PRINTED BY J.B. LIPPINCOTT COMPANY, PHILADELPHIA, U.S.A.

ILLUSTRATIONS.

                                                             PAGE

In her dainty bathing-dress, Miss Allison's wings were discarded                          
Frontispiece.

"May I trouble you for those despatches, Mr. Elmendorf?"                                  
176

"All that space in there will be needed in five minutes from this time."                  
207

"Is it potent--only at Christmas?"                           277

A TAME SURRENDER.

CHAPTER I.

She had met him the previous summer on the Rhine, and now "if they aren't engaged they might
as well be," said her friends, "for he is her shadow wherever she goes." There was something
characteristically inaccurate about that statement, for Miss Allison was rather undersized
in one way and oversized in another; at least that, too, is what her friends said. She was
not more than five feet in height nor less than five feet in breadth "measured from tip to
tip of her wings," as her brother said. Miss Allison had wings, not because she was an angel,
but because it was the fashion,--wings that sprouted at her fair, plump, shapely shoulders
and billowed out like balloons. Her brother Cary, above referred to, a sixteen-year-old specimen
of Young American impudence and independence, said further of her, in the spring of '94, that
if Floy's sleeves were only inflated with gas she could float on air as easily as she did on
water, and on water Miss Allison was buoyancy personified. On water, too, and in her dainty
bathing-dress, Miss Allison's wings were discarded and her true proportions more accurately
defined. She was anything but slender. She was simply deliciously, exquisitely rounded now;
but the question which so disturbed her feminine friends as to call for perennial repetition
was, What would she be a few years hence? This, however, was a matter that seemed to give the
lady in question no uneasiness whatever. Certainly it resulted in no loss of flesh. Perhaps
it might have been better for her future figure if it had. With her perfect health, digestion,
and disposition, there was absolutely no way of worrying off a pound or two a week. She was
the soul of good nature and content. She had an indulgent father, a luxurious home, abundant
wealth, an unimpeachable complexion, character, and social position. She had a swarm of enviously
devoted girl friends on the one hand and selfishly devoted male admirers on the other, or on
both if she chose. She was absolutely without a mean or unkind thought of anybody. She was
full of every generous impulse. She was lazy and energetic by turns, had been a romping idler
in her earlier school-days, and had been polished off and finished in an expensive Eastern
establishment without finishing anything herself. She had lived an almost unshadowed life,
had laughed off a dozen lovers when she went abroad in '93, and had then fallen in with her
fate across the water.

There was really no excuse for her falling in love with Mr. Floyd Forrest. An utter dissimilarity
to her other admirers, a romantic and somewhat absurd adventure, and, above all, proximity,
were what did it. He must have been over ten years her senior; she was barely twenty when they
met. He was tall, slender, and strong, with deep burning brown eyes and heavy brows and lashes.
She was short and plump and distractingly fair and fresh and blue-eyed,--big melting blue eyes,
too, they were. His lips were well-nigh hidden by a heavy moustache; hers were well-nigh faultless
in their sweet, warm, rosy curves, faultless as the white, even teeth that gleamed in her merry
laughter. He was reserved and taciturn, even gloomy at times, facts which, through no fault
or connivance of hers, were presently explained and only served to heighten the interest she
had begun to feel in him. She was frankness, almost loquacity itself,--a girl who could no
more keep a secret than she could harbor a grudge. He was studious, thoughtful, forever reading.
She loved air, sunshine, action, travel, tennis, dancing, music (of the waltz variety), and,
beyond her Bible and her Baedeker, read nothing at all, and not too much of them! She was with
her aunt and some American friends when first she met him. It was the morning they hove in
sight of England, and the steamer was pitching through a head sea. Her party were wretchedly
ill; she was aggressively well. She had risen early and gone up to the promenade deck in hopes
of getting the first glimpse of Bishop's Rock, and found the spray dashing high over the bows,
drenching her accustomed perch on the forward deck and keeping people within-doors.

It was too early for those who had been her beaux and gallants on the swift spring run; a late
session in the smoking-room the night before had kept them below. Only one man was visible
at the rail under the bridge,--the tall, dark, military-looking American who seemed to divide
his time between reading and tramping on the promenade deck, pacing the planks with long, swinging
stride and never seeming to care for other society than his own thoughts. He was on deck and
keenly enjoying the strong, salt wind and its whistling load of spray; and, clinging to the
stanchions at the saloon door, wistfully did Miss Allison regard him, but only as the means
to an end. She wanted to get there, and did not see a way without a helping hand, and just
here old Neptune seemed to tender it. A huge, foam-crested billow came sweeping straight from
the invisible shores of Albion, burst in magnificent deluge upon the port bow, lifted high
in air one instant the heaving black mass of the stem, then let it down with stomach-stirring
swish deep into the hollow beyond,--deep, deep into the green mountain that followed, careening
the laboring steamer far over to starboard, and shooting Miss Allison, as plump and pleasing
a projectile as was ever catapulted, straight from the brass-bound door-way, across the slippery
deck and into the stranger's welcoming arms. Springing suddenly back from under the bridge
to avoid the coming torrent, Mr. Forrest was spun along the rail until nearly opposite the
companion-way, and just in the nick of time.

"I think I'd have gone overboard if it hadn't been for you," said Miss Allison, all smiles
and salt water, as she clung to the rail a moment later, while Mr. Forrest's steamer-cap, bumped
off in the collision, rode helplessly astern on the crest of the hissing wave. "But I couldn't
swim like your cap. Do take my Tam," she cried, tearing off her knitted head-gear and letting
her soft, fair curls whip out into so many briny strings.

"I'll use this," he shouted, turning up the capote of his ulster, while the cape thrashed furiously
in the wind. "Will you pardon my saying you are a trifle venturesome?"

"Oh, I love the ocean and the wind and the sea," she cried, enthusiastically. "Don't you pity
people who are too ill or too lazy to get up and see this?" And she stretched forward one white,
dimpled, dainty hand over the seething waters. "Dare we get over on the other side?"

"You couldn't stand there," he said, briefly, "and would be drenched if you could. Best stay here."

And stay they did until breakfast, by which time she had told him a great deal about herself
and learned next to nothing about him.

"Remember," she said, "you are to give me your address, and I'm to send you a new steamer-cap
to replace the one I knocked overboard." And he merely smiled, thanked her, said it was entirely
unnecessary, but did not present the expected card at all. "Perhaps he hadn't any," suggested
Aunt Lawrence, after they got into sheltered waters off the Start Point. "He doesn't look like
a society man. There are so many of these commercial people travelling now."

"Oh, he didn't talk at all like a drummer," said Miss Allison in prompt defence of her new
protector. "In fact, I don't think he talked at all."

"Not if you had first innings, Flo," drawled Master Cary, from the shelter of his steamer-rug.
"He ain't a drummer, but like's not he's been one. He's an army officer. Hubbard said so."
Hubbard was one of the belated admirers.

Whether soldier or not, however, Mr. Forrest did not prosecute the chance acquaintance. He
lifted the successor to the shipwrecked cap on passing Miss Allison's party later in the day,
but never approached them nearer, never seemed to see the invitation in Miss Allison's shining
blue eyes. "Really, Cary," said she, as they neared Southampton, "you must go and get his address
and the size of the steamer-cap." But Cary was the type of the traditional younger brother,
a spoiled one at that, and Cary wouldn't. It was Mr. Hubbard who went on the mission and came
back with the man.

"Pray don't think of getting me a cap," said Mr. Forrest, bowing and smiling rather gravely.
"I'd much rather you did not. Indeed, it wouldn't find me, as I make no stay in England at
all. I--I wish you a very pleasant sojourn," he finished, somewhat abruptly, and with a comprehensive
bow to the party backed away.

But just two months later they ran upon him on the Rhine. The express steamer had picked them
up at Bonn and paddled them up the crowded stream to Coblentz, and there at the dock, chatting
with two immensely swell Prussian officers, was Mr. Forrest.

"Here's your drummer again, Flo," said Cary, turning disdainfully from the contemplation of
the battlements of Ehrenbreitstein. "Just catch on to the cut of those Dutch trousers, will
you?" indicating by a nod of his sapient head the tight-fitting, creaseless garments in which
were encased the martial lower limbs visible below the long, voluminous skirts of their double-breasted
frock-coats. Flo gazed with frank animation in her eyes, but Forrest never saw her until after
he had waved adieu to his German friends, standing in statuesque and superb precision at the
salute beyond the foaming wake of the Deutscher Kaiser.

"I knew we'd see you again," said Miss Allison, smiling sunshine up into his face, "and I've
brought your cap. It's in one of those trunks now," she concluded, indicating the pile of luggage
on the deck abaft the wheel. Hubbard and other admirers, who had besieged her on the steamer,
were no longer in attendance. In their stead was a well-groomed, sedate, prosperous-looking
man referred to as "my father" when Mr. Forrest was presented a moment later, and with him,
conversing eagerly and fluently in a high-pitched, querulous voice, was a younger man whose
English was as pure as his accent was foreign. "Mr. Elmendorf," said Miss Allison, but she
did not explain, as perhaps she might have done, "Cary's tutor." Forrest bowed civilly to both,
but looked hard at the latter, and Miss Allison presently went on to explain. "Father joined
us nearly a week ago. He couldn't come before. I wish I could have stayed to see the World's
Fair, but auntie was so miserable the doctor said she must get away from Chicago at once, and
so we had to come. Then Cary's a perfect hoodlum at home,--one scrape after another as fast
as he can get in and father can get him out. They sent him with us," she continued, in the
flow of her boundless confidences.

"Herr Max is a very highly educated young man, but I don't think he's doing Cary any good."

That night at Mainz there was an episode. Mr. Allison senior, fatigued, had gone to bed as
soon as they reached their hotel. Mrs. Lawrence,--"auntie," that is,--Miss Allison, and their
maid were billeted in very comfortable rooms under Herr Schnorr's hospitable roof. Elmendorf
stepped in to write letters, and Cary sneaked out for a smoke. It was after ten. The shops
were closed. Cigarettes had been strictly forbidden, and the boy's small stock of contraband
had been discovered and seized that morning at Bonn. Herr Max wrote currente calamo, and as
he turned off page after page he lost all thought of his charge. Among Cary's treasured possessions
was a calibre 32 Smith & Wesson, and with this pellet-propeller in his hip-pocket the boy fancied
himself as dangerous as an anarchist. Twice had it been captured by paterfamilias and twice
recovered, the last time at Cologne. Carrying concealed weapons was as much against the law
in Cologne as it is in Chicago, and much more of an offence, but nothing had there occurred
to impel him to draw it. The boat-landing was not five hundred yards away. There under the
arching lights of its beautiful bridge, sparkling with the reflection of myriad stars, silently
flowed the Rhine, and there lay the Deutscher Kaiser, with her well-stocked larder and wine-room.
Thither went the boy in quest of forbidden fruit. A waiter to whom he had confided his desire
had promised to have the cigarettes on hand, and kept his promise. For one small package he
demanded a four-mark piece,--a silver coin of about the size and rather more than the value
of the American dollar. Cary responded with "What you giving us?" which the Teutonic kellner
couldn't understand. The boy proffered a mark, the German equivalent for the American quarter,
and sought vainly through the misty memories of his lessons for the German equivalent of "Size
me up for a chump?" The waiter had friends and fellow-conspirators, the boy had none, and when
a grab was made for his portemonnaie he backed against the stone wall and whipped out his pygmy
six-shooter. Miss Allison, looking out from her casement over the moonlit beauty of the scene
before her, had recognized her brother's form and later his uplifted voice. She knew there
was trouble, and felt that worse would follow unless prompt measures were taken. She was not
dressed for promenade, being already in peignoir, slippers, and dishevelled hair; but the sudden
sound of a shot and a scream banished her scruples. She darted into the corridor and on towards
the head of the stairs just in time to collide once again with her Atlantic protector, but
was not received with open arms. Forrest bade her run back to her room while he sped on to
the boy. German police are slow, if sure, but the waiter's associates were quick enough. They
had scattered before the police could converge, and Forrest was first at the scene. Just as
he supposed, the boy had peppered himself.

It was only a flesh-wound, something to scare and distress and confine Young America to his
bed for ten days, and so to be bragged about prodigiously later on. But the injury to German
institutions, the affront to the majesty of German law, was not so slight. It took some days
of consular and diplomatic correspondence and a week of official espionage to satisfy the local
authorities that no deep-rooted conspiracy was at the bottom of this discovery of murderous
weapons in the hands of the Amerikaner. In the care of the patient and in all the formalities
attendant upon the case, Mr. Forrest proved of infinitely more value than the accomplished
tutor. The former, an officer reared with deep regard for established law and order, accepted
the situation as a fact, the laws as incontrovertible, and considered himself and friends,
although involuntarily, as the offenders. The German-American scholar, on the contrary, spent
fruitless hours in striving to argue the officials out of their stand and in preaching a crusade
against the laws they were sworn to obey. Forrest won their regard and Elmendorf their distrust,
if not disgust, and from the moment Forrest reappeared bearing the limp and lamenting Cary
in his arms, Miss Allison had chosen to look upon him as in some sense the family's good angel.
They were much together for a week about young Cary's bedside, and the boy swore that if he
had "a feller like him for a toot" he wouldn't mind trying to obey. Then, when Forrest had
to go his way, she found that she missed him as she never before had missed mortal man. It
was the first shadow on her life since her mother's death, five years before.

In September, most unexpectedly, they met him again at Geneva. Cary had been feeding the swans
in the blue waters about the little isle of J.J. Rousseau, and was figuring how much he'd have
to pay in costs and fines if he yielded to his consuming desire to "drop a donick" on the head
of one of them that had spit at him, when Flo suddenly gasped, "Oh! there's----" and stopped
short. Loungers and passers-by looked up and shrugged their Gallic shoulders and exchanged
glances of commiseration at sight of a sixteen-year-old boy rushing yelling after a cab. But
the boy was fleet, despite his recent flesh-wound, and presently reappeared, dragging a man
by the arm, who bared his brown head and bowed low over a frankly extended hand. He looked
a trifle dusty and travel-stained to Cary's critical eye, and the boy meant to comment on the
foreign cut of his Norfolk jacket and knickerbockers, provided a chance were afforded him to
enter a remark edgewise, but Florence, with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes, was pouring
forth a volume of welcome and explanation all in one. Forrest was on his way to the station
en route to Montreux.

"Oh, don't go by rail! Wait and take the boat with us; it's so much lovelier!"

Over at the quay lay moored the Major Davel, and thither Forrest bade the cabman take his luggage.
It was indeed lovelier,--the evening voyage up that beautiful Alp-locked lake,--and while auntie,
fatigued with her day's shopping and sight-seeing, snoozed placidly in the salon, and Cary,
on honor not to smoke cigarettes again until his next birthday, was puffing a Swiss "penny-grab"
at the bow, Mr. Forrest and this fair, joyous girl sat and talked while the sun went down over
the Jura and turned to purple and gold and crimson the dazzling summits of Mont Blanc and the
far-away peaks up the valley of the Rhone. Elmendorf was enjoying a week's leave, Mr. Allison
was sampling the waters at Carlsbad, and auntie and Florence had Cary on their hands. The boy
adored Forrest by this time. Couldn't Forrest spend a day or two? They would take him to Chillon
and up to the Rochers de Naye. There was a view worth seeing! "I can stand on that point up
yonder," said Cary, "a mile and a quarter high, and fire a stone down the chimney of the hotel
at Territet." And they did take him, for Forrest remained four days. Mr. Elmendorf wrote that,
on the advice of his physician, he had asked for a week more to spend in quiet at his home
in the shades of his alma mater in a placid old German town. Stopping at Berne a few hours
after leaving his friends on Lac Leman, Mr. Forrest found the quaint old capital crowded. A
congress of Socialists had been called, and from all over Europe the exponents of the Order
were gathered, and almost the first voice to catch his ear as Forrest strolled through the
throng in the open platz near the station was high-pitched, querulous, and oddly familiar.
Turning sharply the officer came face to face with Mr. Elmendorf, still presumably recuperating
in the shades of the university at Jena; and that night Mr. Elmendorf called upon him at his hotel.

"I found myself so much better," said he, "that I decided to push ahead, and, still availing
myself of my leave, to stop and see some of these most interesting old Helvetic cities. My
coming here to-day was fortuitous, yet possibly unfortunate. Mr. Allison has a deep-rooted
prejudice against anything of this kind,--against anything, I may say, that has a tendency
to improve the condition of the laboring man,--and, while I have nothing to shrink from in
the matter, I prefer not to offend the sensibilities, whether right or wrong, of my employer,
and therefore should, on his account, ask that you make no mention, should you write, of having
seen me here." And Elmendorf waited a moment.

"I shall not be apt to write," said Forrest, coldly, after a pause.

"Well--in case you--you see any of the family again. If it's all the same to you----"

"I shall not volunteer any information, Mr. Elmendorf; but should I ever be asked the direct
question, since you have nothing to shrink from in the matter, there need be, I presume, no
hesitancy in my saying that I saw you here."

"Oh, not at all,--not at all," was the answer, though in tone by no means cheery or confident;
and Elmendorf departed with the conviction that Forrest did not like him,--which was simply
a case of reciprocity.

There was yet another meeting, as unexpected as its predecessors, between the Allisons and
Mr. Forrest, and this was of all perhaps the most decisive. Forrest's leave was soon to expire.
He was returning from Vienna to Paris, and met Allison senior at Basle. The Bohemian waters,
or the rest and regimen, or both combined, had greatly benefited the merchant. His manner was
brisk and buoyant, his face shone with health and content. He was cordiality itself to the
man whom he had greeted with but cool civility on the Rhine. "I feel ready for anything," said
he, "and am going back at once. Cary and Elmendorf go with me, but Flo and her aunt want to
stay awhile in Paris. Look them up, will you, if you go there?--Hôtel Lafond." Forrest promised.
He was going to Metz and Luxembourg on the way, and purposed spending only a few days in the
capital. He found the ladies packing and almost ready to start. Once again he crossed the Atlantic
in Miss Allison's company, and this time, though there might have been Hubbards and other gallants
aboard, she had no use for them. It was Mr. Forrest's figure her eye sought the moment she
came on deck, Forrest's arm on which she leaned in the joyous, exhilarating tramps on the breezy
promenade. Every woman on board except Aunt Lawrence believed her engaged to him before they
were half-way over, and would have sworn to it at Sandy Hook. Anything more blissful, gladsome,
confident than her manner at first could hardly be described, but when it presently began to
give way to something half shy, half appealing, almost tender,--when long silences and down-drooping
lashes replaced the ceaseless prattle and frankly uplifted eyes,--then there was little room
for doubt in Aunt Lawrence's mind that Flo had flung herself away.

"Well, I wash my hands of it," said the pious lady. "It was Fate and her father. He deliberately
threw them together again after my warning. Now I suppose he'll have to do something for him,
for if Flo loves the man she'll marry him if he hasn't a penny beyond his pay,--which he probably
hasn't. There ought to be a law against such things."

But never a confession or confidence did Flo have to offer. The ladies spent a week in New
York before going West. Mr. Forrest went on about his business. It was when he met them at
Chicago and calmly escorted them from their state-room on the Limited to their waiting carriage
that Aunt Lawrence felt the time had come for her to speak; and speak she did the moment Mr.
Forrest had closed the carriage door, raised his hat, and was left behind.

"Has that young man asked you to marry him, Florence?"

And Florence burst into tears.

From having been a bitter opponent of the possibility, Mrs. Lawrence from this moment veered
squarely around. A month agone she would have resented his daring to speak of such a thing.
Now she raged at his daring not to. Here they were home again at Chicago with all Florence's
friends crowding about and rejoicing in her return, and here, said Aunt Lawrence, was this
extraordinary young man detained on some mysterious duty on the staff of the general commanding,
working in his office at the Pullman building by day and meeting Flo at dinners, dances, theatres,
and operas by night, coming occasionally to the house, welcomed by her brother, the millionaire,
with whom the young man often sat now and had long talks about the questions of the hour, welcomed
shyly but unmistakably by Florence, adored by Cary, who took to paying long visits to the lieutenant's
workshop and meeting those swells his brother officers, and looked upon with distrust only
by Elmendorf and herself. Never before had the lady fancied the tutor or shown a disposition
to listen to his dissertations, which were long. Now she rejoiced his soul by encouraging him.
It was an easy step to discreet confidences with Forrest as the subject. Mr. Elmendorf became
a seeker for truth. Other officers whom Florence met in society came to the house to call,
and presently to dine. Mr. Elmendorf and his pupil were seldom absent from the table, and Mr.
Elmendorf made martial acquaintances which, as a member of the Allison household, he was welcome
to cultivate. One day he came in big with news, and that evening, after a long conference with
Elmendorf, Mrs. Lawrence decided on another warning talk with her charming niece.

"Florence," she said, finally, "I am the last woman on earth to pry into any one else's affairs"
(a conviction with regard to herself which is cherished by almost every woman), "but I have
felt it my duty to learn something about Mr. Forrest's past life. I own I did object to him
as a possible suitor, but better that than a man insincere in his intentions. What would you
say were I to tell you what I have heard recently?"

Miss Allison turned and faced her aunt unflinchingly, "That he was engaged to Miss Hosmer,--now
Mrs. Stuyvesant,--that she broke it off, and that he has never cared for any one since? I know
all about it, auntie,--mainly from his own lips."

"Then all I've got to say is, you are the most extraordinary persons I ever met,--both of you."

CHAPTER II.

There are many excellent people in this bright world who, like Mrs. Lawrence, are prone to
assert that all they've got to say on a given subject is so and so, and then to stultify themselves
by proceeding to talk a whole torrent. Mrs. Lawrence said a great deal in the course of this
initial interview, and followed it up with a very great deal more. She considered Mr. Forrest's
conduct worse than incomprehensible. What business had he to tell a girl his heart was buried
in the past and pay her all lover-like attentions in the present? "He hasn't," said Miss Allison,
promptly and flatly. "He has simply been kind and friendly. He would have been discourteous,
un-American, had he done anything less." It wasn't he who told her he never had cared or would
care for any one after Miss Hosmer; Kate Lenox told her that, and so did other girls here.
When, then, did Mr. Forrest inform her of his broken engagement? asked Aunt Lawrence. "On the
steamer coming home," said Florence. "He couldn't help himself. I met Mrs. Stuyvesant in Washington
last winter,--such a lovely woman,--and some one said she was once engaged to an army officer
and it was broken off; she found she didn't love him enough to leave her luxurious home to
live on the frontier among Indians. I don't know how her name came up, or what prompted me
to talk as I did. I was saying that I thought her cruel, heartless, and that she should have
considered all that before ever she engaged herself to him; and then he simply put up his hand,
saying, 'Do not speak of it, Miss Allison: I was the man.' It fairly took my breath away,"
said Florence,--which her aunt could hardly believe,--"and I didn't know what to say; and then
he went on quietly to speak of her in the most beautiful way, and assured me there were other
and graver reasons which led to her decision, some of which, at least, he could not gainsay,
and Mr. Stuyvesant's wealth and social position had very little to do with the fact of her
finally marrying him, as she did, and not until several years after the engagement was broken."

Indeed, Miss Allison waxed tearfully eloquent in defence of Mr. Forrest, whom she declared
high-minded and honorable and manly. He wasn't in love with her, nor she with him,--not a bit;
but she honored him and respected him and liked him better than any man she knew, and papa
thought him such a superior man, and Cary was devoted to him, and he had been of infinite service
to them abroad, and was welcome now and should be welcome any time--any time--to their doors,
and if Aunt Lawrence or anybody spoke ill of him to her she'd defend him to the bitter end,
and as for hinting or insinuating that he was trifling with her, it was simply outrageous--outrageous,
and if Aunt Lawrence dared to let him suppose it was his duty to propose to her now she'd never
forgive her,--never. And so Aunt Lawrence discovered that her blithe, merry, joyous niece of
the years gone by had developed a fine temper of her own and a capacity for independent thought
and action that was simply appalling.

Florence went dancing down into the parlor with flushed cheeks and briny, indignant eyes and
the mien of an offended five-foot goddess, leaving Aunt Lawrence to the contemplation of the
field of her disastrous defeat and the card of the unworthy object of their discussion:

"What on earth brings him here at this time of day?" quoth she, irate and ruffled. "For a man
who is neither lover nor fiancé, he assumes the airs and, for aught I know, the rights of both.
The girl is as ill-balanced as her mother." And not all women, it must be owned, think too
well of an only brother's wife. "The manners of these army men are simply uncouth. Who ever
heard of calls at ten A.M.?"

It was but a few minutes before Miss Allison returned. In fact, she did not return to the scene
of the late struggle,--a lovely boudoir overlooking the flashing blue waters of the lake from
high over the intervening boulevard. Miss Allison went direct to her own rooms on the opposite
side of the broad hall-way, and not until evening was Mrs. Lawrence favored with explanation.

"Why are you not dressed?" she somewhat caustically inquired, as her niece came down arrayed
for dinner.

For answer Miss Allison contemplated her pretty white arms, and took a backward and downward
glance at the fall of the trailing skirt of heavy silk, then--must it be recorded?--she calmly
asked, "What's the matter with this?"

"This," said Aunt Lawrence, with marked emphasis, "may do for home dinners, but won't for an
opera-party. Here it is seven. You can't change your dress before eight, and you simply can't
go to the Langdons' box in that."

"I'm not going to the Langdons' box."

"You were, and Mr. Forrest was to dine here and take you."

"Mr. Forrest left for the West on sudden orders at noon, and came at ten to tell me."

Mrs. Lawrence's hands and eyes went up in mad dismay. "You don't mean to tell me you've given
up going because that man's ordered off? Child, child, you are simply bent on ruining yourself
socially. I don't wonder people say you're daft about him."

"Who says I'm daft about him?" queried Miss Allison, flushing instantly, but looking dangerous.

"Well, not just that, perhaps," returned Mrs. Lawrence. "But that's what they will say now.
Surely Mrs. Langdon could ask somebody in his place who could have escorted you,--or else I could."

"Mrs. Langdon did invite somebody else,--two somebody elses, in fact, as my letter urged her
to do. Fanny Tracy was wild to go, and Captain Farwell wild to take her. I did a charitable
thing in suggesting them."

"Then the result of that piece of charity will be that all Chicago will say you are so much
in love with that man you couldn't go 'Faust' when he went away."

"Chicago has too many other things to think of, and---- Where's papa?" said Miss Allison, turning
abruptly from her aunt and moving with quick, impetuous step towards the heavy portière that
hung between the parlor and Mr. Allison's library. But she stopped short at the threshold,
for there, just within the rich folds of the hanging barrier, apparently searching for some
particular book among the shelves nearest the parlor and farthest from the library lights,
and humming musically to himself as he did so, was Cary's tutor.

"I did not know you were here, Mr. Elmendorf," said Miss Allison, coldly. "I supposed you were
in the study with my brother."

"I was until a moment ago. We needed a book, and I came down for it." 

The volumes of religious discourses which are worthy to hold a place in literature, when judged
by the usual critical standard, are very few. A very large proportion of those which are continually
appearing from the press deserve no remembrance, and fortunately have no permanence. They are
addressed to a special class of readers,--a class generally neither of highly cultivated taste,
nor of acute critical perception. Their writers are rarely men of sufficient talent to win for
themselves recognition out of their own narrow set. What in the slang of the day are called
"sensation" sermons are no exception to the common rule. Their momentary effect, depending upon
exaggeration and extravagance, is no indication of worth. We should no more think of criticizing
them in a literary journal, than of criticizing the novels of Mr. Cobb or Mr. Reynolds. Some
of the causes of the poverty of thought and of the negligence of style of average sermons
are obvious. The very interest and importance of the subjects with which the preacher has to deal
oftentimes serve to deaden rather than to excite the mind of one who takes them up in the formal
round of duty. The pretensions of the clergy of many sects, pretensions as readily acknowledged
as made, save them from the necessity of intellectual exertion. The frequent recurrence of the
necessity of writing, whether they have anything to say or not, leads them into substituting
words for thoughts, platitudes for truths.

The natural weariness of long-continued solitary professional labor brings mental lassitude
and feebleness. The absence of the fear of close and watchful criticism prevents them from
bestowing suitable pains upon their composition. These and other causes combine to make the
mass of the writing which is delivered from the pulpit poorer than any other which passes current
in the world,--perhaps, indeed, not poorer in an absolute sense, but poorer when compared with
the nature of the subjects that it treats.

It is by no means, however, to be inferred, that, because a sermon
is totally without merit as a work of literature, it is incapable
of producing some good in those who listen to it.

On the contrary, such is the frame of mind of many who regularly attend church, that they are
not unlikely to derive good from a performance which, if weak, may yet be sincere, and which
deals with the highest truths, even if it deal with them in an imperfect and unsatisfactory manner.
And, indeed, as George Herbert says, good may be got from the worst preaching; for,

"if all want sense, God takes the text, and preacheth patience."

Unquestionably, however, there is too much preaching in these days; too many sermons are written, and
the spirit of Christianity is less effective than if the words concerning it were less numerous.

It
is a rare satisfaction, therefore, to find such a volume of sermons as that of Mr. Brooks,
which, though not possessing the highest merit in point of style,
are the discourses of a thoughtful and cultivated man, with a peculiar
spiritual refinement, and with a devout intellect, made clear by its
combination with purity of heart and simplicity of faith.

The religious questions which are chiefly stirring the minds of men are taken up in them and discussed
with what may be called an earnest moderation, with elevation of feeling and insight of spirit.

Goethe's
Correspondence with a Child.

Boston: Ticknor & Fields. 1859.

The immediate cause of the republication of these letters is the recent death of Bettina, the
child with whom Goethe corresponded. Though this fact, and the beauty of the volume, may quicken
the sale of the work, and draw out fresh encomiums on its excellence, it has long since passed
the critical crisis and taken its place as one of the most remarkable
series of letters which the public have ever been invited to peruse.

Something of the marvellous vanishes from them, however, when we find that the title, "Correspondence
with a Child," is a misnomer; Bettina having been, in truth, twenty-two
years of age when she first visited Goethe.

Yet while this important circumstance abates much of the wonder with which we once read her thoughts
and confessions, they really become all the more valuable as studies in human nature when
we learn that they are the exhalations of a heart in full flower, and one upon which the dews
of morning should not linger.

The poet had reached the age of sixty when this tide of tender sentiment, original ideas, and
enthusiastic admiration began to flow in upon him. Their first interview, as Bettina describes
it, with singular freedom, in one of the letters to Goethe's mother, will be found a useful
key, though perhaps not a complete one, by which to interpret the
glowing passion which gushed from her pen.

That the poet was pleased with the homage of this sweet, graceful,
and affectionate girl, and drew her on to the revealing of her whole
nature, is readily perceived.

But when we inquire, To what end? we should remember, that, like
Parrhasius, Goethe was before all things an artist; and furthermore,
the correspondence of time will show that from this crowning knowledge
the "Elective Affinities" sprang.

It may be that her admiration was for his genius alone; if so, she chose love's language for
its wealth of expression.

Were it so received, it could not but be regarded as a peerless offering,
for she was certainly a kindred spirit.

There are many rare thoughts and profound confessions in these letters,
which would have commanded the praise of Goethe, had they been written
by a rival; and coming, as they did, from a devotee who declared that
she drew her inspiration from him alone, they must have filled his
soul with incense, of which that burned by the priest in the temple
of the gods is only an emblem.

To be brief and compendious on this book, it appears to be a heart unveiled. German critics throw
some doubts on the literal veracity of the book; but it belongs at
any rate to the better class of the ben trovati, and among its leaves,
the dreamer, the lover, and the poet will find that ambrosial fruit
on which fancy loves to feed, but whose blossoms are so generally
blasted by the common air that only the few favored ones have had
their longings for it appeased.

In imagination, at least, Bettina partook of this banquet, and had the genius to wreak on words the
emotions which swept through her heart.

Sir Rohan's Ghost. A Romance. Boston: J. E. Tilton & Company. 1860. pp. 352.

It is very plain that we have got a new poet,--a tremendous responsibility both for him who
will have to learn how to carry the brimming vase of Art from the Pierian spring without squandering
a drop, and for us critics who are to reconcile ourselves to what is new in him, and to hold
him strictly to that apprenticeship to the old which is the condition of mastery at last.

Criticism in America has reached something like the state of the old Continental currency. There is
no honest relation between the promises we make and the specie basis of meaning they profess to
represent. "The most extraordinary book of the age" is published every week; "genius" springs
up like mullein, wherever the soil is thin enough; the yearly catch of "weird imagination,"
"thrilling pathos," "splendid description," and "sublime imagery" does not fall short of an
ordinary mackerel-crop; and "profound originality" is so plenty that one not in the secret would
be apt to take it for commonplace. Now Tithonus, whom, as the oldest inhabitant, we have engaged
to oversee the criticism of the "Atlantic," has a prodigiously long
memory,--almost as long as one of Dickens's descriptive passages,--he
remembers perfectly well all the promising young fellows from Orpheus
down, and has made a notch on the stalk of a devil's-apron for every
one who ever came to anything that was of more consequence to the
world than to himself.

His tally has not yet mounted to a baker's dozen. Accordingly, when a young enthusiast rushes
to tell Tithonus that a surprising genius has turned up, that venerable and cautious being either
puts his hand behind his ear and absconds into an extemporary deafness, or says dryly, "American
kind, I suppose?" This coolness of our wary senior is infectious, and we confess ourselves
so far disenchanted by it, that, when we go into a library, the lettering on the backs of nine-tenths
of the volumes contrives to shape itself into a laconic Hic jacet.

It is of prime necessity to bring back the currency of criticism to
the old hard-money basis.

We have been gradually losing all sense of the true relation between words and things,--the
surest symptom of intellectual decline. And this looseness of criticism reacts in the most
damaging way upon literature by continually debasing the standard, and by confounding all distinction
between fame and notoriety. Ought it to be gratifying to the author of "Popular Sovereignty,
a Poem in Twelve Cantos," to be called the most remarkable man of the age, when he knows that he
shares that preëminence with Mr. Tupper, nay, with half the names in the Directory? Indiscriminate
eulogy is the subtlest form of depreciation, for it makes all praise suspicious.

We look upon artistic genius as the rarest and most wayward apparition among mankind. It cannot
be predicated upon any of Mr. Buckle's averages. Given the census, you may, perhaps, say so many
murders, so many suicides, so many misdirected letters (and men of letters), but not so many
geniuses. In this one thing old Mother Nature will be whimsical and womanish. This is a gift
that John Bull, or Johnny Crapaud, or Brother Jonathan does not find in his stocking every
Christmas. Crude imagination is common enough,--every hypochondriac has a more than Shakspearian
allowance of it; fancy is cheap, or nobody would dream; eloquence sits ten deep on every platform.
But genius in Art is that supreme organizing and idealizing faculty which, by combining, arranging,
modulating, by suppressing the abnormal and perpetuating the essential, apes creation,--which
from the shapeless terror or tipsy fancy of the benighted ploughman can conjure the sisters of
Fores heath and the court of Titania,--which can make language thunder or coo at will,--which,
in short, is the ruler of those qualities any one of which in excess is sure to overmaster the
ordinary mind, and which can crystallize helpless vagary into the clearly outlined and imperishable
forms of Art.

It is not, therefore, from any grudging incapacity to appreciate new authors, but from a strong
feeling that we are to guard the graves of the dead from encroachment, and their fames from vulgarization,
that the "Atlantic" has been and will be sparing in its use of the word genius. One may safely predicate
power, nicety of thought and language, a clear eye for scenery and character, and grace of
poetic conception of a book, without being willing to say that it gives proof of genius. For
genius is the shaping faculty, the power of using material in the best way, and may not work
itself clear of the besetting temptation of personal gifts and of circumstances in a first or even
second work. It is something capable of education and accomplishment, and the patience with
which it submits itself to this needful schooling and self-abnegation is one of the surest tests
of its actual possession. Could even Shakspeare's poems and earlier plays come before us for
judgment, we could only say of them, as of Keats's "Endymion," that they showed affluence, but
made no sure prophecy of that artistic self-possession without which
plenty is but confusion and incumbrance.

So much by way of preface, lest we might seem cold to the very remarkable merits of "Sir Rohan's
Ghost," if we treated it as a book worth finding fault with, instead of condemning it to the indifferent
limbo of general eulogy. It is our deliberate judgment that no first volume by any author has
ever been published in America showing more undoubtful symptoms of genuine poetic power than this.
There are passages in it where imagination and language combine in the most artistic completeness,
and the first quatrain of the song which Sir Rohan fancies he hears,--

----"In a summer twilight, While yet the dew was hoar, I went plucking purple pansies Till my
love should come to shore,"--

seems to us absolutely perfect in its simplicity and suggestiveness. It has that wayward and
seemingly accidental just-right-ness that is so delightful in old ballads. The hesitating cadence
of the third line is impregnated with the very mood of the singer, and lingers like the action
it pictures. All those passages in the book, too, where the symptoms of Sir Rohan's possession
by his diseased memory are handled, where we see all outward nature but as wax to the plastic will
of imagination, are to the utmost well-conceived and carried out. It was part of the necessity
of the case that the book should be conjectural and metaphysical, for it is plain that the author
is young and has little experience of the actual.

Accordingly, with a true instinct, she (for the newspapers ascribe the authorship of the book
to Miss Prescott) calls her story a Romance, thus absolving it from any cumbersome allegiance
to fact, and lays the scene of it in England, where she can have old castles, old traditions,
old families, old servants, and all the other olds so essential to the young writer, ready to her
hand.

We like the book better for being in the main subjective (to use the convenient word Mr. Ruskin
is so angry with); for a young writer can only follow the German plan of conjuring things
up "from the depths of his inward consciousness." The moment our author quits this sure ground,
her touch becomes uncertain and her colors inharmonious. Character-painting is unessential to a
romance, belonging as it does properly to the novel of actual life, in which the romantic element
is equally out of place.

Fielding, accordingly, the greatest artist in character since Shakspeare, hardly admits sentiment,
and never romance, into his master-pieces. Hawthorne, again, another great master, feeling instinctively
the poverty and want of sharp contrast in the externals of our New England life, always shades
off the edges of the actual, till, at some indefinable line, they meet and mingle with the supersensual
and imaginative.

The author of "Sir Rohan" attempts character in Redruth the butler, and in the villain and heroine
of her story. We are inclined to think the villain the best hit of the three, because he is
downright scoundrel without a redeeming point, as the Nemesis of the story required him to be,
and because he is so far a purely ideal character. But there is no such thing possible as an ideal
butler, at least in the sense our author assumes in the cellar-scene. The better poet, the worse
butler; and so we are made impatient by his more than Redi-isms about wine, full of fancy as they are
in themselves, because they are an impertinence. For the same reason, we forgive the heroine
her rhapsodies about the figures of the Arthur-romances, but cannot pardon her descents into
real life and her incursions on what should be the sanctuary of the breakfast-table. The author
attributes to her a dash of gypsy blood; and if her style of humorous conversation be a fair
type of that of the race in general, we no longer wonder that they
are homeless exiles from human society.

When will men learn the true nature of a pun,--that it is a play upon ideas, and not upon
sounds,--and that a perfect one is as rare as a perfect poem?

In the prose "Edda," the dwarfs tell a monstrous fib, when they pretend that Kvasir, the inventor
of poetry, has been suffocated by his own wisdom.

Nevertheless, the little fellows showed thereby that they were not short of intelligence; for
it is almost always in their own overflow that young poets are drowned. This superabundance
seems to us the chief defect in "Sir Rohan's Ghost." The superabundance is all very fine, of
the costliest kind; but was Clarence any the better for being done to death in Malmsey instead
of water?

This fault we look on as a fault of promise. There is always a chance that luxuriance may be
pruned, but none short of a miracle that a broomstick may be made to blossom. There is, however,
one absolute, and not relative fault in the book, which we find it
harder to forgive, since it is one of instinct rather than of Art.

The author seems to us prone to confound the terrible, (the only true subject of Art) with the horrible.
The one rouses moral terror or aversion, the other only physical disgust. This is one of the worst
effects of the modern French school upon literature, the inevitable
result of its degrading the sensuous into the sensual.

We have found all the fault we could with this volume, because we sincerely think that the author
of it is destined for great things, and that she owes it to the rare gift she has been endowed
with to do nothing inconsiderately, and by honest self-culture to raise natural qualities to
conscious and beneficent powers.

RECENT AMERICAN PUBLICATIONS

RECEIVED BY THE EDITORS OF THE ATLANTIC MONTHLY.

Essays of Elia. By Charles Lamb.

A New Edition. Boston. William Veazie. 8vo. pp. 466. $1.25.

Archaia; or, Studies of the Cosmogony and Natural History of the Hebrew Scriptures. By J. W. Dawson,
LL. D., F. G. S., Principal of McGill College, Author of "Acadian Geology," etc. Montreal.
B. Dawson & Son. 12mo. pp. 406.

Manual of Public Libraries, Institutions, and Societies in the United
States and British Provinces of North America.

By William J. Rhees, Chief Clerk of the Smithsonian Institution. Philadelphia. J. B. Lippincott
& Co. 8vo. pp. xxviii., 687. $3.00.

The Oakland Stories. By George R. Taylor, of Virginia. Volume I. Kenny. New York. Sheldon &
Co. 16mo. pp. 176. 60 cents.

Poems read at the Opening of the Fraternity Lectures, 1858-9. By F. B. Sanborn and Rufus Leighton,
Jr. Boston. Printed for the Fraternity. 16mo. pp. 59. 25 cts.

The Law of the Territories. Philadelphia. Printed by C. Sherman and Son. 16mo. pp. 127. 50 cts.

The
Wife's Trials and Triumphs. By the Author of "Grace Hamilton's School-Days," etc. New York.
Sheldon & Co. 16mo. pp. 347. $1.00.

The Old Battle-Ground. By J. T. Trowbridge, Author of "Father Brighthopes," etc. New York. Sheldon
& Co. 24mo. pp. 276. 50 cts.

Abridgment of the Debates of Congress, from 1789 to 1856. From Gales
and Seaton's Annals of Congress; from their Register of Debates; and
from the Official Reported Debates, by John C. Rives. By the Author
of the "Thirty Years' View." Volume XII. New York. Appleton & Co.
8vo. pp. 807. $2.50.

"Woman's Right to Labor"; or, Low Wages and
Hard Work: in Three Lectures, delivered in Boston, November, 1859.
By Caroline H. Dall. Boston. Walker, Wise, & Co. 16mo. pp. xvi., 184.
50 cts.

The Diary of a Samaritan. By a Member of the Howard Association
of New Orleans. New York. Harper & Brothers. 12mo. pp. 324. $1.00.

A
Popular History of the United States of America: from the Discovery
of the American Continent to the Present Time. By Mary Howitt. Illustrated
with Numerous Engravings. In Two Volumes. New York. Harper & Brothers.
12mo. pp. xii., 406; xii., 388. $2.00.

Poems. By Henry Timrod. Boston.
Ticknor & Fields. 16mo. pp. iv., 130. 50 cts.

New Miscellanies. By
Charles Kingsley. Boston. Ticknor & Fields. 12mo. pp. vi., 375. $1.00.

The
Two Christmas Celebrations, A. D. 1 and 1855. His people are 'swells,' so to speak,--people whose heads
are held very high and their morals correspondingly low,--people who think it condescension
on their part to notice wage-workers except as menials. Hence I am in no wise surprised to
hear of him as I do, even among those who are--well, of his own cloth."

"Surely, Mr. Elmendorf, the officers who have so often dined here do not entertain ill opinions
of Mr. Forrest. Such men as Colonel Kenyon, Captain Waring, Major Cranston,--they have known
him long and well, and they speak of him, to us at least, most highly."

Again the significant shrug of Elmendorf's shoulders and the sneer in his tone. "Oh, certainly,"
said he. "Noblesse oblige, or honor among thieves, whichever maxim you choose. I doubt not
that in his younger days each of the eminently respectable trio you mention was no more a model
of morality than is Mr. Forrest. I have, indeed, heard as much of Captain Waring; but one has
only once to penetrate beyond the veil of that professional reserve which they assume, and
the details of one another's lives are not such guarded secrets, after all."

"And you really mean that from them--among them you have learned these--these----"

"These particulars of Mr. Forrest's sudden orders to leave the city?" said Elmendorf, dryly,
with another shrug. "From where else? Even to the name and station of the lady in the case."

CHAPTER IV.

Not half a mile away from the Allisons' costly residence was the home of Major Cranston, an
officer of some thirty years' experience in the cavalry. It was an unpretentious, old-fashioned
frame house, that had escaped the deluge of fire that swept the city in '71, and that looked
oddly out of place now in the midst of towering apartment blocks or handsome edifices of brick
and stone. But Cranston loved the old place, and preferred to keep it intact and as left to
him at the death of his father until such time as he should retire from active service. Then
he might see fit to rebuild. The property was now of infinitely more value than the house.
"You could move that old barrack out to the suburbs, cut down them trees, and cut up the place
into buildin'-lots and sell any one of them for enough to build a dozen better houses," said
a neighbor who had prospered, as had the Cranstons, by holding on to the paternal estate. But
Cranston smilingly said he preferred not to cut up or cut down. "Them" trees and he had grown
up together. They were saplings when he was a boy, and had grown to sturdy oakhood when his
own youngsters, plains-bred little cavaliers, used to gather their Chicago friends about them
under the whispering leaves and thrill their juvenile souls with stirring tales of their doings
"out in the Indian county." Louis Cranston was believed to have participated with his father's
troop in many a pitched battle with the savage foe before his tenth birthday, and "Patchie,"
the younger, was known to be so called not because of his mother's having sprung from the distinguished
family in which George Patchen was a patron saint, but because he had been born in the Arizona
mountains and rocked in a Tonto cradle. Those two boys were now stalwart men, cattle-growers
in the Far West, whose principal interest in Chicago was as a market for their branded steers.
They had their own vines and fig-trees, their own wives and olive-branches, and after the death
of the venerable grandparents the homestead on the shores of Lake Michigan was for some years
untenanted.

But therein were stored the old furniture and the old books and pictures, all carefully guarded
by one of Cranston's veteran sergeants, who, disabled by wounds and infirmities, was glad to
accept his commander's offer to give to him and his a home and suitable pension in return for
scrupulous care of the old place. At long intervals the master had come in on leave, and the
neighbors always knew when to expect him, for the snow-shovel or the lawn-mower, holly wreaths
or honeysuckles, seemed to pervade the premises, and old McGrath's neatest uniform was hung
out to sun and air on the back piazza. Mac was a bibulous veteran at times, a circumstance
of which place-hunters were not slow to take advantage on those rare occasions of the owner's
home-coming, and many a time did the major receive confidential intimation from the Sheehans,
Morriseys, and Meiswinkles in service in the neighborhood that McGrath was neglectful of his
patron's premises and over-given to the flowing bowl; but in Mrs. McGrath's stanch protectorate,
as in McGrath's own fidelity, Cranston had easy confidence. Twenty years of close communion
all over the frontier give fair inkling as to one's characteristics, and Cranston had known
Mac and his helpmeet even longer. "Dhrink, yer honor? Faith an' I do, as regularly as iver
I drunk the captain's health and prosperity in the ould regiment; and I'd perhaps be doin'
it too often, out of excessive ghratitude, but for Molly yonder. She convinces me wid me own
crutch, sorr." And Molly confirmed the statement: "I let him have no more than is good for
him, major, barrin' Patrick's Day and the First of April, that's Five Forks,--when he always
dhrinks as many fingers at a time. Then he's in arrest till Appomattox, nine days close,--and
then I let him out for a bit again. Never fear, major, I'm the dishbursin' officer of the family,
an' the grocer has his orders." Mac had his other anniversaries, be it understood, on all of
which occasions he repaired to Donnelly's Shades on a famous thoroughfare two blocks west of
the Cranstons' back gate, and entertained all comers with tales of dragoon days that began
in the 50's and spread all over the century. Shrewd historians of the neighborhood made it
a point to look up the dates of Brandy Station and Beverly Ford, of Aldie, Winchester, and
Waynesboro', of Yellow Tavern and Five Forks, as well as to keep tab on subsequent events of
which history makes no mention, but which troopers know well, for Summit Springs, Superstition
Mountain, Sunset Pass, and Slim Buttes--a daring succession of sibilant tongue-tacklers--were
names of Indian actions from Dakota to the Gila the old soldier loved to dwell upon, even if
Donnelly's whiskey had not put clogs on his tongue. Two things was Mac always sure of at the
Shades,--good listeners and bad liquor; but the trooper who has tasted every tipple, from "pine-top"
to mescal, will forgive the latter if sure of the former. Donnelly had his "ordhers," as Mrs.
Mac said. Those generals who have had but little experience attempt to protect every point, while
those who are better acquainted with their profession, having only the capital object in view,
guard against a decisive blow, and acquiesce in smaller misfortunes to avoid greater." Frederick
the Great's Instructions to his Generals.) The cries and complaints of those who find themselves
abandoned do not penetrate to the camp, but they may bring down an administration. It is easy
to contrive excuses for the inaction of the President, and it is no new thing to find the
demands of strategy sacrificed to political expediency. Nor did the army which had suffered
so heavily on the banks of Bull Run evince any marked desire to be led across the Potomac. Furloughs
were liberally granted.

Officers and privates dispersed to look after their farms and their plantations. The harvests
had to be gathered, the negroes required the master's eye, and even the counties of Virginia
asked that part of the contingents they had furnished might be permitted to return to agricultural
pursuits.

The senior generals of the Virginia army were not alone in believing that the victory they had
won would be barren of result unless it were at once utilised as
a basis for further action.

Jackson, engrossed as he was with the training of his command, found time to reflect on the broader
aspects of the war. Before he left for the Shenandoah Valley he sought an interview with General
G.W. Smith, recently appointed to the command of his division. "Finding me lying down in my
tent," writes this officer, "he expressed regret that I was sick, and said he had come to
confer with me on a subject of great importance, but would not then trouble me with it. I told
him that I wished to hear whatever he desired to say, and could rest whilst he was talking. He
immediately sat down on the ground, near the head of the cot on which I was lying, and entered
on the subject of his visit.

"'McClellan,' he said, 'with his army of recruits, will not attempt to come out against us this
autumn. If we remain inactive they will have greatly the advantage over us next spring. Their raw recruits
will have then become an organised army, vastly superior in numbers to our own. We are ready
at the present moment for active operations in the field, while they
are not.

We ought to invade their country now, and not wait for them to make the necessary preparations
to invade ours. If the President would reinforce this army by taking troops from other points
not threatened, and let us make an active campaign of invasion before winter sets in, McClellan's
raw recruits could not stand against us in the field.

"'Crossing the Upper Potomac, occupying Baltimore, and taking possession of Maryland, we could cut
off the communications of Washington, force the Federal Government to abandon the capital, beat
McClellan's army if it came out against us in the open country, destroy industrial establishments
wherever we found them, break up the lines of interior commercial intercourse, close the coal-mines,
seize and, if necessary, destroy the manufactories and commerce of
Philadelphia, and of other large cities in our reach; take and hold
the narrow neck of country between Pittsburg and Lake Erie; subsist
mainly the country we traverse, and making unrelenting war amidst
their homes, force the people of the North to understand what it will
cost them to hold the South in the Union at the bayonet's point.'

"He
then requested me to use my influence with Generals Johnston and Beauregard
in favour of immediate aggressive operations.

I told him that I was sure that an attempt on my part to exert any influence in favour of his proposition
would do no good.

Not content with my answer he repeated his arguments, dwelling more at length on the advantages
of such strategy to ourselves and its disadvantages to the enemy,
and again urged me to use my influence to secure its adoption.

I gave him the same reply I had already made.

"After a few minutes' thought he abruptly said: 'General, you have not expressed any opinion
in regard to the views I have laid before you.

But I feel assured that you favour them, and I think you ought to do all in your power to have
them carried into effect.'

"I then said, 'I will tell you a secret.'

"He replied, 'Please do not tell me any secret. I would prefer not to hear it.' I answered, 'I must
tell it to you, and I have no hesitation in doing so, because I am certain that it will not be
divulged.' I then explained to him that these views had already been laid before the Government,
in a conference which had taken place at Fairfax Court House, in the first days of October,
between President Davis, Generals Johnston, Beauregard, and myself, and told him the result.

"When
I had finished, he rose from the ground, on which he had been seated, shook my hand warmly,
and said, 'I am sorry, very sorry.'

"Without another word he went slowly out to his horse, a few feet
in front of my tent, mounted very deliberately, and rode sadly away.

A few days afterwards he was ordered to the Valley.* (* Letter of General G.W. Smith to the
author.)

November 5.

It was under such depressing circumstances that Jackson quitted the army which, boldly used, might
have ensured the existence of the Confederacy. His headquarters were established at Winchester;
and, in communication with Centreville by road, rail, and telegraph, although sixty miles distant,
he was still subordinate to Johnston. The Confederate front extended from Fredericksburg on
the Rappahannock to Winchester on the Opequon. Jackson's force, holding the Valley of the Shenandoah
and the line of the Potomac westward of Point of Rocks, was the extreme outpost on the left, and
was connected with the main body by a detachment at Leesburg, on the other side of the Blue Ridge,
under his brother-in-law, General D.H. Hill.

At Winchester his wife joined him, and of their first meeting she tells a pretty story:

"It can readily be imagined with what delight General Jackson's domestic plans for the winter
were hailed by me, and without waiting for the promised 'aide' to be sent on escort, I joined
some friends who were going to Richmond, where I spent a few days to shop, to secure a passport,
and to await an escort to Winchester. The latter was soon found in a kind-hearted, absent-minded
old clergyman. We travelled by stage coach from Strasburg, and were told, before reaching Winchester,
that General Jackson was not there, having gone with his command on an expedition. It was therefore
with a feeling of sad disappointment and loneliness that I alighted in front of Taylor's hotel,
at midnight, in the early part of dreary cold December, and no husband to meet me with a glad
welcome. By the dim lamplight I noticed a small group of soldiers standing in the wide hall,
but they remained silent spectators, and my escort led me up the big stairway, doubtless feeling
disappointed that he still had me on his hands. Just before reaching the landing I turned to look
back, for one figure among the group looked startlingly familiar, but as he had not come forward,
I felt that I must be mistaken. However, my backward glance revealed an officer muffled up in a military
greatcoat, cap drawn down over his eyes, following us in rapid pursuit, and by the time we
were upon the top step a pair of strong arms caught me; the captive's head was thrown back, and
she was kissed again and again by her husband before she could recover from the delightful
surprise he had given her. The good old minister chuckled gleefully, and was no doubt a sincere
sharer in the joy and relief experienced by his charge. When I asked my husband why he did not
come forward when I got out of the coach, he said he wanted to assure himself that it was his
own wife, as he didn't want to commit the blunder of kissing anybody else's esposa!"

The people amongst whom they found themselves were Virginian to the core. In Winchester itself the
feeling against the North was exceptionally bitter. The town was no mushroom settlement; its
history stretched back to the old colonial days; the grass-grown intrenchments on the surrounding
hills had been raised by Washington during the Indian wars, and the
traditions of the first struggle for independence were not yet forgotten.

No single section of the South was more conservative. Although the citizens had been strong Unionists,
nowhere were the principles which their fathers had respected, the sovereignty of the individual
State and the right of secession, more strongly held, and nowhere had the hereditary spirit
of resistance to coercive legislation blazed up more fiercely. The soldiers of Bull Run, who had
driven the invader from the soil of Virginia, were the heroes of the hour, and the leader
of the Stonewall Brigade had peculiar claims on the hospitality of the town. It was to the people
of the Valley that he owed his command. "With one voice," wrote the Secretary of War, "have they
made constant and urgent appeals that to you, in whom they have confidence, their defence
should be assigned."

"The Winchester ladies," says Mrs. Jackson, "were amongst the most famous of Virginia housekeepers,
and lived in a good deal of old-fashioned elegance and profusion. The old border town had not
then changed hands with the conflicting armies, as it was destined to do so many times during the war.
Under the rose-coloured light in which I viewed everything that winter, it seemed to me that no people
could have been more cultivated, attractive, and noble-hearted. Winchester was rich in happy
homes and pleasant people; and the extreme kindness and appreciation shown to General Jackson
by all bound us to them so closely and warmly that ever after that winter he called the place
our 'war home.'"

But amid congenial acquaintances and lovely surroundings, with the tumult of war quiescent, and the
domestic happiness so dear to him restored, Jackson allowed no relaxation either to himself
or to his men. His first care was to train and organise his new regiments. The ranks were filled
with recruits, and to their instruction he devoted himself with unwearied energy. His small
force of cavalry, commanded by Colonel Turner Ashby, a gentleman of Virginia, whose name was
to become famous in the annals of the Confederacy, he at once despatched to patrol the frontier.

Prompt
measures were taken to discipline the troops, and that this last
was a task of no little difficulty the following incident suggests.

In the middle of November, to Jackson's great delight, the Stonewall Brigade had been sent
to him from Manassas, and after its arrival an order was issued which forbade all officers leaving
the camp except upon passes from headquarters.

A protest was immediately drawn up by the regimental commanders, and laid before the general.
They complained that the obnoxious order was "an unwarranted assumption
of authority, disparaged their dignity, and detracted from that respect
of the force under their command which was necessary to maintain their
authority and enforce obedience."

Jackson's reply well illustrates his own idea of discipline, and of the manner in which it
should be upheld. His adjutant-general wrote as follows to the discontented officers:

"The Major-General Commanding desires me to say that the within combined
protest is in violation of army regulations and subversive of military
discipline.

He claims the right to give his pickets such instructions as in his opinion the interests
of the service require.

"Colonels ---- and ---- on the day that their regiments arrived at their present encampment, either
from incompetency to control their commands, or from neglect of duty, so permitted their commands
to become disorganised and their officers and men to enter Winchester
without permission, as to render several arrests of officers necessary.

"If

officers desire to have control over their commands, they must remain habitually with them, industriously
attend to their instruction and comfort, and in battle lead them
well, and in such a manner as to command their admiration.

"Such officers need not apprehend loss of respect resulting from inserting in a written pass the
words 'on duty,' or 'on private business,' should they have occasion
to pass the pickets."

Even the Stonewall Brigade had yet much to learn.

At this time Jackson was besieged with numerous applications for service
on his staff.

The majority of these were from persons without experience, and they
were made to the wrong man.

"My desire," he wrote, "is to get a staff specially qualified for
their specific duties.

I know Mr. ---- personally, and was favourably impressed by him.

But if a person desires office in these times, the best thing for
him to do is to pitch into service somewhere, and work with such energy,
skill, and success as to impress those round him with the conviction
that such are his merits that he must be advanced, or the interests
of the service must suffer...My desire is to make merit the basis
of my recommendations."

Social claims had no weight with him whatever. He felt that the interests at stake were too great
to be sacrificed to favouritism or friendship, and he had seen enough of war to know the importance
of staff work.

Nor was he in the unfortunate position of being compelled to accept the nominees of his superiors.
The Confederate authorities were wise enough to permit their generals
to choose for themselves the instruments on which they would have
to rely for the execution of their designs.

Wellington, in 1815, had forced on him by the Horse Guards, in the
teeth of his indignant remonstrances, incompetent officers whom he
did not know and whom he could not trust.

Jackson, in a country which knew little of war, was allowed to please
himself.

He need appoint no one without learning all about him, and his inquiries were searching. Was he
intelligent?

Was he trustworthy?

Was he industrious? Did he get up early? If a man was wanting in any one of these qualifications
he would reject him, however highly recommended. That his strict investigations and his insistence
on the possession of certain essential characteristics bore good fruit it is impossible to gainsay.
The absence of mishaps and errors in his often complicated manoeuvres is sufficient proof that
he was exceedingly well served by his subordinates. The influence of a good staff is seldom apparent
except to the initiated. If a combination succeeds, the general gets all the credit. If it fails,
he gets all the blame; and while no agents, however efficient, can compensate by their own efforts for
the weakness of a conception that is radically unsound, many a brilliant plan has failed in execution
through the inefficiency of the staff. In his selection of such capable men as his assistants
must needs have been Jackson gave proof that he possessed one at least of the attributes of a great
leader. He was not only a judge of character, but he could place men in the positions to which
they were best suited. His personal predilections were never allowed to interfere. For some months
his chief of the staff was a Presbyterian clergyman, while his chief quartermaster was one
of the hardest swearers in Virginia. The fact that the former could combine the duties of spiritual
adviser with those of his official position made him a congenial comrade; but it was his energy
and ability rather than this unusual qualification which attracted Jackson; and although the
profanity of the quartermaster offended his susceptibilities, their relations were always cordial.
It was to the intelligence of his staff officers, their energy and their loyalty, that he looked;
for the business in hand these qualities were more important than their morals.

That a civilian should be found serving as chief of the staff to a general of division, one of the
most important posts in the military hierarchy, is a curious comment
on the organisation of the Confederate army. The regular officers
who had thrown in their lot with the South had, as a rule, been appointed
to commands, and the generals of lower rank had to seek their staff
officers amongst the volunteers. It may be noticed, however, that
Jackson was by no means bigoted in favour of his own cloth. He showed
no anxiety to secure their services on his staff. He thought many
of them unfitted for duties which brought them in immediate contact
with the volunteers. In dealing with such troops, tact and temper
are of more importance than where obedience has become mechanical,
and the claims of rank are instinctively reflected. In all his campaigns,
too, Jackson was practically his own chief of the staff. He consulted
no one. He never divulged his plans. A man in the carriage sitting opposite two ladies,
one of middle age and dignified bearing, the other young and divinely fair, had seemed suddenly
to recognize her and whipped off his hat in somewhat careless fashion. Taking no notice whatever
of the salutation beyond coloring vividly, Miss Wallen passed quickly behind the carriage and
was speedily over the crossing.

"A friend of yours, Mr. Elmendorf?" asked the elder lady, languidly.

"A friend of--Mr. Forrest's, rather," was the significant reply, and both ladies started, the
younger turning to see who it could be, the elder staring one instant after her, then suddenly
confronting Elmendorf again. One swift glance at her niece, and Mrs. Lawrence, with uplifted
eyebrows, framed her question with sensitive, speechless lips. Elmendorf nodded sapiently.
Then Miss Allison turned around.

"What's her name? Who is she?"

"Her name is Wallen. She is employed at the Lambert Library."

"Oh, indeed!" exclaimed Miss Allison, in quick and lively interest. "I've heard Mr. Forrest
speak of her. I do wish we could see her again." Whereupon Mrs. Lawrence and Mr. Elmendorf
exchanged glances of commiseration.

A quarter of a mile farther up the drive Mr. Elmendorf checked the driver. "If you will excuse
me now, ladies, I have a call to make near here, and will leave you. Should Cary return before
I do, kindly ask him not to go out again until I see him."

Mrs. Lawrence suggested driving him to his destination, but Elmendorf declined. Two minutes
more, and he had disappeared from their view among the shrubbery, and in ten was rapidly walking
southward along a busy thoroughfare. Just as he expected, coming up the opposite side of the
street, moving swiftly and with downcast eyes, was Miss Wallen. Springily he crossed, and the
next instant was lifting his hat in more respectful fashion than when in the park, half confronting,
half turning as though to join her. Barely noticing him at all, Miss Wallen moved determinedly
on, and Elmendorf, following, placed himself at her side.

"I could not but note your manner to me yesterday in the library, Miss Wallen, and indeed on
several previous occasions, and in spite of it I venture to ask you to listen patiently to
me for a moment. My object is such as to entitle my words to your respect, not resentment.
It is for your own sake, your mother's, your name, that I brave your indignation again."

"If it is to repeat what you intimated the other day, Mr. Elmendorf," said the girl, in low,
firm tone, "I refuse to listen. You have no right to speak in such a way."

"I have the right to try and save a poor girl from fatal error. I have devoted the best years
of my life to the cause of the poor as against the rich, the down-trodden against the purse-proud.
I should not have presumed to speak to you on such a subject had I not heard your name lightly,
slightingly used among these very satraps whom Mr. Forrest hails as companions,--comrades.
It is to protect you from the misjudgment, the censure of others that I strive to warn you.
Pardon me if I recall to you that it was partially, at least, on my recommendation that you
were given the position at the library, and that now my name as your endorser is measurably
involved. Of course if after what I have to say you persist in receiving Mr. Forrest's--attentions,
as we will call them, you must do so at your own risk."

"Mr. Elmendorf, I have told you that there is no truth whatever in these reports."

"I do not say there is. It is to warn you of the scandalous, outrageous things these people
in so-called high society say of people who are in humbler walks of life that I ventured to
relate what I'd heard. It is to obviate the possibility of them in future."

"I have told you, Mr. Elmendorf, that I need no such warning, that I will listen to no such
affront. I refuse to believe that any gentleman of Mr. Forrest's set has spoken ill of me.
I know none of them, they know nothing of me."

"Knew nothing, perhaps, until your name became linked with his,--how," said he, with significant
shrug of his shoulders, "I know not, unless he himself has boyishly boasted of----"

But here Miss Wallen stopped short and faced him. "I will hear no more of this, either now
or hereafter," she said, with blazing eyes, then turned abruptly, and entered the hall-way
of an apartment-house close at hand and shut the door in his face. It was not her home, as
Elmendorf knew very well, but possibly friends lived there who would give her refuge and welcome.
At all events, he had received his congé, and there was nothing for it but to go; and go he
did, in high dudgeon. Not until Miss Wallen, watching from an upper window in the room of a
friend and fellow-worker, had seen him board a car and disappear with it far down the street,
did she resume her homeward walk; and now her eyes were wet with indignant tears.

That Mr. Elmendorf should have asserted that it was through his influence, "partially, at least,"
Miss Wallen had received her appointment in the library was characteristic of Mr. Elmendorf.
Coming to the city himself a stranger, only the year previous, he had spent some hours there
each day in reading and writing and study, and had early made acquaintance with Mr. Wells,
the librarian, greatly impressing that gentleman at first with the fluency of his chat and
the extent of his travel, information, and culture. John Allison, millionaire and manager,
was one of the trustees of the Lambert bequest, and when Cary came home from boarding-school
in April--a premature appearance which the superintendent's letter fully explained--Allison
didn't know what to do with him. "I wish I knew the right sort of tutor to take him in hand,"
said he to Wells, and Elmendorf, apparently deep in a volume across the office, heard, and
promptly acted upon the hearing. He asked Wells for a letter of introduction and recommendation.
Wells, having known the applicant less than a fortnight, was pleased with him and said what
he could. Allison was impressed by the applicant's fluency and apparent frankness, and in less
than a week the erudite Elmendorf found himself in halcyon waters. Then came the foreign trip,
another thing to rejoice in; but before he sailed Elmendorf had had an opportunity of doing
good to his kind, as he conceived it. Seeking an inexpensive lodging on his arrival in Chicago,
he had found a neat, cheerful home under the roof of an elderly widow, a Mrs. Wallen, in a
little house on the north side. She lived alone with her daughter, who, it presently transpired,
was her main support. There was a son, a stalwart fellow, too, who, being only twenty-four
and a man of some education and ability, should have been the mother's prop and stay in her
declining years, and so he would have been, very possibly, but for the fact that he had provided
himself with encumbrances of his own in the shape of a wife, two children, and numerous debts.
He was provident in no other way. "Martin," as the mother fondly said, "would have made a mark
in the world if he'd only been started right," but as Mart started himself he started wrong.
So long as the father lived, both brother and sister had been well educated and gently reared,
for Mr. Wallen was a man of scholarly tastes, but a poor man slaving on a poor man's salary.
He had little to leave his children beyond his blessing and the care of their aging mother.
Martin was already pledged to a girl schoolmate when the father died, and Jeannette, his sister,
who seemed to be the only practical member of the household, promptly withdrew from school,
invested her savings in a typewriter, spent her days in the care of her mother and the little
house, two rooms in which were presently advertised as to let furnished, went to evening school
at a business school, practised stenography and typewriting when not doing housework, washing
dishes, or making clothes for her mother and herself, and patiently, pluckily, cheerily looked
forward to the time when Mart could help. Mart spent six months "hunting for something to suit,"
and found nothing he liked so much as making love to his pretty, penniless neighbor. The clerkships
he was offered didn't pay twenty dollars a week, which was the least he thought a man of his
ability and education should accept. Jeannette told him the proper way was to take ten if he
could get it, and work his way up; but Mart disapproved of women's interference in his affairs.
It ended in his finally getting a bottom-of-the-list berth in the freight dépôt of a big railway,
and a wife forthwith. Jeannette said nothing. She had taken Mart's measure and saw this coming.
"If I do not soon have to take care of Mart's wife and babies, I'll be in luck," was the thought
that possibly occurred to her; but she was a silent little body, much given to shrewd and common-sense
observation of the world in which she lived. She was a sunny-natured, merry-hearted child in
the old days, and even as she grew older and more burdened with care the little home still
echoed to the sound of her blithe song as she flitted from room to room about her work, ever
brave, hopeful, uncomplaining. "If I only had Jenny's spirits," said the widow to her one lodger,
"I might do something, too," but, as she hadn't Jenny's spirits or disposition, by a good deal,
the bereaved lady thought it unnecessary to try. It was Jenny who bore the burden of every
detail, Jenny who did their humble marketing, Jenny who made the hard bargains with landlord
and coal-merchant, Jenny who taught and supervised the one clumsy damsel who was brought in
as cook, scullion, laundress, and maid-of-all-work, and Jenny who, after all, did more than
she taught. It was Jenny who cut and fashioned almost every garment worn by either her mother
or herself, who made and trimmed the modest little hats or bonnets, who watched the bargain-counters
at the great retail shops and wished that women didn't have to wear gloves and buttoned boots;
Jenny who had to follow up their flitting lodgers,--young men who folded their tents like the
Arabs they were, and as silently stole away out of the house, leaving sometimes a big lodging-bill
and little luggage; Jenny who presently had to nurse Mart's wife and baby, just as she expected,
for Mart lost that job, and the house he had rented, and the furniture he hadn't paid for and
that was seized just when most needed. So baby Number One first saw the light under the roof
that Jenny's hard work paid for,--a lodger having opportunely "skipped." And all the while
she managed to keep up her study and practice, and to do little odd jobs in copying, sitting
far into the dawn sometimes with aching arms and wrists and burning eyes and whirling brain.
There was no yielding to "beauty sleep" for poor Jenny. Dark circles often settled underneath
the brave, steadfast eyes, and big, blinding tears sometimes welled up from unseen depths when
no one was near to spy upon her woman's weakness, and the very people she slaved for were often
querulous and complaining, and Mart's wife had about as much helpfulness as a consumptive old
cow. Jenny had to tell Mart he must find work and pay their board, or some portion of it, and
Mart got another berth at another railway dépôt, and, without paying anything whatever for
the months he and his had lived under the mother's roof, or much for the new furniture, moved
into another house, where the family circle was presently reinforced by the coming of another
baby. Meantime, however, Jenny's skill, quickness, and accuracy had been steadily bringing
her work into favor. A girl friend and fellow-student had a good position in a down-town office,
where lawyers and business-men brought many a long paper demanding immediate copies, and thither
Jenny moved her typewriter, shrewdly calculating that the money she could earn would more than
offset the expense of a good servant at home. As for car-fare, she meant to walk: she needed
exercise. As for luncheon, she'd carry it with her in her little basket. The plan worked well.
There were some days and weeks in which she was given as much as she could possibly finish,
but there were others--alack! many others--when nothing came. There was a winter when she wore
old clothes, a winter through which other young women in the great hive of a business block
were blooming in gowns and garments that were of latest mode and material. It was, so far as
work was concerned, either a feast or a famine with her, and she longed for just such a position
as that held by an older scholar, who was stenographer and typewriter on salary in the office
of a great law firm and yet was enabled to take frequent transcribing or copying from outside;
but for a billet of this kind she looked in vain. Then came another winter. How it affected
Miss Wallen can best be told through this simple fact, that she was no longer able to ride
home even in the dark wet evenings. Mart had again been turned out of house and home, and came
with his ailing wife and wailing babies to the doting mother's door, and again was Jenny burdened
with their maintenance. Mart had struck. There had been a scaling down of wages for all hands.
Most of them, realizing that these were hard times and that other and better were coming, stood
by the company. Mart was a leader at the meetings of the employees, and a brilliant orator.
With all the eloquence of which he was capable he urged his fellows to stand together and strike.
He was one of a committee of five sent to see the local manager. The manager showed the facts,
and the other men were satisfied that things were about as he showed. They had been long in
his employ, and Mart but a short time. The manager addressed himself to the old men, rather
ignoring the new, and Mart's tongue and temper got away with him. He said he'd strike anyhow,
and he did. He struck his own name off the company's books.

And so during these dark, dreary winter evenings, sometimes wet and raw, sometimes bitterly
cold, quitting when she could her desk at five o'clock, yet often kept pegging away until later,
Miss Jeannette Wallen walked those crowded blocks below the State Street bridge and all the
many, many squares that interposed between her and her little home. As the days began to lengthen
and the cold to strengthen, she sometimes reached there well-nigh frozen and exhausted, to
be welcomed and regaled not so much with hot tea and loving words as by wailing infants and
complaining women,--Mart being, as usual, away at some soul-stirring meeting, where much was
said about the wrongs of the workingman, but nothing thought of those of the workingwoman.

And then came an adventure. Many a time had she been accosted by street prowlers, and sometimes
followed, but her rule had been to make no reply, simply to walk straight on, and look neither
to the right nor to the left. One dark evening in early January she had been working late,
and it was nearly seven as she passed the river. A few blocks farther north she overtook a
man whose unsteady gait did not prevent his quickening speed and striving in turn to overtake
her. Finding him at her heels and his detaining hand actually on her arm, her nerve gave way,
and she took to flight, her pursuer following. Half a block ahead and around a corner was the
apartment-house where she had acquaintances, and into the hall-way Jenny bolted, hoping to
turn and slam the door into the blackguard's face, but, to her horror, the heavy portal refused
to swing. Despairingly she touched the electric button, then turned pluckily to face her pursuer
and warn him off. But the fellow was daft with drink, and, with maudlin exultation, he sprang
after her and strove to seize her in his arms, laughing at her frantic blows. Then the inner
door suddenly opened and tumbled them both into the hall and into the arms of a tall, dark,
heavily-moustached man who looked amazed one second and enlightened the next, for he seated
the half-fainting girl in a chair, kicked the intruder into the gutter, and then sprang back
into the hall in time to catch her as she was almost toppling over on the tiled floor. This
brought her the second time within the clasp of a muscular arm, and then she gasped an inquiry
for her friends, and he sent the staring hall-boy to ask if they were in, and stepped into
his own room and brought forth a glass of wine, which he calmly ordered her to sip, and then,
seeing her heart was fluttering like a terrified bird's, he spoke gently and soothingly, and
little by little she had regained some composure when the boy came down from the fourth floor
to say the ladies were out.

Then she would have gone, and she strove to go, but her knees shook, and he sent the boy with
a message and made her wait, seated in the hall chair, and came forth again from his room in
a fur overcoat and cap, and a moment later a cab was at the door. She recoiled and said she
could go in a car; but the cars were two blocks away. "Kindly permit me to see you safely home,"
he said. "You have had a terrible fright, and are in no condition to walk." At all events,
she was in no condition to rebel, and was glad to sink back into the cushioned corner of the
hansom. "I'll have to trouble you for the street and number," said he, apologetically, as he
stepped calmly in beside her.

"Oh, indeed I mustn't trouble you to come. The driver can----" And then, alas! she remembered
that she had but ten cents about her.

"The driver can, perhaps, but in this case he won't," was the grave, half-smiling answer. "Number
what? Which street, if you please?"

Helplessly she gave them. Commandingly he repeated them to cabby peeping down through his pygmy
man-trap in the roof, and away went the two-wheeler. Her home was but six blocks distant. "You
must let me pay the cabman," she faltered, not well knowing how she was going to do so.

"I would, if it would comfort you," said he, calmly, "but he's already engaged to me by the
hour for the evening."

"Then my share of it, at least," she persisted.

"That I estimate to be possibly fifteen cents," said he, as the vehicle drew up at the curb;
"and I think I owe you ten times the amount for the pleasure of kicking such an arrant cur
as that specimen. Has he ever annoyed you before? Do you know him?"

"By sight only," said she, the color at last reappearing in her face. "He is often on that
street corner below the Beaulieu, but I do not know his name."

"He will be there less frequently in future. And now is there nothing I can do? Are you sure
you have everything you need at home?"

"More than I need,"--very much more, she could have added to herself, thinking of her many
unbidden lodgers,--"but you haven't given me your name, and I owe you so much--besides the
fifteen cents." She was trying to smile now.

"You owe me nothing, unless----" he was turning away, but something in her sweet, earnest face
drew him back,--"unless it be permission to call and ask how you are after all this excitement."

Miss Wallen's face clouded. Where could she receive him? Were not every nook and corner of
the house except her own little room given over to the use of occupants in whom this distinguished-looking
gentleman could be expected to feel no interest whatever? He saw the hesitation, and spoke at once.

"I beg your pardon," said he, frankly and heartily. "I had no right whatever to be intrusive.
Good-night, and--better luck next time." With that he was into the cab and off in a trice.

Two days afterwards Miss Wallen called at the Beaulieu on her way down town, clambered to the
fourth floor, and asked her friends the name of the gentleman who occupied the left front room,
ground-floor. They said he was a Mr. Forrest, but he'd gone away--he was often away; from which
she decided him to be one of the knights errant of the commercial world, but vastly unlike
in tone and manner those who usually accosted her. Two weeks afterwards, as she was seated
at her desk in the big office building, while her friend Miss Bonner was clicking away at the
opposite window, the door opened, and in came an elderly lawyer for whom she had done many
a page of accurate work. "Miss Wallen," said he, "can you do some quick copying for a friend
of mine? Let me present Lieutenant Forrest, of the regular army."

CHAPTER VI.

That Miss Wallen was no more surprised than her new customer was apparent at a glance, but
there was no time wasted in remarks on previous meetings or present weather. It seemed that
the gentleman in question needed three typewritten copies of a long essay he had written, and
needed them at once. It was now four P.M. on Tuesday. He came for the work at five o'clock
Wednesday afternoon, and, although she had wrought hard and faithfully, it lacked completion
by just a page. "It will be ready in ten minutes, sir, if you can wait," said Miss Wallen, rising.

"Pray be in no hurry," said Mr. Forrest. "I have nothing to do to-night but read it over."
He took a vacant chair and produced the evening paper, but through its pages he had already
glanced while at the club; over its pages he was glancing now at the slender, fragile-looking
girl with those busy, flying fingers and the intent gaze in her tired eyes. He saw how wan,
even sallow, she looked. The lines of care were on her forehead and already settling about
the corners of the soft, sensitive mouth. He did not know that all alone she had returned to
the office the previous evening and worked until midnight, then hied her homeward fast as cable-car
could bear her, only, with racking nerves and aching limbs, to toss through almost sleepless
hours until the pallid dawn. He did not know that in order that he might have this work on
time she had never left the building since eight A.M. that day. Silently she finished the last
page, counted and arranged the sheets, shaking out the intervening carbons, quickly bound each
set with heavier cover, and then stood before him with her work. The pale yellow gleam of the
wintry twilight was streaming through the west window, the most unbecoming and trying ever
girl had to face, and she faced it unflinchingly. Forrest quickly arose.

"I fear this has been heavy work, Miss Wallen," he said, regretfully. "You must make allowance
for my inexperience. I have to leave town to-morrow, and needed this before going. Mr. Langston--an
old friend--brought me in to you. I--I hope you will let me pay you--all I think it worth."

"I could have got along faster if the manuscript had been a little clearer," said the girl,
smiling slightly. "Some of it was hard to decipher, and the technical terms were new to me.
If you will look it over and let me know how nearly correct it is, I will then make out my
bill accordingly."

"There won't be any time for that," said he, "and Mr. Langston says you are never inaccurate.
He tells me, furthermore, that you brought my scrawl to him three times to-day for words he
himself could hardly make out. It is over eighteen thousand words, according to my count. I
know what such work is worth in New York,"--and now he held forth three crisp ten-dollar bills,--"but
this had to be done so rapidly. Will thirty dollars be--anywhere near right?" he asked.

Miss Wallen consulted a memorandum on her desk, gravely searched through her portemonnaie,
found some small coin and a two-dollar bill, then as gravely took two of the bills and handed
him the ten, the two, and the small change. "More than sufficient by just twelve dollars and
fifteen cents," she quietly said, "provided it be understood that you are to send me a memorandum
of any and all errors detected, and I shall be here early to-morrow morning and will be glad
to rewrite the pages in which they occur."

But Forrest protested. "I gave twenty-five dollars in New York for work much shorter and done
leisurely," said he, "and you have worked long hours. I feel under very great obligation."

"You needn't," said she. "I have made more in the last twenty-four hours than in the previous
week. I was only too glad to get the work."

Down the iron stairs clerks and office-boys were clattering. From the crowded pavement a hundred
feet below, the thunder of hoofs and wheels and thronging traffic rose on the frosty air. Over
the roofs, wind-driven, came the screech of a hundred whistles from foundry, factory, and mill
on the wide-spreading west side. Toil-worn men by thousands were laying down their tools and
turning eagerly, wearily homeward. The gongs of the cable-cars hammered mad alarums, and swarms
of people squeezed upon the platforms. In adjacent office blocks the electric lights were beginning
to gleam, and the pallid hues of dying day were fading from the wintry sky. Forrest's business
was done, and he had no excuse to linger. She stood there facing him, evidently expecting him
to go. Never before in his life had he encountered anything of this description. He had read
and heard that many a girl delicately reared was now employed as book-keeper, typewriter, and
stenographer, in offices all over the land, and here was one, plainly--even poorly--clad, yet
proud, independent, self-reliant, and in every word and look and act, no matter how humble
her lot, as unmistakably a "lady" as his own sister. He wanted to stay, wanted to impress upon
her his appreciation of the service she had done him, wanted to persuade her to accept what
he felt she sorely needed,--the remaining ten dollars of the sum Langston had told him would
be about what she would probably charge,--but, after a moment's irresolute pause, he turned
abruptly and went to the door.

"I shall be back in a month with more such work, and I shall be fortunate if I can get you
to do it for me. Good-night, Miss Wallen, and--thank you."

"Good-night, sir, and thank you."

Forrest went discontentedly over to the Union League. He felt somehow that he hadn't treated
that girl right. One or two men from the fort were there,--Waring of the light battery and
little "Chip" Sanders of the cavalry. These jovial captains hailed him and besought him in
cordial soldier fashion to stay and dine, especially in view of the long trip ahead of him
on the morrow, but he begged off. He had an evening's work ahead, and must get home betimes,
said he. He compromised, however, on a modest tipple, and, not caring to fight his way through
the crowd in either car or street, summoned a cab and was soon comfortably trundling to the
north side. One block beyond the river, under the electric lights, he caught sight of a slender,
girlish form, swiftly threading a way along the pavement, and recognized at a glance the heroine
of the adventure of a fortnight gone, the transcriber of those fruitful pages on the seat by
his side, and the object of his thoughts.

"Hold up under those lights yonder," he cried to cabby through the trap in the roof, and cabby,
seeing no bar in close proximity, marvelled as he obeyed. Forrest sprang out, turned back,
and in another moment was raising his hat to the girl, who glanced up with nervous start and
repellent mien that only slowly changed to recognition. Even then there was womanly reserve,
and much of it, in her manner.

"Pardon me, Miss Wallen, I never dreamed of such a thing as your walking all the way home,
and after such a long day's work. My cab is right here; please let me drive you the rest of
the way."

"Thank you, no," she answered, quietly. "I always walk after a long day's work. It is exercise
and pleasure both."

"But surely you are very late, and--forgive my reminding you of your recent unpleasant experience."

"No one else ever chased me," she said, "and I don't think even he would had he not been drinking.
You seem to have scared him away, for not once have I set eyes on him since."

"But you will ride, won't you? It would be a pleasure--some comfort to my conscience--if I
might send you home, after the lot that you have done and the little you would take." They
had reached the cab now, and he stopped invitingly, but she never faltered, and only turned
towards him and slackened her steps sufficiently to repeat her thanks and a courteous refusal.

"Upon my word, you make me ashamed of my own laziness," said Forrest. "I used to be a good
tramper on the Plains, but have been getting out of the way of it. At least I may walk a little
way with you, may I not?"

And this she could not well see how to decline. Cabby was dismissed with a douceur, and Forrest
hastened after his new acquaintance. When the day dawned the Confederate divisions, reinforced
by some 5000 or 6000 stragglers, held the same position as the previous evening, and over
against them, seen dimly through the mist, lay the Federal lines. The skirmishers, crouching behind
the shattered fences, confronted each other at short range; the guns of both armies were unlimbered,
and the masses of infantry, further to the rear, lay ready for instant conflict. But not a
shot was fired. The sun rose higher in the heavens; the warm breath of the autumn morning rustled
in the woods, but still the same strange silence prevailed.

The men spoke in undertones, watching intently the movements of staff officers and orderlies; but
the ranks lay as still as the inanimate forms, half hidden by the
trodden corn, which lay so thickly between the lines; and as the hours
passed on without stir or shot, the Southern generals acknowledged
that Lee's daring in offering battle was fully justified.

The enemy's aggressive strength was evidently exhausted; and then arose the question, Could
the Confederates attack? It would seem that the possibility of a great counterstroke had already
been the subject of debate, and that Lee, despite the failure of the previous evening, and
Jackson's adverse report, believed that the Federal right might be outflanked and overwhelmed.
"During the morning," writes General Stephen D. Lee, "a courier from headquarters came to my
battalion of artillery with a message that the Commander-in-Chief wished to see me. I followed
the courier, and on meeting General Lee, he said, "Colonel Lee, I wish you to go with this courier
to General Jackson, and say that I sent you to report to him." I replied, "General, shall I take
my batteries with me?" He said, "No, just say that I told you to report to him, and he will
tell you what he wants." I soon reached General Jackson.

He was dismounted, with but few persons round him. He said to me, "Colonel Lee, I wish you to
take a ride with me," and we rode to the left of our lines with but
one courier, I think.

We soon reached a considerable hill and dismounted. General Jackson then said, "Let us go up this
hill, and be careful not to expose yourself, for the Federal sharpshooters
are not far off."

The hill bore evidence of fierce fight the day before.* (* Evidently
the ridge which had been held by Stuart on the 17th.) A battery of
artillery had been on it, and there were wrecked caissons, broken
wheels, dead bodies, and dead horses around.

General Jackson said: "Colonel, I wish you to take your glasses and
carefully examine the Federal line of battle."

I did so, and saw a remarkably strong line of battle, with more troops
than I knew General Lee had.

After locating the different batteries, unlimbered and ready for action, and noting the strong
skirmish line, in front of the dense masses of infantry, I said to him, "General, that is a very strong
position, and there is a large force there." He said, "Yes. I wish you to take fifty pieces of
artillery and crush that force, which is the Federal right. Can you do it?" I can scarcely describe
my feelings as I again took my glasses, and made an even more careful examination. I at once
saw such an attempt must fail. More than fifty guns were unlimbered and ready for action, strongly
supported by dense lines of infantry and strong skirmish lines, advantageously
posted.

The ground was unfavourable for the location of artillery on the
Confederate side, for, to be effective, the guns would have to move
up close to the Federal lines, and that, too, under fire of both infantry
and artillery.

I could not bring myself to say all that I felt and knew. I said, "Yes, General; where will I get
the fifty guns?" He said, "How many have you?" I replied, "About
twelve out of the thirty I carried into the action the day before."

(My losses had been very great in men, horses, and carriages.) He said, "I can furnish you
some, and General Lee says he can furnish some." I replied, "Shall I go for the guns?" "No,
not yet," he replied.

"Colonel Lee, can you crush the Federal right with fifty guns?"

I said, "General, I can try. I can do it if anyone can." He replied, "That is not what I asked
you, sir. If I give you fifty guns, can you crush the Federal right?" I evaded the question
again and again, but he pressed it home. Finally I said, "General, you seem to be more intent
upon my giving you my technical opinion as an artillery officer, than upon my going after the
guns and making the attempt."
 Forrest himself brought
Miss Wallen to the library and presented her to Mr. Wells. A gentleman was seated in the librarian's
room at the time,--an industrious fellow who had recently appeared, who spent some hours turning
over many books, and whom Wells described as a most interesting and travelled man, a graduate
of Jena, etc.; but at sight of him Miss Wallen showed slight though unmistakable signs of embarrassment,
almost annoyance. He pretended to busy himself with his books, but was evidently listening
to what was going on, and Miss Wallen was decidedly constrained. Presently he arose and came
forward, saying, with much suavity of manner, "You must pardon my intrusion. I could not but
catch something of this conversation, and had I known before that Mr. Wells was contemplating
a change here I should have eagerly availed myself of the privilege our friendship gives to
recommend this young lady, of whose character and qualifications--we being inmates of the same
household--I can speak ex cathedra, as it were, and can hardly speak too highly." He went on
to say more, taking the floor, as was his custom, to the exclusion of everybody else, and Mr.
Forrest withdrew to a distant part of the room. Miss Wallen presently bade Mr. Wells good-night
and asked when she might come to see him again, and Wells, looking a trifle vexed, asked for
her address and said he would write.

And then Mr. Elmendorf announced that it would give him much pleasure to see Miss Wallen home,
and what could she do? Forrest had said nothing about going further. Elmendorf had certainly
been most flattering in his commendation. She had taken a decided dislike to him during the
few weeks he had occupied the lodger's room, and had avoided him as much as possible, but it
might well be that he was a man of influence in library matters. She had no reason for rebuffing,
but good reason for showing gratitude. Forrest gravely bade her good-evening and good luck,
and Miss Wallen walked away with her lodger in close attendance. All the way home he descanted
on his influence with Wells and the trustees. He was already, he said, contemplating taking
a position in the household of Mr. Allison, the millionaire magnate. He took it, in truth,
within the week, and wrote Miss Wallen that it had given him much pleasure to urge warmly her
claim for the position soon to become vacant. He found they had several other applications,
and some who had strong influence, but he would not cease to urge her appointment and keep
her well-being in mind. But meantime one day Mr. Wells gladdened the girl's heart by a brief
note saying that he had been so favorably impressed with the work she had done for Mr. Forrest
that he had determined to tender her the place.

Two days later Forrest came to congratulate her and to bid her adieu, as he would sail for
Europe within the week. She tried to thank him, but could not frame the words. She did not
lack for language, however, when her mother read to her that night the charming note she had
just received from Mr. Elmendorf, felicitating her upon the promotion of her devoted and dutiful
daughter, and himself upon the fact that this good fortune was probably due to his determined
and persistent presentation of her daughter's claims before the trustees, whom he had frequent
opportunity of meeting at Mr. Allison's house. Doubtless Elmendorf considered this presentation
equivalent in full for the three weeks' arrears of room rent, a cheque for which he had said
should be forthcoming as soon as Mr. Allison paid in advance his first quarter's salary, but
which never came at all.

CHAPTER VII.

When Mr. Forrest returned from Europe in the late autumn of '93, he expected to go forthwith
to the station of his regiment and devote his energies to those ceaseless, engrossing, yet
somewhat narrowing duties that keep a man of mature years, capable of much better things, attending
roll-calls, drilling two sets of fours addressed by courtesy as "company," grilling on the
rifle-range, and consuming hours of valuable time in work allotted in older services to sergeants.
Calling at the War Department on his way, he was asked about the autumn manoeuvres and if he
had seen any of them. He had seen a great deal, the interest of friends in both the German
and Austrian services having enabled him to follow the armies assembled about Metz and Güns
to excellent advantage. Returning to his billet after each long day in the saddle, he had spent
some hours before retiring in recording his impressions and observations, the result being
several big note-books crammed with data of deep interest to the professional soldier. The
adjutant-general took Forrest in to the Secretary of War, and there was some significant talk,
the result of which was the intimation that he should again be assigned to temporary duty at
department head-quarters in Chicago in order to give him opportunity to write out his notes.
Long before this, Forrest's essays on grand tactics and certain papers on military history
had won much favor among the studious men in the army, and it was with pride and pleasure that
he entered on the allotted task. He wrote, as did Zachary Taylor, a hand that looked much as
though a ramrod rather than a pen had been used, and naturally his first thought was to find
his transcriber of the previous winter. There she was at her desk in the library, and looking
far younger, happier, and better than when he saw her last, and the frank pleasure in her face
was good to see as she welcomed him more in manner than in words.

"Certainly," said Miss Wallen; "I shall be glad to give as many evenings to the work as may
be necessary. I am too busy here by day." And so as the autumn wore out and the winter wore
on, her slender white fingers danced over the keys, and page after page, in neatly typed duplicates,
his voluminous notes on the armies of Germany and Austria-Hungary were faithfully transcribed.
Home was not so far away now, and her brisk walks led her no longer through sections she had
learned to dread. Accustomed for some years to far longer and lonelier tramps in the wintry
evenings, she thought nothing of tripping to and fro between the Lambert and the rather crowded
little house in which she dwelt. Mart and his wife and babies still sojourned there, and the
babies waxed strong and loud and lusty on Aunt Jenny's bounty, never caring whose fingers earned
the porridge, so long as their share was ample and frequent. Mart was out of work, and correspondingly
out of elbows and temper. Mart had taken to continual meetings and to such drink as he could
get treated to or credit for, and still the mother condoned, the wife complained, and Jenny
carried the family load. Mart loved to tread the rostrum boards and portray himself as a typical
victim of corporation perfidy and capitalistic greed. The railway company from which he had
seceded refused to take him back, and other companies, edified by the reports of his speeches
in The Switch Light, The Danger Signal, and other publications avowedly devoted to the interest
of the down-trodden operatives of the railway and manufacturing companies, thought that in
a winter when many poor fellows were out of work through no fault of their own, beyond having
exercised the right of suffrage the wrong way, the few vacancies should be given to men more
likely to render faithful service. Mart's wife, impressed with the idea that she must do something,
took in sewing, and took the sewing to ask Jenny to show her how, which in nine cases out of
ten Jenny did practically. If the little money thus earned had gone to pay for the babies'
milk or Mart's whiskey bills, Jenny would have been grateful; but even these shillings, earned
with her numbed and weary fingers, somehow found their way to Mart's broad palm and thence
to the dram-shop, though not to that which had claims for goods already delivered. And then
followed scenes that covered the poor girl with shame and indignation. To her office at the
library one winter evening, when Wells was reading the late mail, and Mr. Forrest, seated at
a neighboring desk with a big atlas before him was far away among the glinting pickelhaubes
on the banks of the Moselle, a man came with an account which he wished Miss Wallen to settle.
It was Martin Wallen's bar bill for the autumn months at Donnelly's Shades, and the girl flushed
with mortification. "This is something with which I have nothing to do," said she. "I would
not pay it if I had the money."

"I was told to come to you," said the man. "It's your brother's account, and he said you'd
promised him the money time and again. If it ain't paid we'll send for the furniture." And
then he wanted to show it to Wells, who waved him off in annoyance; and then he looked as though
he would like to interest the other occupant of the room in the matter, but something about
that gentleman's face as he arose and came forward proved unsympathetic. "I'll send this bill
in again on the 31st," said Mr. Donnelly, "and if it ain't paid then----"

But the tall, brown-eyed, brown-moustached man was walking straight at him, looking him through
and through, and there would have been a collision in the office had not Donnelly backed promptly
out through the door-way. This merely transferred the scene of it and involved a third party,
for there, just outside the ground-glass partition, ostensibly hunting for a book in the revolving
case and humming a lively tune, was Elmendorf. Recoiling to avoid contact with the advancing
Forrest, the bill-collector backed into the listening tutor and bumped him up against a table.

"Oh, beg pardon," said Elmendorf, as though in no wise aware who his bumper might be, and then
edged off towards the corridor beyond, apparently desirous of escaping further connection with
the affair. But Forrest, even in the dim light of the anteroom, recognized him at a glance.
More and more, ever since the return from Europe, had he grown to dislike and distrust the
man. More than once had he seen an expression on Miss Wallen's face when Wells happened to
mention Elmendorf that gave ground for the belief that she, too, had no pleasant recollection
of her erstwhile lodger; but never had she opened her lips upon the subject. Indeed, bright
and intelligent as was the girl when she chose to talk, both Wells and Forrest had found that
when she preferred to be silent it was useless to question. But here, skulking in the anteroom,
where reading was out of the question, where, however, one might easily hear what was going
on in the private office, here was Elmendorf again, and though Donnelly's foot-falls were audible
to all as he came pounding up the stairway and turned from the corridor into the office rooms,
not a sound of others had been heard. The main stairway--that which led to the great reading-rooms
of the library proper--was on the southern front. Only those having business with the head
librarian or the trustees were supposed to come this way. Forrest often read, wrote, and studied
here, because the more valuable atlases and books of reference were near at hand, and whenever
not writing for Wells Miss Wallen was at work on his notes. It flashed upon Forrest that the
tutor had some object other than book-hunting in that noiseless visit, and he called him back.
"Would you mind waiting a moment, Mr. Elmendorf?" said he. "I should like to speak with you
after I've said a word to this--gentleman." Then, coolly pushing beyond both, he closed the
corridor door and turned on the electric light.

"Mr. Donnelly," said he, facing the now nervous-looking Irishman, "you know as well as I that
no woman on earth is liable for the liquor bills of any man, even a relative. What brought
you here?"

"Me legs, I s'pose, an' me own affairs. What's it to you, anyhow?" But Donnelly was shifting
rather unsteadily on those same legs and twisting his bill in his hands.

"This, to begin with," said Forrest, very coolly, though his blood was boiling, and the impulse
to floor the fellow was strong within him. "An old fellow campaigner of mine, Sergeant McGrath,
has told me----" but there was no need to go further. Donnelly's tone and manner underwent
instant change.

"Is this Lieutenant Forrest?"

"It is Lieutenant Forrest; and I have this to say to you here and now. You came here to bring
shame and distress on an honest girl,--you, an old soldier and an Irishman,--the first soldier
and the first Irishman I ever knew to be guilty of so low and contemptible a piece of persecution.
When I write to Major Cranston of this, and when I tell McGrath----"

"Don't be hard on me, lieutenant. I meant no harm to the lady at all. Sure the bill's been
unpaid ever since October. I tuk it to the house--I thought mebbe she could inflooence Mart,
but I'd never have come here wid it at all, sorr, but--but----" And his troubled gaze wandered
now to where Elmendorf stood biting his nails and watching a chance to speak.

"But what, Donnelly? Who put you up to such a dirty piece of business?"

"Permit me. Nothing dirty was intended for a minute, if I may be allowed to speak," said Elmendorf,
as he came forward. "As a friend of all parties concerned, for I know Mr. Wallen well and have
remarked his bibulous propensities with distress, I merely suggested to Mr. Donnelly that perhaps
if he could get Miss Wallen's ear he might possibly induce her to exercise a restraining influence
upon her brother. I thought it best that she should know how and where he was spending so much
money in esse as well as money in posse. That Mr. Donnelly should have misconstrued my well-meant
words into----"

"Oh, sure ye told me to show this bill when everybody could see it, sorr, and that would take
the starch out av her."

"Settle it between you, gentlemen," said Mr. Forrest, turning contemptuously away. "I have
heard more than enough."

"I will see you about this later this evening," said Elmendorf, as the lieutenant disappeared
within the sanctum, slamming the door after him and vouchsafing no answer.

That evening Wells's letters seemed interminable. It was nearly half-past six when he finished
dictating, and with aching heart and burning face Miss Wallen closed her desk and silently
went for her cloak and overshoes. For over half an hour Mr. Forrest had stood to his guns across
the room, making much pretence of being busy with the atlas and his notes, but time and again
his eyes wandered, following his thoughts, to the other two,--Wells rapidly dictating, his
stenographer with bowed head, determinedly wielding her pencil. When Wells finally started,
the lieutenant arose and strolled out with him, closing the door behind them. "I shall see
Miss Wallen home," said he, in low tone. "She's had more than enough indignity for one day."

"I'd do it if you couldn't, Mr. Forrest, even though they're waiting for me at home. That girl's
a lady, by Jupiter! You've no idea how she's studied and developed ever since she's been here;
and it's a damned outrage that such fellows should be allowed to annoy her."

"Such fellows won't, another time," said Forrest, quietly. "Elmendorf was back of this, for
some reason that I mean to fathom."

"That's all very well as far as the Irishman's concerned, Mr. Forrest,--he's had his fill,--but
look out for that other. I'm no judge of character, now, if he isn't a snake."

When Forrest re-entered the room Miss Wallen had turned out the electric lights over her desk
and was standing by the window, her face bowed in her thin white hands. Forrest's overcoat
and hat always hung in the closet without. He had gone with Wells, closing the door. She was,
as she supposed, at last alone, and the reaction had come. All the weary months of work, work,
work, all the patient slaving to provide for the improvident, all the brave, cheery, hopeful,
uncomplaining days of honest toil and honest effort, only to end in such a scene of shame and
mortification as this! What could Mr. Wells think of his secretary, chased to her desk with
the liquor-bills of her kindred! What would not Mr. Forrest think! A weaker woman would have
found refuge and comfort in a passion of tears, but her eyes seemed burning. Leaning against
the open casement, she stood there fairly quivering with wrath and the sense of indignity and
wrong. She, too, had recognized Elmendorf's nasal whine in the anteroom, and felt well assured
that he was in some way responsible for Donnelly's action. Mart had had much to say of late
of the foreigner's convincing logic and thrillingly eloquent appeals to the workingman. There
was the man to wring the neck of capital and bring the bloated bond-holders to terms, said
he. Mart never missed a meeting where Elmendorf was to speak, and had more than once been brought
home, fuddled, in the cab which conveyed the agitator back to the scene of his labors in the
Allison homestead. The cab was paid for by the Union, and Elmendorf didn't mind having it wait
outside while he assisted Mart within and stopped to condole with Mrs. Wallen the elder, or
Mrs. Wallen junior, and to inquire significantly, if he did not see her, where Miss Wallen
was; he always supposed the library closed at nine o'clock, and was not aware, he said, that
anybody except the janitor was permitted to remain there later. He knew very well that the
librarian was sometimes there until nearly midnight. He knew well that it was there and in
the evenings, mainly, that Miss Wallen worked at the transcript of Forrest's reports. "At least,"
as he said to himself, and suggested to others, "that is the ostensible purpose of her frequently
prolonged visits." He often walked by the lighted windows of the sanctum and occasionally slipped
into the dark hall-way, so the watchman later said. The same irrepressible propensity to meddle
in the affairs of everybody in the household where he was employed, in the councils of the
various labor unions, in the meetings of political associations, in the official duties or
off-hand chats of the men at military head-quarters, in the management of the Lambert Library,
seemed to follow him in his casual intercourse with this obscure little household. One night
when towards ten o'clock Miss Wallen came blithely down the corridor stairs, she was surprised
to find the tutor awaiting her. "As I know Mr. Forrest to be otherwise engaged to-night, Miss
Wallen, I have ventured to offer my services as escort," said he, and though she shrank from
and could not bear him, there was no reason at that time for denying him; but when he presently
began talking of Forrest in his suggestive, insinuating way, and excusing his references to
the lieutenant on the ground of his extreme regard for her widowed mother, her impoverished
but amiable relatives, and her own refined, intellectual, and accomplished self, she shrank
still more and strove to silence him,--a difficult matter. She had, however, a trait that proved
simply exasperating to a man of Elmendorf's calibre,--a faculty of listening in absolute silence
where she did not desire to confirm or approve,--and when he had spent much breath and nearly
half an hour in descanting upon his impressions of the demoralizing tendencies of military
associations in general and of idle officers in particular, it rasped him to find that she
did not seem to consider his views worthy the faintest comment; nor would she nor did she invite
him in. When her mother reproved her for this, Miss Wallen smiled, and said, "Next time I will,
and then you might ask him for the three weeks' lodging he hasn't paid," and Mart said she
ought to be ashamed of speaking so of a man who had done everything for her. She'd never have
got that library place at all if it hadn't been for Elmendorf, no matter what her fine friends
might have told her. Oh, Mart knew all about it; needn't try to pull the wool over his eyes!
Another time had Elmendorf come, and again had he talked more of what he had done for her and
the rights it gave him to tender her counsel, and this time his references to Forrest took
a graver form and became offensive. It was then, indignant, she refused to hear more of it,
and that night Elmendorf went away gritting his teeth, and now had come this contemptible essay
to humiliate her before her employer. Oh, it was cowardly! shameful! She threw up her arms,
clinching her little white hands and stamping as slender a foot as ever walked in a machine-made
shoe, and then, ejaculating, as women will, in moments of supreme exasperation, "If I were
only a man!" whirled about and beheld one.

"In your present mood," said Mr. Forrest, quietly, "I am rather glad you are not, especially
as what I have to say refers to you rather in your capacity as 'the clever woman of the family.'
Did you ever read an English book of that title?" And then in the most matter-of-fact way in
the world he proceeded to assist her into the heavy winter cloak he had lifted from its accustomed
peg. "No, of course you haven't," he went on, chatting unconcernedly, and well knowing she
was too overwrought to talk at all; "a girl who works from morning till late at night has little
chance to read anything beyond stenographic notes and hideous hieroglyphics--mine, for instance.
Now, this sensible head-gear, if you please---- How can a woman wear a hat in winter? Yes,
it's on quite straight,--quite as straight as though you had a glass in front of you. Now the
overshoes. No, pardon me, Miss Wallen, you're not going to put them on yourself. Sit down,
if you please, or stand, if you don't." And down he dropped on one knee and in a trice had
stowed away the thin, worn little boots, with their frayed button-holes, within the warm yet
clumsy Arctics. "You are sensible to wear such things as these," he said. "The snow is falling
heavily, and I mean to walk you home to-night. Now the gloves.--Yes, you may have your own
way there, as I shouldn't know how." And, so saying, he seemed calmly to have taken possession
of the hitherto self-willed and independent young woman, who for the first time in her life
began to realize how much sweetness there was, after all, in having some one to do something
for one, instead of being expected to do everything for every one else. She submitted silently
to be led forth into the cool, fresh evening air, and then when he as calmly took her hand
and placed it within his arm she made no move to withdraw it, neither did she seem to know
how by means of it to lean upon his strength. Passively she let it lie, and, walking by his
side, turned her face to the drifting snowflakes and cared not that the night was raw and chill,
the lake wind blustering.

For a moment more Forrest did not speak. He glanced keenly up the dim avenue, holding his head
very high, as was his way, and himself very erect. Already the sting and shame of her recent
experience seemed fading in Jenny's past. There was something so new, strange, sweet, in this
masterful assumption on his part of all control and command, there was something so complete
in her faith in him, something so like girlish admiration if not hero-worship surging up in
the throbbing little heart beneath that worn old winter cloak, that much of her old bright,
buoyant, merry self came back to her. "If I can't be a man," said she to herself, "I'm the
next thing to one, if there ever was one," and then was amazed at her own impulse to peer up
into his grave, soldierly face and aghast to find herself drawing closer to his side. In the
suddenness and alarm of this revelation she nearly jumped beyond arm's length, and he felt
constrained to retake her hand and draw it farther through his arm.

"You will find it easier if you will let me bear a little of the weight to-night," said he,
gravely, "and that is why I have made it my business to intrude upon your time and attention.
Miss Wallen, will you kindly tell me what claim your brother has upon you?"

"He is my brother and out of work," she answered, simply.

"Can't he get work?"

"He says he can't."

"What can he do?"

"He writes well, and he had a clerkship, but Mart was--unsteady, and he lost it. Then he got
a place in the freight-yards, but there was a strike, and he went out. They wouldn't take him
back then because he was so foolish in his talk; and they can't take him now, for hundreds
of better men, steadier men, old employees, have been laid off. Ever since the World's Fair
business has been falling away."

"And you have had not only that house and your mother to care for, but an able-bodied brother?"

Jenny dropped her head. Able-bodied brother, indeed!--with wife, babies, debts, duns, and all!
She had borne the weight of the whole establishment upon her fragile shoulders; but that wasn't
a thing to speak of to him,--to anybody. Her silence touched him.

"Do you mean that out of your little salary you have paid that house-rent and all the expenses
and your mother's and his too?"

No answer.

"I wish you would tell me," he said, in such grave, courteous tones that they went to her heart.
"I beg you not to think me intrusive. I have never heard of such a case before. Why, Miss Wallen,
I'm appalled when I see how thoughtless I have been. You simply cannot afford the time to work
for me at the price you fixed."

"It pays better than mending Mart's clothes, etc., at home," said she, whimsically; "very much
better than anything I can get to do up town."

"Good heavens! cannot your mother mend Mart's clothes? Can't he mend them himself? My--my--poor
little friend, I had no idea matters were as bad as this!"

He had no idea even now how bad matters were, nor did she care to edify him. "Why, Mr. Forrest,"
said she, "when I look around me this winter and see all the want and suffering on every side--the
absolute destitution in places--I think my fortune regal. I only wish all the girls I know
of were half as well-to-do."

Forrest drew a long breath. "Well, of all the incarnations of pluck and cheerfulness I ever
heard of, commend me to this," thought he. They were within two squares of home, and at the
corner was a large family grocery store. She faltered now. "I'm very much obliged to you for
coming with me so far, and--I have to stop here."

"But only to make some purchases. You are going on to tea, and I have something I want to say."

"I may have to wait, and you have your engagements."

"Nothing in the world but to dine, solus, at the Virginia, and my appetite's about gone. I
mean to wait, Miss Wallen."

Miss Wallen flushed, but made no further remonstrance. Entering the store, she gave her orders.
Some little packages of tea and sugar were speedily ready. In the window were some pyramids
of Florida oranges, rich and luscious fruit. Watching her with uncontrollable interest, he
saw her eyes glancing towards them, saw and knew the question framed by her soft lips, saw
and realized what was passing as the salesman answered and she shook her head. Turning to another
clerk, he pencilled a number on a card he handed him and gave some orders of his own. Presently
she stored her change in the little portemonnaie and picked up her bundles. Promptly he relieved
her of them, and again as they came forth he tendered his arm. The side street into which they
turned was darker than the broad avenue. The houses were poor and cheap, the gas-lamps few
and far between. Silently now they walked rapidly along, for he was deep in thought. He longed
to find some way of opening the subject uppermost in his mind, but knew not how. At last he spoke:

"Miss Wallen, where and how can I see your brother? I've an idea of a place he might fill.
He is unmarried, I presume?"

Silence a moment. "No, Mart has a wife."

"A wife? Where is she? What does she do?"

"She isn't strong, and can't do much of anything."

"Not even mend his clothes, or stop---- How about children?"

"You know the old adage," said she, with a quiet smile, "and Mart is a poor man."

"And they, too, are your care--you their support--and--this has been going on since last year?"

"Oh, no; Mart gets odd jobs now and then."

"The proceeds of which he spends in---- But I entreat your pardon, my--my friend. This is beyond
anything I ever dreamed of; and--don't come to the library to-night, please. There's no hurry
about those pages; to-morrow night will be better."

They were at the little gateway now, and he released her arm. Over-against them on the opposite
side of the street two men, skulking back in the shadows of a dark entrance-way, edged a little
farther forward, watched him as he restored the bundles, watched him as he took again her hand,
then lifted his hat and bowed over it as he might have done reverence to a queen, watched her
as she tripped within-doors, and then Forrest again as he slowly turned and walked thoughtfully
away.

"That's the man, then?" asked, in cautious, querulous tone, the shorter, slighter of the two.

"That's him--damn him! I can feel his kick to this day." 

"After the truce had been agreed upon," says Captain Smith, "litter-bearers
to bring away the dead and wounded were selected from the command
of General Rodes.

When they had fallen in, General Rodes said to them: "Now, boys,
those Yankees are going to ask you questions, and you must not tell
them anything.

Be very careful about this." At this juncture one of the men spoke up, and said, "General, can't we
tell them that we whipped them yesterday?" Rodes replied, laughing: "Yes, yes! you can tell
them that." Immediately another man spoke up: "General, can't we tell them that we can whip
them tomorrow and the day after?" Rodes again laughed, and sent those incorrigible jokers
off with: "Yes, yes! go on, go on! Tell them what you please.""

The Army of the Potomac, on the other hand, was not likely to become
weaker or less formidable if time were allowed it to recuperate.

It had behind it enormous reserves. 60,000 men had been killed, wounded, or captured since the
battle of Kernstown, and yet the ranks were as full as when McClellan first marched on Richmond.
Many generals had disappeared; but those who remained were learning their trade; and the soldiers,
although more familiar with defeat than victory, showed little diminution of martial ardour. Nor
had the strain of the war sapped the resources of the North. Her trade, instead of dwindling, had
actually increased; and the gaps made in the population by the Confederate bullets were more
than made good by a constant influx of immigrants from Europe.

It was not by partial triumphs, not by the slaughter of a few brigades, by defence without
counterstroke, by victories without pursuit, that a Power of such strength and vitality could
be compelled to confess her impotence. Whether some overwhelming disaster, a Jena or a Waterloo,
followed by instant invasion, would have subdued her stubborn spirit is problematical. Rome survived
Cannae, Scotland Flodden, and France Sedan. But in some such crowning mercy lay the only hope of
the Confederacy, and had the Army of the Potomac, ill-commanded as it was, been drawn forward
to the North Anna, it might have been utterly destroyed. Half-hearted strategy, which aims only
at repulsing the enemy's attack, is not the path to king-making victory; it is not by such
feeble means that States secure or protect their independence. To occupy a position where Stuart's
cavalry was powerless, where the qualities which made Lee's infantry so formidable--the impetuosity
of their attack, the swiftness of their marches--had no field for display, and where the enemy had
free scope for the employment of his artillery, his strongest arm, was but to postpone the evil
day. It had been well for the Confederacy if Stonewall Jackson, whose resolute strategy had but
one aim, and that aim the annihilation of the enemy, had been the supreme director of her councils.
To paraphrase Mahan: "The strategic mistake (in occupying a position for which pursuit was impracticable)
neutralised the tactical advantage gained, thus confirming the military maxim that a strategic
mistake is more serious and far-reaching in its effects than an error in tactics."

Lee, however, was fettered by the orders of the Cabinet; and Mr. Davis and his advisers, more
concerned with the importance of retaining an area of country which still furnished supplies
than of annihilating the Army of the Potomac, and relying on European intervention rather than
on the valour of the Southern soldier, were responsible for the occupation
of the Fredericksburg position.

In extenuation of their mistake it may, however, be admitted that the advantages of concentration on
the North Anna were not such as would impress themselves on the civilian mind, while the surrender
of territory would undoubtedly have embarrassed both the Government and the supply department. Moreover,
at the end of November, it might have been urged that if Burnside were permitted to possess
himself of Fredericksburg, it was by no means certain that he would advance on Richmond; establishing
himself in winter quarters, he might wait until the weather improved, controlling, in the meantime,
the resources and population of that portion of Virginia which lay within his reach.

Nevertheless, as events went far to prove, Mr. Davis would have done wisely had he accepted the
advice of the soldiers on the spot. His strategical glance was less comprehensive than that
of Lee and Jackson. In the first place, they knew that if Burnside proposed going into winter quarters,
he would not deliberately place the Rappahannock between himself and his base, nor halt with
the great forest of Spotsylvania on his flank. In the second place, there could be no question
but that the Northern Government and the Northern people would impel him forward. The tone of
the press was unmistakable; and the very reason that Burnside had been appointed to command
was because McClellan was so slow to move. In the third place, both Lee and Jackson saw the need of
decisive victory. With them questions of strategic dispositions, offering chances of such victory,
were of more importance than questions of supply or internal politics. They knew with what rapidity
the Federal soldiers recovered their morale; and they realised but too keenly the stern determination
which inspired the North. They had seen the hosts of invasion retire in swift succession, stricken
and exhausted, before their victorious bayonets. Thousands of prisoners had been marched to
Richmond; thousands of wounded, abandoned on the battle-field, had been paroled; guns, waggons
and small arms, enough to equip a great army, had been captured; and general after general had
been reduced to the ignominy that awaits a defeated leader. Fremont and Shields had disappeared;
Banks was no longer in the field; Porter was waiting trial; McDowell had gone; Pope had gone,
and McClellan; and yet the Army of the Potomac still held its ground, the great fleets still
kept their stations, the capture of Richmond was still the objective of the Union Government, and
not for a single moment had Lincoln wavered from his purpose.

It will not be asserted that either Lee or Jackson fathomed the source of this unconquerable tenacity,
They had played with effect on the fears of Lincoln; they had recognised in him the motive power
of the Federal hosts; but they had not yet learned, for the Northern people themselves had not
yet learned it, that they were opposed by an adversary whose resolution was as unyielding as their own, who
loved the Union even as they loved Virginia, and who ruled the nation with the same tact and
skill that they ruled their soldiers.

In these pages Mr. Lincoln has not been spared. He made mistakes, and he himself would have
been the last to claim infallibility. He had entered the White House with a rich endowment
of common-sense, a high sense of duty, and an extraordinary knowledge of the American character;
but his ignorance of statesmanship directing arms was great, and his military errors were numerous.
Putting these aside, his tenure of office during the dark days of "61 and "62 had been marked
by the very highest political sagacity; his courage and his patriotism had sustained the nation
in its distress; and in spite of every obstacle he was gradually bringing into being a unity of sympathy
and of purpose, which in the early days of the war had seemed an impossible ideal. Not the
least politic of his measures was the edict of emancipation, published after the battle of Sharpsburg.
It was not a measure without flaw. It contained paragraphs which might fairly be interpreted, and
were so interpreted by the Confederates, as inciting the negroes to rise against their masters,
thus exposing to all the horrors of a servile insurrection, with its accompaniments of murder and
outrage, the farms and plantations where the women and children of
the South lived lonely and unprotected.

But if the edict served only to embitter the Southerners, to bind the whole country together
in a still closer league of resistance, and to make peace except by conquest impossible, it was
worth the price. The party in the North which fought for the re-establishment of the Union
had carried on the war with but small success. The tale of reverses had told at last upon
recruiting. Men were unwilling to come forward; and those who were bribed by large bounties
to join the armies were of a different character to the original volunteer. Enthusiasm in the
cause was fast diminishing when Lincoln, purely on his own initiative, proclaimed emancipation,
and, investing the war with the dignity of a crusade, inspired the soldier with a new incentive,
and appealed to a feeling which had not yet been stirred. Many Northerners had not thought
it worth while to fight for the re-establishment of the Union on the basis of the Constitution. If
slavery was to be permitted to continue they preferred separation; and these men were farmers
and agriculturists, the class which furnished the best soldiers, men of American birth, for
the most part abolitionists, and ready to fight for the principle they had so much at heart.
It is true that the effect of the edict was not at once apparent. It was not received everywhere
with acclamation. The army had small sympathy with the coloured race, and the political opponents
of the President accused him vehemently of unconstitutional action. Their denunciations, however,
missed the mark. The letter of the Constitution, as Mr. Lincoln clearly saw, had ceased to
be regarded, at least by the great bulk of the people, with superstitious reverence.

They had learned to think more of great principles than of political expedients; and if the defence of
their hereditary rights had welded the South into a nation, the assertion
of a still nobler principle, the liberty of man, placed the North
on a higher plane, enlisted the sympathy of Europe, and completed
the isolation of the Confederacy.

But although Lee and Jackson had not yet penetrated the political genius of their great antagonist,
they rated at its true value the vigour displayed by his Administration, and they saw that something
more was wanting to wrest their freedom from the North than a mere passive resistance to the
invader's progress. Soon after the battle of Fredericksburg, Lee went to Richmond and laid
proposals for an aggressive campaign before the President. "He was assured, however," says
General Longstreet, "that the war was virtually over, and that we need not harass our troops
by marches and other hardships. Gold had advanced in New York to two hundred premium, and
we were told by those in the Confederate capital that in thirty or forty days we would be recognised
(by the European Powers) and peace proclaimed. General Lee did not share this belief."* (*
Battles and Leaders. volume 3 page 84.)

Dec. 18.

So Jackson, who had hoped to return to Winchester, was doomed to the inaction of winter quarters
on the Rappahannock, for with Burnside's repulse operations practically ceased. The Confederate
cavalry, however, did not at once abandon hostilities. On December 18, Hampton marched his brigade as far
as the village of Occoquan, bringing off 150 prisoners and capturing a convoy.

Dec. 26.

And on December 26 Stuart closed his record for 1862 by leading 1800 troopers far to the Federal
rear. After doing much damage in the district about Occoquan and Dumfries, twenty miles from
Burnside's headquarters, he marched northward in the direction of Washington, and penetrated
as far as Burke's Station, fifteen miles from Alexandria. Sending a telegraphic message to General
Meigs, Quartermaster-General at Washington, to the effect that the
mules furnished to Burnside's army were of such bad quality that he
was embarrassed in taking the waggons he had captured into the Confederate
lines, and requesting that a better class of animal might be supplied
in future, he returned by long marches through Warrenton to Culpeper
Court House, escaping pursuit, and bringing with him a large amount
of plunder and many prisoners.

From the afternoon of December 26 to nightfall on December 31 he rode one hundred and fifty
miles, losing 28 officers and men in skirmishes with detachments
of the Federal cavalry.

He had contrived to throw a great part of the troops sent to meet him into utter confusion
by intercepting their telegrams, and answering them himself in a manner that scattered his pursuers
and broke down their horses.

Near the end of January, Burnside made a futile attempt to march his army round Lee's flank by
way of Ely's and Germanna Fords. The weather, however, was inclement; the roads were in a fearful
condition, and the troops experienced such difficulty in movement, that the operation, which
goes by the name of the Mud Campaign, was soon abandoned.

1863. January 26.

On January 26, Burnside, in consequence of the strong representations made by his lieutenants
to the President, was superseded. General Hooker, the dashing fighter of the Antietam, replaced
him in command of the Army of the Potomac, and the Federal troops
went into winter quarters about Falmouth, where, on the opposite shore
of the Rappahannock, within full view of the sentries, stood a row
of finger-posts, on which the Confederate soldiers had painted the
taunting legend, "This way to Richmond!"

CHAPTER 2.21. THE ARMY OF NORTHERN VIRGINIA.

"In war men are nothing; it is the man who is everything.

The general is the head, the whole of an army. It was not the Roman army that conquered Gaul,
but Caesar; it was not the Carthaginian army that made Rome tremble in her gates, but Hannibal;
it was not the Macedonian army that reached the Indus, but Alexander; it was not the French army that
carried the war to the Weser and the Inn, but Turenne; it was not the Prussian army which,
for seven years, defended Prussia against the three greatest Powers of Europe, but Frederick
the Great." So spoke Napoleon, reiterating a truth confirmed by the experience of successive ages,
that a wise direction is of more avail than overwhelming numbers, sound strategy than the most
perfect armament; a powerful will, invigorating all who come within its sphere, than the spasmodic
efforts of ill-regulated valour.

Even a professional army of long standing and old traditions is what its commander makes it; its character
sooner or later becomes the reflex of his own; from him the officers take their tone; his energy
or his inactivity, his firmness or vacillation, are rapidly communicated even to the lower
ranks; and so far-reaching is the influence of the leader, that those
who record his campaigns concern themselves but little as a rule with
the men who followed him.

The history of famous armies is the history of great generals, for no army has ever achieved
great things unless it has been well commanded. If the general be second-rate the army also will
be second-rate. Mutual confidence is the basis of success in war, and unless the troops have
implicit trust in the resolution and resources of their chief, hesitation and half-heartedness
are sure to mark their actions. They may fight with their accustomed courage; but the eagerness
for the conflict, the alacrity to support, the determination to conquer, will not be there.
The indefinable quality which is expressed by the word morale will to some degree be affected.
The history of the Army of the Potomac is a case in point.

Between the soldiers of the North and South there was little difference. Neither could claim
a superiority of martial qualities. The Confederates, indeed, at the beginning of the war possessed
a larger measure of technical skill; they were the better shots and the finer riders. But they were
neither braver nor more enduring, and while they probably derived some advantage from the fact
that they were defending their homes, the Federals, defending the integrity of their native
land, were fighting in the noblest of all causes. But Northerner and Southerner were of the same
race, a race proud, resolute, independent; both were inspired by the same sentiments of self-respect;
noblesse oblige--the noblesse of a free people--was the motto of the one as of the other.
It has been asserted that the Federal armies were very largely composed of foreigners, whose motives
for enlisting were purely mercenary. At no period of the war, however, did the proportion of
native Americans sink below seventy per cent.,* (* See Note at end of chapter.) and at the beginning
of 1863 it was much greater.

As a matter of fact, the Union army was composed of thoroughly staunch
soldiers.* (* "Throughout New England," wrote the Special Correspondent
of an English newspaper, "you can scarcely enter a door without being
aware that you are in a house of mourning.

Whatever may be said of Irish and German mercenaries, I must bear witness that the best classes
of Americans have bravely come forth for their country. I know of scarcely a family more than
one member of which has not been or is not in the ranks of the army. The maimed and crippled
youths I meet on the highroad certainly do not for the most part belong to the immigrant rabble
of which the Northern regiments are said to consist; and even the
present conscription is now in many splendid instances most promptly
and cheerfully complied with by the wealthy people who could easily
purchase exemption, but who prefer to set a good example." Letter
from Rhode Island, the Times, August 8, 1863.) Nor was the alien element
at this time a source of weakness. Ireland and Germany supplied the
greater number of those who have been called "Lincoln's hirelings;"
and, judging from the official records, the Irish regiments at least
were not a whit less trustworthy than those purely American.

"There is a matter I much desire to speak about," said he, placing himself at her side. "I'm
aware I have not the good fortune to stand well in Miss Wallen's opinion," he added, with a
half-sneer, "and a man more vindictive and less devoted to principle would have felt like resenting
the--the slights you have seen fit to put upon me. I shall observe your prohibition with regard
to the--alleged officer and gentleman of whom I had occasion to speak to you, since his superiors
have taken that responsibility off my hands by summarily sending him away, and as it is not
likely that he will ever cross your path in this neighborhood again,--a matter in which I find
sincere cause for rejoicing, for of all men I have ever met he seemed to me the least worthy
of such confidence as you placed in him----"

"Is this observing my prohibition, Mr. Elmendorf?" said Jenny, stopping and facing him.

"Oh, well, possibly not."

"Then you will kindly say at once what your business is. I have told you I will not listen
to anything you say about Mr. Forrest."

"I am detaining you here," he said, evasively. "Let us walk on."

"No, I will not walk on. Mr. Elmendorf, I have learned to look upon you as anything but a friend
to me or mine, and I mean to be perfectly frank with you here and now. You have slandered my
friend, you have tricked and misled my brother, you have deceived my mother, and I know well
you have sought to injure me with my employer----"

"Oh, only so far as was justifiable in the protection of my own name. As your recommender and
endorser for the position you hold, I had a right, when you showed yourself heedless of my
counsel and defiant of my injunctions, to say to your immediate superior that he should be
cautious about allowing your intimacy with Mr. Forrest to be prosecuted within the shelter
of his sanctum and practically under his own nose. I----"

"That's quite enough, Mr. Elmendorf. You have added insult to injury. Once and for all, let
there be an end of this. I decline any and all communication with you from this time on." And
with cheeks that lacked no color now, and eyes all ablaze with wrath, Miss Wallen turned and
left him. But Elmendorf pursued. He had one arrow left, and meant to send it home.

"At least I may accompany you to the corner, only twenty yards away, and there, as you suggest,
our paths shall separate. You decline to believe my estimate of Mr. Forrest, and hold him up
as something knightly and chivalric, forsooth. My deluded friend, all the time he was making
you the object of those charming little attentions he was pressing his suit under my own eyes
at home, and, in spite of all her father, her aunt, or her friends could do, I regret to say
that Miss Florence Allison became so infatuated as to follow that young man to his exile, and
should he ever return here it will doubtless be as her husband. Good-morning, Miss Wallen."

She had turned from him in renewed anger and disgust as they reached the corner, had hastened
along with flaming eyes and cheeks and loudly throbbing heart. She was furious at him for daring
to speak of such things, daring to couple Forrest's name with hers, with--anybody's. She was
ready to cry out against the man for such malignity--mendacity; and then her cooler judgment
and common sense began to reassert themselves. Why shouldn't it be true? Why shouldn't he seek
the hand of one so--so lovely and wealthy as Miss Allison? What more natural than that Miss
Allison should learn to love him? Why shouldn't she--she, Jenny Wallen--rejoice with her whole
heart that her friend and protector could look forward to such happiness? He had never been
anything but kind, thoughtful, courteous, to her. Other men had taken advantage of her defenceless
post to accost her with low gallantries, with bourgeois flattery, with ridiculous attempts
at flirtation or love-making, and she had laughed or stormed them off; but Forrest had shown
her from the first the high-bred courtesy he would have accorded the proudest lady in the land,
had never presumed upon a look, a word, a touch, that was not marked by respect and deference.
He was a gentleman, she said; any girl might be proud of such a lover; and if it was true that
he and Florence Allison were engaged, she would congratulate him and her with all her heart
and rejoice with them and for them, and pray that their lives might be happy,--happy as her
own was desolate,--and then the day became dark and dull and hopeless despite a brilliant sun,
for just as the Lambert towers loomed in sight, the Allison carriage came spinning up the avenue,
a radiant, happy, lovely face beaming upon her from the window, then turning to look up into
the dark, soldierly features of the man at her side. Florence Allison was home, then, from
her wanderings, bringing her beloved with her.

CHAPTER IX.

Elmendorf was an astonished man. He had confidently told Mrs. Lawrence that the objectionable
lieutenant had been ordered off under a cloud of official censure and forbidden to return.
He really believed it. It was one of his peculiarities that he invariably attached a sinister
explanation to every action of his fellow men and women whose social station, at least, was
superior to his own, when other explanation was withheld. He had sneeringly told Miss Wallen
that unless the gentleman resigned from the army and returned to be the husband of Miss Allison,
he would not return at all. He believed this too. He was so constituted mentally that he believed
Forrest guilty of anything that could be alleged against him, believed that Miss Allison was
interested in him to a certain extent, but would probably lose her interest when once the gallant
himself was well out of the way, believed that he could even convince her, as he had convinced
her aunt, that Forrest was totally unworthy her regard, provided Forrest himself did not return;
and, lo and behold! Forrest had returned, and returned with Miss Allison herself, brought back
on their train,--in their carriage, as he learned from Aunt Lawrence,--and apparently more
influential with the father and daughter than ever before. Not until luncheon-time that day
did he know of this, and the news came like a dash of ice-water on shivering skin. It was plain
that Mrs. Lawrence looked to him to defend his statement and name his authorities then and
there; for Miss Allison did not come down to luncheon, Cary was speedily excused and permitted
to go about his own affairs, and then Mrs. Lawrence whirled upon the tutor with the tidings
that not only was Mr. Forrest back, but that Florence had brought him back; that Mr. Allison,
so far from objecting, had approved--had invited him to lunch with his fellow-magnates at the
club and to dine en famille in the evening. As for Mr. Forrest being under the ban of official
censure, Mrs. Lawrence declared she couldn't understand it, in view of the fact that he was
with the general and his staff when the party encountered them at Wichita, and that the general
himself had authorized his return to Chicago. "Authorized!" said Elmendorf, with his ready
sneer; "ordered, very probably, with the view of having him tried by court-martial here where
the witnesses are ready; and Mr. Forrest has had the effrontery to saddle himself on respectable
company by way of establishing high connection to start with. I have heard of just such expedients
before. My informants are men who thoroughly know the ins and outs of military affairs in the
department, and they are not likely to be mistaken." All the same the tutor was glad to get
away and to go post-haste to the Pullman building, hoping to catch his one intimate in the
clerical force and to dodge the officials with whom he stood in evil odor. Luck often follows
audacity. In the elevator he met two officers to whom he had been presented during the earlier
days of his tutorship, when he was still cordially received. These gentlemen had been away
on duty in the interim, and, knowing nothing of his lapse from grace, greeted him as pleasantly
as ever, invited him into the aide-de-camps' offices, and there made him at home in the absence
of the usual occupants. They knew nothing of Forrest's movements beyond the fact that he had
not been with his regiment at all. One of the two was Major Cranston; the other was Lieutenant-Colonel
Kenyon, of Forrest's own regiment. "I suppose you know he--left here under very sudden--rather
summary, orders some two months ago," suggested Elmendorf; "and it created, as you can readily
imagine, some little comment in society." No, Kenyon hadn't heard, and he eyed the speaker
sharply from under his bushy, overhanging brows. Cranston, however, promptly replied that there
was nothing in the least remarkable in it. Officers were frequently hurried off on sudden orders,
and there was no reason why society should be exercised over it. Elmendorf promptly disavowed
any intention of casting the faintest aspersion on Mr. Forrest, whom he at least had found
to be certainly quite the equal of his comrades in most things pertaining to the officer and
gentleman, although there were some things, perhaps, which to a humble civilian like himself
might call for explanation. He was merely stating a fact, one which he regretted, of course,
as he did all the idle talk that circulated in superficial circles of society. He was glad
to find officers of such prominence as Kenyon and Cranston so ready to stand up for Forrest,
as some men--he preferred not to mention names--had been less outspoken, at least, in his behalf.
And then Kenyon impatiently arose and went out, Cranston met a brace of cavalrymen going back
to their regiment after a leave, and Elmendorf drifted away in search of his clerk and found him.

A glance at the register showed that Forrest had already been in to report his arrival, had
given his old rooms as his present address, and "verbal instructions of Dept. Comdr." as the
explanation of his return. The adjutant-general, seated in his own office, had seen Forrest,
and had further instructions to communicate, evidently, for they had been closeted together
nearly half an hour, but what passed between them the clerk could not say, and Elmendorf was
left to his own vivid imagination. Forrest certainly had not rejoined his regiment, and Elmendorf
had chosen to think that that was what he was ordered to do when leaving Chicago. Thinking
of it so much, he had come to believe it a fact; but Forrest was now back here in Chicago,
as suddenly and mysteriously as he went. He was not, however, back in his old office, was not
then restored to his functions at head-quarters. What more was needed, therefore, to warrant
the belief that he was picked up by the general in his wanderings in the Indian Territory and
sent in for trial on charges of disobedience of orders and absence without leave? At all events,
it was a working theory in the absence of any other. Elmendorf strolled away discontentedly,
and was presently overhauling books on Brentano's counters, and there Cranston found him, and,
when books were the theme, found him more to his liking. They walked up to Cranston's old home
that afternoon together, and Elmendorf, as previously detailed, made his first appearance before
Mrs. Sergeant McGrath.

Later he strolled up to the Lambert Memorial, revolving many things in his mind. With all the
discomfort and uneasiness and foreboding Forrest's sudden reappearance cost him, with all the
embarrassment likely to follow, one reflection had given him joy. There at least within those
walls was a proud and wilful girl whose spirit he had longed to tame, whose distrust and defiance
he had smarted under, but who now would have to admit the truth of some of the most salient
of his accusations and prophecies with regard to Forrest. There was still abundant opportunity
for him to rejoice in that triumph. Wells did not like him, but what of that? Wells was probably
gone by this time, and she would be there all alone, bending as usual over her typewriter.
She couldn't order him out or refuse him admittance, since Wells had never yet done so. She
would have to listen, and he would go and break to her the news of Forrest's return,--of Forrest's
return with Florence Allison, of his luncheon with the magnates at the club to-day, of his
coming to dinner informally, like one of the family, at the Allisons' to-night. It would be
comfort to watch her sensitive face, thought Elmendorf, and he meant to make the successive
announcements as humorous and lingering as his command of rhetoric would permit. His step was
light, his smile significant, his bearing quite debonair, as he turned into the private hall-way
and encountered the janitor at the first turn. The janitor was Irish. "Misther Wells is gone--if
it's him ye want, sorr," said he, with scant civility, for the Celt had become imbued with
distaste for the Teuton.

"Then I'll see his secretary," answered Elmendorf, with his usual shrug, and without a stop.

"Ye wouldn't, bedad, if I saw her first," said honest Maloney, as he looked after the agitator.
"Maneness goes wid the loikes of him, and mischief and trouble wherever he sets his fut."

Springily did Elmendorf go up the echoing stairway, and then, reaching the second floor, he
saw fit to saunter, and that, too, with noiseless footfall. He approached the familiar door-way,
and the anteroom--the scene of his discomfiture when Donnelly presented Mart's liquor-bill--stood
invitingly open. But the door to the private office beyond was closed, and it was barely five
o'clock. She was there; he felt assured of that. He could hear the busy clicking of the typewriter.
She was probably alone, too. Hitherto he had entered unannounced, but then the door stood open.
Why should he knock now? He would not. He decided to enter as hitherto, and so, quietly, turned
the knob and pushed.

But the door resisted. Evidently it was latched from within. Twice he made the trial, noiselessly
as possible, and then paused to consider. This was something new. Miss Wallen had locked herself
in, or possibly had locked him out. If not at her desk, she might easily have seen him sauntering
leisurely up the street, might have seen him cross, and, divining that his object was to see
her and perhaps renew his offensive talk, have taken prompt measures to resist. Well, even
if lettered "Private Office" on the door, it was a public office in point of fact; and that
public office was not for personal use or benefit he had the authority, in one sententious
form or other, of many an Executive, from Jefferson down. So Elmendorf rapped, and rapped loudly.
The clicking presently ceased, a light footstep was heard, then the voice of the official stenographer:

"What is wanted?"

"Open the door, please."

"Whom do you wish to see."

"I desire to speak with Miss Wallen."

"Miss Wallen declines."

"I have business to transact."

"Mr. Wells is not here, and Miss Wallen is not empowered to act for him. You will have to wait
and see him to-morrow."

"Miss Wallen, you are barring me out of an office I have a perfect right to enter, and that
I mean to enter here and now, or make formal complaint to the trustees. If this door is not
opened in twenty seconds I warn you there will be trouble."

To this remark no answer whatever was vouchsafed. Miss Wallen quietly returned to her typewriter,
and the only sound from within was the clicking of that ingenious machine. Elmendorf had sense
enough not to shout his news, but he had not sense enough to abandon the attempt to tell her.
There was another way of reaching the sanctum, provided he moved with promptness and decision.
It was through the library itself. Turning away, muttering angrily, he returned through the
darkening corridor, down the stairs, and around to the main entrance. Another moment, and he
was at the lattice that separated the reading-room from the library proper. There, beyond,
were the long aisles and rows of crowded shelves. Here was the customary throng of patrons,
returning or taking out books. There were the busy attendants bustling to and fro, and beyond
them and beyond those vaults and dim recesses was the passage leading to the sanctum of the
head librarian. A young girl, standing within the lattice, was noting the numbers of some books
upon a slip of card-board, and, with quick decision, Elmendorf addressed her. "Pardon me,"
said he, "I have to go into Mr. Wells's office at once. Miss Wallen has accidentally locked
the door, and can't open it. Will you kindly let me through this way?"

The girl hesitated an instant. It was against orders, but she had often seen the gentleman
in the library and in the sanctum itself with the librarian. "I suppose it will be all right,"
said she, doubtfully.

"Oh, certainly," said Elmendorf. "Pardon my haste; I have left some papers there that I need
at once. Ah, thank you." And slipping through the wicket, he hastened on his way before any
one else could interpose, and in another moment stood within the sanctum and closed the door
behind him.

Nor was he much surprised to find Miss Wallen no longer at her instrument, but leaning wearily
against the casement, apparently gazing out into the street. "You see," he began, with cold,
sarcastic emphasis, "the power to lock one door does not make a woman the mistress of an entire
situation. It would have been better had you accepted what was meant for your good and spared
me the necessity of forcing it upon you, as it were; but I have had my own sisters to protect
in the past, and knew what was best for you. Nor am I to be balked in what I consider my duty
by the obstinacy of a moonstruck, passion-blinded girl."

She had turned her back upon him as he began to speak. Now she turned and faced him. He half
expected fierce denunciation, but, to his surprise, her manner was as contemptuously cool as
his was sardonically cold.

"You have succeeded in getting in here on the plea of business, Mr. Elmendorf; but this is
insolence."

"It is my business, and has ever been and shall ever be, to stand between the helplessness
of the poor and the oppression of the rich. My business is to see that you and yours suffer
no wrong at the hands of those who consider such as you their natural prey. I see the ghost
of a smile flickering about your lips, Miss Wallen, and am aware you regard my mission with
disfavor, but you cannot and shall not treat it with contempt."

She was smiling, poor girl, and it was but the ghost of a wintry smile, too, for, even in her
exasperation and distress, the whimsical, humorous side of her nature--its helpful, sunny side--was
asserting itself at the moment. For the life of her she could not feel the indignation he deserved
just then, for the contrast between the grandiloquence of his sentiments and the pettiness
of that unpaid lodging-bill almost forced her to laugh outright.

"I am here," he went on, "because you would not believe my statements regarding Mr. Forrest,
because I feel it my duty to open your eyes as to his character and intentions. You refused
to believe what I said concerning him and you, and that only confirms my fears. I am powerless
to contend against the logic of a woman's love, but when I spoke of him and her whom I may
be pardoned for referring to as your rival, I spoke the truth."

Now she was smiling in contemptuous amusement again, as though she actually considered it beneath
her to answer. How amazed would Miss Allison be at the idea of her being placed on the same
plane with a working-girl!

Her silence and self-control maddened Elmendorf. "Have you no reason, no sense?" he demanded.
"I told you this very day that she had gone to follow and bring him back, did I not?"

A cool nod of assent.

"I told you he would reappear here, if at all, only as her husband, or possibly her affianced,
did I not?"

Another nod as cool as the first.

"And you turned away in contemptuous unbelief, did you not?"

"Contempt certainly, but unbelief--not entirely."

Elmendorf was fairly trembling with wrath by this time. The idea that this simple, unlettered,
friendless "girl of the people" should so coolly brave him--him on whose words enraptured ears
were wont to hang, at whose eloquence enthusiastic hundreds burst into applause! It stung him
to the very marrow of his conceit. Something must be said or done to bring her to her knees,
and, believing that she loved and dearly loved the man in question, he prepared his final coup.

"Well, it may modify your contempt to know that my words have come true."

"That Mr. Forrest was ordered away in disgrace?" she calmly asked.

"Not so much that, as that he has returned, brought back, as I said, by Miss Allison."

"Why, but that is no news at all. I knew he was coming, and I saw them together this morning."

"You--saw them--and you knew he was coming?" faltered the tutor. "You mean to--you mean he
writes to you,--that you correspond with him?"

"I mean nothing whatsoever beyond what I said, Mr. Elmendorf,--that I knew Mr. Forrest would
be here this week, that I saw them this morning; and, as it is his work that lies here unfinished,
interrupted by this visitation, I may now, I presume, return to my business--and you to yours."

"Then he has been here, too?"

"Yes, and will be again,--another reason, perhaps, why you would better not linger. I will
open the door now,--since it is to let you out."

"Yes, and to let him in, I suppose, and see him behind locked doors, as you doubtless have
before, Miss Wallen----"

"The door is both unlocked and open, Mr. Elmendorf," said she, throwing it wide, but now in
her turn the girl was quivering with indignation. "Furthermore, one touch on this button brings
our janitor here--Mr. Wells speaks of him as 'our bouncer.'" And her white hand poised not
six inches from the button.

Elmendorf took a long breath. "You may consider this a moral victory, Miss Wallen," said he,
backing to the portal, "but you will do well to remember this. As I have said before, I have
a duty to perform that I owe to society,--to my employers on the one hand, to the people on
the other. Rest you well assured that whatever may have been his successes, so called, in the
past, there are two schemes of your paragon, Mr. Forrest, that shall fail, even if I have to
fight him through the public press. In one or other, separately, he may be too much for my
efforts, but at one and the same time that accomplished roué shall never win a wife in that
household and a mistress here."

And immediately thereafter a gentleman coming up the dim corridor without heard a sound that
resembled the loud crack of a toy torpedo, followed by the reverberant bang of a door, and,
a moment later, encountered an oddly familiar figure hurrying out and hanging on to its left
jowl as though afflicted with a violent attack of tic douloureux.

"Why, I believe that's Mr. Elmendorf!" remarked the new-comer, and then was surprised to find
the inner door locked,--to find that he had to knock thrice before it was opened, and by that
time it seemed quite dark.

CHAPTER X.

The dinner at Allison's the night of his return from the long journey was not a success. It
was to be an entirely informal affair,--no guests present but a high official of the road in
which the host was so heavily interested, and Mr. Forrest, whom Miss Allison had invited on
her own account. The brother magnate came, and Mr. Forrest did not. True, his acceptance had
been conditioned on his being able to finish certain papers, which, so he told both Florence
and her father, would be required at the office early the next day. Mr. Elmendorf came hurrying
in and went up to his room about half-past six, and fifteen minutes later came a messenger
with a note which was taken at once to Miss Allison's room. She was dressed for dinner and
ready to come down, but she took it and read it hurriedly, uttered an exclamation of disappointment,
and sharply closed her door. Not until Mr. Allison sent for her with the information that dinner
was on the table did she appear. Elmendorf eyed her covertly, and Aunt Lawrence sharply. There
were unmistakable traces of tears. "Did he say why he couldn't come?" asked Mrs. Lawrence,
presently.

"Yes--no--at least--he had told me before that he thought it might be impossible," answered
Florence, in embarrassment and annoyance. Her father was laying down the law on Interstate
Commerce to his guest at the moment, and it was a subject on which he never tired. Even while
listening intently, watching for his chance to "chip in," as Cary said, Elmendorf caught Miss
Allison's every word. What he had not yet been enlightened upon was the explanation of Forrest's
return with the party. All he knew was that early on the previous day the general, with two
of his aides and Mr. Forrest, boarded the train in Southern Kansas. Allison invited them all
into the private car and proposed making them his guests on the homeward run. The chief declined
for himself and staff, saying that they had other matters to detain them, but it transpired
that Mr. Forrest was to go right on. He had his berth engaged in an adjoining sleeper, but
spent several hours with the railway party, and on their arrival in Chicago the Allisons had
insisted on his taking a seat in their carriage. Allison himself was dropped at his club, Florence
in turn left Mr. Forrest at his lodgings, and then was driven home. This was actually all Elmendorf
had been able to learn.

But here was basis enough for all manner of theory and conjecture, none of them to Forrest's
advantage, and Elmendorf felt that the more he could make of them the better for his own cause
and the worse for Forrest. There had been an intangible something in Allison's manner to warn
the tutor that just so soon as the guests were out of the way he might look out for squalls.
Allison had greeted him with utter absence of cordiality, and Elmendorf felt that his employer
was even more displeased with him than when he went away. Under such circumstances a wise man
would have avoided saying or doing anything to augment the feeling against him, but Elmendorf,
except in his own conceit, was far from wise, and his propensity for putting his foot in it
was phenomenal. Allison loved his post-prandial cigar,--it agreed with him,--and so did his
guest. The ladies withdrew quite early, Cary slipped away, and Elmendorf should have slipped
after him, but here were two great men of the railway world, the natural oppressors of the
masses, the very type of the creatures he delighted in describing upon the platform as "bloated
bond-holders;" their conversation could hardly fail to be of interest to him, and he remained.
Warming up to their work, they were discussing the situation at Pullman and its probable effect
upon the employees of the roads centring in Chicago. That their views should be radically opposed
to those of their absorbed listener was of course to be expected, and Elmendorf was fidgeting
furiously upon his chair, every now and then striving to interject a sentence and claim the
floor, but Allison knew his man, and knew that once started, Elmendorf could not well be suppressed.
Every attempt on the part of the tutor to interpose, therefore, was met by uplifted and warning
hand and prompt "Permit me" or "Permit Mr. Sloan to finish, if you please," which was galling
in the last degree. Elmendorf had planned to have a conciliatory word or two with Miss Allison,
with whom he knew himself to have been in grave disfavor ever since the occasion of his presuming
to tender advice and remonstrance on the score of Mr. Forrest, but she had escaped to her own
room again immediately after quitting the table. Her manner towards him showed that she had
neither forgiven nor forgotten the impertinence, and that was additional reason why he should
have done nothing more, in that household at least, to add to the array of his offences. But
presently the opportunity came, and he could not resist. The Interstate Commerce Law was again
under discussion. Allison had always fiercely opposed it, declaring it to be an utterly unconstitutional
and unwarrantable interference with the rights of corporations and individuals. Mr. Sloan was
rather more conservative. He was contending that, despite its restrictions upon certain railway
companies, the appointment of the Commission had resulted in much that was beneficial to most
parties concerned.

Allison burst forth impetuously: "Why, Sloan, look at the thing! It is direct and absolute
usurpation on the part of the general government of the functions of the State. Here's a road
running from Chicago to Cairo, for instance. Its traffic is entirely within the State; its
offices, road-bed, and rolling-stock--everything concerning it, in fact--within the limits
of the State; and yet, just because it delivers freight and passengers over on the Kentucky
shore, here comes the general government formulating laws for its control, which should be
the province of the State and of the State only. If we've got to be trammelled by legislation,
let it be at the hands of our own legislators---- Eh, what?" he asked, breaking suddenly off
to acknowledge the presence of the butler standing solemnly beside him with a card on the salver.
Allison took the card mechanically, glanced at the name, and, even as he was saying, "Oh, show
him in here. Send this up to Miss Florence," Elmendorf had seized his opportunity and "chipped in."

"Yes, but, my dear sir," he began, in his eager, nerve-racking, whining tone, "is there not
inconsistency here? Can you deny that when the legislature, not only of this, but of neighboring
States, essayed to enact laws on these very subjects, your attorneys were promptly on the ground
to argue against it and to declare that only Congress had the power under the Constitution
to regulate commerce between the States? Can you deny that at the meeting of managers and business-men
here one of the most prominent of your number declared that you objected to any and all legislation?
Can you deny that when Congress did take the matter up your attorneys were just as promptly
in Washington, proclaiming that any attempt to legislate in your affairs was a violation of
the rights of the sovereign States? Can you deny, in fine, that when the whole subject was
under discussion here a second time, one of your most eminent confrères put himself on record
as saying that, while he was opposed to any legislation, of two evils he preferred to choose
the less, and if any legislators were to meddle with the affairs of the roads, better let it
be the State Solons, who were far more--well--approachable and ready to listen to--let us say--reason?
Can you deny that----" But here Elmendorf found himself without listeners. The odd point in
it all was that very much that he said was true; and Allison was reddening with wrath, and
Sloan chuckling with suppressed merriment, when the entrance of a tall, brown-eyed, brown-moustached
man in evening dress gave both opportunity to escape the deluge.

"Forrest at last!" exclaimed the host, turning and seizing his hand. "So sorry you were detained,
lad; but sit you down, sit you down, and let me ring for some dinner for you. No? Had a bite?
All right. Take a chair and some wine. Sloan and I were whacking away at the old bone."

"Yes, Allison, and here's a Federal officer who won't agree with you for a moment."

With a dissatisfied shake of his head, Elmendorf had arisen as though to pull his chair nearer
the end of the table and resume his attack, but Allison had purposely turned his back squarely
upon him and was drawing Forrest to the very place the tutor had hoped to occupy. Sloan arose
and cordially shook hands with the new-comer, who then for the first time, apparently, caught
sight of Elmendorf. The latter had started as though to come forward, but something in Forrest's
eyes restrained him. The lieutenant simply bowed, and said, very coldly, "Good-evening," but
did not even mention the tutor by name.

"Now, Mr. Forrest," began Mr. Sloan, with much heartiness of manner, "I want you to say to
Allison here just what you said to me. He's a trifle hot-headed to-night. He thinks the government
has been paternalizing at our expense, and that only harm will come from it."

Forrest looked from one to the other a moment, a quiet smile upon his lips. All the previous
afternoon as they trundled along in the cosy private car had these gentlemen been disputing
over the same thing, and late in the evening, as Mr. Sloan and Forrest were enjoying a cigar
together, they, too, had had a chat upon the subject, and Sloan had turned and looked upon
the officer in some surprise. In common with most of his class, the man of wealth and worldly
wisdom had regarded the genus regular officer as a something impressive, possibly, on parade,
useful probably on the frontier, but out of place anywhere else. That he should have read or
studied anything beyond drill and dime novels was not to be expected. The magnates had even
had their modest game of draw poker at a late hour and laughingly referred some mooted question
to Forrest as a probable expert, and were astonished to hear that he had never played, not
so much because he disapproved of it as because he had never had time. Allison had already
found out that Forrest was a student and a thinker, but up to that evening he was the only
man of the party who believed that the average officer had any other use for time than to kill
it. Whatever it was that Mr. Forrest might have said to Mr. Sloan, it was evident he did not
care to repeat it now.

"I would rather not reopen the matter," said he. "Possibly I had no right to forecast the action
of the government, even speculatively, in a contingency that may not arise."

Elmendorf planted his chair and lighted a cigarette, throwing himself down with an air as much
as to say, "Well, I've got to be bored and must be resigned to it, since they won't listen
to a man of intelligence;" and Allison, with blacker gloom in his eyes, looked squarely at
him as he began to speak:

"Sloan, you're not even sipping your wine; Forrest, you never seem to indulge. Suppose we three
adjourn to my den, where the books are right at hand. Mr. Elmendorf has his duties and will
excuse us."

If he had struck him, the master of the house could not more have stung his employee. Even
Forrest, who by this time had many reasons of his own for bringing Elmendorf to book, tingled
with something like sympathy at a slight so marked. There were so many other and better ways
of letting Elmendorf know that in the coming conference his presence could be dispensed with,
that Sloan spoke of it the moment they reached the library; but Allison was imperious and positive.
"You don't begin to know the man," said he. "Anything less than unmistakable prohibition he
would consider as invitation, and he'd turn our talk into a lecture on the relations of capital
to labor. You saw how he got in the instant I stopped a moment, Sloan."

"Faith and I did," said Sloan, laughing, "and he hit you fellows in the ribs. Why, where'd
he find it all out?"

"I'm blessed if I know, unless it was from the newspaper men. They get hold of almost everything,--wrong
side foremost, as a rule, but they get it. Now I heard something of your talk last night. Brooks
was speaking of it. He looks upon the Interstate Bill just as I do. What do you mean by saying
it might prove our salvation?" he asked, abruptly, turning to Forrest.

"I was simply supposing a case," said Forrest, calmly. "Say that the Granger element in one
State, the Populists in another, the Socialists in a third, were to obtain control of the legislature
and elect their own governor. You say they are utterly antagonistic to the railways; that in
the event of a general strike, mob violence, etc., they would refuse you help or protection;
that as common carriers you would be powerless to carry out your contracts, and that not only
passenger and freight traffic would be blocked, but the government mails. Now, prior to February,
'87, the general government, as I understand it, had left the management of the railways to
the States. It had neither formulated laws for their control nor adopted measures for their
protection. Magruder, Hooker, McDowell, and Ambrose Hill belonged to his own regiment. McClellan,
Beauregard, and Gustavus Smith served on the same staff as Lee. Joseph E. Johnston, twice severely
wounded, was everywhere conspicuous for dashing gallantry. Shields commanded a brigade with marked
ability. Pope was a staff officer. Lieutenant D.H. Hill received two brevets. Lieutenant Longstreet,
struck down whilst carrying the colours at Chapultepec, was bracketed for conspicuous conduct
with Lieutenant Pickett. Lieutenant Edward Johnson is mentioned as having specially distinguished
himself in the same battle. Captain Huger, together with Lieutenants Porter and Reno, did good
service with the artillery, and Lieutenant Ewell had two horses killed under him at Churubusco.

So
having proved his mettle and "drunk delight of battle with his peers," Jackson spent nine pleasant
months in the conquered city. The peace negotiations were protracted. The United States coveted
the auriferous provinces of California and New Mexico, a tract as large as a European kingdom,
and far more wealthy. Loth to lose their birthright, yet powerless to resist, the Mexicans could
only haggle for a price. The States were not disposed to be ungenerous, but the transfer of so vast
a territory could not be accomplished in a moment, and the victorious army remained in occupation
of the capital.

Beneath the shadow of the Stars and Stripes conqueror and conquered lived in harmony. Mexico
was tired of war. Since the downfall of Spanish rule revolution had followed revolution with
startling rapidity. The beneficent despotism of the great viceroys had been succeeded by the
cruel exactions of petty tyrants, and for many a long year the country had been ravaged by their
armies. The capital itself had enjoyed but a few brief intervals of peace, and now, although
the bayonets of an alien race were the pledge of their repose, the citizens revelled in the unaccustomed
luxury.

Nor were they ungrateful to those who brought them a respite from alarms and anarchy. Under
the mild administration of the American generals the streets resumed their wonted aspect. The great
markets teemed with busy crowds. Across the long causeways rolled the creaking waggons, laden with
the produce of far-distant haciendas. Trade was restored, and even the most patriotic merchants
were not proof against the influence of the American dollar. Between the soldiers and the people
was much friendly intercourse.

Even the religious orders did not disdain to offer their hospitality to the heretics. The uniforms
of the victorious army were to be seen at every festive gathering, and the graceful Mexicanas
were by no means insensible to the admiration of the stalwart Northerners. Those blue-eyed and
fair-haired invaders were not so very terrible after all; and the beauties of the capital, accustomed
to be wooed in liquid accents and flowery phrases, listened without
reluctance to harsher tones and less polished compliments.

Travellers of many races have borne willing witness to the charms and virtues of the women
of Mexico. "True daughters of Spain," it has been said, "they unite the grace of Castile to
the vivacity of Andalusia; and more sterling qualities are by no means wanting. Gentle and refined,
unaffectedly pleasing in manners and conversation, they evince a
warmth of heart which wins for them the respect and esteem of all
strangers."

To the homes made bright by the presence of these fair specimens of womanhood Scott's officers
were always welcome; and Jackson, for the first time in his life, found himself within the sphere
of feminine attractions. The effect on the stripling soldier, who, stark fighter as he was,
had seen no more of life than was to be found in a country village or within the precincts of West
Point, may be easily imagined. Who the magnet was he never confessed; but that he went near
losing his heart to some charming senorita of sangre azul he more
than once acknowledged, and he took much trouble to appear to advantage
in her eyes.

The deficiencies in his education which prevented his full enjoyment of social pleasures were
soon made up. He not only learned to dance, an accomplishment which must have taxed his perseverance
to the utmost, but he spent some months in learning Spanish; and it is significant that to the
end of his life he retained a copious vocabulary of those tender diminutives which fall so gracefully
from Spanish lips.

But during his stay in Mexico other and more lasting influences were at work. Despite the delights
of her delicious climate, where the roses bloom the whole year round, the charms of her romantic
scenery, and the fascinations of her laughter-loving daughters, Jackson's serious nature soon
asserted itself. The constant round of light amusements and simple duties grew distasteful.
The impress of his mother's teachings and example was there to guide him; and his native reverence
for all that was good and true received an unexpected impulse. There were not wanting in the
American army men who had a higher ideal of duty than mere devotion to the business of their
profession. The officer commanding the First Artillery, Colonel Frank Taylor, possessed that
earnest faith which is not content with solitude. "This good man," says Dabney, "was accustomed
to labour as a father for the religious welfare of his young officers, and during the summer
campaign his instructions and prayers had produced so much effect as to awake an abiding anxiety
and spirit of inquiry in Jackson's mind." The latter had little prejudice
in favour of any particular sect or church.

There was no State Establishment in the United States.

His youth had been passed in a household where Christianity was practically unknown, and with
characteristic independence he determined to discover for himself the rule that he should follow.
His researches took a course which his Presbyterian ancestors would assuredly have condemned.
But Jackson's mind was singularly open, and he was the last man in the world to yield to prejudice.
Soon after peace was declared, he had made the acquaintance of a
number of priests belonging to one of the great religious orders of
the Catholic Church.

They had invited him to take up his quarters with them, and when he determined to examine for
himself into the doctrine of the ancient faith, he applied through
them for an introduction to the Archbishop of Mexico.

Several interviews took place between the aged ecclesiastic and the young soldier. Jackson
departed unsatisfied. He acknowledged that the prelate was a sincere and devout Christian, and he
was impressed as much with his kindness as his learning. But he left Mexico without any settled
convictions on the subject which now absorbed his thoughts.

June 12.

On June 12, peace having been signed at the end of May, the last of the American troops marched
out of the conquered capital. Jackson's battery was sent to Fort Hamilton, on Long Island, seven
miles below New York, and there, with his honours thick upon him, he settled down to the quiet
life of a small garrison. He had gone out to Mexico a second lieutenant; he had come back
a field-officer. He had won a name in the army, and his native State had enrolled him amongst
her heroes. He had gone out an unformed youth; he had come back a man and a proved leader of
men. He had been known merely as an indefatigable student and a somewhat unsociable companion.
He had come back with a reputation for daring courage, not only the courage which glories in swift
action and the excitement of the charge, but courage of an enduring quality. And in that distant
country he had won more than fame. He had already learned something of the vanity of temporal success.
He had gone out with a vague notion of ruling his life in accordance with moral precepts and
philosophic maxims; but he was to be guided henceforward by loftier
principles than even devotion to duty and regard for honour, and from
the path he had marked out for himself in Mexico he never deviated.

CHAPTER 1.3. LEXINGTON. 1851 TO 1861.

1848.

Of Jackson's life at Fort Hamilton there is little to tell. His friend and mentor, Colonel Taylor,
was in command.

The chaplain, once an officer of dragoons, was a man of persuasive
eloquence and earnest zeal; and surrounded by influences which had
now become congenial, the young major of artillery pursued the religious
studies he had begun in Mexico.

There was some doubt whether he had been baptised as a child. He was anxious that no uncertainty
should exist as to his adhesion to Christianity, but he was unwilling that the sacrament should
bind him to any particular sect.

1849.

On the understanding that no surrender of judgment would be involved, he was baptised and received
his first communion in the Episcopal Church.

Two years passed without incident, and then Jackson was transferred to Florida. In his new quarters
his stay was brief.

1851.

In March 1851 he was appointed Professor of Artillery Tactics and
Natural Philosophy at the Virginia Military Institute.

His success, for such he deemed it, was due to his own merit.

One of his Mexican comrades, Major D.H. Hill, afterwards his brother-in-law, was a professor
in a neighbouring institution, Washington College, and had been consulted by the Superintendent
of the Institute as to the filling of the vacant chair.

Hill remembered what had been said of Jackson at West Point: "If the
course had been one year longer he would have graduated at the head
of his class."

This voluntary testimonial of his brother cadets had not passed unheeded. It had weight, as the
best evidence of his thoroughness and application, with the Board of Visitors, and Jackson was unanimously
elected.

The Military Institute, founded twelve years previously on the model
of West Point, was attended by several hundred youths from Virginia
and other Southern States.

At Lexington, in the county of Rockbridge, a hundred miles west of
Richmond, stand the castellated buildings and the wide parade ground
which formed the nursery of so many Confederate soldiers.

To the east rise the lofty masses of the Blue Ridge.

Of all its pleasant market towns, Lexington is not the least attractive; and in this pastoral
region, where the great forests stand round about the corn-fields,
and the breezes blow untainted from the uplands, had been built the
College which Washington, greatest of Virginians and greatest of American
soldiers, had endowed.

Under the shadow of its towers the State had found an appropriate site for her military school.

The
cadets of the Institute, although they wore a uniform, were taught by officers of the regular
army, were disciplined as soldiers, and spent some months of their
course in camp, were not destined for a military career.

All aspirants for commissions in the United States army had to pass through West Point; and
the training of the State colleges--for Virginia was not solitary
in the possession of such an institution--however much it may have
benefited both the minds and bodies of the rising generation, was
of immediate value only to those who became officers of the State
militia.

Still in all essential respects the Military Institute was little
behind West Point.

The discipline was as strict, the drill but little less precise. The cadets had their own officers
and their own sergeants, and the whole establishment was administered on a military footing.
No pains were spared either by the State or the faculty to maintain the peculiar character
of the school; and the little battalion, although the members were
hardly likely to see service, was as carefully trained as if each
private in the ranks might one day become a general officer.

It was fortunate indeed for Virginia, when she submitted her destinies to the arbitrament of
war, that some amongst her statesmen had been firm to the conviction that to defend one's country
is a task not a whit less honourable than to serve her in the ways of peace. She was unable
to avert defeat.

But she more than redeemed her honour; and the efficiency of her troops was in no small degree
due to the training so many of her officers had received at the Military Institute.

Still, notwithstanding its practical use to the State, the offer of a chair at Lexington would
probably have attracted but few of Jackson's contemporaries.

But while campaigning was entirely to his taste, life in barracks
was the reverse.

In those unenlightened days to be known as an able and zealous soldier was no passport to preferment.
So long as an officer escaped censure his promotion was sure; he might reach without further
effort the highest prizes the service offered, and the chances of the dull and indolent were
quite as good as those of the capable and energetic. The one had no need for, the other no
incentive to, self-improvement, and it was very generally neglected. Unless war intervened--and
nothing seemed more improbable than another campaign--even a Napoleon would have had to submit
to the inevitable. Jackson caught eagerly at the opportunity of freeing himself from an unprofitable
groove.

"He believed," he said, "that a man who had turned, with a good military reputation, to pursuits
of a semi-civilian character, and had vigorously prosecuted his mental improvement, would have
more chance of success in war than those who had remained in the treadmill of the garrison."

It was with a view, then, of fitting himself for command that Jackson broke away from the restraints of
regimental life; not because those restraints were burdensome or distasteful in themselves, but
because he felt that whilst making the machine they might destroy
the man.

Those responsible for the efficiency of the United States army had not yet learned that the
mind must be trained as well as the body, that drill is not the beginning and the end of the soldier's
education, that unless an officer is trusted with responsibility in peace he is but too apt to lose
all power of initiative in war. That Jackson's ideas were sound may be inferred from the fact that
many of the most distinguished generals in the Civil War were men whose previous career had been
analogous to his own.* (* Amongst these may be mentioned Grant, Sherman, and McClellan. Lee
himself, as an engineer, had but small acquaintance with regimental life. The men who saved India
for England in the Great mutiny were of the same type.)

His duties at Lexington were peculiar. As Professor of Artillery he was responsible for little
more than the drill of the cadets and their instruction in the theory of gunnery. The tactics
of artillery, as the word is understood in Europe, he was not called upon to impart. Optics,
mechanics, and astronomy were his special subjects, and he seems strangely out of place in
expounding their dry formulas.

In the well-stocked library of the Institute he found every opportunity of increasing his professional
knowledge. He was an untiring reader, and he read to learn. The wars of Napoleon were his
constant study. He was an enthusiastic admirer of his genius; the swiftness, the daring, and
the energy of his movements appealed to his every instinct. Unfortunately, both for the Institute
and his popularity, it was not his business to lecture on military history. We can well imagine
him, as a teacher of the art of war, describing to the impressionable youths around him the
dramatic incidents of some famous campaign, following step by step the skilful strategy that brought
about such victories as Austerlitz and Jena. The advantage would then have been with his pupils;
in the work assigned to him it was the teacher that benefited. He was by no means successful as
an instructor of the higher mathematics. Although the theories of light and motion were doubtless
a branch of learning which the cadets particularly detested, his methods of teaching made it
even more repellent. A thorough master of his subject, he lacked altogether the power of aiding
others to master it. No flashes of humour relieved the tedium of his long and closely-reasoned
demonstrations. He never descended to the level of his pupils' understanding, nor did he appreciate
their difficulties.

Facts presented themselves to his intellect in few lights. As one of his chief characteristics
as a commander was the clearness with which he perceived the end to be aimed at and the shortest
way of reaching it, so, in his explanations to his stumbling class, he could only repeat the
process by which he himself had solved the problem at issue. We may well believe that his self-reliant
nature, trained to intense application, overlooked the fact that others, weaker and less gifted,
could not surmount unaided the obstacles which only aroused his own masterful instincts. Nevertheless,
his conscientious industry was not entirely thrown away. To the brighter intellects in his class
he communicated accurate scholarship; and although the majority lagged far behind, the thoroughness
of his mental drill was most useful, to himself perhaps even more than to the cadets.

1854 to 1857.

The death of his first wife, daughter of the reverend Dr. Junkin, President of Washington College,
after they had been married but fourteen months, the solution of his religious difficulties,
and his reception into the Presbyterian Church; a five months' tour in Europe, through Scotland,
England, Germany, Switzerland, and Italy; his marriage to Miss Morrison, daughter of a North
Carolina clergyman: such were the chief landmarks of his life at Lexington. Ten years, with
their burden of joy and sorrow, passed away, of intense interest to the individual, but to the world
a story dull and commonplace. Jackson was by no means a man of mark in Rockbridge county.
Although his early shyness had somewhat worn off, he was still as reserved as he had been at West Point.
His confidence was rarely given outside his own home. Intimates he had few, either at the Institute
or elsewhere. Still he was not in the least unsociable, and there were many houses where he was always welcome.
The academic atmosphere of Lexington did not preclude a certain amount of gaiety. The presence
of Washington College and the Military Institute drew together a
large number of families during the summer, and fair visitors thronged
the leafy avenues of the little town.

During these pleasant months the officers and cadets, as became their cloth, were always well
to the fore. Recreation was the order of the day, and a round of entertainments enlivened the "Commencements."
Major Jackson attended these gatherings with unfailing regularity, but soon after his arrival
he drew the line at dancing, and musical parties became the limit of his dissipation. He was
anything but a convivial companion. He never smoked, he was a strict teetotaller, and he never
touched a card. His diet, for reasons of health, was of a most sparing kind; nothing could tempt
him to partake of food between his regular hours, and for many years he abstained from both
tea and coffee. In those peaceful times, moreover, there was nothing either commanding or captivating
about the Professor of Artillery. His little romance in Mexico had given him no taste for trivial
pleasures; and his somewhat formal manner was not redeemed by any special charm of feature. The
brow and jaw were undoubtedly powerful; but the eyes were gentle, and the voice so mild and
soft as to belie altogether the set determination of the thin straight lips. Yet, at the same
time, if Jackson was not formed for general society, he was none the less capable of making himself
exceedingly agreeable in a restricted and congenial circle. Young and old, when once they had
gained his confidence, came under the spell of his noble nature; and if his friends were few they were
very firm.

Why Jackson should have preferred the Presbyterian denomination to all others we are nowhere told.
But whatever his reasons may have been, he was a most zealous and
hardworking member of his church. He was not content with perfunctory
attendances at the services. He became a deacon, and a large portion
of his leisure time was devoted to the work which thus devolved on
him. His duties were to collect alms and to distribute to the destitute,
and nothing was permitted to interfere with their exact performance.
He was exceedingly charitable himself--one tenth of his income was
laid aside for the church, and he gave freely to all causes of benevolence
and public enterprise. At the church meetings, whether for business
or prayer, he was a regular attendant, and between himself and his
pastor existed the most confidential relations. Nor did he consider
that this was all that was demanded of him.

Then there were some lonely, anxious days for a pale-faced, slender, sad-eyed girl who seemed
to get no benefit from the bracing breezes, and then, bursting suddenly from winter to summer,
as is often the way with our ill-ordered, turbulent, defiant, and generally indescribable climate,
came the first day of moisture-laden heat, depressing, debilitating,--a day when the tide of
his affairs swept Elmendorf from his moorings at Cranston's and sent the freeholder thereof
in search of a stenographer,--the day when poor Jenny begged to be excused from having even
to write that detested name. And then speedily came the long-threatened outbreak, the demand
of the American Railway Union that the public cease to patronize or the railway companies to
run, no matter what their contracts, the cars of the Pullman Company. "We've got 'em by the
throat at last," screamed Mart Wallen at Donnelly's Shades that night. "This means that the
people, the people of the whole nation, have risen to down that damned old miser, and we'll
make a clean sweep of other misers while we're about it."

"We've got 'em foul," echoed with drunken hiccoughs the graceless nephew Mrs. Mac and her sobered
sergeant were dragging home between them, deaf to the eloquence of Elmendorf haranguing the
crowd in the open square beyond. What was he saying?--"Stand firm, and the blood of the innocent
victims of the glorious appeal of seven years ago, the martyred lives of the innocent men who
died upon the scaffold, strangled in their effort to speak for you and your children, not only
will not have been lost in vain, but soon shall be magnificently avenged. Oh, that it had been
my lot to lead you here in '86! God be thanked, it is my lot to lead you now!"

"Oh, that ye had been here to lead in '86, ye howling lunatic," echoed Mrs. Mac, shaking her
one unoccupied fist at the glorified but luckily distant face of the speaker; "yer only lot
this night would have been in the graveyard, for ye never would have lived to lead anything,
barrin' yer own funeral."

CHAPTER XII.

Then came a few days in which Elmendorf was in his glory. To be in a position where he could
command attention, where he could practically compel people of all classes and conditions to
be his listeners, to hang upon his words and regard him as clothed with power backed by authority,
this was indeed joy and triumph new to him, though still far below the dreams he had dreamed.
Though not even a member of the great railway union, not even possessing the confidence of
its leaders, the fervor of his speeches had won him favor and admitted him to their councils.
Not even tolerated for days at head-quarters, he suddenly reappeared there with all the assurance
of the past, and during the first forty-eight hours of the memorable strike no one man in all
Chicago seemed to carry on his shoulders the weight of information, authority, and influence
of John Allison's whilom tutor, whose note of dismissal, unopened, awaited him at the deserted
study. To the officials of the American Railway Union he represented himself as deep in the
confidence of the officials at military head-quarters, personally intimate with most of the
staff, and a man to whose warnings the general himself ever lent attentive ear. To the adjutant-general
and others in authority, the chief being still away, he declared himself the envoy of the leaders
of the strike, a man empowered to levy war or compass peace. In both assumptions he was impudent,
yet not without support. What he craved was prominence, notoriety, the fame, if not the fact,
of being an arbiter in the destinies of Chicago in this crisis of her history. From the Pullman
to the Leland, from inner dépôt to outlying freight-yards, from meetings to municipal offices,
he sped, never stopping for rest or refreshment. Irascible officers at Springfield, receiving
despatches signed Elmendorf, put an H to his name and lopped it off at the neck. There were
two precincts he left unpenetrated,--the head-quarters of the railway managers and those of
the National Guard. Allison had made him known at the one, his public utterances and persistent
sneers at "the militia boys," "our tin soldier boys," at the other. His appearance in the armory
of any regiment in the city would have been the signal for a demonstration he had no desire
to face. Through the newspaper offices, too, he flitted, shedding oracular statement and prophecy,
claiming to speak "by the card" when he had news to tell, and preserving mysterious, suggestive
silence when questioned on matters whereof he knew nothing.

Two days had the strike been in force. Switchmen, yardmen, firemen, had quit their posts, and
they or sympathizing gangs of toughs stoned and cursed the men who took their places. Yard-masters
and master-mechanics leaped into the cabs and handled the levers of switch-engines; white-handed
clerks and electricians swung lanterns and coupled cars; conductors turned switchmen, superintendents
became conductors, and managers stepped down to yard-masters; and still the mob, gaining in
numbers and wrath and villany with every hour, blackguarded the trainmen, blockaded the trains,
and bombarded with sticks and stones and coupling-pins the few shrinking and terrified passengers.
Trains reaching the city were towed in with every pane smashed and their inmates a mass of
cuts and bruises. Trains due in the city and seized by the strikers were side-tracked at desolate
prairie stations miles from food and water, and helpless, pleading women and children were
penned up in them and left to hunger and thirst and tremble. In vain the railway officials
pleaded with the city authorities for protection for passengers and trains. "We have been watching
everywhere; we've seen no violence," was the answer. Policemen along the railway lines laughed
and looked on while, almost within swing of their clubs, strikers were kicking a victim to
death. In vain all appeals to the State. This was a popular movement,--a poor man's protest
against the tyranny of a grasping monopolist,--The People vs. Pullman. Let the railways join
in and discard his cars, and all would be well. Contracts be damned! What cared they for the
law of contract when on the eve of revolution--and election? Feigning to believe that the managers
were merely pretending that their roads were blocked, openly asserting that the managers could
run their trains if they really wanted to, and slyly intimating that all the destruction thus
far effected was at the hands of paid emissaries of the managers themselves, officials of a
great State and of a great city, sworn to preserve peace and good order and enforce the laws,
dared to look idly on and trust the masses, to whom they betrayed the honor of the commonwealth,
for the vindication of a re-election. Within three days of the start, passenger traffic, except
on the two or three roads in the hands of the Federal courts, was practically ended, freight
traffic paralyzed, and the great stock-yards were in the hands of a mob of frantically rejoicing
men. "Not one wheel shall turn in any yard in all Chicago with the morrow's sun," said Elmendorf,
slyly and jeeringly exultant in the presence and hearing of officers and clerks at the Pullman
building late that night. "The managers have played their last card, made their last bluff.
The State and the city virtually tell them that it is their own fight, with their own men,
men whom they have systematically browbeaten, bullied, swindled, and starved until now the
worm has turned. At last you see the beginning of the end, the dawn of the glorious future,
the rise of labor against capital, and your friends the magnates have the option of ruin or
surrender. I tell you, gentlemen, three hundred thousand freemen will line those tracks at
noon to-morrow, and if their----" But the officers to whom he addressed himself turned impatiently
away. Clerks were passing to and fro along the hall between the office of the adjutant-general
and their desks. Some powerful but subdued excitement pervaded the building. Watchers of the
strikers had noted the increasing number of officers in civilian dress long after the usual
business hours, and Elmendorf, quick to take the alarm, had hastened thither to ferret out
the cause. Vain his effort to communicate with his one victim. He was at his desk, and a vigilant
ex-sergeant-major of cavalry scowled at the would-be intruder and told him visitors could not
enter the clerks' rooms. Vain his effort to extract news along the corridors. No man seemed
to know why so many of them were there. Perplexed, he rushed back to his associates, the strike-leaders.
"Are you sure they're stanch at Springfield?" he asked; "sure they haven't asked for aid from
Washington?" The idea was laughed to scorn.

"The governor is with us to the bitter end," was the loud boast of prominent sympathizers,
"and until he touches the button no power in or out of Illinois can stand between us and victory.
To-morrow we lock the lines from Pittsburg to the Pacific."

Exultant, he sprang into a cab and drove to the north side. It was late at night, but he had
his latch-key. A bath, a few hours' rest, a change of linen, and he would issue forth on the
morrow refreshed, invigorated, ready to launch his shallop on this tide in his affairs which,
taken at full flood, must lead to everlasting fame and fortune. Who would now dare crush him
with curt refusal to listen? Who would pooh-pooh his prophecies, who deny his views, who withhold
the homage due him now, as he strode, agitator, elevator, inspirer, Anax andrôn,--King of men,--the
divinely appointed, heaven-anointed leader of mankind in this sublime movement for liberty
and the Lord only knew what else? It was late, and the great house was dark, but he let himself
in, and, seeking first the butler's pantry, ransacked the larder for refreshment. He had eaten
and drunk his fill, when the electric bell called his eye to the indicator. Some one at the
street door. Humming softly his blithe tune, he shuffled over the tiled pavement and unbolted
the inner door. A telegraph-boy handed him two messages, with a receipt-book and pencil. "John
Allison," was all he said.

"I don't think he's home," said Elmendorf. "Did you try the club?"

For answer the boy sleepily pointed with grimy finger to the address on the envelope. Street
and number were distinct.

"Well, just wait, youngster, and I'll see if he's in," said Elmendorf, and trotted swiftly,
noiselessly up-stairs. But it was the check of a mighty wave, mounting slowly to full volume, ere
it falls in thunder on the shrinking sands. Running to the front with uplifted swords, the officers
gave the signal for the charge. The men answered with a yell of triumph; the second line,
closing rapidly on the first, could no longer be restrained; and as the grey masses, crowding together
in their excitement, breasted the last slope, the Federal infantry, in every quarter of the
field, gave way before them; the ridge was abandoned, and through the dark pines beyond rolled
the rout of the Eleventh Army Corps.

7 P.M.

It was seven o'clock.

Twilight was falling on the woods; and Rodes' and Colston's divisions
had become so inextricably mingled that officers could not find their
men nor men their officers.

But Jackson, galloping into the disordered ranks, directed them to press the pursuit. His
face was aglow with the blaze of battle.

His swift gestures and curt orders, admitting of no question, betrayed the fierce intensity
of his resolution.

Although the great tract of forest, covering Chancellorsville on the west, had swallowed up
the fugitives, he had no need of vision to reveal to him the extent of his success. 10,000
men had been utterly defeated. The enemy's right wing was scattered to the winds. The Southerners
were within a mile-and-a-half of the Federals' centre and completely in rear of their intrenchments;
and the White House or Bullock road, only half-a-mile to the front, led directly to Hooker's line of
retreat by the United States Ford. Until that road was in his possession Jackson was determined
to call no halt. The dense woods, the gathering darkness, the fatigue and disorder of his troops,
he regarded no more than he did the enemy's overwhelming numbers. In spirit he was standing at Hooker's
side, and he saw, as clearly as though the intervening woods had
been swept away, the condition to which his adversary had been reduced.

To

the Federal headquarters confusion and dismay had come, indeed, with
appalling suddenness.

Late in the afternoon Hooker was sitting with two aides-de-camp in the verandah of the Chancellor
House. There were few troops in sight. The Third Corps and Pleasonton's cavalry had long since
disappeared in the forest. The Twelfth Army Corps, with the exception of two brigades, was
already advancing against Anderson; and only the trains and some artillery remained within the
intrenchments at Hazel Grove. All was going well. A desultory firing broke out at intervals
to the eastward, but it was not sustained; and three miles to the south, where, as Hooker believed,
in pursuit of Jackson, Sickles and Pleasonton were, the reports of their cannon, growing fainter
and fainter as they pushed further south, betokened no more than a lively skirmish. The quiet
of the Wilderness, save for those distant sounds, was undisturbed, and men and animals, free
from every care, were enjoying the calm of the summer evening. It was about half-past six.
Suddenly the cannonade swelled to a heavier roar, and the sound came from a new direction. All
were listening intently, speculating on what this might mean, when a staff-officer, who had stepped
out to the front of the house and was looking down the plank road
with his glass, exclaimed: "My God, here they come!"

Hooker sprang upon his horse; and riding rapidly down the road, met the stragglers of the Eleventh
Corps--men, waggons, and ambulances, an ever-increasing crowd--rushing
in blind terror from the forest, flying they knew not whither.

The whole of the right wing, they said, overwhelmed by superior numbers, was falling back on Chancellorsville,
and Stonewall Jackson was in hot pursuit.

The situation had changed in the twinkling of an eye. Just now congratulating himself on the
complete success of his manoeuvres, on the retreat of his enemies,
on the flight of Jackson and the helplessness of Lee, Hooker saw his
strong intrenchments taken in reverse, his army scattered, his reserves
far distant, and the most dreaded of his opponents, followed by his
victorious veterans, within a few hundred yards of his headquarters.

His weak point had been found, and there were no troops at hand wherewith to restore the fight.
The centre was held only by the two brigades of the Twelfth Corps at the Fairview Cemetery.
The works at Hazel Grove were untenanted, save by a few batteries and a handful of infantry.
The Second and Fifth Corps on the left were fully occupied by McLaws, for Lee, at the first sound
of Jackson's guns, had ordered a vigorous attack up the pike and the plank road. Sickles, with
20,000 men, was far away, isolated and perhaps surrounded, and the line of retreat, the road
to United States Ford, was absolutely unprotected.

Messengers were dispatched in hot haste to recall Sickles and Pleasonton to Hazel Grove. Berry's division,
forming the reserve north-east of the Chancellor House, was summoned
to Fairview, and Hays' brigade of the Second Corps ordered to support
it.

But what could three small brigades, hurried into position and unprotected
by intrenchments, avail against 25,000 Southerners, led by Stonewall
Jackson, and animated by their easy victory?

If Berry and Hays could stand fast against the rush of fugitives, it was all that could be expected;
and as the uproar in the dark woods swelled to a deeper volume, and the yells of the Confederates,
mingled with the crash of the musketry, were borne to his ears, Hooker must have felt that all
was lost. To make matters worse, as Pleasonton, hurrying back with his cavalry, arrived at Hazel
Grove, the trains of the Third Army Corps, fired on by the Confederate skirmishers, dashed wildly
across the clearing, swept through the parked artillery, and, breaking
through the forest, increased the fearful tumult which reigned round
Chancellorsville.

The gunners, however, with a courage beyond all praise, stood staunchly to their pieces; and
soon a long line of artillery, for which two regiments of the Third Army Corps, coming up
rapidly from the south, formed a sufficient escort, was established on this commanding hill. Other
batteries, hitherto held in reserve, took post on the high ground
at Fairview, a mile to the north-east, and, although Berry's infantry
were not yet in position, and the stream of broken troops was still
pouring past, a strong front of fifty guns opposed the Confederate
advance.

But it was not the artillery that saved Hooker from irretrievable disaster.* (* Lieutenant-Colonel Hamlin,
the latest historian of Chancellorsville, has completely disposed of the legend that these fifty
guns repulsed a desperate attack on Hazel Grove.) As they followed the remnants of the Eleventh
Army Corps, the progress of Rodes and Colston had been far less rapid than when they stormed
forward past the Wilderness Church. A regiment of Federal cavalry, riding to Howard's aid
by a track from Hazel Grove to the plank road, was quickly swept aside; but the deep darkness
of the forest, the efforts of the officers to re-form the ranks, the barriers opposed by the tangled
undergrowth, the difficulty of keeping the direction, brought a large portion of the troops
to a standstill. At the junction of the White House road the order to halt was given, and although
a number of men, pushing impetuously forward, seized a line of log
breastworks which ran north-west through the timber below the Fairview
heights, the pursuit was stayed in the midst of the dense thickets.

8.15 P.M.

At this moment, shortly after eight o'clock, Jackson was at Dowdall's Tavern. The reports from
the front informed him that his first and second lines had halted; General Rodes, who had galloped
up the plank road to reconnoitre, sent in word that there were no
Federal troops to be seen between his line and the Fairview heights;
and Colonel Cobb, of the 44th Virginia, brought the news that the
strong intrenchments, less than a mile from Chancellorsville, had
been occupied without resistance.

There was a lull in the battle; the firing had died away, and the excited troops, with a clamour
that was heard in the Federal lines, sought their companies and regiments by the dim light
of the rising moon. But deeming that nothing was done while aught remained to do, Jackson was
already planning a further movement.

Sending instructions to A.P. Hill to relieve Rodes and Colston, and to prepare for a night attack,
he rode forward, almost unattended, amongst his rallying troops,
and lent his aid to the efforts of the regimental officers.

Intent on bringing up the two divisions in close support of Hill,
he passed from one regiment to another.

Turning to Colonel Cobb, he said to him; "Find General Rodes, and tell him to occupy the barricade*
(* In the woods west of the Fairview Heights.) at once," and then added: "I need your help for
a time; this disorder must be corrected. As you go along the right, tell the troops from me
to get into line and preserve their order."

It was long, however, before the men could be assembled, and the delay was increased by an
unfortunate incident. Jackson's chief of artillery, pressing forward up the plank road to within
a thousand yards of Chancellorsville, opened fire with three guns upon the enemy's position. This
audacious proceeding evoked a quick reply. Such Federal guns as could be brought to bear were
at once turned upon the road, and although the damage done was small, A.P. Hill's brigades, just
coming up into line, were for the moment checked; under the hail of shell and canister the
artillery horses became unmanageable, the drivers lost their nerve, and as they rushed to the
rear some of the infantry joined them, and a stampede was only prevented
by the personal efforts of Jackson, Colston, and their staff-officers.

Colonel Crutchfield was then ordered to cease firing; the Federals did the same; and A.P.
Hill's brigades, that of General Lane leading, advanced to the deserted breastworks, while two brigades,
one from Rodes' division and one from Colston's, were ordered to guard the roads from Hazel Grove.

8.45
P.M.

These arrangements made, Jackson proceeded to join his advanced line. At the point where the track
to the White House and United States ford strikes the plank road he met General Lane, seeking his
instructions for the attack. They were sufficiently brief: "Push right ahead, Lane; right ahead!"
As Lane galloped off to his command, General Hill and some of his staff came up, and Jackson
gave Hill his orders. "Press them; cut them off from the United States Ford, Hill; press them."
General Hill replied that he was entirely unacquainted with the topography of the country,
and asked for an officer to act as guide. Jackson directed Captain Boswell, his chief engineer, to
accompany General Hill, and then, turning to the front, rode up the plank road, passing quickly
through the ranks of the 18th North Carolina of Lane's brigade. Two or three hundred yards eastward
the general halted, for the ringing of axes and the words of command were distinctly audible
in the enemy's lines.

While the Confederates were re-forming, Hooker's reserves had reached the front, and Berry's
regiments, on the Fairview heights, using their bayonets and tin-plates for intrenching tools, piling
up the earth with their hands, and hacking down the brushwood with
their knives, were endeavouring in desperate haste to provide some
shelter, however slight, against the rush that they knew was about
to come.

After a few minutes, becoming impatient for the advance of Hill's division, Jackson turned and
retraced his steps towards his own lines. "General," said an officer who was with him, "you
should not expose yourself so much." "There is no danger, sir, the enemy is routed. Go back
and tell General Hill to press on."

Once more, when he was only sixty or eighty yards from where the 18th North Carolina were standing
in the trees, he drew rein and listened--the whole party, generals, staff-officers, and couriers,
hidden in the deep shadows of the silent woods. At this moment a single rifle-shot rang out with
startling suddenness.

A detachment of Federal infantry, groping their way through the thickets,
had approached the Southern lines.

The skirmishers on both sides were now engaged, and the lines of battle in rear became keenly
on the alert. Some mounted officers galloped hastily back to their commands. The sound startled
the Confederate soldiers, and an officer of the 18th North Carolina, seeing a group of strange
horsemen riding towards him through the darkness--for Jackson, hearing the firing, had turned
back to his own lines--gave the order to fire.

The volley was fearfully effective. Men and horses fell dead and dying on the narrow track.
Jackson himself received three bullets, one in the right hand, and
two in the left arm, cutting the main artery, and crushing the bone
below the shoulder, and as the reins dropped upon his neck, "Little
Sorrel," frantic with terror, plunged into the wood and rushed towards
the Federal lines.

An overhanging bough struck his rider violently in the face, tore off his cap and nearly unhorsed
him; but recovering his seat, he managed to seize the bridle with
his bleeding hand, and turned into the road.

Here Captain Wilbourn, one of his staff-officers, succeeded in catching the reins; and, as the
horse stopped, Jackson leaned forward and fell into his arms. Captain Hotchkiss, who had just
returned from a reconnaissance, rode off to find Dr. McGuire, while Captain Wilbourn, with a small
penknife, ripped up the sleeve of the wounded arm. As he was doing so, General Hill, who had
himself been exposed to the fire of the North Carolinians, reached
the scene, and, throwing himself from his horse, pulled off Jackson's
gauntlets, which were full of blood, and bandaged the shattered arm
with a handkerchief.

"General," he said, "are you much hurt?" "I think I am," was the reply, "and all my wounds are from
my own men. I believe my right arm is broken."

To all questions put to him he answered in a perfectly calm and self-possessed
tone, and, although he spoke no word of complaint, he was manifestly
growing weaker.

It seemed impossible to move him, and yet it was absolutely necessary that he should be carried
to the rear. He was still in front of his own lines, and, even as Hill was speaking, two of
the enemy's skirmishers, emerging from the thicket, halted within a few paces of the little
group.

Hill, turning quietly to his escort, said, "Take charge of those
men," and two orderlies, springing forward, seized the rifles of the
astonished Federals.

Lieutenant Morrison, Jackson's aide-de-camp, who had gone down the road to reconnoitre, now
reported that he had seen a section of artillery unlimbering close
at hand.

Hill gave orders that the general should be at once removed, and that no one should tell the
men that he was wounded. Jackson, lying on Hill's breast, opened
his eyes, and said, "Tell them simply that you have a wounded Confederate
officer."

Lieutenants Smith and Morrison, and Captain Leigh of Hill's staff, now lifted him to his feet,
and with their aid he walked a few steps through the trees. But hardly had they gained the
road when the Federal batteries, along their whole front, opened a terrible fire of grape and
canister. The storm of bullets, tearing through the foliage, was fortunately directed too high,
and the three young officers, laying the general down by the roadside, endeavoured to shield
him by lying between him and the deadly hail. The earth round them was torn up by the shot, covering
them with dust; boughs fell from the trees, and fire flashed from the flints and gravel of the
roadway. Once Jackson attempted to rise; but Smith threw his arm over him, holding him down, and
saying, "General, you must be still--it will cost you your life to
rise."

After a few minutes, however, the enemy's gunners, changing from canister to shell, mercifully
increased their range; and again, as the Confederate infantry came hurrying to the front,
their wounded leader, supported by strong arms, was lifted to his
feet.

Anxious that the men should not recognise him, Jackson turned aside
into the wood, and slowly and painfully dragged himself through the
undergrowth.

As he passed along, General Fender, whose brigade was then pushing forward, asked Smith who
it was that was wounded. "A Confederate officer" was the reply; but as they came nearer Fender,
despite the darkness, saw that it was Jackson. Springing from his horse, he hurriedly expressed
his regret, and added that his lines were so much disorganised by the enemy's artillery that
he feared it would be necessary to fall back. "At this moment," says an eye-witness, "the scene
was a fearful one. The air seemed to be alive with the shriek of shells and the whistling of bullets;
horses riderless and mad with fright dashed in every direction; hundreds left the ranks and
hurried to the rear, and the groans of the wounded and dying mingled with the wild shouts
of others to be led again to the assault. Almost fainting as he was from loss of blood, desperately
wounded, and in the midst of this awful uproar, Jackson's heart was unshaken. The words of Fender
seemed to rouse him to life. Pushing aside those who supported him, he raised himself to his full
height, and answered feebly, but distinctly enough to be heard above the din, 'You must hold your
ground, General Fender; you must hold out to the last, sir.'"

His strength was now completely gone, and he asked to be allowed to lie down. His staff-officers,
however, refused assent. The shells were still crashing through the forest, and a litter having
been brought up by Captain Leigh, he was carried slowly towards Dowdall's
Tavern.

But before they were free of the tangled wood, one of the stretcher-bearers, struck by a shot
in the arm, let go the handle. Jackson fell violently to the ground
on his wounded side.

His agony must have been intense, and for the first time he was heard to groan.

Smith sprang to his side, and as he raised his head a bright beam of moonlight made its way through
the thick foliage, and rested upon his white and lacerated face.

The aide-de-camp was startled by its great pallor and stillness, and cried out, "General, are
you seriously hurt?" "No, Mr. Smith, don't trouble yourself about me," he replied quietly, and
added some words about winning the battle first, and attending to the wounded afterwards. He was
again placed upon the litter, and carried a few hundred yards, still
followed by the Federal shells, to where his medical director was
waiting with an ambulance.

Dr. McGuire knelt down beside him and
said, "I hope you are not badly hurt, General?" He replied very calmly
but feebly, "I am badly injured, doctor, I fear I am dying." I tell
you that this movement means revolution, that within this very week the long-oppressed people
shall be paramount, and we who reap shall rule. I have long seen it coming, long foretold and
long been ridiculed, but now the hour, ay, the hour and the man have come. Already I have saved
you from the dishonor of alliance with---- Nay, you must listen," for, with infinite disgust
upon her face, she turned angrily away. But, as she would not listen, he sprang forward and
seized her wrists. "Florence," he cried, "I----"

And then her voice re-echoed through the hall. "Cary!" she screamed, and far aloft there was
a shout of "Coming!" and, six steps at a bound, that exuberant specimen of Young America came
thundering down the broad spiral of the stairway. The portentous butler, too, hove suddenly
in sight. Elmendorf dropped the subject--and her wrist, whisked his hat off the hall table,
and was out of the house and into his cab before the wrathful brother could reach him.

Not until cabby had driven blindly for six blocks did Elmendorf poke his cane through the trap
and bid him speed for the Lambert. A carriage stood at the private entrance, and the driver
said it was Mr. Allison's. The anteroom was open; the glazed doors to the private office were
closed, but excited voices arose from within. He recognized Allison's, Wells's, and that of
the chairman of the board of trustees, in hot altercation. The chairman seemed siding with
Wells, which added to Allison's wrath, and he wound up with an explosion:

"I've given you more than reason enough. She has been shut up here alone with him time and
again at night; she has been seen going to his rooms long after dark; she has been seen walking
or driving with him as late as midnight; and the very evening he is due at a gentleman's house
at dinner he sends 'urgent business' as his plea, and is found supping alone with her at the
Belmont. If she stays, I resign."

"And I answer," thundered Wells, "that that girl's as pure-hearted a woman as ever lived. She
has been shut up here with me time and again, working at my letters until late at night; she
has been to my rooms a dozen times to leave her finished work on her homeward way; she has
been seen, or could have been seen, walking or driving with me late at night, for I'm proud
to say I've taken her home instead of letting her go it alone in the rain; and as for the Belmont,
it's the nearest and neatest restaurant I know of, and a dozen times when we had work to be
finished in a hurry have I taken her, as Mr. Forrest did, to have her cup of tea there, instead
of letting her tramp two miles to get it at home. I'm a married man, and he isn't; that's the
only difference. You say if she stays, you resign. All right, Mr. Allison. If she goes, I go."

And then upon this stormy scene entered Elmendorf, the blessed, the peacemaker.

"It would be idle to assume ignorance of the subject of this conference," he began, before
any one had sufficiently recovered from surprise to head him off, "and, as it is audible throughout
this portion of the building, I could not but hear and be attracted by it. I am here, as ever,
to take the side of the oppressed, and to say that should that young woman be punished thus
summarily for her--indiscretions, I shall consider it my duty to make public certain circumstances
in connection with the case, notably Mr. Forrest's relations with certain families in our midst,
that may prove unpleasant reading."

"Enough of this, Mr. Elmendorf," began Wells, angrily. "This young woman, as you term her,
is not to be summarily punished, because she has done nothing to deserve it, and despite every
sneaking endeavor on your part to cloud her good name. And now, like the double-dealing cad
you are, you come here posing as her defender. She needs none, by God, as long as my wife and
I are left in the land; and I would trust her cause with Mr. Allison himself at any other time
than now, when he is overstrained and worn out.--Miss Wallen is at home," he continued, addressing
himself to the two trustees, "owing, she explains, to her mother's severe illness. She, too,
is far from well. She has been looking badly for weeks. I was going up there to see what I
could do for her, when surprised by this visit. Mr. Waldo, as president of the board of trustees
you may understand that I declare these allegations against Miss Wallen to be utterly, brutally
unjust, and that I protest against the action proposed by Mr. Allison. Most unfortunately our
talk has been overheard by the man whom of all others I distrust in this connection."

"What business have you here, Mr. Elmendorf, anyway?" said Allison, glowering angrily. "I have
forbidden you my doors, yet you follow me."

"My business is with you, sir, not as a suppliant pleading for mercy, as you seem to think,
but as the representative of a great people demanding immediate answer to their----"

"What? Why, you meddling, insignificant----" scowled Allison, gripping his cane as though eager
to use it.

"Spare your insults and your cane, Mr. Allison. Our relative positions have been utterly reversed
in the last forty-eight hours. At this moment there is a clamor for your downfall in the throats
of three hundred thousand toil-worn, honest laboring men. Between their victim and their vengeance
no State, no municipal authority will interpose a hand. Last night, false to your promises
to the Brotherhood of Trainmen, you sent strong bodies of armed men to terrorize the few strikers
gathered in the effort to establish their just claims. You broke their blockade, ran your trains
in and out, and indulged in insolent triumph before the people in the morning press. At this
moment within easy range of your palatial home ten thousand determined men are assembled, awaiting
the word. Once launched upon their work, not one stone of your railway buildings, not a shingle
on the roofs of your elevators, not one brick in the walls of your homestead, will be left
to show where once they stood. Only my appeals, only my urgent counsels, have thus far restrained
them. What will be the consequences if you refuse to listen God alone can tell. Despite my
personal wrongs, I have come to you as mediator, deprecating riots and destruction. All the
Union asks of you, all I implore you to do is to sign a written promise that until such time
as this unhappy controversy be settled the railway company of which you are the virtual head
will make no further attempt to move a single train."

Allison's face was a sight to see, purpling with wrath and amaze, yet quivering with sense
of the wild absurdity of the situation. Glancing from one to another, portly Mr. Waldo stood
uneasily by. He believed some escaped lunatic had invaded the Lambert. Even Wells, who had
known Elmendorf for months, seemed unprepared for the sublimity of this flight. He turned away
towards the window to let them settle it between them. At last Allison spoke, with exaggerated
calm:

"And if I refuse this modest request, what am I to expect as the consequence?"

"The immediate consequence will be the calling out at noon to-day of the Brotherhood of Railway
Trainmen and the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, thus tying up every road in the country,
to be followed to-morrow by similar action on the part of the Knights of Labor, involving every
industry in the land and turning millions of idle men loose upon our streets. What will stand
between you, your hoarded wealth, and your cherished ones--your lives--and the wild vengeance
of a long oppressed and starving populace, I leave you to imagine."

"And you actually expect me to believe this trash,--expect me to believe that the State of
Illinois will stand idly by and see----"

"The governor of Illinois," interrupted Elmendorf, "has refused to interfere. His heart beats
in sympathy with that of his people. He knows their wrongs. He has dared to say that never
by his call shall sabre or bayonet be used to intimidate the workingman in the effort to secure
his rights. The blood of the martyred men you hanged eight years ago as Anarchists cries aloud
for vengeance, and the day of the people has come at last. They govern the governor; they are
the legislature of Illinois, and when they rise no power on earth can save you."

But Wells could stand it no longer. He was fuming at the great window overlooking the street,
and now burst impetuously into speech. "No power on earth, you absurd lunatic? do you mean
that because this State has a crank like you temporarily at the top there's nothing beyond
or behind it to save us from pillage and murder and anarchy? Listen to that, you foreign-born
fraud!" and far up the street the morning air was ringing with shouts of acclaim; "listen to
that! There's some American music for you, you half-witted, stall-fed socialist!" For loud
and clear a trumpet-call echoed down the thoroughfare. "Look at that!" he cried, throwing aside
the lower shutters, "look at that, you mad-brained, moon-blinded dreamer!"

And there, covering the space almost from curb to curb, a squadron of regular cavalry came
sweeping down the avenue, the guidons fluttering over the uniforms of dusty blue, the drab
campaign hats shading the stern, soldierly faces, the grim cartridge-belts bulging with copper
and lead, the ugly little brown barkers of carbines and revolvers peeping from their holsters.
Troop after troop, they swung steadily by, the guns of a light battery following close at their
heels. "No power on earth!" persisted the incensed man of books. "You stuffed owl! Go back
to your mobs and murderers, and when you've told them what you've seen, keep going until you
get back out of this to the country where such as you belong,--if there is one on earth that'll
own you,--and tell them the United States is a government, a Nation,--by the Eternal! and don't
you dare forget it again." And, stupefied, thunderstruck, Elmendorf turned and fled.

"But this is invasion! this is treason!" he gasped, as he bolted madly from the room.

CHAPTER XIV.

And these were but the advanced guard of the little army of regulars that, welcomed with glad
acclaim by every law-abiding, order-loving citizen, came pouring into Chicago all through that
day and for some days that followed, their very presence bringing assurance of peace and safety
to thousands and thousands of anxious householders, and confusion and dismay to the leaders
of the mob. Believing as had these latter that, despite the vast and valuable Federal properties
in the heart of the city, despite the fact that some of the railways involved were at that
very moment under the wing of the Federal courts, despite the laws of the general government
affecting the working and management of every one of over a dozen great trunk lines centring
in Chicago, Uncle Sam would be ass enough to confide them all to the care of State authorities
notoriously dependent upon the masses, and that he would not venture to protect his property,
sustain his courts, enforce his laws, demand and command respect and subordination, or even
venture upon his own, except at the invitation and permission of a hesitant State government,
there had been little short of triumph and exultation in the camp of the American Railway Union
until this fatal July morning. Now their wrath was frantic.

And Elmendorf was madder than ever. The general and his staff reappeared in the midst of the
concentration. Their coming was announced. After vainly haranguing the stolid officials at
head-quarters upon the enormity of their conduct in declining to see the fearful blunder made
by their President and commander-in-chief, after attempting to harangue a battalion of dusty
infantry in the vague hope that, inspired by his eloquence, they might do something the enlisted
men of the United States never yet have done, no matter what the temptation,--revolt against
their government and join the army of the new revolution,--and being induced to desist only
when summarily told to "Go on out of that! or----" while a bayonet supplied the ellipsis, poor
Elmendorf flew to the station, to be the first to meet the general on his return and to open
his eyes to a proper conception of law, order, and soldierly duty. Even here those minions
from head-quarters were ahead of him. Three or four officers were already on the spot awaiting
their chief, and Elmendorf felt convinced that they had come solely to prevent his getting
the ear of the commander. Even as they waited and a curious crowd began to gather, numbers
of strike sympathizers among them, down the broad steps from the street above came the tramp,
tramp of martial feet, and in solid column of fours, in full marching order, every man a walking
arsenal of ball cartridges, a battalion of infantry filed sturdily into the grimy train-shed,
formed line, facing the murmuring crowd, and then stood there in composed silence "at ease."
Then the little knot of staff-officers and newspaper men was presently joined by Lieutenant-Colonel
Kenyon, commanding the --th Infantry, one battalion of which had just taken position as indicated;
and to him came others, officers of the battalion. Again did Elmendorf raise his voice in appeal
for the rights of his fellow-men.

"Colonel Kenyon," he declaimed, his shrill tones distinctly audible above the hoarse murmur
of voices in the rapidly augmenting throng, "you have been so considerate as to listen to a
humble outsider before this, and to express appreciation of some, at least, of the views I
have felt constrained to express. You are, as I understand, the commanding officer of the regiment
that has just arrived in this city. You are an officer sworn to maintain the Constitution of
the United States; and is not your very presence here--you and your men--in glaring violation
of that Constitution?"

Here the few officers who had joined their commander, all strangers to Elmendorf, turned upon
him in astonishment. The newspaper men chuckled and nudged each other companionably. Some of
the staff turned away, plainly indicating that they had already had to listen to too much of
that sort of thing. Kenyon looked him curiously over.

"Mr. Elmendorf, do you ask that question in your sober senses, or only as a jocular reminder?
Those identical words were addressed to me by an irate gentleman in Virginia in '62." So far
from being irritated, old Kenyon seemed to find amusement in drawing his interlocutor out.

"Ah, but, my dear sir, there the whole State--the whole South--was in armed rebellion against
the Federal government. Here is neither insurrection nor rebellion. Here, honest, law-abiding,
patriotic men, as loyal to the Union of States as ever you could be, are exerting their prerogative
as men, their rights as citizens, to obtain justice for themselves and their brethren at the
hands of a defiant and oppressive monopoly. They have done no wrong, violated no law, and yet
here you come with bayonets and ball cartridges to intimidate, if not to shoot down in cold
blood, husbands and fathers and peaceable citizens who are only pleading for justice at the
hands of their employers."

"Some mistake here, Mr. Elmendorf. Your leaders have already declared it a rebellion. The husbands
and fathers we are here to look after are the amiable parties who stove in our car-windows
and soaped our rails and let drive such pygmy projectiles as coupling-pins, a wild switch engine
or two, and blazing freight-cars at us as we came in awhile ago."

"Our people are in no wise connected with that," cried Elmendorf. "All this alleged violence
is the work of lawless classes whom we cannot control, or of the emissaries of the railways
themselves. It has been grossly and purposely exaggerated."

"Oh! Then all this rioting is done by outsiders, not by your friends the strikers, who heartily
condemn the whole business, do they?"

"Most assuredly. We have forbidden violence in any and every form."

"I see. And yet the rabble and the railway folks have insisted on it. Well, now, how grateful
you ought to be to the President for ordering us here to help you suppress them! Really, Mr.
Elmendorf, I am glad to find we are on the same side of this question, after all." But here
a shout of laughter drowned Kenyon's words and drove Elmendorf frantic.

"You don't understand," he almost shrieked. "It is our people who are intimidated,--beaten
back in the moment of victory." And then some of the crowd, now thronging the open space in
front of the battalion, began to cheer. A man pushed through, handed Kenyon a telegram, and
whispered a few words in his ear. Kenyon glanced quickly around upon the multitude now surging
close about the group, and stepped back a few paces to read his despatch. Elmendorf followed,
eager to resume his harangue. Kenyon uplifted his hand. "Pardon me now, Mr. Elmendorf. I have
business to attend to." But Elmendorf was wild with excitement and wrath. He had been laughed
at,--he, the mover of millions. Here were already a thousand fellow-citizens at his back, and
more coming. From the freight-yards up and down the tracks, from the docks, the elevators,
the neighboring saloons, they were swarming to the scene. There in double rank stood the four
compact little companies of regulars in the business-like rig of blue and brown, resting on
their arms, chatting in low tones, or calmly surveying from under the broad hat-brims the gathering
crowd. To their right and left, up and down the long vista of train-sheds, letting themselves
down from overarching bridges, or pushing boldly past the feeble railway police, hundreds of
tough-looking citizens were slowly closing in. Back of the battalion, separated from it by
only two tracks, were long files of passenger and Pullman cars, behind which and on whose platforms,
in knots of half a dozen, other men were gathering. It was the general superintendent of the
road who had spoken to Kenyon and was now exchanging a few words with the chief quartermaster
of the department. Dozens in the crowd pushed forward instantly, newspaper men as a matter
of business, others from curiosity, as Kenyon opened his despatch. A burly, gray-haired major
was quickly at his side, and a tall young subaltern, the adjutant of the regiment. One brief
glance over the paper, and the commander turned to his right. "Clear the station," was all
he said. Major Cross touched his hat, an eager light shooting across his frank, soldierly face,
and strode quickly back to the line. A mere gesture brought the four company commanders to
him. Not a dozen words were spoken, but in an instant the swords of the officers leaped from
their scabbards, and then, obeying some low-toned commands, the right and left flank companies,
simply lifting their rifle-butts, enough to clear the ground, changed front to right and left
respectively, thus bringing them facing the outer ends of the train-sheds. About a dozen men,
led by a sergeant, broke suddenly away from the eastward flank of each of the two companies
thus moved, and, without so much as an audible word, scattered away to the passenger-cars,
covering a hundred yards of their length in a dozen seconds. Then under the cars dove some
of the lot, up the steps sprang others, and away before them scattered the intruders. A long
brick wall hemmed the yards in at the eastern side, and there, dividing into two parties in
the same prompt, business-like way, the squads drove before them north or south every one of
the late lookers-on, some grinning, some scowling and swearing, some remonstrating, but all
going. Up from the throats of the dense throng in front of the battalion went a chorus of jeers
and laughter. It is always fun to one part of a street crowd to see some other part of it,
especially if it occupied a better point of view, driven from its enviable ground. The moment
the space behind their new alignment was thus cleared, the flank companies each threw forward
another squad of eight, which, promptly shaking itself out into a long thin rank and fixing
bayonet as it went, marched straight at the thin crowds which had entered the station along
the right of way. A solid platoon followed in support, and in less time than it takes to tell
it the populace was on the move.

Then came the turn of the centre companies; and here a very different problem presented itself.
Leading up to the street was one broad stairway in the middle of the great depot building,
and one, somewhat narrower, a hundred feet farther north, next to the baggage-rooms. Between
the tracks and the offices on this floor, enclosing a space perhaps a hundred yards in length
by ten in breadth, was a high iron fence, pierced here and there with little turnstile gates,
now closed, and by three or four rolling gates, the main or centre one of which stood open.
This was directly opposite the broad stairway. It was this through which the battalion had
marched, the newspaper men and officials had followed, and the crowd had speedily bulged. No
good would result from shoving back this protruding swarm of curious or combative citizens,
for the space behind the bars was packed solid. The crowd began to grin and exchange jocular
remarks. It would take a long time to squeeze them back through the stairway, and meanwhile
they could have lots of fun, and Elmendorf a chance for a speech, so they began to shout for
him. He was still squeaking and gesticulating about the knot of newspaper men and staff-officers,
but Kenyon, climbing on a baggage-truck, was calmly looking over the sea of upturned and often
leeringly impudent faces beyond the grating. Then he called Major Cross to his side, and together
they looked it over.

The crowd began to wax facetious. They knew the soldiers wouldn't shoot so long as they were
not shooting. They knew they wouldn't prod with their bayonets men who manifestly couldn't
get back. They thought they had the regulars, in fine, where they couldn't do a blessed thing
unless the police would come and pull the crowd out from behind, and the police were not interfering
with the populace just then. An American street crowd is gifted with a fine sense of humor,
and the sight of these two veteran officers perched on a baggage-truck and reconnoitring their
ground was full of suggestion. "Don't jump on us, major: we couldn't stand them feet!" shouted
one jovial tough. "A speech from Old-Man-Afraid-Of-His-Dignity!" sang out a second. The gang
guffawed, and the officers went on with their conference utterly unmoved, deaf, apparently,
to the salutations. Then Kenyon climbed down and said a word to the superintendent, who nodded
appreciatively. The adjutant went one way, the regimental quartermaster the other. Each took
half a dozen men from the supporting platoons of the flank companies, who had by this time
pushed the scattering throng beyond the yard limits and set their guards at the entrances.
Then the gray-headed, white-moustached major whipped out his watch and held up his hand. There
was a good deal of chaff going on, but a half-silence fell on the throng.

"All that space in there will be needed in five minutes from this time," he said, in a quiet,
conversational tone. "The way out is open, and you will oblige me very much by quietly withdrawing.
Begin the move back there by the main staircase, and up there also, if you please, so that
these gentlemen who are crowded in here can follow you. Move at once, and you'll be out in
plenty of time."

Not a few on the outskirts did begin subordinately to move away, and a dozen or more were already
going up the steps, when the crowd gave tongue. "Come back, there. Stay where you are. We've
got as much right here as they have," were the cries. And then the luckless Elmendorf was seized
with an inspiration. Bounding upon a baggage-truck, he waved his hat and shouted, "Hear me,
fellow-citizens. You have said right. We have indeed more right here than these----" But here
a muscular hand grasped him by the seat of his trousers, and Elmendorf's speech wound up in
a shriek, as he was lifted backward off the truck, a big Irish sergeant glowering at him as
he landed him on terra firma. "I yield to force," screamed Elmendorf. "Go and tell it." And
then between a couple of brawny, unsympathetic soldiers he was rushed back, and, in the twinkling
of an eye, hustled into the smoking-compartment of a vacant Pullman and there locked in, with
a bayonet at the window. For a moment the throng howled, but there was no forward impulse.
The motionless line of the two centre companies seemed to have a soothing effect, and still
the major coolly stood there, watch in hand. Two minutes passed, three, and not ten men of
the crowd had slipped away. Certain railway men and reporters edged forward, away from the
crowd. Certain of the crowd strove to follow, but some men in plain clothing whipped open their
coats, displaying silver stars, and warned them back. Three minutes and a half, and still the
major stood calmly glancing over the crowd and then at his watch, and then the corners of his
mouth began to twitch, for he had cast one quick glance up and down the line of that iron fence.
Unreeling something behind them as they reappeared, the squads that had followed the regimental
staff officers quickly trotted into sight again at the upper and lower ends of the pen, and
the outskirts of the crowd "caught on" at a glance. They were manning the hose. Already the
gleaming nozzles were being screwed on, and the humor of the situation became suddenly clouded.
"Watch out!" was the cry from both ends of the dense mass. Dozens of men at the north end who
could readily escape were already in rush for the upper stairway, but those at the south were
less lucky. A dense mass of fellow-citizens was wedged between them and the exits, but rapidly
the alarm was spreading inward from the flanks. "Four minutes," said the major, grimly, though
his lips were twitching like mad. Then the upturned faces began to blanch, the crowd to heave
and swell, and a backward sway sent a hundred or more surging up the main staircase. The next
minute panic seemed to seize on all, for the jeers gave way to shouts of fright and pain as
men were squeezed breathless in the crush; and then, tumbling over one another's heels, climbing
one another's backs in sheep-like terror, they fought for air and escape, and the last coat-tails
went streaming up the stairs sharp on time, as Kenyon said, with the bayonets of the left centre
company threateningly close in their wake.

Once out in the open street, they strove to rally and encourage one another and to shower defiance
and stones at their assailants; but these latter contented themselves with clearing a space
for carriages about the doors and calmly stationing their guards to hold it; and when, a few
moments later, the general's special train came steaming in, Elmendorf raged in vain. There
was neither orator nor deputation to meet him on behalf of the strike-leaders. Not until after
the chief had driven away in his carriage was the agitator released from the hated confines
of the Pullman and bidden to go his way. Fuming with the indignity of his position, he left,
vowing that he would return if there was law in the land, backed with warrants for the arrest
of Kenyon for felonious assault and false imprisonment; and Kenyon smiled and said the warrant
wouldn't surprise him in the least.

And then followed the stirring scenes of a riot week that showed not only the depth and extent
of the insurrectionary spirit among the unlettered masses of the people, but also the wisdom
of the President in ordering the prompt concentration of regular troops in the heart of the
threatened city. Silently, in disciplined order, the various detachments had marched to their
stations. Silently, in disciplined order, puny in points of numbers as compared with the vast
mob of their howling antagonists, they faced the throng, grimly peering from under their slouched
hat-brims, gripping with their brown, sinewy hands the muzzles of the old trusty rifles, listening
with utter amaze, with tingling nerves, to the furious yells of "Down with the government!"
"To hell with the United States!" and wondering how long their fathers would have stood such
treason thirty years ago. Calm, grim, and silent, conscious of their power, merciful in their
strength, superb in their disdain of insult, their contempt of danger, their indifference to
absolute outrage,--for maddened men showered the ranks with mud and gravel, and foul-mouthed,
slatternly women--vile, unclean harpies of the slums--dipped their brooms in the reeking gutters
and slashed their filth into the stern, soldierly faces,--for hours, for days, they coolly
held that misguided, drink-crazed, demagogue-excited mob at bay, reopening railways, protecting
trains, escorting Federal officials, forcing passage after passage through the turbulent districts,
until the fury of the populace wore itself out against the rock of their iron discipline, and
one after another the last of the rioters slunk to their holes, unharmed by even one avenging
shot. Fire and flame had wrought their havoc, miles of railway lines and cars had been wrecked
and ruined, but otherwise the mad-brained effort had utterly failed of its purpose, and for
the third time had the regulars stood almost the sole bulwark between the great city and absolute
anarchy. True, the regiments of the National Guard were at last ordered into service, but not
until after the presence of the Federal force had given assurance that, whether the State officials
liked it or not, the general government would tolerate such insurrection no longer. True, the
State troops stood ready, eager to do their work, and some of them, at least, so capable, so
drilled and disciplined, that, left to the orders of their own officers, they could and would
have suppressed the riots. But, there was the difference, even when called into action the
most reliable and experienced of the regimental commanders were practically deprived of their
commands; their regiments were broken up into pygmy detachments and scattered hither and thither
by companies and squads, covering sometimes a tract of suburbs fifteen miles long and half
as wide, while the entire force was placed under the orders of a city official notoriously
in sympathy with the initial strike and seeking the suffrages of the very class from which
the mobs were drawn. The extraordinary spectacle was seen of a veteran colonel with only half
a company to guard the head-quarters of the regiment in a remote and dangerous spot, and absolutely
forbidden to summon any of his own regiment to his defence in case of emergency, except upon
the advice and consent of some official of the city police. Well was it for Chicago and the
nation that the President of the United States stood as unmoved by the puerile protests of
the demagogue in office as were his loyal soldiery by the fury of insult, abuse, and violence
heaped upon them by that mob of demagogue-supporters.

"By heaven," said the editor of a great daily to old Kenyon at the close of the week, "I never
dreamed of such superb discipline, and under such foul insult. I swear I don't see how you
fellows could stand it."

"Oh," said Kenyon, grimly, "it wasn't half as hard to bear as what your columns have been saying
about us any time these last five years."

CHAPTER XV.

When the President of the United States declined to withdraw the regulars from Chicago as urged
by the governor of Illinois, Mr. Elmendorf decided that it was because he had not been heard
from on the subject, and so started for Washington. This was how it happened that he abandoned
his project of leading his friends and fellow-citizens in their determined assault upon the
serried ranks of capital, backed though they were by "the bristling bayonets of a usurper."
For several days his deluded disciples looked for him in vain. The telegraphic despatches of
the Associated Press told briefly of another crank demanding audience at the White House, claiming
to represent the people of Chicago and persisting in his demand until, "yielding to force,"
he was finally ejected. But Elmendorf was silent upon this episode when he returned, so the
story could hardly have referred to him. Tell General Hitchcock to see that the force around Washington
is in proper condition."

It was indeed unfortunate for the North that at this juncture the military affairs of the Confederacy
should have been placed in the hands of the clearest-sighted soldier in America. It was an unequal
match, Lincoln and Stanton against Lee; and the stroke that was to prove the weakness of the Federal
strategy was soon to fall. On May 7 Jackson westward marched in the following order: Edward Johnson's
regiments led the way, several miles in advance; the Third and Second Brigades followed; the Stonewall,
under General Winder, a young West Point officer of exceptional promise, bringing up the rear.
"The corps of cadets of the Virginia Military Institute," says Dabney, "was also attached to the
expedition; and the spruce equipments and exact drill of the youths, as they stepped out full of
enthusiasm to take their first actual look upon the horrid visage of war, under their renowned
professor, formed a strong contrast with the war-worn and nonchalant veterans who composed the army."*
(* Dabney volume 2 page 65.)

Eighteen miles west of Staunton a Federal picket was overrun, and in the pass leading to the
Shenandoah Mountain Johnson captured a camp that had just been abandoned. The Federal rear-guard
fired a few shells, and the Confederates went into bivouac. Johnson had marched fourteen and
Jackson twenty miles.

That night Milroy concentrated his whole brigade of 3700 men at M'Dowell,
a little village at the foot of the Bull Pasture Mountain, and sent
back in haste for reinforcements.

Fremont's command was much strung out. When Milroy had moved from Cheat Mountain through Monterey,
twelve miles west of M'Dowell,* (* See ante, pages 185, 269, 275.) the remainder of the army
had started up the South Branch Valley to reinforce him. But snowstorms and heavy rains had
much delayed the march, and Schenck's brigade had not advanced beyond Franklin, thirty-four miles
north of M'Dowell. Fremont himself, with a couple of battalions, was approaching Petersburg,
thirty-five miles from Franklin; and Blenker's division, still further to the rear, had not
yet quitted Romney.

May 8.

"On the following morning," to quote from Jackson's report, "the march was resumed, General Johnson's
brigade still in front. The head of the column was halted near the top of Bull Pasture Mountain,
and General Johnson, accompanied by a party of thirty men and several officers, with a view to
a reconnaissance of the enemy's position, ascended Sitlington's Hill, an isolated spur on the
left of the turnpike and commanding a full view of the village of M'Dowell. From this point
the position, and to some extent the strength, of the enemy could be seen. In the valley in which
M'Dowell is situated was observed a considerable force of infantry. To the right, on a height,
were two regiments, but too distant for an effective fire to that point. Almost a mile in
front was a battery supported by infantry. The enemy, observing a reconnoitring party, sent
a small body of skirmishers, which was promptly met by the men with General Johnson and driven
back. For the purpose of securing the hill all of General Johnson's regiments were sent to him."

Jackson
had no intention of delivering a direct assault on the Federal position. The ground was altogether
unfavourable for attack. The hill on which his advanced guard was now established was more
than two miles broad from east to west. But it was no plateau. Rugged and precipitous ridges
towered high above the level, and numerous ravines, hidden by thick
timber, seamed the surface of the spur.

To the front a slope of smooth unbroken greensward dropped sharply down; and five hundred feet
below, behind a screen of woods, the Bull Pasture River ran swiftly through its narrow valley.
On the river banks were the Federals; and beyond the valley the wooded mountains, a very labyrinth
of hills, rose high and higher to the west. To the right was a deep gorge, nearly half a mile across
from cliff to cliff, dividing Sitlington's Hill from the heights
to northward; and through this dangerous defile ran the turnpike,
eventually debouching on a bridge which was raked by the Federal guns.
To the left the country presented exactly the same features. Mountain
after mountain, ridge after ridge, cleft by shadowy crevasses, and
clothed with great tracts of forest, rolled back in tortuous masses
to the backbone of the Alleghanies; a narrow pass, leading due westward,
marking the route to Monterey and the Ohio River. Arrived at the house, he was sure of it, for there,
with solemn face, was Mr. Wells. "My wife," said he, "is up-stairs, trying to see what she
can do. This is Martin Wallen, is it?--Well, Martin, I regret exceedingly to hear you assaulted
Mr. Elmendorf to-day--and didn't kill him."

Manifestly Mr. Wells was not a proper person for the position he held, being far too impulsive
in speech for a bookish man; but then Wells had been sorely tried. He told Cranston something
of it as they walked away together after loading Mart with provisions and fruit at the corner
grocery. Together they stopped to see Dr. Francis and have a brief chat with him about his
patient, and then Cranston mounted and rode thoughtfully back to camp at the lake front. Captain
Davies, with his troop, had just returned from a long day's dusty, dirty, exasperating duty
at the stock-yards, and no sooner had he made his brief report than the major queried, "Do
you happen to know whether Forrest is back with his regiment?"

"He was commanding his company at the yards to-day, sir. I heard he returned four days ago."

"H'm!" said the major, reflectively: "I think I'll stroll over to-night and find Kenyon."

They were both sons of Chicago, these two field officers, and had always been close friends.
Forrest, however, was a New Yorker, many years their junior in the service. Cranston had liked
him well, yet now he felt that he should be glad to consult Kenyon, who had known him still
longer, for that which he had heard from Wells as they walked to the doctor's filled him with
vague anxiety. In common with most society people, Cranston shared the belief that, if not
actually engaged to Florence Allison, Forrest certainly would be as soon as old Allison's objections
were removed; but in speaking of the probable cause of Miss Wallen's illness Wells had used
some vehement language. Plainly the librarian told Cranston of the stormy interview between
Allison and himself, in which, in presence of Mr. Waldo and "that man Elmendorf," Allison had
demanded her discharge. Plainly he told him his own views of Miss Wallen's character and conduct,
and what his wife thought of her,--that she was a girl to be honored and admired and respected
above her kind; "but," said he, "Mr. Forrest always treated her as though he thought so too,
and it may be that she learned to care for him before she had heard about his being a suitor
for the hand of Miss Allison. I sent the girl who was temporarily occupying her place back
into the library when we had our talk," said Wells, "but I reckon she didn't go beyond the
passage-way and heard pretty much the whole thing. Allison bellowed, like the bull he is, and
perhaps I did, too. Still, it hadn't occurred to me to question her on the subject, though
I was minded to tell her if she had heard anything she was on no account to repeat it or any
part of it; but Miss Wallen came back to her desk sooner than I expected, and the moment this
young minx hesitatingly told me she had been here and had gone home I suspected something,
and presently pumped the whole truth out of her. The contemptible meanness of some women passes
all my descriptive powers. There are several girls employed in the library, and it seems some
of them were jealous of Miss Wallen, or rather of her superior position, and one evening that
fellow Elmendorf got in there and threatened her with exposure or something of the kind and
insulted her, so that she slapped his face, and two of those library girls heard it. It happened
just before Forrest came in, and he found her all quivering and unstrung. She was to have finished
some work for him that evening, and he was to have dined at Allison's, but she was so broken
up it was some time before she could go on with it. Neither could she tell him the cause. Well,
it was one of these very girls whom, all unthinkingly, I had put in her place, and what does
the little wretch do the morning that Jeannette returned but tell her all about Allison's row
with me, and his demand and reasons for her discharge! Of course she didn't tell of my refusal;
she says she didn't happen to hear that, which is a lie, I reckon. However, that's the big,
big last pound that broke the heart of that poor hard-working, long-suffering girl and sent
her home a sick woman. Francis says she'll pull through; but what do you suppose will come
of it even then?" Wells told him more about poor Jenny, all the story of her long, brave struggle
so far as he knew it, which was far less than the facts, and Cranston wished with all his heart
that Meg, his own bonny wife, were home to help and counsel. All the same he meant to see Kenyon,
and later, perhaps, Forrest.

But he saw the latter first.

There was a brilliant gathering at the club that night. Matters had so quieted down in the
disturbed districts that many of the regular officers had been permitted to accept invitations
to be present. Allison had not wished to go, but Florence begged. She was looking "absolutely
saffron," said Aunt Lawrence, and if something wasn't done to break up that child's nervous
melancholy she wouldn't be responsible for her. That she herself was in the faintest degree
responsible for the alleged nervous melancholy Aunt Lawrence would not have admitted for a
moment. Allison was in evil humor, as is many a better man when beginning to realize that he
has made an ass of himself. Wells had been after him with a hot stick on discovering that the
only authority for his accusations against Miss Wallen was "that devil's tool Elmendorf and
a creature of his own coaching." Allison knew, moreover, that Forrest was back, commanding
a company of his regiment, for his own associates were pouring into his ears their praises
for Forrest's nerve and calm courage in facing with only twenty men a furious mob of nearly
a thousand and rescuing some so-called "scabs" from their hands, poor fellows who had been
pulled from the platforms of the P.Q. & R. trains. The sun was setting, and the rays struck full on
his familiar face, brown with exposure, and his dusty uniform. Ewell's division led the way,
and when the men saw their general, they prepared to salute him with their usual greeting.
But as they began to cheer he raised his hand to stop them, and the word passed down the column,
"Don't shout, boys, the Yankees will hear us;" and the soldiers contented themselves with swinging
their caps in mute acclamation. When the next division passed a deeper flush spread over Jackson's
face. Here were the men he had so often led to triumph, the men he had trained himself, the men of the
Valley, of the First Manassas, of Kernstown, and M'Dowell. The Stonewall regiments were before
him, and he was unable to restrain them; devotion such as theirs was not to be silenced at such
a moment, and the wild battle-yell of his own brigade set his pulses tingling. For once a breach
of discipline was condoned. "It is of no use," said Jackson, turning to his staff, "you see
I can't stop them;" and then, with a sudden access of intense pride in his gallant veterans,
he added, half to himself, "Who could fail to win battles with such men as these?"

It was midnight before the column halted near Salem village, and the men, wearied outright with
their march of six-and-twenty miles, threw themselves on the ground by the piles of muskets,
without even troubling to unroll their blankets.

So far the movement had been entirely successful. Not a Federal had been seen, and none appeared
during the warm midsummer night. Yet the soldiers were permitted scant time for rest. Once more
they were aroused while the stars were bright; and, half awake, snatching what food they could,
they stumbled forward through the darkness.

August 26.

As the cool breath of the morning rose about them, the dark forests of the Bull Run Mountains became
gradually visible in the faint light of the eastern sky, and the men at last discovered whither
their general was leading them. With the knowledge, which spread quickly through the ranks, that they
were making for the communications of the boaster Pope, the regiments stepped out with renewed energy.
"There was no need for speech, no breath to spare if there had been--only the shuffling tramp of
marching feet, the rumbling of wheels, the creak and clank of harness
and accoutrements, with an occasional order, uttered under the breath,
and always the same: "Close up, men!

Close up!""* (* "Battles and Leaders volume 2 page 533.)

Through Thoroughfare Gap, a narrow gorge in the Bull Run range, with high cliffs, covered with
creepers and crowned with pines on either hand, the column wound steadily upwards; and, gaining
the higher level, the troops looked down on the open country to the eastward. Over a vast
area of alternate field and forest, bounded by distant uplands, the shadows of the clouds were
slowly sailing. Issuing from the mouth of the pass, and trending a little to the south-east,
ran the broad high-road, passing through two tiny hamlets, Haymarket
and Gainesville, and climbing by gentle gradients to a great bare
plateau, familiar to the soldiers of Bull Run under the name of Manassas
Plains.

At Gainesville this road was crossed by another, which, lost in dense woods, appeared once
more on the open heights to the far north-east, where the white buildings
of Centreville glistened in the sunshine.

The second road was the Warrenton and Alexandria highway, the direct
line of communication between Pope's army and Washington, and it is
not difficult to divine the anxiety with which it was scrutinised
by Jackson.

If his march had been detected, a far superior force might already be moving to intercept
him. At any moment the news might come in that the Federal army was rapidly approaching; and
even were that not the case, it seemed hardly possible that the Confederate column, betrayed
by the dust, could escape the observation of passing patrols or orderlies. But not a solitary
scout was visible; no movement was reported from the direction of Warrenton; and the troops pressed
on, further and further round the Federal rear, further and further from Lee and Longstreet.
 They were absorbed and did not look up, but something told Allison there was
trouble ahead for him. Even his friend Waldo had been embarrassed and constrained in his presence.
He made up his mind to stop and see Wells that very afternoon, and did so, bursting in in his
fine old English manner. After fidgeting a few moments until Wells had had his stenographer
(acting) withdraw, he impetuously began:

"Hum--haw--Wells, tell me about that girl. How's she getting on?"

"If by 'that girl,' Allison, you mean Miss Wallen, she's not getting on at all. A lady who
is robbed of her mother, her health, her good name, and threatened with the loss of her means
of livelihood, at one fell swoop, cannot be expected to get on."

"Mr. Wells, I don't like the tone which you assume towards me."

"Mr. Allison, I shouldn't like it if you did."

For one moment Allison stared at the librarian, and Wells glared unflinchingly back. The magnate
was mad in earnest now. "By God! Mr. Wells, you're the only man in this city who dares treat
me with disrespect, and I won't have it!"

"By gad, Mr. Allison, it's because I'm probably the only one who thoroughly knows you. Wait
till I tell all about your demands regarding Miss Wallen, and you'll find others in plenty."

"You can't, without looking elsewhere for a position."

"I can, for the position is looking for me, and the only reason I haven't accepted it is that
I mean to stay right here until full justice has been done my stenographer,--full justice,
sir. If that young lady were to place this case in the hands of even a tolerable lawyer, yours
wouldn't have a leg to stand on."

"You don't mean she's going to law!"

"It's what my wife says would serve you right; and I agree with her. Just let this community
know that solely on the statements of a cur you kicked out of your own employ you had defamed
that brave, honest girl, and there'd be a tempest about your head compared to which this riot
was a zephyr."

Allison's wrath was cooling now. He sank back in a chair and stared gloomily at the librarian.
"Where is that" (gulp) "Elmendorf?" he finally asked.

"In jail, I hope; in the gutter, the last time I heard of him, being pommelled by her brother.
Major Cranston and Mr. Forrest are looking for him."

"What do they want?" asked Allison, suspiciously.

"Several things; one is to find out how much he will admit having told you, and how much to
hold you solely responsible for."

Allison fidgeted for a moment, and then turned again upon the librarian. "You mean to tell
me that you think she's entirely good and honest and all that, do you?"

"No. I told you I knew she was."

"Well, then, what does it mean that Forrest is trying to hunt up or run down my witnesses?"

"It simply means that he's a gentleman who intends to defend the girl whose name you have coupled
with his."

"Why don't he come to me? He hasn't been near my house since he came back," said Allison, in
a tone of complaint. "He hasn't given me a chance to--fix things. Who was fool enough to tell him?"

"You, principally, by your reception of him. He knew all about it before he came here to me.
Of course he hasn't been to your house, and probably never will go there again. I wouldn't
in his place."

Allison pondered painfully awhile. "Well, I suppose this thing is beginning to get around the
neighborhood?--people are talking about it?" he queried guardedly.

"Beginning?" was the answer. "Lord, no! It began the day you shouted the whole business so
that everybody in the library could hear. Of course people are talking, but not as loud as
you did."

"And you say she's down sick and can't see people. Of course if I've been--made a victim of
in this matter by that fellow Elmendorf--why, damn him, he's been trying to make up to my own
daughter! she had to order him out of the house,--of course I want to straighten things out.
I withdraw my demand for her discharge, under the circumstances; and if I might send her a
check--or something, in reason----"

"You might, if you wanted to see how quick it would come back."

"Why, hang it, Wells, what should a man do? What can a man do?"

"Sit down and write her that you have made a consummate ass of yourself. That might not be
a delicate way out of it, but it would be telling the truth. Anyhow, you've got to do something,
and that right soon. My wife tells me that her one idea is to get well enough to come over
here for one day, just to confront her accusers. Then where'll you be, and your invaluable
witnesses?"

Allison went home and had a conference with his sister which left that lady dissolved in tears.
It was a brutally hot July afternoon, and he ordered the carriage for a drive in the Park and
bade Florence drive with him, and obediently she went. There wasn't a whiff of breeze off the
lake; it all came pouring from the hot prairies to the southwest, and everybody looked languid
and depressed. The sun was almost down, and the walks and roadways in the Park were but sparsely
occupied. Slowly the heavy family carriage rolled along the smooth macadam and drew up, with
others of its kind, near a shaded kiosk where a band was playing. Presently from under her
parasol Florence caught sight of a familiar figure. Leaning against the door of an open livery
carriage, a tall man in straw hat and white duck suit was chatting with the occupants, one
a middle-aged woman, with a gentle, motherly face, the other a slender girl in deep mourning,
reclining languidly as though propped on cushions. Allison, anxiously watching his daughter,
saw the light in her eyes, the faint color rising in her cheeks; and he, too, looked, then
reddened, for all that other party seemed to face him at the instant. The tall man in duck
came promptly around and stood beside them, bowing coldly to the father, but raising his hat
and holding out his hand to Florence. She took it, her eyes not downcast, but seeking his.

"I am glad to see you out, Miss Allison," he said, in frank and cordial tone. "You were looking
far from--yourself the night we met in front of the club. I hope you are well?"

"I am--better," she answered, rather faintly, "and I had hoped to see you--before this."

"That was why I went to the club that night," he answered, gravely. "How is Cary?"

"Oh, he's just miserable, because pa--father kept him cooped up and wouldn't let him out to
the riots. He was simply mad when he heard of your experience with the mob. But you are coming
to see us?" she finished, looking appealingly at her father.

"Yes, Forrest," said Allison, "I wish you would. There's a matter I want to talk to you about."

"Possibly the same that Mr. Elmendorf is to bring up at department head-quarters to-morrow
afternoon, which I believe you will be invited to hear," said Forrest, calmly. Then, turning
once more to Florence, he held forth his hand. "I am very glad to meet you again, Miss Allison,"
he said, "and to find you looking better. But now I must return to my friends." And, bowing
again to her, but almost ignoring Allison, he walked away, and was soon in earnest talk with
the ladies in the open carriage.

"Do you know who they are?" asked Florence presently of her father.

"Yes. One is Mrs. Wells, wife of our librarian. The other is a Miss Wallen, one of the library
employees. She has been ill.--Go on, Parks," he said to his coachman, and they drove silently home.

"He came and talked with me," said Florence to her aunt that night. "He was polite and kind,
and didn't seem angry,--didn't say anything, but--he went--he said he must go to his friends,--to
his friends, do you understand? We're no longer--no longer of them." Then she turned and sought
her own room.

And there was an invitation for Mr. Allison,--a very pressing invitation, for an aide-de-camp
delivered it personally,--a request that Mr. Allison should be at head-quarters the next afternoon
at four o'clock; and Allison went. He was received by Captain Morris, who expressed the general's
regrets at being unable to see him in person, and was ushered into a room where were Colonel
Kenyon, Major Cranston, and Lieutenant Forrest, still in service dress, and two of the senior
staff-officers. These latter came forward and shook hands with the magnate, the others simply
bowed.

"See if Mr. Elmendorf is anywhere about," said Captain Morris to a messenger. But it was ten
minutes before that intellectual party appeared. The great strike had collapsed, the leaders
were under the indictment of the law, and this particular agitator's occupation, like that
of hundreds of his hapless dupes, was gone. Nevertheless it pleased him to lurk about the neighborhood
until fifteen minutes after the appointed time, so that he might be the last to arrive and
might thereby keep the so-called upper classes waiting. The moment he arrived the chief of
staff proceeded to business.

"You set four o'clock as the time you would appear to make your charges, Mr. Elmendorf, and
we've been waiting here a quarter of an hour."

"Affairs of greater importance, sir, occupied my time."

"Oh, yes; our janitor tells us that you have been communing with yourself over a glass of beer
in the saloon across the way for the last hour.--Gentlemen, I received a letter from Mr. Elmendorf
yesterday morning, which I will read:

"'SIR,--Having been informed that Mr. Warren Starkey, a clerk in your employ, has been discharged
because of his having been accused of revealing to the press certain facts relative to the
circumstances under which Lieutenant Forrest was twice ordered away from Chicago, this is to
inform you that unless Mr. Starkey is immediately reinstated I shall consider it my duty, as
an accredited correspondent of numerous newspapers of high repute, to publish all the facts
in the case as well known to me, and to demand the dismissal of Lieutenant Forrest. That you
may know I speak by the card, I purpose calling at your office at four P.M. to-morrow, at which
time, if you see fit, the gentleman and those he may claim as his friends can hear the grounds
on which I base my demand. Let the laws which oppress the poor and friendless now apply to
the proud and powerful.

"'MAX ELMENDORF.'

"Now, Mr. Elmendorf, Mr. Starkey has been discharged, and has not been reinstated. We'll hear
him first, and then you."

"Very good, sir. Though I seem to be alone in the lions' den, I shall not flinch from my duty
even in the face of all this array that has been carefully selected from among mine enemies."

"They are exactly as indicated by yourself," coldly answered the colonel. "Send in Starkey."

And Starkey came,--Elmendorf's one weak victim among head-quarters force,--and Starkey was
in a sorry plight. He told his story ruefully:

"I supposed this gentleman was all right. I used to see him with the officers. He was with
them every day or two for hours. Then he made himself pleasant and sociable, and used to get
me to lunch, or treat to drinks sometimes, and seemed to know everything that was going on.
I didn't know anything whatever about Mr. Forrest's affairs except what he told me from time
to time, and I believed what he told. Perhaps I did let on I knew more. He got me to drinking,
and God only knows how it all came about. That reporter came to me and said that Mr. Elmendorf
had told him this and that and Captain Morris had told him more, and then he got things up
around the Lambert and around Forrest's lodgings, and asked me if 'twasn't so that Forrest
had been ordered off on account of things happening there. Well, I suppose perhaps I did say
that it was so, but I never dreamed that he'd make what he did of it. And then when the chief
clerk caught me drunk and accused me of the whole thing I broke down and owned up to everything,
and I've been a--well, I've just been that man's dupe."

The unhappy ex-clerk was withdrawn. Mr. Elmendorf cleared his throat in readiness to speak.
Forrest, with a smouldering fire in his eyes and with compressed lips, sat gazing sternly at
the ex-tutor. The others, with faces indicative of various shades of contempt and indifference
or indignation, not unmingled with the curiosity which one feels in studying some uncommon
type of animal or man, silently awaited his remarks. "I will begin by saying that my suspicions
in this case were aroused long months ago," said Elmendorf, when the judge-advocate of the
department suavely spoke:

"Kindly spare us your suspicions, Mr. Elmendorf. You promised facts, and, as time is short,
owing to your own delay, we desire facts alone."

"The facts," said Elmendorf, nettled, "are that the gentleman in question, while posing as
a man of honor and a welcome guest in a most estimable family circle, has long been secretly
laying siege to the affections of a young and comparatively friendless girl, with such success
that their relations became the talk of the neighborhood. I found that she had been seen at
his lodgings after dark, that they were frequently seen alone together as late as midnight,
and that they were often alone in the private rooms at the Lambert. These facts were so well
known that when he was suddenly ordered to leave Chicago last winter the explanation arrived
at by common consent was that the general sent him off to his regiment to avert further scandal,
and that his second orders were for practically the same reason. It is notorious that because
of this affair the girl has been threatened with discharge from the position she holds, and
so I am here to say that since this poor clerk and this poor girl are made the sufferers and
the only ones, I, as the ever ready representative of the people, demand the prompt punishment
of the real offender, whom doubtless his class would shield. Nothing but my dislike of involving
a poor working-girl in further scandal and trouble has held me silent until now."

"I see," said the judge-advocate, reflectively; "and you have intimated that in order to spare
her further publicity you would be willing to abandon your purpose, provided----?"

"Provided Mr. Forrest tender his immediate and unconditional resignation from the service,
and I be furnished written assurance that it will be accepted, also admission that my statement
as to the cause of his sudden orders to leave Chicago was true."

The scene in the office that sultry afternoon was something to remember long days after. Cranston
couldn't help thinking what a blessing it was that the breeze at last was blowing fresh from
the lake and the white caps were bounding beyond the breakwater. It was a group worthy of a
painter's brush,--Elmendorf's sublime confidence in the criminality of his fellow-man and the
unassailable integrity of his own position, Kenyon's attitude of close and appreciative study
of this unique specimen, Cranston's twitching lips and clinching fists, Allison's almost apoplectic
face at one moment, contrasting oddly with the infinite consternation with which he contemplated
his own probable connection with the plot the next:--the speaker was a monument of conceit
and "cheek,"--might even be a lunatic, but what--what could be said of himself? The chief of
staff was fuming. Forrest was inwardly raging, yet by a strong effort maintained, as he had
agreed, utter silence, leaving to his friends their own method of conducting the affair. One
officer alone seemed to be deriving entertainment from the situation: the judge-advocate had
never had a professional treat to compare with it.

"Before committing ourselves to any promise, Mr. Elmendorf," said he, most blandly, "you will
pardon me if I refer to what seems a trifle weak link in your chain of evidence. You say the
young lady was in the habit of visiting Mr. Forrest's lodgings. How often have you seen her there?"

"I said she was seen there. I did not keep watch."

"On Mr. Forrest's lodgings, no. But how often was she seen there?"

"I am not prepared to state. Once is considered enough, I venture to say."

"How often did the witness tell you she was there, Mr. Allison?" asked the judge-advocate,
turning, to his consternation, upon that gentleman.

Allison went crimson in an instant. "Well, I paid so little attention. It was all so frivolous,"
he stammered.

"Yet he was the witness named by Mr. Elmendorf, I believe,--the only one; and you had him come
to your office and you questioned him there, did you not?"

"I did, yes, but the impression passed away almost immediately. The man wasn't worthy of confidence."

"When you hear his story you may think otherwise," said Elmendorf, with a contemptuous sneer.

"I have heard," said the judge-advocate; "but we'll hear it again.--Send Starkey's friend in
here," he said to the messenger; and presently in came a hangdog, corner-loafer specimen of
the shabby-genteel young man, supremely impudent on his native heath, but wofully ill at ease
now. "This is your reputable witness, Mr. Elmendorf."

"I protest against indignity to my witnesses or browbeating of any kind. This is not a court,
and he's not on oath."

"Certainly not. He's saved us all the trouble by telling the truth beforehand.--Now you can
tell us how you came to chase the young lady into that door-way," said the judge-advocate,
turning suddenly on the shrinking new-comer.

"Well, sir, I'd been drinking, and I thought she was--a girl I knew."

"Yes? and when you caught her in the vestibule what happened?"

"Nothin' much. She fought, and the door flew open, and----" here the shifting eyes wandered
around until they rested on Forrest--"this gentleman kicked me out. I wouldn't 'a' said anything
about it, only--him there found me afterwards." And he nodded at Elmendorf.

"Didn't you declare to me you'd seen the lady going in there with him? Didn't you see them
together late at night up near her own home?" asked Elmendorf, excitedly.

"Well, you took me up and showed 'em to me."

"Didn't you tell me you knew she often went to his rooms?"

"Well, you asked me if I hadn't seen her, and I said no, and then you asked if I didn't think
it was more'n likely, and----" Here Starkey's friend faltered.

"That will do," said the judge-advocate. "You both knew very well then, and you know now, that
it is an apartment-house, in which several families dwell, some of them friends of the young
lady in question. You can go, young man,--I merely introduced that party as a specimen of the
evidence for the prosecution. Now, Mr. Elmendorf, let me give you a specimen of the evidence
for the defence.--Colonel," said he to the chief of staff, "would you mind saying in the presence
of these gentlemen whether the faintest inkling of any such charge as this of Mr. Elmendorf's
against Mr. Forrest had ever reached you?"

"Not a whisper."

"Were Mr. Forrest's sudden orders in any way the result of any such rumor?"

"Not in the least. He was selected by the general to make certain confidential investigations
regarding the encroachments of settlers, boomers, etc., on the Oklahoma tract. It was necessary
that the object should not be heralded beforehand by the press, and so we had to keep it quiet."

"There, Mr. Elmendorf; admitting these as specimen bricks of the probable testimony, we decline
to reinstate the clerk, or to attach the slightest importance to your allegations at the expense
of Mr. Forrest, and I am constrained to say that your propensity for meddling has got you into
a nasty mess. So far as head-quarters are concerned, we've done with you. Now I'll leave you
to settle with the friends of the young lady." Here Elmendorf made for the door.

"I'm not to be assaulted, and----" he began; but Allison blocked the way.

"You lied to me and mine," he cried. "You declared on your honor that gentlemen high in authority
in this office told you the reasons you gave for Mr. Forrest's summary orders to quit Chicago.
I demand now to know whether it was not that poor devil whom you've ruined here,--Starkey.
Answer me."

"What good would it do?" whined Elmendorf, shrugging his shoulders. "Would not my statement
be promptly denied? Noblesse oblige, sir; the first business of these Knights of the Sword
is to stand together, and woe betide the knave who dare accuse one of them. But if you'll be
guided by my advice, Mr. Allison, you'll look well to your own vine and fig-tree, lest the
despoiler----"

But here Allison hurled himself upon the fellow and grasped him by the throat. "You whelp!"
he cried, banging the luckless head against the door-post before any one could interfere. In
an instant, however, the officers had seized him, shaking the tutor loose. Madly sped the latter
to the elevator, but, finding Starkey and his crestfallen friend awaiting him there, he turned
and dashed down the stairway, his ex-witnesses after him.

For a moment there was silence in the office, while Allison recovered breath. Bowing coldly
to him, Colonel Kenyon, with Cranston and Forrest, turned to leave the room.

"Mr. Forrest," said the magnate, stepping hastily forward, "I am more rejoiced at your vindication
than I can say. Of course I see I've been led into doing you an injustice, and I hope you'll
permit me to make amends."

But Forrest declined the outstretched hand and thrust his own within the breast of his uniform.

"You have amends to make elsewhere, Mr. Allison," he answered, with lips that trembled despite
his efforts at control, "and a wrong to right beside which mine is insignificant. Good-day, sir."

And so they left him.

CHAPTER XVII.

The regulars were gradually withdrawn from the Garden City, as old-timers loved to call Chicago,
and Kenyon with his sturdy battalion was among the first to be restored to his own station.
The crusty veteran left the home of his boyhood to resume duty at his proper post, and left
with feelings somewhat mixed. "We never had more temper-trying work to do," said he, "and there
isn't a man in the whole regiment that wouldn't rather stand six months Indian-fighting than
six hours mobbing in Chicago. It's my own old home, so I've got a right to speak the truth
about it. For years its newspapers, with one exception, have made it a point to sneer at, vilify,
and hold up to public execration the officers of the regular army. During the past four or
five years the lampooning and lying have been redoubled, and it is like heaping coals of fire
on their heads that the very regiment they have abused the most was the most conspicuous in
Chicago's defence. We had no picnic, but the Fifteenth simply had hell and repeat,--the meanest,
most trying, most perilous duty, from first to last. Those fellows were scattered in little
detachments all over Cook County, and faced fifty times their weight in toughs, and carried
out their orders and stood all manner of foul abuse and never avenged it, when if any one of
those young captains or lieutenants commanding detachments had lost his temper and let drive
the lightning sleeping in those brown Springfields, there'd 'a' been a cleaning out of the
rabble that would have thinned the ranks of one political party in our blessed country, at
least. Oh, we're glad enough to get away and see the change of tone in the Chicago press; but
it won't last."

And Kenyon's was by no means an exaggerated statement. In the far-spreading course of the great
strike "the regulars" came in for many a hard knock from the mob and for not a few from the
press. At one point experienced railway-hands, not mere ruffian rioters, wrecked the track
at a trestle in front of a coming troop train, hurling the engine, with its gallant guard of
half a dozen artillerymen, into the depths below, crushing or drowning them like rats. At another
point, when baffled in their efforts to overturn a sleeping-car in front of a patrol engine,
and dispersed by a dozen well-aimed shots, the rioters impanelled their coroner's jury, and
declared the red-handed participants innocent spectators and the officer and his men murderers.
At a third, when a great railway centre was found in the hands of the strikers and the troops
were ordered to clear the platform, one surly specimen not only refused to budge, but lavished
on the captain commanding the foulest epithets in a blackguard's vocabulary. The crowd outnumbered
the troops by twenty to one. The faintest irresolution or hesitancy would have been fatal.
One whack with the sword knocked the fight out of the bully, and, while he was led off to be
plastered in hospital, the maddened rioters held their indignation meeting, and not only they,
but high officials eager for their votes, united in denouncing the officer to the President
of the United States, declaring the victim a model citizen, sober and peaceable, and the captain
drunk, foul-mouthed, and abusive. The press of the neighborhood aided in spreading abroad the
utterly false report of the affair, with the usual result of the temporary humiliation and
distress of the officer and his friends, the inevitable official investigation, and the prompt
verdict, "The officer deserves commendation, not condemnation." One paper, within five days
of its original report, announced that it had discovered that it was the civilian who was drunk
and who used the foul language attributed to the officer. It furthermore said that the officer
had done just right; but this was the single and phenomenal instance. The other papers, like
Elmendorf, probably reasoned that if the officer wasn't the blackguard they had striven to
make him appear, he might as well have been.

These are specimens of experiences too well known to all concerned. "May the Lord preserve
us from any more riot duty!" said Kenyon, piously, as they steamed away across the Illinois
prairies; "but," he added, "I'll bet ten dollars to ten cents the politicians will get us into
more and worse another year."

Yet even such scenes have their humorous side. It was Daniel O'Connell, I believe, who defeated
the female champion of Billingsgate by calmly referring to her as the hypothenuse of a right-angled
triangle, which was something utterly beyond her powers of repartee: it was he, at all events,
who silenced another virago with the cutting response, "Sure every one knows, ma'am, ye're
no better than a parallelogram, and you keep a whole parallelopipedon concealed in your closet
at home;" and it was one of the trimmest, nattiest, most punctilious of our captains who stood
in front of the silent ranks, listening in apparently absorbed attention to the furious tirade
lavished on him by the spokeswoman of the mob, a street drab of uncommon stature and powers
of expression and command of expletive. Winding up a three-minute speech with the remark, "I
could pick ye up and ate ye, only the taste would turn me stomach, you white-livered, blue-bellied
son of a scut," the lady had to pause for breath, and the soldier looked up from under his
hat-brim and mildly remarked, "Madam, you're prejudiced," whereat even some of her sympathizers
forgot their rancor and roared with laughter, and the idolatrous rank of his soldiery doubled
up like so many blue pocket-rules, and the newspaper men chuckled with glee. By tacit consent,
apparently, the Chicago papers were saying as little as possible against the regulars just
then, and many a bright fellow who owned that he hadn't known anything about them before, except
what he had read in his paper in the past, found many a friend among them and many a cause
for writing of them in a new and different vein.

Cranston's old home was decorated in style the day the cavalry marched away. Mrs. Mac had the
old guidons and a big flag swung out on the porch, Mac in his most immaculate uniform standing
at the salute. Many an eye in the long, dusty column danced at sight of the honest couple,
and one young fellow, their graceless nephew, now a recruit in Captain Davies's troop, braced
up in saddle and fixed his eyes fiercely on his file-leader, and for fear of the stern avuncular
injunction to "Kape yer eyes to the front, there!" couldn't be induced to peep at Aunt Mollie
as she swung a tattered guidon that had been carried by Mac in the ranks of "C" troop many
a year before. Captain Davies himself rode out of column and held forth a cordial hand to the
old sergeant, as the last troop went clinking by. "We'll make a soldier of the boy, sergeant,
as you tried to make of me when I joined," said he; "and if he has half the stuff there was
in his uncle it'll be no trouble at all."

And so they went on up the avenue, with hats and handkerchiefs waving adieu and cordial voices
shouting approving words. Presently, riding at ease now, they filed along under the beautiful
façade of the Lambert Memorial, and, glancing up, Cranston saw at the broad bow window the
familiar features of Mr. Wells and caught his joyous "Hurrah!" By his side, smiling and nodding
and kerchief-waving, was his buxom helpmeet, one arm thrown about a fragile, pale-faced girl
in black. Off came Cranston's broad campaign hat; he bent low over the pommel of his saddle,
ay, and looked back again with admiration in his eyes and a fervent "Thank God!" upon his lips.
There were decorations in plenty, and enthusiastic demonstrations, too, from a wide portico,
"crowded with prominent society people," as the papers said, when a few moments later the column
swung by Allison's impressive home; but here the major merely raised his hat and neither bent
nor bowed.

Riot duty over for the time being, Mr. Forrest was recalled from the command of his company
to a desk at head-quarters and bidden to complete the maps and reports of his Oklahoma work.
The maps he went at methodically enough, but the report he hesitated over. "No," said Wells,
in response to his call and question, "Miss Wallen is not ready to resume work at the Lambert,
and it is my belief she never will be." Then he looked keenly at the officer's face, and was
gratified to see the deep shade of anxiety and distress with which it was instantly covered.
"She'll be well enough; it isn't that," he continued; "but the girl is proud and sensitive,
as any lady has a right to be, and she hasn't forgiven Allison. Oh, yes, he sent her a sort
of apology,--five lines of somebody else's fault and ten pounds of fruit. She gave the fruit
to Mart's hopeful family, and I think she gave Allison the devil. I didn't see her letter,
but the old man dropped in here the other day to ask when she'd be back, and incidentally remarked
that she seemed to be rapidly recovering, if fifty pounds of temper to the square inch was
any indication. Beyond his pickets, strongly posted at New Market and Conrad's Store, all was dim
and dark. Had Jackson halted, awaiting reinforcements? Was he already in motion, marching
swiftly and secretly against some isolated garrison? Was he planning another dash on Washington,
this time with a larger army at his back? Would his advance be east or west of the Blue Ridge,
across the sources of the Rappahannock, or through the Alleghanies? Had he 15,000 men or 50,000?

Such
were the questions which obtruded themselves on the Federal generals, and not one could give
a satisfactory reply. That a blow was preparing, and that it would fall where it was least expected,
all men knew. "We have a determined and enterprising enemy to contend with," wrote one of Lincoln's
generals. "Jackson," said another, "marches thirty miles a day."

The successive surprises of the Valley campaign had left their mark;
and the correspondence preserved in the Official Records is in itself
the highest tribute to Jackson's skill.

He had gained something more than the respect of his enemies. He had brought them to fear his
name, and from the Potomac to the Rappahannock uncertainty and apprehension reigned supreme.
Not a patrol was sent out which did not expect to meet the Confederate columns, pressing swiftly
northward; not a general along the whole line, from Romney to Fredericksburg,
who did not tremble for his own security.

There was sore trouble on the Shenandoah. The disasters of M'Dowell and Front Royal had taught
the Federal officers that when the Valley army was reported to be sixty miles distant, it was
probably deploying in the nearest forest; and with the rout of Winchester still fresh in their
memories they knew that pursuit would be as vigorous as attack would be sudden. The air was
full of rumours, each more alarming than its predecessor, and all of them contradictory. The reports
of the cavalry, of spies, of prisoners, of deserters, of escaped negroes, told each a different
story.

Jackson, it was at first reported, had been reinforced to the number of 35,000 men.* (* The telegrams
and letters containing the reports quoted on pages 399-400 are to be found in O.R. volume 11 part
3 and volume 12 part 3.) A few days later his army had swelled to 60,000 with 70 guns, and he
was rebuilding the bridge at Port Republic in order to follow Fremont. On June 13 he was believed
to be moving through Charlottesville against one or other of McDowell's divisions. "He was either
going against Shields at Luray, or King at Catlett's, or Doubleday at Fredericksburg, or going
to Richmond." On the 16th it was absolutely certain that he was within striking distance of
Front Royal. On the 18th he had gone to Richmond, but Ewell was still in the Valley with 40,000
men. On the 19th Banks had no doubt but that another immediate movement down the Valley was intended
"with 80,000 or more." On the 20th Jackson was said to be moving on Warrenton, east of the Blue
Ridge. On the 22nd "reliable persons" at Harper's Ferry had learned that he was about to attack Banks
at Middletown; and on the same day Ewell, who was actually near Frederickshall, was discovered
to be moving on Moorefield! On the 25th Fremont had been informed that large reinforcements
had reached Jackson from Tennessee; and Banks was on the watch for a movement from the west.
Fremont heard that Ewell designed to attack Winchester in rear, and the threat from so dangerous a quarter
made Lincoln anxious.

"We have no definite information," wrote Stanton to McClellan, "as to the numbers or position
of Jackson's force.

Within the last two days the evidence is strong that for some purpose the enemy is circulating
rumours of Jackson's advance in various directions, with a view to conceal the real point of
attack. Neither McDowell nor Banks nor Fremont appear to have any accurate knowledge of the subject."

This
was on June 25, the day the Valley army halted at Ashland; but the climax was reached on the 28th.
For forty-eight hours Jackson had been fighting McClellan, yet Banks, although "quite confident
that he was not within thirty miles, believed that he was preparing for an attack on Middletown."
To reach Middletown Jackson would have had to march one hundred and fifty miles!

Under the influence of these rumours the movements of the Federal troops were erratic in the extreme.

Fremont,
who had originally been ordered to remain at Harrisonburg, had fallen back on Banks at Middletown, although
ordered to Front Royal, was most reluctant to move so far south. Shields was first ordered to
stand fast at Luray, where he would be reinforced by Ricketts, and was then ordered to fall
back on Front Royal. Reinforcements were ordered to Romney, to Harper's Ferry, and to Winchester;
and McDowell, who kept his head throughout, struggled in vain to reunite his scattered divisions.
Divining the true drift of the Confederate strategy, he realised that to protect Washington,
and to rescue McClellan, the surest method was for his own army corps to march as rapidly as
possible to the Chickahominy. But his pleadings were disregarded. Lincoln and Stanton had not
yet discovered that the best defence is generally a vigorous attack. They had learned nothing from
the Valley campaign, and they were infected with the fears of Banks
and Fremont.

Jackson was well on his way to Richmond before Shields and Ricketts were permitted to cross the
Blue Ridge; and it was not till the 25th that McDowell's corps was once more concentrated at
Fredericksburg.

The Confederates had gained a start of five marches, and the Northern Government was still ignorant
that they had left the Valley.

McClellan was equally in the dark.

Faint rumours had preceded the march of Jackson's army, but he had
given them scant credit.

On the morning of the 26th, however, he was rudely enlightened. It was but too clear that Jackson,
strongly reinforced from Richmond, was bearing down upon his most vulnerable point--his right
wing, which, in anticipation of McDowell's advance, remained exposed on the north bank of the
Chickahominy.

Nor was this the sum of his troubles. On this same day, when his outposts were falling back before
superior numbers, and the Valley regiments were closing round their flank, he received a telegram
from Stanton, informing him that the forces commanded by McDowell, Banks, and Fremont were to
form one army under Major-General Pope; and that this army was "to attack and overcome the rebel
forces under Jackson and Ewell, and threaten the enemy in the direction of Charlottesville!"
All hope of succour passed away, and the "Young Napoleon" was left
to extricate himself as best he could, from his many difficulties;
difficulties which were due in part to his own political blindness,
in part to the ignorance of Lincoln, but, in a far larger degree,
to the consummate strategy of Lee and Jackson.

NOTE

The Marches in the Valley Campaign, March 22 to June 25, 1862.

Miles March 22 Mount Jackson-Strasburg 28 March 23 Strasburg-Kernstown-Newtown 18 Battle of Kernstown
March 24-26 Newtown-Mt. Jackson 35 April 17-19 Mt. Jackson-Elk Run Valley 50 April 30-May 8 Elk
Run Valley-Mechum's River Station 60 May 7-8 Staunton-Shenandoah Mt. 32 Battle of M'Dowell
May 9-11 Bull Pasture Mount-Franklin 30 Skirmishes May 12-15 Franklin-Lebanon Springs 40 May
17 Lebanon Springs-Bridgewater 18 May 19-20 Bridgewater-New Market 24 May 1 New Market-Luray 12
May 22 Luray-Milford 12 May 23 Milford-Front Royal-Cedarville 22 Action at Front Royal May 24
Cedarville-Abraham's Creek 22 Action at Middletown and Newtown May 25 Abraham's Creek-Stevenson's
7 Battle of Winchester May 28 Stevenson's-Charlestown 15 Skirmish May 29 Charlestown-Halltown
5 Skirmish May 30 Halltown-Winchester 25 May 31 Winchester-Strasburg 18 June 1 Strasburg-Woodstock
12 Skirmish June 2 Woodstock-Mount Jackson 12 June 3 Mount Jackson-New Market 7 June 4-5 New
Market-Port Republic 30 June 8 Battle of Cross Keys June 9 Cross Keys-Brown's Gap 16 Battle
of Port Republic June 12 Brown's Gap-Mount Meridian 10 June 17-25 Mount Meridian-Ashland Station
(one rest day) 120 --- 676 miles in 48 marching days Average 14 miles per diem

CHAPTER 1.12. REVIEW OF THE VALLEY CAMPAIGN.

In March, 1862, more than 200,000 Federals were prepared to invade Virginia. McClellan, before McDowell
was withheld, reckoned on placing 150,000 men at West Point. Fremont, in West Virginia, commanded
30,000, including the force in the Kanawha Valley; and Banks had
crossed the Potomac with over 30,000.

Less than 60,000 Confederate soldiers were available to oppose this enormous host, and the
numerical disproportion was increased by the vast material resources of the North. The only
advantages which the Southerners possessed were that they were operating in their own country,
and that their cavalry was the more efficient. Their leaders, therefore, could count on receiving
more ample and more accurate information than their adversaries.* (* "If I were mindful only
of my own glory, I would choose always to make war in my own country, for there every man is a spy,
and the enemy can make no movement of which I am not informed." Frederick the Great's Instructions
to his Generals.) But, except in these respects, everything was against them. In mettle and in discipline
the troops were fairly matched. On both sides the higher commands, with few exceptions, were
held by regular officers, who had received the same training. On both sides the staff was inexperienced.
If the Confederate infantry were better marksmen than the majority of the Federals, they were not
so well armed; and the Federal artillery, both in materiel and in handling, was the more efficient.

The
odds against the South were great; and to those who believed that Providence sides with the
big battalions, that numbers, armament, discipline, and tactical
efficiency, are all that is required to ensure success, the fall of
Richmond must have seemed inevitable.

But within three months of the day that McClellan started for the Peninsula the odds had been
much reduced. The Confederates had won no startling victories. Except in the Valley, and there
only small detachments were concerned, the fighting had been indecisive. The North had no reason
to believe that her soldiers, save only the cavalry, were in any way inferior to their adversaries.
And yet, on June 26, where were the "big battalions?" 105,000 men were intrenched within sight
of the spires of Richmond; but where were the rest? Where were the 70,000* (* At the date of
the action at Front Royal, May 23, the following was the strength of the detached forces: Banks,
10,000; Fremont, 25,000; McDowell (including Shields, but excluding McCall), 35,000.) that should
have aided McClellan, have encircled the rebel capital on every side, cut the communications,
closed the sources of supply, and have overwhelmed the starving garrison? How came it that Fremont
and Banks were no further south than they were in March? that the Shenandoah Valley still poured
its produce into Richmond? that McDowell had not yet crossed the Rappahannock? What mysterious
power had compelled Lincoln to retain a force larger than the whole Confederate army "to protect
the national capital from danger and insult?"

It was not hard fighting. The Valley campaign, from Kernstown to Port Republic, had not cost
the Federals more than 7000 men; and, with the exception of Cross Keys, the battles had been well
contested. It was not the difficulties of supply or movement. It was not absence of information;
for until Jackson vanished from the sight of both friend and foe
on June 17, spies and "contrabands"* (i.e. Fugitive slaves) had done
good work.

(* The blacks, however, appear to have been as unreliable as regards numbers as McClellan's
detectives. "If a negro were asked how many Confederates he had seen at a certain point, his answer
was very likely to be: "I dunno, Massa, but I guess about a million.""--McClellan's Own Story
page 254.) Nor was it want of will on the part of the Northern Government. None were more anxious
than Lincoln and Stanton to capture Richmond, to disperse the rebels, and to restore the Union.
They had made stupendous efforts to organise a sufficient army.

To equip that army as no army had ever been equipped before they had spared neither expense
nor labour; and it can hardly be denied that they had created a vast machine, perhaps in part
imperfect, but, considering the weakness of the enemy, not ill-adapted for the work before
it.

There was but one thing they had overlooked, and that was that their
host would require intelligent control.

So complete was the mechanism, so simple a matter it appeared to set the machine in motion,
and to keep it in the right course, that they believed that their untutored hands, guided
by common-sense and sound abilities, were perfectly capable of guiding it, without mishap,
to the appointed goal. Men who, aware of their ignorance, would probably have shrunk from assuming
charge of a squad of infantry in action, had no hesitation whatever in attempting to direct
a mighty army, a task which Napoleon has assured us requires profound study, incessant application,
and wide experience.* (* "In consequence of the excessive growth of armies tactics have lost
in weight, and the strategical design, rather than the detail of the movements, has become
the decisive factor in the issue at a campaign. The strategical design depends, as a rule, upon
the decision of cabinets, and upon the resources placed at the disposal of the commander. Consequently,
either the leading statesmen should have correct views of the science of war, or should make
up for their ignorance by giving their entire confidence to the man
to whom the supreme command of the army is entrusted.

Otherwise, the germs of defeat and national ruin may be contained in the first preparations
for war."--The Archduke Charles of Austria.)

They were in fact ignorant--and how many statesmen, and even soldiers, are in like case?--that
strategy, the art of manoeuvring armies, is an art in itself, an art which none may master by
the light of nature, but to which, if he is to attain success, a man must serve a long apprenticeship.

The
rules of strategy are few and simple. They may be learned in a week. They may be taught by familiar
illustrations or a dozen diagrams. But such knowledge will no more teach a man to lead an army
like Napoleon than a knowledge of grammar will teach him to write like Gibbon. Lincoln, when the
army he had so zealously toiled to organise, reeled back in confusion from Virginia, set himself
to learn the art of war. He collected, says his biographer, a great library of military books;
and, if it were not pathetic, it would be almost ludicrous, to read of the great President,
in the midst of his absorbing labours and his ever-growing anxieties, poring night after night,
when his capital was asleep, over the pages of Jomini and Clausewitz. And what was the result?
In 1864, when Grant was appointed to the command of the Union armies, he said: "I neither ask
nor desire to know anything of your plans. Take the responsibility and act, and call on me for
assistance."

He had learned at last that no man is a born strategist.

The mistakes of Lincoln and Stanton are not to be condoned by pointing to McClellan.

McClellan designed the plan for the invasion of Virginia, and the plan failed. But this is
not to say that the plan was in itself a bad one. Nine times out of ten it would have succeeded.
In many respects it was admirable. It did away with a long line of land communications, passing
through a hostile country. It brought the naval power of the Federals into combination with
the military. It secured two great waterways, the York and the James, by which the army could
be easily supplied, which required no guards, and by which heavy ordnance could be brought up
to bombard the fortifications of Richmond. But it had one flaw. It left Washington, in the
opinion of the President and of the nation, insecure; and this flaw,
which would have escaped the notice of an ordinary enemy, was at once
detected by Lee and Jackson.

Moreover, had McClellan been left in control of the whole theatre of war, Jackson's manoeuvres
would probably have failed to produce so decisive an effect. The fight at Kernstown would
not have induced McClellan to strike 40,000 men off the strength of the invading army. He
had not been deceived when Jackson threatened Harper's Ferry at the end of May. The reinforcements
sent from Richmond after Port Republic had not blinded him, nor did
he for a moment believe that Washington was in actual danger.

There is this, however, to be said: had McClellan been in sole command,
public opinion, alarmed for Washington, would have possibly compelled
him to do exactly what Lincoln did, and to retain nearly half the
army on the Potomac.

So much for the leading of civilians. On the other hand, the failure of the Federals to concentrate
more than 105,000 men at the decisive point, and even to establish those 105,000 in a favourable
position, was mainly due to the superior strategy of the Confederates. Those were indeed skilful
manoeuvres which prevented McDowell from marching to the Chickahominy; and, at the critical
moment, when Lee was on the point of attacking McClellan, which drew McDowell, Banks, and Fremont
on a wild-goose chase towards Charlottesville. The weak joint in the enemy's armour, the national
anxiety for Washington, was early recognised. Kernstown induced Lincoln, departing from the original
scheme of operations, to form four independent armies, each acting on a different line. Two months
later, when McClellan was near Richmond it was of essential importance that the move of these
armies should be combined, Jackson once more intervened; Banks was driven across the Potomac,
and again the Federal concentration was postponed. Lastly, the battles of Cross Keys and Port
Republic, followed by the dispatch of Whiting and Lawton to the Valley, led the Northern President
to commit his worst mistake. For the second time the plan of campaign was changed, and McClellan
was left isolated at the moment he most needed help.

The brains of two great leaders had done more for the Confederacy than 200,000 soldiers had
done for the Union. Without quitting his desk, and leaving the execution of his plans to Jackson,
Lee had relieved Richmond of the pressure of 70,000 Federals, and had lured the remainder into
the position he most wished to find them. The Confederacy, notwithstanding the enormous disparity
of force, had once more gained the upper hand; and from this instance, as from a score of others,
it may be deduced that Providence is more inclined to side with the big brains than with the
big battalions.

It was not mere natural ability that had triumphed. Lee, in this respect, was assuredly not more highly
gifted than Lincoln, or Jackson than McClellan. But, whether by accident or design, Davis had
selected for command of the Confederate army, and had retained in the Valley, two past masters in the
art of strategy. If it was accident he was singularly favoured by fortune. He might have selected
many soldiers of high rank and long service, who would have been as innocent of strategical
skill as Lincoln himself. His choice might have fallen on the most dashing leader, the strictest
disciplinarian, the best drill, in the Confederate army; and yet the man who united all these qualities
might have been altogether ignorant of the higher art of war. Mr. Davis himself had been a soldier.
He was a graduate of West Point, and in the Mexican campaign he had commanded a volunteer
regiment with much distinction. But as a director of military operations he was a greater marplot
than even Stanton. It by no means follows that because a man has lived his life in camp and barrack,
has long experience of command, and even long experience of war, that he can apply the rules
of strategy before the enemy. In the first place he may lack the character, the inflexible
resolution, the broad grasp, the vivid imagination, the power of patient thought, the cool
head, and, above all, the moral courage. In the second place, there are few schools where strategy
may be learned, and, in any case, a long and laborious course of study is the only means of acquiring
the capacity to handle armies and outwit an equal adversary. The light of common-sense alone
is insufficient; nor will a few months' reading give more than a smattering of knowledge.

"Read and RE-READ," said Napoleon, "the eighty-eight campaigns of Alexander, Hannibal, Caesar,
Gustavus, Turenne, Eugene, and Frederick. Take them as your models, for it is the only means
of becoming a great leader, and of mastering the secrets of the art of war. Your intelligence,
enlightened by such study, will then reject methods contrary to those adopted by these great
men."

In America, as elsewhere, it had not been recognised before the Civil War, even by the military
authorities, that if armies are to be handled with success they must be directed by trained strategists.
No Kriegsakademie or its equivalent existed in the United States, and the officers whom common-sense
induced to follow the advice of Napoleon had to pursue their studies by themselves. To these
the campaigns of the great Emperor offered an epitome of all that had gone before; the campaigns
of Washington explained how the principles of the art might be best
applied to their own country, and Mexico had supplied them with practical
experience. Of the West Point graduates there were many who had acquired
from these sources a wide knowledge of the art of generalship, and
among them were no more earnest students than the three Virginians,
Lee, Jackson, and Johnston.

When Jackson accepted an appointment
for the Military Institute, it was with the avowed intention of training
his intellect for war. In his retirement at Lexington he had kept
before his eyes the possibility that he might some day be recalled
to the Army. He had already acquired such practical knowledge of his
profession as the United States service could afford. He had become
familiar with the characteristics of the regular soldier. He knew
how to command, to maintain discipline, and the regulations were at
his fingers' ends. A few years had been sufficient to teach him all
that could be learned from the routine of a regiment, as they had
been sufficient to teach Napoleon, Frederick, and Lee.

Bowing his head, conscious of rapidly increasing dizziness, raging at the thought of breaking
down before her, yet smarting under the lash of her undeserved rebuke, he pushed blindly by
and went forth into the night. The street was rocking like the steamer of the summer twice
gone by as it pitched through the "roaring forties." He remembered trying to make his way back
towards that corner--where the horses went down--there were friends there--and that big policeman--he'd
help. The lamp-post leaned over and tapped him hard on top of the head. He tried to grapple
it, but the right arm would not answer. Then his feet shot out from under him on the icy pavement,
and the curb flew up and struck him a violent blow at the base of the skull.

Ten minutes later, as Jeannette Wallen was rejoicing over the returning consciousness of a
sorely bumped but otherwise unharmed little maid, and hugging that precious niece to her heart,
while the doctor administered a soothing draught, and Mrs. Wells was pulling off the pygmy
shoes and stocking, the servant admitted an abashed citizen who faltered at the parlor door
and mumbled, "Say, doctor, that gen'l'm'n that saved that little girl must 'a' got badly hurt.
He's lyin' out here down the street--senseless----"

That was all Jeannette heard. Who caught little Kate was a question the distracted aunt never
asked until many a long day after. Nobody caught her until, a dozen doors away, under the gas-light,
in the midst of a little knot of neighbors, a battered, bleeding head was lifted from a rough
coat-sleeve, and, folded in the slender, clasping arms of a kneeling girl, was pillowed on
the pure heart where the baby curls were nestling but a moment before.

Fractured ribs and collar-bones yield not unreadily to treatment; even fractured skulls have
been known to mend; and in a week, though dazed and bewildered, Captain Forrest was convalescing.
Cranston and other fellows from the fort were in frequent attendance. The army surgeon from
head-quarters had been unflagging, and Colonel Kenyon himself was at the railway station when
the "Limited" arrived from New York, bringing a much-alarmed mother and sister, who relieved,
if they did not entirely replace, certain other nurses at the patient's bedside. Upon their
arrival, after three days and nights of vigil, Miss Wallen disappeared. She betook herself
to Miss Bonner's refuge far down town, and just what Mrs. Forrest could have heard from the
Cranstons, from her son's commanding officer, and from the fluent lips of Mrs. Wells, the reader
may best conjecture, for it is a recorded fact that no sooner was her son out of all danger
and well on the road to recovery than two ladies drove to the south side to seek this modest
abode of working-girls and to call in person on Jeannette.

That afternoon came Cary Allison to visit his old friend the captain. Day after day had the
boy been there to inquire, and it was good to see his rejoicing in the mending of the stalwart
patient and refreshing to hear his comments on affairs domestic. Flo and her spoons just made
him sick, he said, and the idea of having a Stoughton bottle like that for a brother-in-law
was disgusting. "Why couldn't he have jumped out and lent a helping hand, instead of sneaking
inside the coach and crying at Parks? Hubbard's a muff! I tell Flo he belongs to the family
the squash was named for, and I call him Squash, too, and so does pa, though he's glad enough
to rope him in to buying more stocks, I notice." It was plain that in Cary's eyes sister Titania
had found her Bottom and was enamoured of an ass. Brother-like, he had made her wince many
and many a time, and now it was Forrest's turn.

"Say, cap, I do wish you'd come around and cheer the governor up a bit. He's been warped all
out of shape since the strike, and seems to feel all broke up over home matters, too. He won't
stay there at all. The last thing he did was to drive around to Wallen's and offer him a first-class
clerkship, and now he's rowing with Wells because he won't let on what's become of your typewriter."

His typewriter? The girl he loved with all the strength of his being, honored and revered and
longed to make his wife,--and the world could speak of her in that loose, pragmatical, possessive,
chattel-like way. His typewriter! No more his than any man's who gave her employment. No longer
his, in fact, since he was virtually forbidden her presence. He who had offered her his hand
and name and love was actually of less account in the arrangement of her daily life than any
one of the thousands who trod the pavement under her office windows, for they could offer work.
Forrest threw himself back upon his pillow, buried his face in his arms, groaned aloud as the
innocent youth went gayly forth into the wintry sunshine, and the doctor and the household
of anxious women wondered what had happened to set back their impatient patient. Could it be,
suggested that social prophet, his sister, that he was, after all, really interested in Florence
Allison and chagrined at the news of her engagement, now formally announced? Might it not be,
after all, that, as she had originally suggested, his apparent infatuation for Jeannette Wallen
was mere sentiment, quixotism, proximity, and that he would speedily recover could they only
get him away awhile? Surely it was worth the trial. His mother's health was suffering in the
rigors of a Chicago winter. They had spent three months in St. Augustine each winter for years
past, and but for Floyd should be there now.

It was arranged somehow. He was passive, submissive, indifferent. He knew nothing of the one
wild moment of Jenny's break-down. He had never been allowed one hint of where his blessed
head had been pillowed that bitter November night. The girl had pledged her friend to absolute
secrecy. Removed on his convalescence from Wells's roof to his mother's rooms at The Virginia,
Forrest saw no more of his hostess for several days. Then, with a three months' leave on surgeon's
certificate, he was driven, under his mother's wing, to bid her adieu, and that night they
were off for Florida.

"I'll never forgive him as long as I live," said Mrs. Wells. "He never gave me a chance to
tell what--I can't tell you, Mrs. Cranston, but you know; and those two proud women have just
got him between them now, and they'll never let him out of their leading-strings again."

"You don't know him," said Mrs. Cranston. "He'll break the strings and be back, or he isn't
worth another thought of a girl like her."

But Jenny was not so certain. Never yet had she had opportunity to unsay the cutting words
with which she had met him that bitter night. Time and again in her heart of hearts had she
planned how those unsaying words should be said, and said just as soon as ever he came, but
he came rather soon and suddenly.

They were great Christmas farers at Wellses'. With no children of their own, the sweet holiday
season would have lost its sweetest charm but that Jenny was again with them. They rigged up
a lovely Christmas-tree for Mart's babies, and summoned in sundry little waifs from the neighborhood,
and had games and romps and laughter and merry voices. Later in the week there was a dinner
at which the Cranstons and some fort friends appeared; there was a mistletoe bough that night
and not a little coquetry and merriment, for Wells had invited the library girls and numerous
young men to be present, and the customs of Old England were reproduced with characteristic
American exaggeration. That mistletoe bough remained suspended from its chandelier, a reminder
of the joys of the old year, even after '95 came knocking at the door, and in some odd way
a little sprig thereof was found one evening to be clinging to the top of a cabinet photograph
of Mr. Forrest which stood on the mantel shelf.

It was a sharp, cold January evening, and Jenny Wallen's soft cheek was glowing, and her eyes
sparkling, as she tripped lightly up the stone steps, let herself into the warm hall-way, and
peered into the parlor. No one was there. A bright coal fire blazed in the open grate. The
pretty room looked cosy and inviting. The library beyond--"Wells's particular"--was dark. Mrs.
Wells, said the maid, from the head of the kitchen stairs, had been home, but was gone over
to the Lambert to meet Mr. Wells. So Jenny was alone. Some women lose courage at such times.
She seemed to gain it. Drawing off her gloves and throwing aside the heavy cloak, she stood
there in front of the blaze, her eyes fixed upon that unconscious portrait, her hands extended
over the flames. What speaking eyes the girl had! What would be the words the soft, rosy lips
were framing? With all her soul she was gazing straight into that unresponsive, soldierly,
handsome face. With all her heart she was murmuring some inarticulate appeal, lavishing some
womanly caresses upon the dumb and senseless picture. Then the little hands were upraised,
and the next instant, frame and all, the shadow was nestled just where the substance had lain,
clasped in those encircling arms, long weeks before. A moment or two it was held there, the
sweet face bending over, the soft lips murmuring, crooning to it as a mother might to a precious
child, and then it was raised still more, until those lips were pressed upon it long, long,
long and fervently.

Then down went everything with a crash.

In striving to explain matters and set himself right in the eyes of his lady-love some hours
later, Captain Forrest protested that he had had no intention whatever of spying upon, much
less of startling her. They had speedily discovered at St. Augustine that it was useless trying
to bring back this wayward son and brother, a man of thirty-five, to live without the heart
so unmistakably in the keeping of the girl he'd left behind. "I have written to her--all you
could ask, Floyd, my son," were at last the mother's words. "Go, and God bless you." And three
days later he surprised Mrs. Wells. "I've just got to go out," said she, after a while, "and
you've simply got to stay here. I'll leave directions that I'm out to everybody, and----" Then
did that designing matron pick up his furs and deposit them--and him--in the library. "You're
to stay here, mind, till I get back."

"But you didn't," interposed his hearer, reproachfully, at this juncture. "You burst in there
like a--like a tiger, and scared me out of my seven senses."

"That was entirely your fault. I was merely trying to escape from the house. You see when I
left Florida you were living, as I supposed, at Miss Bonner's, and as soon as you came in it
was my cue to leave, in view of the ferocity of your remarks the last time we met here."

"Knowing how I must regret that, you need not have been so precipitate. It was what I think
you gentlemen call a 'stand-off,'" said she, with a pretty grimace at the slang, "but--do you
always take the roundabout way to reach the door?" Miss Wallen's lips were twitching with suppressed
delight, and Captain Forrest was watching them with ill-suppressed emotion. He rallied promptly,
however.

"Rarely, but in this case I flew--to pick up the picture you had dropped."

"Oh, the maid would have done that. She was promptly on hand."

"Yes, too promptly. So promptly as to inspire the belief that she suspected something was on
foot when you--when I---- By the way, what became of that sprig of potato-vine, or chickweed,
or something, that was on top of the frame? Mrs. Wells missed it as soon as she came in."

"It fell into the grate, I presume; but it wasn't chickweed. There's more of it if Mrs. Wells
needs it," she added, nodding to the pendent spray beneath the chandelier. "It doesn't signify."

"Oh, I thought it did--at least I hoped so. Mistletoe generally does."

"Not when mistaken for potato-vine," she answered, yet her eyes were smiling at him.

"Jeannette," he said, impulsively, his deep voice trembling, as he stood close before her and
strove to seize the little hand that was toying at her white, round throat, "mother's letter
must surely be with you by morning. It is very hard to keep my faith and plead no more until
she has pleaded for me. Must I wait? Will Miss Bonner bring it to you at once?"

"I--hardly think so."

"Then may I not go to-night, if need be, and get it? It was addressed, you know, to her care."

"Yes, so I observed."

"Jenny! Then you have it? You have read what she says? Oh, my darling! Then----"

And what imploring love was in those soft, brown eyes of his! What tenderness and longing and
passion in the outstretched arms! She looked shyly up at him, trembling in spite of herself,
but not yet yielding.

"You know I've had no time to more than glance at it," she said. "I had hoped to read it this
evening, but, you see, visitors came in. I must read it all carefully to-morrow."

"Ah," he said, "you have me at your mercy. You wrung those promises from me, and now----" She
backed away from him a bit, he looked so fiercely reproachful, but he followed. She upheld
her hands in warning, and he strove to seize them, but they evaded him.

"You are proud, stern, unyielding," he said at last, and turned half helplessly away, then
caught sight of the feathery spray now almost over her bonny, curly head. But Banks had made
no remonstrance.

He had either failed to recognise, until it was too late, that the force at Front Royal would
be exposed to attack from the Luray Valley, and, if the post fell, that his own communications
with both Winchester and Washington would be at once endangered; or he had lost favour with the Secretary.
For some time past Mr. Stanton's telegrams had been cold and peremptory. There had been no more
effusive praise of "cautious vigour" and "interesting manoeuvres;" and Banks had gradually
fallen from the command of a large army corps to the charge of a single division.
His 10,000 men were thus distributed. At Strasburg were 4500 infantry,
2900 cavalry, and 16 guns. At Winchester 850 infantry and 600 cavalry.

Only like a whisper, so soft, so tremulous was her voice, the needed words were spoken:

"Is it potent--only at Christmas?"

But he heard, and sprang to her and caught her in his arms. Little heroine though she was,
what a tame surrender after all!

THE END.

THE LOTOS LIBRARY.

Illustrated. 16mo. Polished buckram.

75 cents per volume.

By ELIZABETH PHIPPS TRAIN.

A SOCIAL HIGHWAYMAN.

THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A PROFESSIONAL BEAUTY.

By HARRIET RIDDLE DAVIS.

IN SIGHT OF THE GODDESS.

A Tale of Washington Life.

By ROBERT BUCHANAN.

A MARRIAGE BY CAPTURE.

A Romance of To-Day.

By JULIAN HAWTHORNE.

THE GOLDEN FLEECE.

BY CAPTAIN CHARLES KING, U.S.A.

A TAME SURRENDER. A Story of the Chicago Strike.

