Hiroshima was the primary target of the first atomic bomb mission.  The mission went smoothly
in every respect.  The weather was good, and the crew and equipment functioned perfectly. 
In every detail, the attack was carried out exactly as planned, and the bomb performed exactly
as expected.

The bomb exploded over Hiroshima at 8:15 on the morning of August 6, 1945.  About an hour previously,
the Japanese early warning radar net had detected the approach of some American aircraft headed
for the southern part of Japan.  The alert had been given and radio broadcasting stopped in
many cities, among them Hiroshima.  The planes approached the coast at a very high altitude.
At nearly 8:00 A.M., the radar operator in Hiroshima determined that the number of planes coming
in was very small--probably not more than three--and the air raid alert was lifted.  The normal
radio broadcast warning was given to the people that it might be advisable to go to shelter
if B-29's were actually sighted, but no raid was expected beyond some sort of reconnaissance.
At 8:15 A.M., the bomb exploded with a blinding flash in the sky, and a great rush of air and
a loud rumble of noise extended for many miles around the city; the first blast was soon followed
by the sounds of falling buildings and of growing fires, and a great cloud of dust and smoke
began to cast a pall of darkness over the city.

At 8:16 A.M., the Tokyo control operator of the Japanese Broadcasting Corporation noticed that
the Hiroshima station had gone off the air. He tried to use another telephone line to reestablish
his program, but it too had failed.  About twenty minutes later the Tokyo railroad telegraph
center realized that the main line telegraph had stopped working just north of Hiroshima. 
From some small railway stops within ten miles of the city there came unofficial and confused
reports of a terrible explosion in Hiroshima.  All these reports were transmitted to the Headquarters
of the Japanese General Staff.

Military headquarters repeatedly tried to call the Army Control Station in Hiroshima.  The
complete silence from that city puzzled the men at Headquarters; they knew that no large enemy
raid could have occurred, and they knew that no sizeable store of explosives was in Hiroshima
at that time.  A young officer of the Japanese General Staff was instructed to fly immediately
to Hiroshima, to land, survey the damage, and return to Tokyo with reliable information for
the staff.  It was generally felt at Headquarters that nothing serious had taken place, that
it was all a terrible rumor starting from a few sparks of truth.

The staff officer went to the airport and took off for the southwest. After flying for about
three hours, while still nearly 100 miles from Hiroshima, he and his pilot saw a great cloud
of smoke from the bomb. In the bright afternoon, the remains of Hiroshima were burning.

Their plane soon reached the city, around which they circled in disbelief.  A great scar on
the land, still burning, and covered by a heavy cloud of smoke, was all that was left of a
great city.  They landed south of the city, and the staff officer immediately began to organize
relief measures, after reporting to Tokyo.

Tokyo's first knowledge of what had really caused the disaster came from the White House public
announcement in Washington sixteen hours after Hiroshima had been hit by the atomic bomb.

Nagasaki

Nagasaki had never been subjected to large scale bombing prior to the explosion of the atomic
bomb there.  On August 1st, 1945, however, a number of high explosive bombs were dropped on
the city.  A few of these bombs hit in the shipyards and dock areas in the southwest portion
of the city.  Several of the bombs hit the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works and six bombs landed
at the Nagasaki Medical School and Hospital, with three direct hits on buildings there.  While
the damage from these few bombs were relatively small, it created considerable concern in Nagasaki
and a number of people, principally school children, were evacuated to rural areas for safety,
thus reducing the population in the city at the time of the atomic attack.

On the morning of August 9th, 1945, at about 7:50 A.M., Japanese time, an air raid alert was
sounded in Nagasaki, but the "All clear" signal was given at 8:30.  When only two B-29 superfortresses
were sighted at 10:53 the Japanese apparently assumed that the planes were only on reconnaissance
and no further alarm was given.  A few moments later, at 11:00 o'clock, the observation B-29
dropped instruments attached to three parachutes and at 11:02 the other plane released the
atomic bomb.

The bomb exploded high over the industrial valley of Nagasaki, almost midway between the Mitsubishi
Steel and Arms Works, in the south, and the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance Works (Torpedo Works),
in the north, the two principal targets of the city.

Despite its extreme importance, the first bombing mission on Hiroshima had been almost routine.
The second mission was not so uneventful. Again the crew was specially trained and selected;
but bad weather introduced some momentous complications.  These complications are best described
in the brief account of the mission's weaponeer, Comdr., now Capt., F. L.  Ashworth, U.S.N.,
who was in technical command of the bomb and was charged with the responsibility of insuring
that the bomb was successfully dropped at the proper time and on the designated target.  His
narrative runs as follows:

"The night of our take-off was one of tropical rain squalls, and flashes of lightning stabbed
into the darkness with disconcerting regularity.  The weather forecast told us of storms all
the way from the Marianas to the Empire.  Our rendezvous was to be off the southeast coast
of Kyushu, some 1500 miles away.  There we were to join with our two companion observation
B-29's that took off a few minutes behind us. Skillful piloting and expert navigation brought
us to the rendezvous without incident.

"About five minutes after our arrival, we were joined by the first of our B-29's.  The second,
however, failed to arrive, having apparently been thrown off its course by storms during the
night.  We waited 30 minutes and then proceeded without the second plane toward the target area.

"During the approach to the target the special instruments installed in the plane told us that
the bomb was ready to function.  We were prepared to drop the second atomic bomb on Japan.
But fate was against us, for the target was completely obscured by smoke and haze.  Three times
we attempted bombing runs, but without success.  Then with anti-aircraft fire bursting around
us and with a number of enemy fighters coming up after us, we headed for our secondary target,
Nagasaki.

"The bomb burst with a blinding flash and a huge column of black smoke swirled up toward us.
Out of this column of smoke there boiled a great swirling mushroom of gray smoke, luminous
with red, flashing flame, that reached to 40,000 feet in less than 8 minutes.  Below through
the clouds we could see the pall of black smoke ringed with fire that covered what had been
the industrial area of Nagasaki.

"By this time our fuel supply was dangerously low, so after one quick circle of Nagasaki, we
headed direct for Okinawa for an emergency landing and refueling".

GENERAL COMPARISON OF HIROSHIMA AND NAGASAKI

It was not at first apparent to even trained observers visiting the two Japanese cities which
of the two bombs had been the most effective.

In some respects, Hiroshima looked worse than Nagasaki.  The fire damage in Hiroshima was much
more complete; the center of the city was hit and everything but the reinforced concrete buildings
had virtually disappeared.  A desert of clear-swept, charred remains, with only a few strong
building frames left standing was a terrifying sight.

At Nagasaki there were no buildings just underneath the center of explosion.  The damage to
the Mitsubishi Arms Works and the Torpedo Works was spectacular, but not overwhelming.  There
was something left to see, and the main contours of some of the buildings were still normal.

An observer could stand in the center of Hiroshima and get a view of the most of the city;
the hills prevented a similar overall view in Nagasaki.  Hiroshima impressed itself on one's
mind as a vast expanse of desolation; but nothing as vivid was left in one's memory of Nagasaki.

When the observers began to note details, however, striking differences appeared.  Trees were
down in both cities, but the large trees which fell in Hiroshima were uprooted, while those
in Nagasaki were actually snapped off.  A few reinforced concrete buildings were smashed at
the center in Hiroshima, but in Nagasaki equally heavy damage could be found 2,300 feet from
X.  In the study of objects which gave definite clues to the blast pressure, such as squashed
tin cans, dished metal plates, bent or snapped poles and like, it was soon evident that the
Nagasaki bomb had been much more effective than the Hiroshima bomb.  In the description of
damage which follows, it will be noted that the radius for the amount of damage was greater
in Nagasaki than Hiroshima.

GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF DAMAGE CAUSED BY THE ATOMIC EXPLOSIONS

In considering the devastation in the two cities, it should be remembered that the cities'
differences in shape and topography resulted in great differences in the damages.  Hiroshima
was all on low, flat ground, and was roughly circular in shape; Nagasaki was much cut up by
hills and mountain spurs, with no regularity to its shape.

In Hiroshima almost everything up to about one mile from X was completely destroyed, except
for a small number (about 50) of heavily reinforced concrete buildings, most of which were
specially designed to withstand earthquake shock, which were not collapsed by the blast; most
of these buildings had their interiors completely gutted, and all windows, doors, sashes, and
frames ripped out.  In Nagasaki, nearly everything within 1/2 mile of the explosion was destroyed,
including heavy structures.  All Japanese homes were destroyed within 1 1/2 miles from X.

Underground air raid shelters with earth cover roofs immediately below the explosion had their
roofs caved in; but beyond 1/2 mile from X they suffered no damage.

In Nagasaki, 1500 feet from X high quality steel frame buildings were not completely collapsed,
but the entire buildings suffered mass distortion and all panels and roofs were blown in.

In Nagasaki, 2,000 feet from X, reinforced concrete buildings with 10" walls and 6" floors
were collapsed; reinforced concrete buildings with 4" walls and roofs were standing but were
badly damaged.  At 2,000 feet some 9" concrete walls were completely destroyed.

In Nagasaki, 3,500 feet from X, church buildings with 18" brick walls were completely destroyed.
12" brick walls were severely cracked as far as 5,000 feet.

In Hiroshima, 4,400 feet from X, multi-story brick buildings were completely demolished.  In
Nagasaki, similar buildings were destroyed to 5,300 feet.

In Hiroshima, roof tiles were bubbled (melted) by the flash heat out to 4,000 feet from X;
in Nagasaki, the same effect was observed to 6,500 feet.

In Hiroshima, steel frame buildings were destroyed 4,200 feet from X, and to 4,800 feet in
Nagasaki.

In both cities, the mass distortion of large steel buildings was observed out to 4,500 feet from X.

In Nagasaki, reinforced concrete smoke stacks with 8" walls, specially designed to withstand
earthquake shocks, were overturned up to 4,000 feet from X.

In Hiroshima, steel frame buildings suffered severe structural damage up to 5,700 feet from
X, and in Nagasaki the same damage was sustained as far as 6,000 feet.

In Nagasaki, 9" brick walls were heavily cracked to 5,000 feet, were moderately cracked to
6,000 feet, and slightly cracked to 8,000 feet. In both cities, light concrete buildings collapsed
out to 4,700 feet.

In Hiroshima, multi-story brick buildings suffered structural damage up to 6,600 feet, and
in Nagasaki up to 6,500 feet from X.

In both cities overhead electric installations were destroyed up to 5,500 feet; and trolley
cars were destroyed up to 5,500 feet, and damaged to 10,500 feet.

Flash ignition of dry, combustible material was observed as far as 6,400 feet from X in Hiroshima,
and in Nagasaki as far as 10,000 feet from X.

Severe damage to gas holders occured out to 6,500 feet in both cities.

All Japanese homes were seriously damaged up to 6,500 feet in Hiroshima, and to 8,000 feet
in Nagasaki.  Most Japanese homes were damaged up to 8,000 feet in Hiroshima and 10,500 feet
in Nagasaki.

The hillsides in Nagasaki were scorched by the flash radiation of heat as far as 8,000 feet
from X; this scorching gave the hillsides the appearance of premature autumn.

In Nagasaki, very heavy plaster damage was observed in many buildings up to 9,000 feet; moderate
damage was sustained as far as 12,000 feet, and light damage up to 15,000 feet.

The flash charring of wooden telegraph poles was observed up to 9,500 feet from X in Hiroshima,
and to 11,000 feet in Nagasaki; some reports indicate flash burns as far as 13,000 feet from
X in both places.

Severe displacement of roof tiles was observed up to 8,000 feet in Hiroshima, and to 10,000
feet in Nagasaki.

In Nagasaki, very heavy damage to window frames and doors was observed up to 8,000 feet, and
light damage up to 12,000 feet.

Roofs and wall coverings on steel frame buildings were destroyed out to 11,000 feet.

Although the sources of many fires were difficult to trace accurately, it is believed that
fires were started by primary heat radiation as far as 15,000 feet from X.

Roof damage extended as far as 16,000 feet from X in Hiroshima and in Nagasaki.

The actual collapse of buildings was observed at the extreme range of 23,000 feet from X in
Nagasaki.

Although complete window damage was observed only up to 12,000 feet from X, some window damage
occurred in Nagasaki up to 40,000 feet, and actual breakage of glass occured up to 60,000 feet.

Heavy fire damage was sustained in a circular area in Hiroshima with a mean radius of about
6,000 feet and a maximum radius of about 11,000 feet; similar heavy damage occured in Nagasaki
south of X up to 10,000 feet, where it was stopped on a river course.

In Hiroshima over 60,000 of 90,000 buildings were destroyed or severely damaged by the atomic
bomb; this figure represents over 67% of the city's structures.

In Nagasaki 14,000 or 27% of 52,000 residences were completely destroyed and 5,400, or 10%
were half destroyed.  Only 12% remained undamaged.  This destruction was limited by the layout
of the city. The following is a summary of the damage to buildings in Nagasaki as determined
from a ground survey made by the Japanese:

  Destruction of Buildings and Houses          Number     Percentage
  (Compiled by Nagasaki Municipality)

  Total in Nagasaki (before atomic explosion)  50,000     100.0
  Blasted (not burned)                          2,652       5.3
  Blasted and burned                           11,494      23.0
  Blasted and/or burned                        14,146      28.3
  Partially burned or blasted                   5,441      10.9
  Total buildings and houses destroyed         19,587      39.2
  Undamaged                                    30,413      60.8

In Hiroshima, all utilities and transportation services were disrupted for varying lengths
of time.  In general however services were restored about as rapidly as they could be used
by the depleted population. Through railroad service was in order in Hiroshima on 8 August,
and electric power was available in most of the surviving parts on 7 August, the day after
the bombing.  The reservoir of the city was not damaged, being nearly 2 miles from X.  However,
70,000 breaks in water pipes in buildings and dwellings were caused by the blast and fire effects.
Rolling transportation suffered extensive damage.  The damage to railroad tracks, and roads
was comparatively small, however.  The electric power transmission and distribution systems
were badly wrecked.  The telephone system was approximately 80% damaged, and no service was
restored until 15 August.

Despite the customary Japanese lack of attention to sanitation measures, no major epidemic
broke out in the bombed cities.  Although the conditions following the bombings makes this
fact seem surprising, the experience of other bombed cities in both Germany and Japan show
Hiroshima and Nagasaki not to be isolated cases.

The atomic explosion over Nagasaki affected an over-all area of approximately 42.9 square miles
of which about 8.5 square miles were water and only about 9.8 square miles were built up, the
remainder being partially settled.  Approximately 36% of the built up areas were seriously
damaged.  The area most severely damaged had an average radius of about 1 mile, and covered
about 2.9 square miles of which 2.4 were built up.

In Nagasaki, buildings with structural steel frames, principally the Mitsubishi Plant as far
as 6,000 feet from X were severely damaged; these buildings were typical of wartime mill construction
in America and Great Britain, except that some of the frames were somewhat less substantial.
The damage consisted of windows broken out (100%), steel sashes ripped out or bent, corrugated
metal or corrugated asbestos roofs and sidings ripped off, roofs bent or destroyed, roof trusses
collapsed, columns bent and cracked and concrete foundations for columns rotated.  Damage to
buildings with structural steel frames was more severe where the buildings received the effect
of the blast on their sides than where the blast hit the ends of buildings, because the buildings
had more stiffness (resistance to negative moment at the top of columns) in a longitudinal
direction.  Many of the lightly constructed steel frame buildings collapsed completely while
some of the heavily constructed (to carry the weight of heavy cranes and loads) were stripped
of roof and siding, but the frames were only partially injured.

The next most seriously damaged area in Nagasaki lies outside the 2.9 square miles just described,
and embraces approximately 4.2 square miles of which 29% was built up.  The damage from blast
and fire was moderate here, but in some sections (portions of main business districts) many
secondary fires started and spread rapidly, resulting in about as much over-all destruction
as in areas much closer to X.

An area of partial damage by blast and fire lies just outside the one just described and comprises
approximately 35.8 square miles.  Of this area, roughly 1/6th was built up and 1/4th was water.
The extent of damage varied from serious (severe damage to roofs and windows in the main business
section of Nagasaki, 2.5 miles from X), to minor (broken or occasionally broken windows at
a distance of 7 miles southeast of X).

As intended, the bomb was exploded at an almost ideal location over Nagasaki to do the maximum
damage to industry, including the Mitsubishi Steel and Arms Works, the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance
Works (Torpedo Works), and numerous factories, factory training schools, and other industrial
establishments, with a minimum destruction of dwellings and consequently, a minimum amount
of casualties.  Had the bomb been dropped farther south, the Mitsubishi-Urakami Ordnance Works
would not have been so severely damaged, but the main business and residential districts of
Nagasaki would have sustained much greater damage casualties.

Calculations show that the structural steel and reinforced concrete frames which survived the
blast fairly close to X could not have withstood the estimated peak pressures developed against
the total areas presented by the sides and roof of the buildings.  The survival of these frames
is explained by the fact that they were not actually required to withstand the peak pressure
because the windows were quickly knocked out and roof and siding stripped off thereby reducing
total area and relieving the pressure.  While this saved the building frame, it permitted severe
damage to building interior and contents, and injuries to the building occupants.  Buildings
without large panel openings through which the pressure could dissipate were completely crushed,
even when their frames were as strong as those which survived.

The damage sustained by reinforced concrete buildings depended both on the proximity to X and
the type and strength of the reinforced concrete construction.  Some of the buildings with
reinforced concrete frames also had reinforced concrete walls, ceilings, and partitions, while
others had brick or concrete tile walls covered either with plaster or ornamental stone, with
partitions of metal, glass, and plaster.  With the exception of the Nagasaki Medical School
and Hospital group, which was designed to withstand earthquakes and was therefore of heavier
construction than most American structures, most of the reinforced concrete structures could
be classified only as fair, with concrete of low strength and density, with many of the columns,
beams, and slabs underdesigned and improperly reinforced.  These facts account for some of
the structural failures which occured.

In general, the atomic bomb explosion damaged all windows and ripped out, bent, or twisted
most of the steel window or door sashes, ripped doors from hinges, damaged all suspended wood,
metal, and plaster ceilings.  The blast concussion also caused great damage to equipment by
tumbling and battering.  Fires generally of secondary origin consumed practically all combustible
material, caused plaster to crack off, burned all wooden trim, stair covering, wooden frames
of wooden suspended ceilings, beds, mattresses, and mats, and fused glass, ruined all equipment
not already destroyed by the blast, ruined all electrical wiring, plumbing, and caused spalling
of concrete columns and beams in many of the rooms.

Almost without exception masonry buildings of either brick or stone within the effective limits
of the blast were severely damaged so that most of them were flattened or reduced to rubble.
The wreckage of a church, approximately 1,800 feet east of X in Nagasaki, was one of the few
masonry buildings still recognizable and only portions of the walls of this structure were
left standing.  These walls were extremely thick (about 2 feet).  The two domes of the church
had reinforced concrete frames and although they were toppled, they held together as units.

Practically every wooden building or building with timber frame within 2.0 miles of X was either
completely destroyed or very seriously damaged, and significant damage in Nagasaki resulted
as far as 3 miles from X.  Nearly all such buildings collapsed and a very large number were
consumed by fire.

