An aluminum plate made double for hot water. This is a very little trouble to fill, and insures
a comfortable meal; otherwise, your meat and vegetables will be cold before you can eat them,
and the gravy will have a thin coating of ice on it. It is always cold night and morning in
the mountains. And if you do not need the plate heated you do not have to fill it; that's all.
I am sure my hot-water plate often saved me from indigestion and made my meals things to enjoy
instead of to endure.

Two cups and saucers of white enamel ware. They always look clean and do not break.

One silver-plated knife and fork and two teaspoons.

One folding camp chair.

N.B.--Provide your husband or brother or sister precisely the same; no more, no less.

Japanese napkins, enough to provide two a day for the party.

Two white enamel vegetable dishes.

One folding camp table.

One candle lamp, with enough candles. Then leave all the rest of the cooking outfit to your
cook and trust in Providence. (If you do not approve of Providence, a full aluminum cooking
outfit can be bought so that one pot or pan nests in the other, the whole very complete, compact
and light.)

Come what may, you have your own particular clean hot plate, cup and saucer, knife, fork, spoon
and napkin, with a table to eat from and a chair to sit on and a lamp to see by, if you are
eating after dark--which often happens--and nothing else matters, but food.

If you want to be canny you will have somewhere in your own pack a modest supply of condensed
soups and vegetables, a box or two of meat crackers, and three or four bottles of bouillon,
to be brought out on occasions of famine. Anyway it is a comfort to know that you have provided
against the wolf. So much for your part of the eating; now for the sleeping. If you do not
sleep warm and comfortable at night, the joys of camping are as dust in the mouth. The most
glorious morning that Nature ever produced is a weariness to the flesh of the owl-eyed. So
whatever else you leave behind, be sure your sleeping arrangements are comfortable. The following
is the result of three years' experience:--

A piece of waterproof brown canvas, 7 by 10 feet, bound with tape and supplied with two heavy
leather straps nine feet long, with strong buckles at one end and fastened to the canvas by
means of canvas loops, and one leather strap six feet long that crosses the other two at right
angles.

One rubber air bed, 36 by 76 inches (don't take a narrower size or you will be uncomfortable),
fitted with large size double valve at each end. This bed is six inches thick when blown full
of air. Be sure that sides are inserted, thus making two seams to join together the top and
bottom six inches apart. If the top and bottom are fastened directly together, your bed slopes
down at the sides, which is always disagreeable.

A sleeping bag, with the canvas cover made the full 36 inches wide. This cover should hold
two blanket bags of different weight, and if you are wise you will have made an eider-down
bag to fit inside all of these for very cold weather. The eider bag costs about $16.00 or $18.00,
but is worth it if you are going to camp out in the mountains after August. Do without one
or two summer hats, but get it, for it is the keynote of camp comfort.

Then you want a lamb's wool night wrapper, a neutral grey or brown in color, a set of heavy
night flannels, some heavy woollen stockings and a woollen tam o' shanter large enough to pull
down over the ears. A hot-water bag, also, takes up no room and is heavenly on a freezing night
when the wind is howling through the trees and snow threatens. N.B.--See that your husband
or brother has a similar outfit, or he will borrow yours.

The sleeping bags should be separated and dried either by sun or fire every other day.

