I am glad you are disfranchised of the exiles. We have several, I am told, here; but I strictly
confine myself to those I knew formerly at Paris, and who all are quartered on Richmond-green.
I went to them on Sunday evening, but found them gone to Lord Fitzwilliam's, the next house
to Madame de Boufflers', to hear his organ; whither I followed them, and returned with them.
The Comtesse Emilie played on her harp; then we all united at loto. I went home at twelve,
unrobbed; and Lord Fitzwilliam, who asked much after you both, was to set out the next morning
for Dublin, though intending to stay there but four days, and be back in three weeks.

I am sorry you did not hear all Monsieur de Lally Tollendal's[1] Tragedy, of which I have had
a good account. I like his tribute to his father's memory. Of French politics you must be tired;
and so am I. Nothing appears to me to promise their chaos duration; consequently I expect more
chaos, the sediment of which is commonly despotism. Poland ought to make the French blush;
but that, they are not apt to do on any occasion....

[Footnote 1: M. de Lally Tollendal was the son of that unfortunate Count Lally, so iniquitously
condemned for his conduct in the government of India, as is mentioned in a former note.]

The Duke of St. Albans has cut down all the brave old trees at Hanworth, and consequently reduced
his park to what it issued from--Hounslow-heath: nay, he has hired a meadow next to mine, for
the benefit of embarkation; and there lie all the good old corpses of oaks, ashes, and chestnuts,
directly before your windows, and blocking up one of my views of the river! but so impetuous
is the rage for building, that his Grace's timber will, I trust, not annoy us long. There will
soon be one street from London to Brentford; ay, and from London to every village ten miles
round! Lord Camden has just let ground at Kentish Town for building fourteen hundred houses--nor
do I wonder; London is, I am certain, much fuller than ever I saw it. I have twice this spring
been going to stop my coach in Piccadilly, to inquire what was the matter, thinking there was
a mob--not at all; it was only passengers. Nor is there any complaint of depopulation from
the country: Bath shoots out into new crescents, circuses, and squares every year: Birmingham,
Manchester, Hull, and Liverpool would serve any King in Europe for a capital, and would make
the Empress of Russia's mouth water. Of the war with Catherine Slay-Czar I hear not a breath,
and thence conjecture it is dozing into peace.

Mr. Dundas[1] has kissed hands for Secretary of State; and Bishop Barrington, of Salisbury,
is transferred to Durham, which he affected not to desire, having large estates by his wife
in the south--but from the triple mitre downwards, it is almost always true, what I said some
years ago, that "nolo episcopari is Latin for I lie." Tell it not in Gath that I say so; for
I am to dine to-morrow at the Bishop of London's at Fulham, with Hannah Bonner, my imprimée.[2]
This morning I went with Lysons the Reverend to see Dulwich College, founded in 1619 by Alleyn,
a player, which I had never seen in my many days. We were received by a smart divine, très
bien poudré, and with black satin breeches--but they are giving new wings and red satin breeches
to the good old hostel too, and destroying a gallery with a very rich ceiling; and nothing
will remain of ancient but the front, and an hundred mouldy portraits, among apostles, sibyls,
and Kings of England. On Sunday I shall settle at Strawberry; and then woe betide you on post-days!
I cannot make news without straw. The Johnstones are going to Bath, for the healths of both;
so Richmond will be my only staple. Adieu, all three!

