Almost the best of modern inventions for inexpensive wall-coverings are found in what are called
the ingrain papers. These have a variable surface, without reflections, and make not only a
soft and impalpable colour effect, but, on account of their want of reflection, are good backgrounds
for pictures.

In these papers the colour is produced by a mixture in the mass of paper pulp of atoms of varying
tint, which are combined in the substance and make one general tint resulting from the mixture
of several. In canvases and textiles, which are a more expensive method of producing almost
the same mixed effect, the minute points of brilliance of threads in light and darkness of
threads in shadow, combine to produce softness of tone, impossible to pigment because it has
but one plain surface, unrelieved by breaking up into light and shadow.

Variation, produced by minute differences, which affect each other and which the eye blends
into a general tone, produce quality. It is at the same time soft and brilliant, and is really
a popular adaptation of the philosophy of impressionist painters, whose small dabs of pure
colour placed in close juxtaposition and fused into one tone by the eye, give the purity and
vibration of colour which distinguishes work of that school.

Some skilful painters can stipple one tone upon another so as to produce the same brilliant
softness of effect, and when this can be done, oil-colour upon plaster is the best of all treatment
for bedrooms since it fulfils all the sanitary and other conditions so necessary in sleeping-rooms.
The same effect may be produced if the walls are of rough instead of smooth plaster, so that
the small inequalities of surface give light and shadow as in textiles; upon such surfaces
a pleasant tint in flat colour is always good. Painted burlaps and certain Japanese papers
prepared with what may be called a textile or canvas surface give the same effect, and indeed
quality of tint and tone is far more easily obtained in wall-coverings or applied materials
than in paint, because in most wall-coverings there are variations of tint produced in the
very substance of the material.

This matter of variation without contrast in wall-surface, is one of the most important in
house decoration, and has led to the increased use of textiles in houses where artistic effects
have been carefully studied and are considered of importance.

Of course wall-paper must continue to be the chief means of wall-covering, on account of its
cheapness, and because it is the readiest means of sheathing a plaster surface; and a continuous
demand for papers of good and nearly uniform colour, and the sort of inconspicuous design which
fits them for modest interiors will have the effect of increasing the manufacture of desirable
and artistic things.

In the meantime one should carefully avoid the violently coloured papers which are made only
to sell; materials which catch the eye of the inexperienced and tempt them into the buying
of things which are productive of lasting unrest. It is in the nature of positive masses and
strongly contrasting colours to produce this effect.

If one is unfortunate enough to occupy a room of which the walls are covered with one of these
glaring designs, and circumstances prevent a radical change, the simplest expedient is to cover
the whole surface with a kalsomine or chalk-wash, of some agreeable tint. This will dry in
an hour or two and present a nearly uniform surface, in which the printed design of the paper,
if it appears at all, will be a mere suggestion. Papers where the design is carried in colour
only a few shades darker than the background, are also safe, and--if the design is a good one--often
very desirable for halls and dining-rooms. In skilfully printed papers of the sort the design
often has the effect of a mere shadow-play of form.

Of course in the infinite varieties of use and the numberless variations of personal taste,
there are, and should be, innumerable differences in application of both colour and materials
to interiors. There are differences in the use of rooms which may make a sense of perfect seclusion
desirable, as, for instance, in libraries, or rooms used exclusively for evening gatherings
of the family. In such semi-private rooms the treatment should give a sense of close family
life rather than space, while in drawing-rooms it should be exactly the reverse, and this effect
is easily secured by competent use of colour.

CHAPTER IX

LOCATION OF THE HOUSE

Besides the difference in treatment demanded by different use of rooms--the character of the
decoration of the whole house will be influenced by its situation. A house in the country or
a house in town; a house by the sea-shore or a house situated in woods and fields require stronger
or less strong colour, and even different tints, according to situation. The decoration itself
may be much less conventional in one place than in another, and in country houses much and
lasting charm is derived from design and colour in perfect harmony with nature's surroundings.
Whatever decorative design is used in wall-coverings or in curtains or hangings will be far
more effective if it bears some relation to the surroundings and position of the house.

If the house is by the sea the walls should repeat with many variations the tones of sea and
sand and sky; the gray-greens of sand-grasses; the blues which change from blue to green with
every cloud-shadow; the pearl tints which become rose in the morning or evening light, and
the browns and olives of sea mosses and lichens. This treatment of colour will make the interior
of the house a part of the great out-of-doors and create a harmony between the artificial shelter
and nature.

There is philosophy in following, as far as the limitations of simple colour will allow, the
changeableness and fluidity of natural effects along the shore, and allowing the mood of the
brief summer life to fall into entire harmony with the dominant expression of the sea. Blues
and greens and pinks and browns should all be kept on a level with out-of-door colour, that
is, they should not be too deep and strong for harmony with the sea and sky, and if, when harmonious
colour is once secured, most of the materials used in the furnishing of the house are chosen
because their design is based upon, or suggested by, sea-forms, an impression is produced of
having entered into complete and perfect harmony with the elements and aspects of nature. The
artificialities of life fall more and more into the background, and one is refreshed with a
sense of having established entirely harmonious and satisfactory relations with the surroundings
of nature. I remember a doorway of a cottage by the sea, where the moulding which made a part
of the frame was an orderly line of carved cockle-shells, used as a border, and this little
touch of recognition of its sea-neighbours was not only decorative in itself, but gave even
the chance visitor a sort of interpretation of the spirit of the interior life.

Suppose, on the other hand, that the summer house is placed in the neighbourhood of fields
and trees and mountains; it will be found that strong and positive treatment of the interior
is more in harmony with the outside landscape. Even heavier furniture looks fitting where the
house is surrounded with massive tree-growths; and deeper and purer colours can be used in
hangings and draperies. This is due to the more positive colouring of a landscape than of a
sea-view. The masses of strong and slightly varying green in foliage, the red, brown, or vivid
greens of fields and crops, the dark lines of tree-trunks and branches, as well as the unchanging
forms of rock and hillside, call for a corresponding strength of interior effect. 

The Number of the infected contained in the two last Classes, were so considerable, that one may
affirm, without any exaggeration, that more than fifteen or twenty Thousand Persons were found
in these sorts of Cases; and if the Distemper had not often taken this turn, there would not
have been left in this City the fourth Part of its Inhabitants.

We may very well admit a Sixth Class of such as we have seen perish without any Forerunner,
or other manifest Hurt, than only a decay in Strength; and who being
asked concerning their Condition, answered, that they were not sensible
of any Disorder, which for the most part denoted a desperate Case,
and an approaching Death; but the Number of these were very small
in Comparison of such as made up the preceding Classes.

It will be seen that the principles of appropriate furnishing and adornment in house interiors
depend upon circumstances and natural surroundings as well as upon the character and pursuits
of the family who are to be lodged, and that the final charm of the home is attained by a perfect
adaptation of principles to existing conditions both of nature and humanity.

In cottages of the character we are considering, furniture should be simpler and lighter than
in houses intended for constant family living. Chairs and sofas should be without elaborate
upholstery and hangings, and cushions can be appropriately made of some well-coloured cotton
or linen material which wind, and sun, and dampness cannot spoil, and of which the freshness
can always be restored by laundering. These are general rules, appropriate to all summer cottages,
and to these it may be added, that a house which is to be closed for six or eight months in
the year should really, to be consistent, be inexpensively furnished. These general rules are
intended only to emphasise the fact that in houses which are to become in the truest sense
homes--that is, places of habitation which represent the inhabitants, directions or rules for
beautiful colour and arrangement of interiors, must always follow the guiding incidents of
class and locality.

CHAPTER X

CEILINGS

As ceilings are in reality a part of the wall, they must always be considered in connection
with room interiors, but their influence upon the beauty of the average house is so small,
that their treatment is a comparatively easy problem.

In simple houses with plaster ceilings the tints to be used are easily decided. The rule of
gradation of colour from floor to ceiling prescribes for the latter the lightest tone of the
gradation, and as the ceiling stands for light, and should actually reflect light into the
room, the philosophy of this arrangement of colours is obvious. It is not, however, an invariable
rule that the ceiling should carry the same tint as the wall, even in a much lighter tone,
although greater harmony and restfulness of effect is produced in this way. A ceiling of cream
white will harmonise well with almost any tint upon the walls, and at the same time give an
effect of air and light in the room. It is also a good ground for ornament in elaborately decorated
ones.

If the walls are covered with a light wall-paper which carries a floral design, it is a safe
rule to make the ceiling of the same colour but a lighter shade of the background of the paper,
but it is not by any means good art to carry a flower design over the ceiling. One sometimes
sees instances of this in the bedrooms of fairly good houses, and the effect is naturally that
of bringing the ceiling apparently almost to one's head, or at all events, of producing a very
unrestful effect.

