He went to bed with them, and just like fleas they would not let him sleep or get a moment's
rest, and the broken stitches of his stockings helped them. But as Time is fleet and no obstacle
can stay his course, he came riding on the hours, and morning very soon arrived. Seeing which
Don Quixote quitted the soft down, and, nowise slothful, dressed himself in his chamois suit
and put on his travelling boots to hide the disaster to his stockings. He threw over him his
scarlet mantle, put on his head a montera of green velvet trimmed with silver edging, flung
across his shoulder the baldric with his good trenchant sword, took up a large rosary that
he always carried with him, and with great solemnity and precision of gait proceeded to the
antechamber where the duke and duchess were already dressed and waiting for him. But as he
passed through a gallery, Altisidora and the other damsel, her friend, were lying in wait for
him, and the instant Altisidora saw him she pretended to faint, while her friend caught her
in her lap, and began hastily unlacing the bosom of her dress.

Don Quixote observed it, and approaching them said, "I know very well what this seizure arises
from."

"I know not from what," replied the friend, "for Altisidora is the healthiest damsel in all
this house, and I have never heard her complain all the time I have known her. A plague on
all the knights-errant in the world, if they be all ungrateful! Go away, Senor Don Quixote;
for this poor child will not come to herself again so long as you are here."

To which Don Quixote returned, "Do me the favour, senora, to let a lute be placed in my chamber
to-night; and I will comfort this poor maiden to the best of my power; for in the early stages
of love a prompt disillusion is an approved remedy;" and with this he retired, so as not to
be remarked by any who might see him there.

He had scarcely withdrawn when Altisidora, recovering from her swoon, said to her companion,
"The lute must be left, for no doubt Don Quixote intends to give us some music; and being his
it will not be bad."

They went at once to inform the duchess of what was going on, and of the lute Don Quixote asked
for, and she, delighted beyond measure, plotted with the duke and her two damsels to play him
a trick that should be amusing but harmless; and in high glee they waited for night, which
came quickly as the day had come; and as for the day, the duke and duchess spent it in charming
conversation with Don Quixote.

When eleven o'clock came, Don Quixote found a guitar in his chamber; he tried it, opened the
window, and perceived that some persons were walking in the garden; and having passed his fingers
over the frets of the guitar and tuned it as well as he could, he spat and cleared his chest,
and then with a voice a little hoarse but full-toned, he sang the following ballad, which he
had himself that day composed:

Mighty Love the hearts of maidens
  Doth unsettle and perplex,
And the instrument he uses
  Most of all is idleness.

Sewing, stitching, any labour,
  Having always work to do,
To the poison Love instilleth
  Is the antidote most sure.

And to proper-minded maidens
  Who desire the matron's name
Modesty's a marriage portion,
  Modesty their highest praise.

Men of prudence and discretion,
  Courtiers gay and gallant knights,
With the wanton damsels dally,
  But the modest take to wife.

There are passions, transient, fleeting,
  Loves in hostelries declar'd,
Sunrise loves, with sunset ended,
  When the guest hath gone his way.

Love that springs up swift and sudden,
  Here to-day, to-morrow flown,
Passes, leaves no trace behind it,
  Leaves no image on the soul.

Painting that is laid on painting
  Maketh no display or show;
Where one beauty's in possession
  There no other can take hold.

Dulcinea del Toboso
  Painted on my heart I wear;
Never from its tablets, never,
  Can her image be eras'd.

The quality of all in lovers
  Most esteemed is constancy;
'T is by this that love works wonders,
  This exalts them to the skies.

Don Quixote had got so far with his song, to which the duke, the duchess, Altisidora, and nearly
the whole household of the castle were listening, when all of a sudden from a gallery above
that was exactly over his window they let down a cord with more than a hundred bells attached
to it, and immediately after that discharged a great sack full of cats, which also had bells
of smaller size tied to their tails. Such was the din of the bells and the squalling of the
cats, that though the duke and duchess were the contrivers of the joke they were startled by
it, while Don Quixote stood paralysed with fear; and as luck would have it, two or three of
the cats made their way in through the grating of his chamber, and flying from one side to
the other, made it seem as if there was a legion of devils at large in it. They extinguished
the candles that were burning in the room, and rushed about seeking some way of escape; the
cord with the large bells never ceased rising and falling; and most of the people of the castle,
not knowing what was really the matter, were at their wits' end with astonishment. Don Quixote
sprang to his feet, and drawing his sword, began making passes at the grating, shouting out,
"Avaunt, malignant enchanters! avaunt, ye witchcraft-working rabble! I am Don Quixote of La
Mancha, against whom your evil machinations avail not nor have any power." And turning upon
the cats that were running about the room, he made several cuts at them. They dashed at the
grating and escaped by it, save one that, finding itself hard pressed by the slashes of Don
Quixote's sword, flew at his face and held on to his nose tooth and nail, with the pain of
which he began to shout his loudest. The duke and duchess hearing this, and guessing what it
was, ran with all haste to his room, and as the poor gentleman was striving with all his might
to detach the cat from his face, they opened the door with a master-key and went in with lights
and witnessed the unequal combat. The duke ran forward to part the combatants, but Don Quixote
cried out aloud, "Let no one take him from me; leave me hand to hand with this demon, this
wizard, this enchanter; I will teach him, I myself, who Don Quixote of La Mancha is." The cat,
however, never minding these threats, snarled and held on; but at last the duke pulled it off
and flung it out of the window. Don Quixote was left with a face as full of holes as a sieve
and a nose not in very good condition, and greatly vexed that they did not let him finish the
battle he had been so stoutly fighting with that villain of an enchanter. They sent for some
oil of John's wort, and Altisidora herself with her own fair hands bandaged all the wounded
parts; and as she did so she said to him in a low voice. "All these mishaps have befallen thee,
hardhearted knight, for the sin of thy insensibility and obstinacy; and God grant thy squire
Sancho may forget to whip himself, so that that dearly beloved Dulcinea of thine may never
be released from her enchantment, that thou mayest never come to her bed, at least while I
who adore thee am alive."

To all this Don Quixote made no answer except to heave deep sighs, and then stretched himself
on his bed, thanking the duke and duchess for their kindness, not because he stood in any fear
of that bell-ringing rabble of enchanters in cat shape, but because he recognised their good
intentions in coming to his rescue. The duke and duchess left him to repose and withdrew greatly
grieved at the unfortunate result of the joke; as they never thought the adventure would have
fallen so heavy on Don Quixote or cost him so dear, for it cost him five days of confinement
to his bed, during which he had another adventure, pleasanter than the late one, which his
chronicler will not relate just now in order that he may turn his attention to Sancho Panza,
who was proceeding with great diligence and drollery in his government. The clarions sounded
as Sancho entered the room, and four pages came forward to present him with water for his hands,
which Sancho received with great dignity. The music ceased, and Sancho seated himself at the
head of the table, for there was only that seat placed, and no more than one cover laid. A
personage, who it appeared afterwards was a physician, placed himself standing by his side
with a whalebone wand in his hand. They then lifted up a fine white cloth covering fruit and
a great variety of dishes of different sorts; one who looked like a student said grace, and
a page put a laced bib on Sancho, while another who played the part of head carver placed a
dish of fruit before him. But hardly had he tasted a morsel when the man with the wand touched
the plate with it, and they took it away from before him with the utmost celerity. The carver,
however, brought him another dish, and Sancho proceeded to try it; but before he could get
at it, not to say taste it, already the wand had touched it and a page had carried it off with
the same promptitude as the fruit. Sancho seeing this was puzzled, and looking from one to
another asked if this dinner was to be eaten after the fashion of a jugglery trick.

To this he with the wand replied, "It is not to be eaten, senor governor, except as is usual
and customary in other islands where there are governors. I, senor, am a physician, and I am
paid a salary in this island to serve its governors as such, and I have a much greater regard
for their health than for my own, studying day and night and making myself acquainted with
the governor's constitution, in order to be able to cure him when he falls sick. The chief
thing I have to do is to attend at his dinners and suppers and allow him to eat what appears
to me to be fit for him, and keep from him what I think will do him harm and be injurious to
his stomach; and therefore I ordered that plate of fruit to be removed as being too moist,
and that other dish I ordered to be removed as being too hot and containing many spices that
stimulate thirst; for he who drinks much kills and consumes the radical moisture wherein life
consists."

"Well then," said Sancho, "that dish of roast partridges there that seems so savoury will not
do me any harm."

To this the physician replied, "Of those my lord the governor shall not eat so long as I live."

"Why so?" said Sancho.

"In that case," said Sancho, "let senor doctor see among the dishes that are on the table what
will do me most good and least harm, and let me eat it, without tapping it with his stick;
for by the life of the governor, and so may God suffer me to enjoy it, but I'm dying of hunger;
and in spite of the doctor and all he may say, to deny me food is the way to take my life instead
of prolonging it."

"Your worship is right, senor governor," said the physician; "and therefore your worship, I
consider, should not eat of those stewed rabbits there, because it is a furry kind of food;
if that veal were not roasted and served with pickles, you might try it; but it is out of the
question."

"That big dish that is smoking farther off," said Sancho, "seems to me to be an olla podrida,
and out of the diversity of things in such ollas, I can't fail to light upon something tasty
and good for me."

"Absit," said the doctor; "far from us be any such base thought! There is nothing in the world
less nourishing than an olla podrida; to canons, or rectors of colleges, or peasants' weddings
with your ollas podridas, but let us have none of them on the tables of governors, where everything
that is present should be delicate and refined; and the reason is, that always, everywhere
and by everybody, simple medicines are more esteemed than compound ones, for we cannot go wrong
in those that are simple, while in the compound we may, by merely altering the quantity of
the things composing them. But what I am of opinion the governor should cat now in order to
preserve and fortify his health is a hundred or so of wafer cakes and a few thin slices of
conserve of quinces, which will settle his stomach and help his digestion."

Sancho on hearing this threw himself back in his chair and surveyed the doctor steadily, and
in a solemn tone asked him what his name was and where he had studied.

He replied, "My name, senor governor, is Doctor Pedro Recio de Aguero I am a native of a place
called Tirteafuera which lies between Caracuel and Almodovar del Campo, on the right-hand side,
and I have the degree of doctor from the university of Osuna." First,
they considered it a new charm her wicked stepmother, but when they their Hands looked, she
understood what she was doing for her sake.

The whole first night, she kept to her work, because it gave her no rest until they not the
brethren had delivered. All the next day they sat, while the Swans were gone, in her loneliness,
but never the time it was gone so quickly.

One coat was ready and now they began the second.

As could be heard among the mountains, the sound of a hunting horn.

She was anxious, The sound came closer, they heard dogs barking. Startled, she pulled back into
the cave, tied the nettles she had gathered and combed, in a bundle and sat upon it.

Suddenly a large dog jumped from the bushes, soon arrived and after several few minutes there was a
group of hunters at the cave entrance.

The most beautiful of them, the King of the country, talked to Elise, "Where did you come here,
my sweet child?"

Elise shook her head, she could not talk so, for it was her brothers life and salvation. She hid
her hands under her apron, so that the king did not see what they
had to suffer.

"You guide me," he began again, "you must not stay here. Are you as good as you are beautiful,
and I will dress you in silk and velvet, and you like the golden crown on the Main set "She was
crying and wringing her hands, but the King said."

I only want your happiness, once you will thank me for it! "Then he stormed forward from the mountains
round, held it before him on the horse and the hunters followed behind them.

As the sun sank, the magnificent royal city, with its churches and cupolas; and the king took
her to his castle where splashing in high marble halls, large fountains, where walls and ceilings
were decorated with paintings, but she had no eyes for it, she cried and mourned. Will-she
tolerated that the women put on her royal robes, her pearls woven into the hair and soft gloves
over her burned fingers moved.

As she stood in all its glory, it was so blindingly beautiful that
the Court even further bowed before her, and chose the king to his
bride, although the archbishop's head shook and said the fair young
maiden would certainly be a witch.

But the king did not listen fact, the music was sounded and it was through fragrant gardens
into the most magnificent halls ushered. But not a smile flitted over her mouth or radiated from
her eyes.

Now the king opened a little room close by, she was to sleep. It was rich green tapestry, decorated
and completely resembled the cave in which the King had found her. On the floor lay the bundle of
flax, which they from the nettles had spun, and under the ceiling hung the coat of mail, which
had already made them ready. All this had taken one of the hunters as a curiosity.

"Here you can dream yourself back in the old home," said the king.

"This is the Work that employed yourself. Now, in the midst of this splendor, it will entertain
you, elapsed time thinking back. "

As the Elise saw what lay so near her heart, a smile played around her mouth and the blood rushed
to her cheeks, she thought of the salvation of her brother, kissed the King hand, and he pressed her
to his heart and let through all the wedding bells proclaim.

The beautiful dumb girl out of the woods was the queen of the country. The Archbishop even
had to put the crown on her head, and he expressed his displeasure
in their narrow Tires as hard on the forehead that it caused her pain.

Her mouth was closed, but had a single word cost the lives of their brothers, but their Eyes reflected
their close affection for the good, handsome king again, everything that, to please her. Had they
only trust in him, he must tell her sorry! But now she must be dumb, dumb had to complete their
work.

Therefore she crept away at night hidden in her closet, which was decorated like the cave, and
knitted a coat of mail done after the other, and when she started at the seventh she had no
more flax.

How they knew the nettles grew, which they could use alone in the cemetery, but they had to pick
them yourself, how they should manage that?

"I must dare, and God will not withdraw his hand from me," she thought.

With

a trembling heart, as if she had an evil deed before, she sneaked in a moonlit Night in the garden
and went down the long tree paths and quiet roads to the Cemeteries also. There she saw on
one of the broad tombstones a circle ugly Witches. Elise had to close to them over and they fixed
their wicked glances upon her, but she prayed, gathered the burning nettles, and took her with
him to the castle.

Only one man she had seen here, the Archbishop, but was still awake when the everybody was asleep.
It was his opinion but now proven that it stands not with her, as it should be a queen. She was a
witch, and therefore they had the king and all the people infatuated. He told the king what
he had seen and what he feared.

Since the king rolled two heavy tears down her cheeks.

He did the night when whether he was asleep, but there was no sleep to his eyes, he noticed that
Elise got up, as she repeated this every night, and every time he went to her softly and saw
that they disappeared into her room.

Day after day, his face grim. Elise saw it, but did not understand why. But this behavior frightened
them and what they suffered not only in their hearts to their brothers
sake.

On the royal purple velvet, and ran down her bitter tears. Meanwhile their work was now completed
soon, only one shirt was missing, but she had now no More flax and not a single nettle. Once, just
this last time yet, it had therefore The cemetery will go out and pluck a few handfuls.

Elise went, but the king and the archbishop followed her and saw her in the churchyard gate
enter into and disappear. As she approached them, they saw the grave stones the witches, as
they had seen Elise, and the king turned away, because he suspected
the Queen among them.

"The people should condemn it," he said, and the people condemned to the stake.

From the gorgeous regal halls she was dragged into a dark, damp hole, in which The wind whistled
through the grated window, instead of velvet and silk they gave her the bundle of nettles which
she had collected, it could lay their heads.

The hard, burning tank shirts, which she had knitted, should serve her instead of pillows and blankets,
but we could give her nothing better. She picked up her work again, and prayed here fervently to God.

As
raced in the evening close to the grid a swan wings, it was the youngest of the brothers, the
had finally found my sister. Aloud she sobbed for joy, although she knew that the coming night
was perhaps the last that she had to live.

But now it was their Work so well was almost completed and her brothers were here.

The little mice ran about the floor, dragged the nettles to her feet, that she might help a little,
and the thrush sat outside the grating of the window and sang it was funny, so Elise should not
lose heart.

It began to dawn on straight, should only rise in one hour, the sun,
as were the to eleven brothers before the portals of the palace and
demanded to be brought before the king.

The could not happen, but they got the answer, it would still night, the king was asleep and
should not be awakened. They begged, they threatened, the guard appeared, and even the King stepped
out of his bedroom and asked what would this mean, but at the moment
the sun rose bright up and now was not a brother to see more, but
about the Castle flew eleven wild swans.

On a bad cart was the poor Queen led to the place, she wore an ugly, gray dress, her long hair
floated loose on her beautiful head, her cheeks were pale, her lips moved silently, while her fingers
wove the flax. Even on her death, she broke through the work begun not lay ten coats of mail
to their Feet at the eleventh, she was knitting.

"Look at the witch," cried the people, "with her ugly sorcery they are sitting down. Tears it
in a thousand pieces! "

  All crowded in upon her and wanted to rip her.

Then came eleven white swans flew The sat around on the cart and flapped their great wings.
As more the pile to the side frightened.

"This is a sign from heaven! She is certainly innocent, "whispered many, dared but not out loud.

Then
she grabbed the constable's hand, as they hastily threw the eleven shirts over the swans and suddenly
became eleven handsome prince, but instead of the youngest had an
arm a swan's wing, because the coat was missing a sleeve, which she
had not yet completed.

"Now I may speak," she exclaimed, "I am innocent!"

"Yes, she is innocent," said the eldest brother and then told all that had happened, and as he
spoke, the air a fragrance as thousands of roses, for each piece Wood of the stake had taken
root, and branches carried. There stood a fragrant Hedge, large and high, with red roses, to
all but the uppermost rocked a flower, white and bright, which shone like a star. This broke
the king, put them in the chest Elisen and now she awoke with peace
and happiness in her heart.

All the church bells rang of themselves and the birds came in great
shoals, it was a Wedding procession back to the castle, as he had
never seen a king.

The happy family.

[Figure / Illustration: capD61.jpg]

The greatest of all leaves is probably the clover leaf, a child can it as an apron or use an
umbrella, but it eats a snail prefers, it is their favorite food. Therefore, we had close to
a precious seat sown burdock, because the worm turn a Favorite food of the gentlemen were
on the EDELHOF. But these had died, the castle had fallen, the wild garden, with only the velcro
on overgrown, they formed a dense Burdock forest and lived in this
the last two surviving snails.

How old they were, they did not know yet, could still remember quite well, that their had been
a lot more that of an immigrant family from other countries descended, and that for them and
theirs the whole forest was planted.

They were about the same never got, however it was not unknown to them, something that was one of
the world, what was said manor. Up there it was cooked, of which one was black, and then you
on a silver dish set, but then what happened next, they did not know. What to mean by the way,
would have to be boiled and placed on a silver dish, were you imagine
not only told them a dark feeling that something wonderful and would
be very noble.

The old white snails were the finest in the world as they knew very well, with only sake of
the forest was, and the estate was there, so they cooked and silver Bowls could be laid.

They were living very lonely and happy and that they themselves were without children, had they
adopted a little common snail of a child.

The little one would not, however, To grow because it was too low descent. But the ancients,
especially the Mother Snail, thought too, can realize an increase, and the latter asked the father,
he wants only the small snail , And feel that he did and found that
the mother was right. -

"Just listen, as is now lapping at the burrs,"
said on a rainy day, the worm father.

"I'm just glad we have good houses, and the little one has his own. For us provided, however,
is better than all other creatures, from which you see, that we the
Domination in the world belongs to!

From birth we have a house and the burdock forest is been planted for our sakes! "-" I just
want to know what lies beyond it "! said Mother Snail.

"Outside is nothing! The lock may have collapsed, "said Father Snail," or the burdock forest
is grown over it so that people can not remove! "

"Have you ever thought about where we could come a bitter wife for
our little ones?" said Mother Snail.

"Do not you think that far, far into the forest climbing into it anyone should find our way? "

"Black snails, I think, will probably be numerous," said the old man, "black Snails without
a house, but belong despite their conceit to the common people. We could, however, instruct the ants
so that they run as if they had to do something regularly to and fro! they certainly know
a woman for our snails "

"I certainly know the most beautiful," said an ant, "but I fear it
will not do because it is a queen!

"-"

  That does nothing, "said the old man.

"Has she a house?" - "She has a palace," said the ant. "The most beautiful castle ants with seven
hundred passages. "-" No, thank you, "said the mother," our son is! not in an ant-hill Do
you know anything better, we will look at the white gnats contact, they fly far around in rain
and sunshine, and know the burdock wood from the inside and from
the outside! "

"We have a wife for him," said the gnats. "Sits hundred
human paces from here on a gooseberry bush a little snail with a house.
"-" Well, they let him ! Come, "said the old man," he has a Velcro
forest, it has only a bush! "

Since they brought the little worm
lady. It took eight days, but that was just the Excellent it; so they
proved that real blood worm rolled in it.

Then marriage was celebrated.
Six fireflies to glow, as well as they could, otherwise was the ceremony
in silence, as the old screws were swarming and amusements not suffer.
In contrast to the worm mother a beautiful speech was delivered, the
father was not able to, he was moved, and then she gave the whole
burdock forest as inheritance and repeated what they had always said
that it would be best in the world, if they and their children once
the the castle, cooked black and silver on a Bowl would be placed.

After
the close of the speech the old man crept into their houses, and came
out again, they slept. The young snail pair reigned in the forest
and received a numerous progeny, never but they were cooked, and it
never arrived on a silver dish, which is why they thought that the
castle had collapsed and all people would be extinct in the world,
and since they no disagreed, it was of course true. The rain fell
upon the burdock leaves, so that they deceive a drum music, and the
sun shone to the Velcro on her account in a forest Light sea diving
and they were very happy and the whole family was happy, and it was
really it.

The angel.

[Pictures / Illustrations: capB63.jpg, pic64.jpg]

For
every good child, if it dies, rises an angel of God down to earth,
takes the dead child in his arms, spreads out his great white wings,
flying over all sites had toward them that love the child had, and
picks a handful of flowers he to God brings up so they bloom more
brightly than on earth. A thousand thoughts at once suggested
themselves to him on the subject of this new adventure, and it struck him as being ill done
and worse advised in him to expose himself to the danger of breaking his plighted faith to
his lady; and said he to himself, "Who knows but that the devil, being wily and cunning, may
be trying now to entrap me with a duenna, having failed with empresses, queens, duchesses,
marchionesses, and countesses? Many a time have I heard it said by many a man of sense that
he will sooner offer you a flat-nosed wench than a roman-nosed one; and who knows but this
privacy, this opportunity, this silence, may awaken my sleeping desires, and lead me in these
my latter years to fall where I have never tripped? In cases of this sort it is better to flee
than to await the battle. But I must be out of my senses to think and utter such nonsense;
for it is impossible that a long, white-hooded spectacled duenna could stir up or excite a
wanton thought in the most graceless bosom in the world. Is there a duenna on earth that has
fair flesh? Is there a duenna in the world that escapes being ill-tempered, wrinkled, and prudish?
Avaunt, then, ye duenna crew, undelightful to all mankind. Oh, but that lady did well who,
they say, had at the end of her reception room a couple of figures of duennas with spectacles
and lace-cushions, as if at work, and those statues served quite as well to give an air of
propriety to the room as if they had been real duennas."

So saying he leaped off the bed, intending to close the door and not allow Senora Rodriguez
to enter; but as he went to shut it Senora Rodriguez returned with a wax candle lighted, and
having a closer view of Don Quixote, with the coverlet round him, and his bandages and night-cap,
she was alarmed afresh, and retreating a couple of paces, exclaimed, "Am I safe, sir knight?
for I don't look upon it as a sign of very great virtue that your worship should have got up
out of bed."

"I may well ask the same, senora," said Don Quixote; "and I do ask whether I shall be safe
from being assailed and forced?"

"Of whom and against whom do you demand that security, sir knight?" said the duenna.

"Of you and against you I ask it," said Don Quixote; "for I am not marble, nor are you brass,
nor is it now ten o'clock in the morning, but midnight, or a trifle past it I fancy, and we
are in a room more secluded and retired than the cave could have been where the treacherous
and daring AEneas enjoyed the fair soft-hearted Dido. But give me your hand, senora; I require
no better protection than my own continence, and my own sense of propriety; as well as that
which is inspired by that venerable head-dress;" and so saying he kissed her right hand and
took it in his own, she yielding it to him with equal ceremoniousness. And here Cide Hamete
inserts a parenthesis in which he says that to have seen the pair marching from the door to
the bed, linked hand in hand in this way, he would have given the best of the two tunics he had.

Don Quixote finally got into bed, and Dona Rodriguez took her seat on a chair at some little
distance from his couch, without taking off her spectacles or putting aside the candle. Don
Quixote wrapped the bedclothes round him and covered himself up completely, leaving nothing
but his face visible, and as soon as they had both regained their composure he broke silence,
saying, "Now, Senora Dona Rodriguez, you may unbosom yourself and out with everything you have
in your sorrowful heart and afflicted bowels; and by me you shall be listened to with chaste
ears, and aided by compassionate exertions."

"I believe it," replied the duenna; "from your worship's gentle and winning presence only such
a Christian answer could be expected. The fact is, then, Senor Don Quixote, that though you
see me seated in this chair, here in the middle of the kingdom of Aragon, and in the attire
of a despised outcast duenna, I am from the Asturias of Oviedo, and of a family with which
many of the best of the province are connected by blood; but my untoward fate and the improvidence
of my parents, who, I know not how, were unseasonably reduced to poverty, brought me to the
court of Madrid, where as a provision and to avoid greater misfortunes, my parents placed me
as seamstress in the service of a lady of quality, and I would have you know that for hemming
and sewing I have never been surpassed by any all my life. My parents left me in service and
returned to their own country, and a few years later went, no doubt, to heaven, for they were
excellent good Catholic Christians. I was left an orphan with nothing but the miserable wages
and trifling presents that are given to servants of my sort in palaces; but about this time,
without any encouragement on my part, one of the esquires of the household fell in love with
me, a man somewhat advanced in years, full-bearded and personable, and above all as good a
gentleman as the king himself, for he came of a mountain stock. We did not carry on our loves
with such secrecy but that they came to the knowledge of my lady, and she, not to have any
fuss about it, had us married with the full sanction of the holy mother Roman Catholic Church,
of which marriage a daughter was born to put an end to my good fortune, if I had any; not that
I died in childbirth, for I passed through it safely and in due season, but because shortly
afterwards my husband died of a certain shock he received, and had I time to tell you of it
I know your worship would be surprised;" and here she began to weep bitterly and said, "Pardon
me, Senor Don Quixote, if I am unable to control myself, for every time I think of my unfortunate
husband my eyes fill up with tears. God bless me, with what an air of dignity he used to carry
my lady behind him on a stout mule as black as jet! for in those days they did not use coaches
or chairs, as they say they do now, and ladies rode behind their squires. This much at least
I cannot help telling you, that you may observe the good breeding and punctiliousness of my
worthy husband. As he was turning into the Calle de Santiago in Madrid, which is rather narrow,
one of the alcaldes of the Court, with two alguacils before him, was coming out of it, and
as soon as my good squire saw him he wheeled his mule about and made as if he would turn and
accompany him. My lady, who was riding behind him, said to him in a low voice, 'What are you
about, you sneak, don't you see that I am here?' The alcalde like a polite man pulled up his
horse and said to him, 'Proceed, senor, for it is I, rather, who ought to accompany my lady
Dona Casilda'--for that was my mistress's name. Still my husband, cap in hand, persisted in
trying to accompany the alcalde, and seeing this my lady, filled with rage and vexation, pulled
out a big pin, or, I rather think, a bodkin, out of her needle-case and drove it into his back
with such force that my husband gave a loud yell, and writhing fell to the ground with his
lady. Her two lacqueys ran to rise her up, and the alcalde and the alguacils did the same;
the Guadalajara gate was all in commotion--I mean the idlers congregated there; my mistress
came back on foot, and my husband hurried away to a barber's shop protesting that he was run
right through the guts. The courtesy of my husband was noised abroad to such an extent, that
the boys gave him no peace in the street; and on this account, and because he was somewhat
shortsighted, my lady dismissed him; and it was chagrin at this I am convinced beyond a doubt
that brought on his death. I was left a helpless widow, with a daughter on my hands growing
up in beauty like the sea-foam; at length, however, as I had the character of being an excellent
needlewoman, my lady the duchess, then lately married to my lord the duke, offered to take
me with her to this kingdom of Aragon, and my daughter also, and here as time went by my daughter
grew up and with her all the graces in the world; she sings like a lark, dances quick as thought,
foots it like a gipsy, reads and writes like a schoolmaster, and does sums like a miser; of
her neatness I say nothing, for the running water is not purer, and her age is now, if my memory
serves me, sixteen years five months and three days, one more or less. To come to the point,
the son of a very rich farmer, living in a village of my lord the duke's not very far from
here, fell in love with this girl of mine; and in short, how I know not, they came together,
and under the promise of marrying her he made a fool of my daughter, and will not keep his
word. And though my lord the duke is aware of it (for I have complained to him, not once but
many and many a time, and entreated him to order the farmer to marry my daughter), he turns
a deaf ear and will scarcely listen to me; the reason being that as the deceiver's father is
so rich, and lends him money, and is constantly going security for his debts, he does not like
to offend or annoy him in any way. Now, senor, I want your worship to take it upon yourself
to redress this wrong either by entreaty or by arms; for by what all the world says you came
into it to redress grievances and right wrongs and help the unfortunate. Let your worship put
before you the unprotected condition of my daughter, her youth, and all the perfections I have
said she possesses; and before God and on my conscience, out of all the damsels my lady has,
there is not one that comes up to the sole of her shoe, and the one they call Altisidora, and
look upon as the boldest and gayest of them, put in comparison with my daughter, does not come
within two leagues of her. For I would have you know, senor, all is not gold that glitters,
and that same little Altisidora has more forwardness than good looks, and more impudence than
modesty; besides being not very sound, for she has such a disagreeable breath that one cannot
bear to be near her for a moment; and even my lady the duchess--but I'll hold my tongue, for
they say that walls have ears."

"For heaven's sake, Dona Rodriguez, what ails my lady the duchess?" asked Don Quixote.

"Adjured in that way," replied the duenna, "I cannot help answering the question and telling
the whole truth. Senor Don Quixote, have you observed the comeliness of my lady the duchess,
that smooth complexion of hers like a burnished polished sword, those two cheeks of milk and
carmine, that gay lively step with which she treads or rather seems to spurn the earth, so
that one would fancy she went radiating health wherever she passed? 

When they had now gone to bed, she lay for a long time and thought how nice it would surely be to
see the beautiful flowers dancing out in the palace of the king. "Whether my flowers are probably
really been present? "Then she fell asleep, however.

"Blessed Virgin!" exclaimed Don Quixote; "and is it possible that my lady the duchess has drains
of that sort? I would not have believed it if the barefoot friars had told it me; but as the
lady Dona Rodriguez says so, it must be so. But surely such issues, and in such places, do
not discharge humours, but liquid amber. Verily, I do believe now that this practice of opening
issues is a very important matter for the health." 

"The Romans and Greeks," said the old man, "called her a Dryad, but understand we do not. Outside,
the new facilities we have a better name for it, there it is "Nanny". From her I will tell you
now. Suddenly the poor duenna felt two hands
seize her by the throat, so tightly that she could not croak, while some one else, without
uttering a word, very briskly hoisted up her petticoats, and with what seemed to be a slipper
began to lay on so heartily that anyone would have felt pity for her; but although Don Quixote
felt it he never stirred from his bed, but lay quiet and silent, nay apprehensive that his
turn for a drubbing might be coming. Then she
swam with the ugly son to the leaf out where Däumelieschen stood. The old Toad bowed to her
deep into the water and said: "This vice I think you Son before that is to be your man.
 Suddenly the
horse jumped to one side, the carriage stopped and the person who drove him, got up; Fur coat and
cap were of pure snow. There was a lady, tall and slender, dazzling white, It was the Snow
Queen.

"We came bravely forward," she said. "But that is about weather to cold? Come on, crawl into
my warm fur, "and she put him in the carriage of their Side and wrapped
the fur round him, that he felt as he versänke in a snowdrift.

