Mignonette, I have observed, is a special passion with the French exile, recalling, doubtless,
the narrow boxes, fitted to the stone window-sill of certain former lofty lodgings across the
sea, perhaps, situated in the heart of some great city, and overlooking roofs and court-yards--the
street being quite out of the question in such a view, distant, as it seems, from them, as
the sky itself, though in an opposite direction.

I have used the word "exile" advisedly with regard to Madame Grambeau, and not figuratively
at all. She was, I had been told, a bourgeoise, of good class, who had taken part in the early
revolution, but who, when the canaille triumphed and drenched the land in blood, in the second
phase of that fearful outburst of volcanic feeling, had fled before the whirlwind with her
child and husband to embark for America. At the point of embarcation--like Evangeline--the
husband and wife had been separated accidentally, and on her arrival in a strange land she
found herself alone and penniless with her son, scarce six years old. Her husband had been
carried to a Southern port, she learned by the merest chance, and, disguising herself in man's
attire, and leading her little son by the hand, she set forth in quest of him, carrying with
her a violin, which, together with the clothes she wore, had been found in the trunk of Monsieur
Grambeau, brought on the vessel in which she came, but which depository she had been obliged
to abandon, when setting forth on her pilgrimage.

She was no unskillful performer on this instrument, and solely by such aid she gained her food
and lodging to the interior of Georgia. Reaching her destination after a long and painful journey
and delays of many kinds, she found her husband living in a log-hut, on the border of Talupa
River, a hut which he had built himself, and earning his bread by ferrying travellers across
that stream.

Yet here, with the characteristic contentment of her people under all circumstances, she settled
down quietly to aid him and make his home happy; bore him many children (most of whom were
dead at the time I saw her, as those living were separated from her at that period), reared
and educated them herself, toiled for and with them, late and early, strained every nerve in
the arduous cause of duty, and found herself, in extreme old age, widowed and alone, having
amassed but little of the world's lucre, yet cheerful and energetic even if dependent still
on her own exertions.

All this and much more I had heard before I saw Madame Grambeau or her abode--a picturesque
affair in itself, however humble--consisting originally of a log-house, to which more recently
white frame wings had been attached, projecting a few feet in front of the primitive building,
and connected thereto by a shed-roofed gallery, which embraced the whole front of the log-cottage,
along which ran puncheon steps the entire length of the grand original tree-trunk, as of the
porch itself. It was a triumph of rural art.

Over this portico, so low in front as barely to admit the passage of a tall man beneath its
eaves, without stooping, a wild multiflora rose, then in full flower, was artistically trained
so as to present a series of arches to the eye as the wayfarer approached the dwelling; no
tapestry was ever half so lovely.

The path which led from the little white gate, with its swinging chain and ball, was covered
with river-pebbles and shells, and bordered by box, trimly clipped and kept low, and the two
broad steps, that led to the porch, bore evidence of recent scouring, though rough and unpainted.

Framed in one of those pointed natural cathedral-windows of vivid green, gemmed with red roses,
of which the division-posts of the porch formed the white outlines, stood the most remarkable-looking
aged woman I have ever seen. At a first glance, indeed, the question of sex would have arisen,
and been found difficult to decide. Her attire seemed that of a friar, even to the small scalloped
cape that scantily covered her shoulders, and the coarse black serge, of which her strait gown
was composed, leaving exposed her neatly though coarsely clad feet, with their snow-white home-knit
stockings, and low-quartered, well-polished calf-skin shoes, confined with steel buckles, and
elevated on heels, then worn by men alone.

She wore a white habit shirt, the collar, bosom, and wristbands of which were visible; but
no cap covered her silver hair, which was cropped in the neck, and divided at one side in true
manly fashion. It was brushed well back from her expansive, fair, and unwrinkled forehead,
beneath which large blue eyes looked out with that strange solemnity we see alone in the orbs
of young, thoughtful children, or the very old.

Scott's description of the "Monk of Melrose Abbey" occurred to me, as I gazed on this calm
and striking figure!

  "And strangely on the knight looked he,
  And his blue eyes gleamed wild and wide."

She stood watching our approach, leaning with both hands on her ebony, silver-headed cane,
above which she stooped slightly, her aged and somewhat severe, but serene face fully turned
toward us, in the clear light of morning, with a grave majesty of aspect.

Above her head in its wicker cage swung the gray and crimson parrot, of which Sylphy had spoken,
and to which, it may be remembered, she had so irreverently likened her master on one occasion;
bursting forth, as it saw us coming, into a shrill, stereotyped phrase of welcome--"Bien venu,
compatriote," that was irresistibly ludicrous and irrelevant.

"Tremble, France! we come--we come," said Major Favraud; "there's your quotation well applied
this time, Miss Harz! It is impressive, after all."

"Hush! she will hear you," I remonstrated, quite awed in that still, majestic presence, for
now we stood before our aged hostess, who, with a cold but stately politeness after Major Favraud's
salutation and introduction, waved us in and across her threshold. As for Major Favraud, he
had turned to leave us on the door-sill, to see to the comfort and safety of his horses; not
liking, perhaps, the appearance of the superannuated ostler, who lounged near the stable of
the inn, if such might be called this rustic retreat without sign, lodging, or bar-rooms.

"Are we in the mansion of a decayed queen, or the log-hut of a wayside innkeeper?" I questioned
low of Marion.

"Both in one, it seems to me," was the reply. "But Madame Grambeau is no curiosity, no novelty
to me, I have stopped here so frequently. I ought to have told you, before we came, not to
be surprised."

Pausing at the door of a large, square room, from which voices proceeded, she invited us with
a singularly graceful though formal courtesy to enter, smiling and pointing forward silently
as she did so, and then, like Major Favraud, she turned and abandoned us at the door-sill,
on which we stood riveted for a moment by the sound of a vibrant and eager voice speaking some
never-to-be-forgotten words.

"For the slave is the coral-insect of the South," said the voice within; "insignificant in
himself, he rears a giant structure--which will yet cause the wreck of the ship of state, should
its keel grate too closely on that adamantine wall. 'L'état c'est moi,' said Louis XIV., and
that 'slavery is the South' is as true an utterance. Our staple--our patriarchal institution--our
prosperity--are one and indissoluble, and the sooner the issue comes the better for the nation!"

Standing with his hand on the back of a chair near the casement-window of the large, low apartment,
in close conversation with two other gentlemen, was the speaker of these remarkable words,
which embraced the whole genius and policy of the South as it then existed, and which were
delivered in those clear and perfectly modulated tones that bespeak the practised orator and
the man of dominant energies.

I felt instinctively that I stood in the presence of one of the anointed princes of the earth--felt
it, and was thrilled.

"Do you know that gentleman, Marion?" I whispered, as we seated ourselves on the old-fashioned
settle, or rather sofa, in one corner of the room, gazing admiringly, as I spoke, on the tall,
slight figure, with its air of power and poise, that stood at some distance, with averted face.

"No, I have no idea who it is, or who are his companions either," she replied; "unless"--hesitating
with scrutiny in her eyes--

"His companions, I do not care to question of them!--but that man himself--the speaker--has
a sovereign presence! Can it be possible--"

The entrance of Major Favraud interrupted further conjecture, for at the sound of those emphatic
boots the stranger turned, and for one moment the splendor of his large dark eyes, in their
iron framing, met my own, then passed recognizingly on to rest on the face of Major Favraud,
and advancing with extended hands, made more cordial by his voice and smile, he greeted him
familiarly as "Victor."

Major Favraud stood for a moment spell-bound--then suddenly rushing forward, flung his hat
to the floor, caught the hand of the stranger between his own and pressed it to his heart.
(To his lips, I think, he would fain have lifted it, falling on one knee, perchance, at the
same time in a knightly fashion of hero-worship that modern reticence forbids.) But he contented
himself with exclaiming:

"Mr. Calhoun! best of friends, welcome back to Georgia!" And tears started to his eyes and
choked his utterance. Thus was my conjecture confirmed. I never felt so thrilled, so elated,
by any presence.

There was a momentary pause after this fervent greeting, emotional on one part only.

"But why did you not meet me at Milledgeville?" asked Mr. Calhoun. "Most of my friends in this
vicinity sustained me there. I have been discussing the great question[2] again, Favraud, and
I should have been glad of your countenance."

"I have been detained at home of late by a cruel necessity," was the faltering reply, "or I
should never have played recreant to my old master."

"Good fortune spoiled me a fine lawyer in your case, Victor! But introduce me to your wife.
Remember, I have never had the pleasure of meeting Madame Favraud," advancing, as he spoke,
toward me, with his hand on Major Favraud's shoulder (above whom he towered by a head), courteously
and impulsively.

"Miss Harz, Miss La Vigne, Miss Durand--Mr. Calhoun," said Major Favraud, pale as death now,
and trembling as he spoke. "These ladies are friends of mine--one, a distant relative"--he
hesitated--"within the last six weeks I have had the misfortune to lose my wife, Mr. Calhoun.
You understand matters better now."

All conversation was cut short by this sudden announcement. Deeply shocked, Mr. Calhoun led
Major Favraud aside, with a brief apology to me for his misapprehension, and they stood together,
talking low, at the extreme end of the apartment, affording me thus an admirable opportunity
for observing the personnel of the great Southern leader, during the brief space of time accorded
by the change of stage-horses. For, with his friends, he was then en route for another appointment.
He was canvassing the State, with a view to a final rally of its resources, preparatory to
his last great effort--to scotch the serpent of the North, which finally, however, wound its
insidious folds around the heart of brotherly affection, stifling it, as the snakes of fable
were sent to do the baby Hercules.

No picture of Mr. Calhoun has ever done him justice,[3] although his was a physiognomy that
an artist could scarcely fail to make an extern likeness of, from its remarkable characteristics.
It was truly an iron-bound face, condensed, powerful in every nerve, muscle, and lineament,
and fraught, beyond almost all others, with intellect and resolution. But the glory and power
of that glance and smile no painter could convey--those attributes of man which more fully
than aught else betray the immortal soul!

Just as I beheld him that day, bending above Major Favraud in his tender, half-paternal dignity
and solicitude combined, soothing and condoling with him (I could not doubt, from the expression
of his speaking countenance), I see him still in mental vision; nor can I wonder more at the
depth and strength of enthusiasm he awakened in the hearts of his friends.

It belongs not to every great man to excite this devotion, yet, where it blends with greatness,
it is irresistible. Mohammed, Cyrus, Alexander, Darius, Pericles, Napoleon, were thus magnetically
gifted. I recall few instances of others so distinguished in station who possessed this power,
which has its root, perhaps, after all, in the great master-passion of mortality, the yearning
for exalted sympathy, so seldom accorded.

This observation of mine was but a glimpse at best, for the winding of the stage-horn was the
signal for Mr. Calhoun's departure, and I never saw him more. But that glimpse alone opened
to my eyes a mighty volume!

A few days before I should have rejected as wearisome the details to which I listened with
eagerness now, and which I even sought to elicit as to Mr. Calhoun--his mode of life, his mountain-home,
and his passion, for those heights he inhabited, and which, no doubt, contributed to train
his character to energy and strengthen his physique to endure its brain-burden, I heard with
pleasure the account of one who had passed much of his youth beneath his roof, and who, however
enthusiastic, was, in the very framing of his nature, strictly truthful with regard to the
mutual devotion of the master and slaves, the invariable courtesy and sweetness of his deportment
to his own family, his justice and regard for the feelings of his lowest dependant, his simplicity,
his cheerfulness.

"A grave and even gloomy man in public life, he is all life and interest in the social circle,"
said Major Favraud. "His range of thought is the grandest and most unlimited, his powers of
conversation are the rarest I have ever met with. Yet he never refused, on any occasion, to
answer with minuteness the inquiries of the smallest child or most insignificant dependant.
'Had he not been Alexander, he must have been Parmenio.' Had fortune not struck out for him
the path of a statesman, he would have made the most impressive and perfect of teachers. As
it was, without the slightest approach to pedagogism, he involuntarily instructed all who came
near him, without effort or weariness on either side."

"Does he love music--poetry?" I asked.

"Oh, yes; Scottish songs and classic verse, especially, are his delights. He has no affectation.
His tastes are all his own--his opinions all genuine. He is, indeed, a man of very varied attainment,
as well as great grasp of intellect. Yet, as you see, he likes his opposites sometimes, Miss
Harz," and he laid his hand proudly on his own manly breast.

Talking thus in that large, low, scantily-furnished parlor, with its split-bottomed chairs,
in primitive frames (and in somewhat strange contrast to its well-polished mahogany tables,
dark with time, and walls adorned with good engravings), with its floor freshly scoured and
sanded, while a simple deal stand in the centre bore a vase filled with the rarest and most
exquisite wild-flowers I had ever seen (from the gorgeous amaryllis and hibiscus of these regions,
down to wax-like blossoms of fragile delicacy and beauty, whose very names I knew not), and
its many small diamond-paned casement-windows, all neatly curtained with coarse white muslin
bordered with blue, time passed unconsciously until the noonday meal was announced.

We followed the Mercury of the establishment, a grave-looking little yellow boy, who seemed
to have grown prematurely old, from his constant companionship, probably, with his preceptor
and mistress, into a long, low apartment in the rear of the dwelling, where a table was spread
for our party, with a damask cloth and napkins, decorated china and cut-glass, that proved
Madame Grambeau's personal superintendence; and which elicited from Major Favraud, as he entered,
a long, low whistle of approval and surprise, and the exclamation "Heh! madame! you are overwhelming
us to-day with your magnificence."

I was amused with the response. "Sit down, Victor Favraud, and eat your dinner Christian-like,
without remarks! You have never got over the spoiling you, received when you lay wounded under
this roof. I shall indulge you no longer." Shaking her long forefinger at him. "Your familiarity
needs to be checked." Her manner of grave and kindly irony removed all impression of rebuke
from this speech, which Major Favraud received very coolly, spoiled child that he really was,
rubbing his hands as he took the foot of the table. At the sight of the bouilli before him,
from which a savory steam ascended to his epicurean nostrils, he said, notwithstanding: "Soup
and bouilli too! Ah, madame, I see why you absented yourself so cruelly this morning. You have
been engaged in good works!"

"Only the sauces, Favraud!--seulement les sauces."

"The sauces--it's just that!--Ude is a mere charlatan in comparison," turning to me. "Miss
Harz, you never tasted any thing before like madame's soup and sauces. I wish she would take
me in partnership for a while, if only to teach me the recipes that will otherwise die with
her. What a restaurant we two could keep together!"

"You are too unsteady, Favraud, for my maître d'hôtel. Your mind is too much engrossed by the
bubbles of politics, you would spoil all my materials, and realize the old proverb that 'the
devil sends cooks.' But go to work like a good fellow, and carve the dish before you; by that
time the soup will be removed. I have a fine fish, however, in reserve (let me announce this
at once), for my end of the table."

"Here are croquets too, as I live," said Duganne, lifting a cover before him and peeping in,
then returning it quietly to its place. "Are you a fairy, madame?"

"Much more like a witch," she said, with gayety. "You young men, at least, think every old,
toothless gray-haired crone like me ready for the stake, you know."

"Not when they make such steaks," said Dr. Durand, attacking the dish, with its savory surroundings,
before him.

"Ah! you make calembourgs, my good doctor.--What do you call them, Favraud? It is one of the
few English words I do not know--or forget. I believe, to make them, however, is a medical
peculiarity."

"Puns, madame, puns, not pills. Don't forget it now. It is time you were beginning to master
our language. You know you are almost grown up!" and Favraud looked at her saucily.

"A language which madame speaks more perfectly than any foreigner I have ever known," I remarked.
She bowed in answer, well pleased.

In truth, the accent of Madame Grambeau was barely detectable, and her phraseology was that
of a well-translated book--correct, but not idiomatic, and bearing about it the idiosyncrasy
of the language from which it was derived. She was evidently a person of culture and native
power of intellect combined, and her finely-moulded face, as well as every gesture and tone,
indicated superiority and character.

In that lonely wild, and beneath that lowly roof, there abode a spirit able and worthy to lead
the coteries of the great, and to preside over the councils of statesmen, and (to rise in climax)
the drawing-room of the grande monde. But it was her whim rather than her necessity to tarry
where she could alone be strictly independent, a sine qua non of her being.

The son she had led by the hand from Hew York to Georgia, and who, standing by her side, distinctly
remembered to have seen the head of the Princess Lamballe borne on a pole through the streets
of Paris, was now a prominent member of the Legislature, and, through his rich wife, the incumbent
of a great plantation.

But the teachings of Jean-Jacques Rousseau, that philosophic sign-post, still influenced his
mother, in her refusal to live under his splendid roof, and partake of his bounty, however
liberally offered.

"I have a home of my own," she said, "a few faithful servants, brains, and energy still, besides
a small account with General Curzon, in his bank at Savannah, wherewith to meet emergencies;
while these things last, I will owe to no man or woman for bread or shelter. And, when these
depart, may the grave cover my bones, and the good God receive my soul!"

Books alone she accepted as gifts from her son, and of these, in a little three-cornered library,
she had a goodly store in the two languages which she read with equal facility, if not delight.

She showed us this nook before we left, and I saw, lying face downward, as she had recently
left it, the volume she was then perusing at intervals--one of Madame Sand's novels, "Les Mauprats,"
I remember, a singular and powerful romance, then recently issued, whose root I have always
thought might be found in Walter Scott's "Rob Roy," and more particularly in the Osbaldistone
family commemorated in that work.

On suggesting this to Madame Grambeau, she too saw the resemblance I spoke of, and she agreed,
with me, that the coincidence of genius furnished many such parallels, where no charge of plagiarism
could be attached to either side.

A few bottles of "wild-berry wine," as Elizabeth Barrett called such fluids, were added to
the dinner toward its close, and Marion begged permission to have her basket of cakes and fruits
brought in for dessert, which else had been wanting to our repast; to which request Madame
Grambeau graciously acceded.

"I make no confections," she said, "but I have lived on the juices of good meats, well prepared,
with such vegetables as the Lord lets grow in this poor region, many years, and behold I am
old and still able to do his service!"

"And a little good wine, too, occasionally--eh, madame?" added Major Favraud, impertinently.

"When attainable, Favraud. You drank good wine yourself, when you were here, and I partook
with you moderately. But I buy none such. I drown not, Clarence-like, even in butts of malmsey,
my hard-earned gold; and I own I am not fond of the juices of the muscadine of your hills;"
and she tapped her snuffbox.

"You are going to hear her talk now," whispered Favraud; "that is a sign--equal to General
Finistere's--the snuffbox tapping, I mean. The oracle is beginning to arouse! Come I let me
stir her further!" and he inclined his head before her.

"I'll tell you what, madame, you must take a little cognac to keep off the chills of age. I
have some of the best, and will send you down a demijohn, if you say the word; and in return
you shall pray for me. I am a great sinner, Miss Harz thinks."

"Miss Harz is correct; and we will both promise you our prayers. She, too, is Catholic, I hope.
No? I regret so, for her own sake; but your brandy I reject, Victor; remember that, and offend
me not by sending it. You must not forget the fate of your malvoisie."

"Ah, madame, that was cruel! but I have forgiven you long since. I think, however, that the
grape-vines bore better that year than ever before--thus watered, or wined, I mean.--Just think
of it, Miss Harz! To pour good wine round the roots of a Fontainebleau grape, rather than replenish
the springs of life with it! Was there ever waste like that since Cleopatra dissolved her pearl
in vinegar?"

"Miss Harz will agree with me that a principle that could not resist the gift of a dozen bottles
of choice wine was little worth. Of such stuff was made not the fathers of your Revolution.
But stay, there is an explanation due to me, yet unrendered," she pursued, "I am a puzzled
bourgeoise, I confess," she said, shaking her head. "Come, Favraud, explain. Who is this young
lady?"

"A bourgeoise also," I replied for him, anxious to turn the tide of conversation into another
channel for some reasons. "I had thought you an expatriated marquise, at least, madame!" I
continued. "As for me, I am simply a governess."

"It is my glory, mademoiselle, to have been of that class to which belonged Madame Roland herself,
and which represented that juste milieu which maintained the balance of society in France.
When the dregs of the bas peuple rose to the surface of the revolution, commenced by the sound
middle classes, we regarded the scum of aristocracy as the smaller of the two evils. As soon
as the true element had ceased to assert itself in France, I fled forever from a land of bloodshed
and misrule, and took shelter under the broad wing of your boasted American eagle."

"Which still continues to flap over you shelteringly, madame," I rejoined, somewhat flippantly,
I fear, "and will to the end, no doubt; for, in its very organization, our country can never
be subjected to the fluctuations of other lands--revolt and revolution."

"I am not so certain of this," she observed, shaking her white head slowly as she spoke, and,
lifting a pinch of snuff from her tortoise-shell box (the companion of her whole married life,
as she acquainted us), she inhaled it with an air of meditative self-complacency, then offered
it quietly to the gentlemen, who were still sitting over their wine and peaches; passing by
Marion, Alice Durand, and myself, completely, in this ovation.

"Good snuff is not to be sneezed at," said Major Favraud. "None offered to young ladies, it
seems," taking a huge pinch, and thrusting it bravely up his nostrils, as one takes a spoonful
of unpleasant medicine. Then contradicting his own assertion immediately afterward, he succeeded
in expelling most of it in a series of violent sternutatory spasms, which left him breathless,
red-faced, and watery-eyed, with a handkerchief much begrimed.

But Madame Grambeau seemed not to have noticed this ridiculous proceeding, which, of course,
created momentary mirth at the expense of the penitent Favraud, to whom Dr. Durand repeated
the tantalizing saying, that "it is a royal privilege to take snuff gracefully"--giving the
example as he spoke, in a mock-heroic manner, quite as absurd and irrelevant as Favraud's own.

Lost in deep thought, and gently tapping her snuffbox as she mused--the tripod of her inspiration,
as it seemed--Madame Grambeau sat silently, with what memories of the past and what insight
into the future none can know save those like herself grown hoary with wisdom and experience.

At last she spoke, addressing her remarks to me, as though the careless words I had hazarded
had just been spoken, and the attention of her hearers undiverted by divers absurdities--among
others the affected gambols of Duganne--anxious to place himself in an agreeable aspect before
both of his inamoratas, past and present.

"I do not agree with you, mademoiselle. I am one of those who think that in the very framing
of this Constitution of ours the dragon's teeth were sown, whose harvest is not yet produced.
Mr. Calhoun, with his prophetic eye, foresees that this crop of armed men is inevitable from
such germs, as does Mr. Clay, were he only frank, which he is not, because he deludes himself--the
most incurable and inexcusable of all deceptions."

And she applied herself again assiduously to her snuffbox, tapping it peremptorily before opening
it, and, with a gloomy eye fixed on space, she continued:

"In all lands, from the time of Cassandra and Jeremiah up, there have been prophets. Prophets
for good and prophets for ill--of which some few have been God-appointed, and the sayings of
such alone have been preserved. The rest vanish away into oblivion like chaff before the wind--never
mind what their achievement, what their boast.

"In this nation we have only two true prophets, Calhoun and Clay--both men of equal might,
and resolution, and intellect--gifted as beseems their vocation, masterful and heroic; and
to these all other men are subordinate in the great designs of Providence."

"Where do you leave Mr. Webster, John Quincy Adams, General Jackson himself, in such a category,
madame?" I asked, eagerly.

"They are doing, or have done, the work God has appointed for them to do, I suppose, mademoiselle;
but they are accessories merely of the times, and will pass away with the necessities of the
moment."

"'The earth has bubbles as the water hath, and these are of them,'" said Major Favraud aside,
between his short, set teeth, nodding to me as he spoke, and lending the next moment implicit
attention to what Madame Grambeau was saying; for the brief pause she had made for another
pinch of snuff was ended, and she continued impetuously, as if no interval had occurred:

"Clay is, unconsciously, I trust, for the honor of mankind, fulfilling his destiny--this great
prophet who still refuses to prophesy. He is entering the wedge for what he declines to admit
the possibility of--yet there must be moments when that eye of power pierces the clouds of
prejudice and party, wherewith it seeks to blind its kingly vision, and descries the horrors
beyond as the result of the acts he is now committing; and when such moments of clear conviction
come to him, the ambitions tool of a party, I envy not his sensations," and she shook her head
mournfully. "Not Napoleon at St. Helena, not Prometheus on his rock, were more to be pitied
than he! the man whose ambition shall never know fruition, whose measures shall pass and leave
no trace in less than fifty years after he has ceased to exist--the splendid failure of our
century!"

She ceased for a moment, with her eye fixed on space, her hands clasped, her whole face and
manner uplifted, as if, indeed, on her likewise the prophet's mantle had dropped from a chariot
of fire.

"As to Calhoun--he is God-fearing," she continued, fervently. "In the solitudes of a spiritual
Mount Sinai, he has received the tablets of the Lord, and bends every energy to their fulfillment.
He, too, foresees--not with an eye like Clay's, clear only at intervals--and clouded by vanity,
ambition, and sophistry, at other seasons--he, too, foresees the coming of our doom! His clear
vision embraces anarchy, dissension, civil war, with all its attendant horrors, as the consequence
of man's injustice; and, like Moses, he beholds the promised land into which he can never enter!
Would that it were given to him to appoint his Joshua, or even to see him face to face, recognizingly!
But this is not God's will. He lurks among the shadows yet--this Joshua of the South, but God
shall yet search him out and bring him visibly before the people! Not while I live," she added,
solemnly, "but within the natural lives of all others who sit this day around my table!"

"She is equal to Madame Le Normand!" said Major Favraud, aside, nodding approvingly at me.

"If one waits long enough, most prophecies may be fulfilled," I ventured; "but, madame, your
words point to results too terrible--too unnatural, it seems to me, ever to be realized in
these enlightened times or in this land of moderation."

"Child," she responded, "blood asserts itself to the end of races. There are two separate civilizations
in this land, destined some day to come in fearful conflict; and the wars of Scylla, of the
Jews themselves, shall be outdone in the horror and persistence of that strife of partners--I
will not say brothers--for there is no brotherhood of blood between South and North, of which
Clay and Calhoun stand forth to my mind as distinct types. No union of the red and white roses
possible."

"But you forget, madame, that Mr. Clay is a Western man, a Virginian, a Kentuckian, and the
representative of slave-holders," I remonstrated. "His interests are coincident with those
of the South. His hope of the presidency itself vests in his constituents, and the wand would
be broken in his hand were he to lend himself to partiality of any kind. Mr. Clay is a great
patriot, I believe, Jacksonite though I am--he knows no South nor North, nor East nor West,
but the Union alone, solid and undivided."

"All this is true," she answered, "in one sense. It is thus he speaks, and, like all partial
parents, even thinks he feels toward his offspring; but observe his acts narrowly from first
to last. He has a manufacturer's heart, with all his genius. He loves machinery--the sound
of the mill, the anvil, the spinning-jenny, the sight of the ship upon the high-seas, or steamboat
on the river, the roar of commerce, far more than the work of the husbandman. We are an agricultural
people, we of the South and West--and especially we Southerners, with our poverty of invention,
our one staple, our otherwise helpless habits, incident to the institution which, however it
may be our curse, is still our wealth, and to which, for the present time, we are bound, Ixion-like,
by every law of necessity. What does this tariff promise? Where will the profit rest? Where
will the loss fall crushingly? The slow torture of which we read in histories of early times
was like to this. Each day a weight was added to that already lying on the breast of a strong
man, bound on his back by the cords of his oppressors, until relief and destruction came together,
and the man was crushed; such was the peine forte et dure."

"Calhoun is patriarchal,[4] and is now placing all his individual strength to the task of heaving
off this incubus from the breast of our body politic, but with small avail, for he has no lever
to assist him--no fulcrum whereon to rest it; otherwise he might say with Archimedes, 'With
these I could move a world.' He is unaided, this eagled-eyed prophet of ours, looking sorrowfully,
sagaciously down into the ages! South Carolina is the Joseph, that his cruel brothers, the
remaining Southern States, have sold to the Egyptians, as a bond-slave. But they shall yet
come to drink of his cup, and eat of his bread of opinion, in the famine of their Canaan. Nullification
shall leave a fitting successor, as Philip of Macedon left Alexander to carry out his plans.
The abolitionist and the slave-holder are as distinct as were Charles I. and Cromwell, or Catharine
de Medicis and Henry of Navarre. The germ that Calhoun has planted shall lie long in the earth,
perhaps, but when it breaks the surface, it shall grow in one night to maturity, like that
in your so famous 'Mother Goose' story of 'Jack and his Bean-stalk,' forming a ladder wherewith
to scale the abode of giants and slay them in their drunken sleep of security. But he who does
this deed, this Joshua of the Lord's, this fierce successor of our gentle Moses, shall wade
through his oceans of blood to gain the stone. God knoweth--He only--how all this shall end,
whether in success or overthrow. It is so far wrapped in mystery."

As if she saw from some spiritual height the reign of terror she predicted, she dropped her
head upon her hands and closed her eyes, and I felt my blood creep slowly through my veins
as I followed her in thought across the waste of woe and desolation. For there was something
in her manner, her voice (august and solemn with age and wisdom as these were), that impressed
all who heard, with or in spite of their own consent, and for a time profound silence succeeded
this harangue.

Dr. Durand was the first to recover himself. "I trust, my dear madame," he remarked, "that
the substantial horrors realized in your youth still cast their dark shadows over the coming
years, and so deceive you into prophecies that it is sad to hear from lips so reverent, and
which, let us all pray, may never be realized. You yourself will say amen to that, I am convinced."

"Amen!" she murmured.

"Nonsense, Durand! don't play at hypocrite in your old age, after having been a true man all
your life," broke in Major Favraud. "What is a conservative, after all, but a social parrot,
who repeats 'wise saws and modern instances,' until he believes himself possessed of the wisdom
of all the ages, and is incapable of conceiving of the existence even of an original idea?"

"By-the-by," digressed Duganne, weary of discussion, "hear that old fellow outside, how he
is going on, Favraud, à propos of poll parrots, you know, as it all else, but the name of the
bird, had been lost on his ear. Just listen!"

"Yes, hear him, and he edified," was the sarcastic response of Favraud to Duganne, who took
no other notice, even if he understood the point, than to lead the way to the portico, where
swung the cage of the jolly bird in question; and, headed by Madame Grambeau leaning on her
cane, we followed simultaneously, with the exception of Major Favraud, who continued at the
table with his cigar and cognac-flask, in sullen and solitary state.

"Nutmegs and nullification!" shrieked the parrot, as we stood before him. "Ha, ha, ha!"

"That is condensing the matter, certainly," I observed.

"Bienvenu, compatriote!" he repeated many times, laughing loudly, the next moment, as if in
mockery.

"What a fiend it is!" said Marion, timidly; "only look at its black tongue, Miss Harz! Then
what a laugh!"

"Danton! Danton! have you nothing to say to this strange lady?" said Madame Grambeau, addressing
her bird by name; "you must not neglect my friends, Danton Pardi!"

"Bird of freedom, moulting--moulting!" was the whimsical rejoinder. "Jackson! give us your
paw, Old Hick--Hick--Hickory!"

"This is the stuff Major Favraud taught him," she apologized, "when he used to lie on his porch
day after day, after his hostile meeting with Juarez, which took place on that hill," signifying
the site of the duel with her slender cane. "It was there they fought their duel, à Poutrance,
and I knew it not until too late! His wife was too ill to come to him at that time, and the
task of nursing him devolved on me, since when, on maternal principles, the lad has grown into
my affections."

"The lad of forty-odd!" sneered Duganne, unnoticed, apparently, by the aged lady, however,
at the moment, but not without amusing other hearers by this sally. Dr. Durand was especially
delighted.

"For he is a boy at heart," she said later, "this same Victor Favraud of ours," gazing reprovingly
around. "Indeed, he is the only American I have ever seen who possessed real gaieté de coeur,
and for that, I imagine, he must thank his French extraction."

"Calhoun and cotton!" "Coal and codfish!" shouted the parrot at the top of his voice. "Catfish
and coffee!"--"Rice cakes for breakfast"--"All in my eye, Betty Martin"--"Yarns and Yankees"--"Shad
and shin-plasters"--"Yams and yaller boys," and so on, in a string of the most irrelevant alliteration
and folly, that, like much other nonsense, evoked peals of laughter by its unexpected utterance,
and which at last mollified and brought out Major Favraud himself, from his dignified retirement.

"You have ruined the morals of my bird," said Madame Grambeau, reproachfully. "Approach, Favraud,
and justify yourself. In former times his discourse was discreet. He knew many wise proverbs
and polite salutations in French and English both, most of which he has discarded in favor
of your profane and foolish teachings. He is as bad as the 'Vert-vert' of Voltaire. I shall
have to expel him soon, I fear."

"Danton, how can you so grieve your mistress?" remonstrated Major Favraud, lifting at the same
time an admonitory finger, at which recognized signal, a part of past instructions probably,
the parrot burst forth at once in a series of the most grotesque and outré oaths ear ever heard,
ending (by the aid of some prompting from his teacher) by dismally croaking the fragment of
a popular song thus travestied:

  "My ole mistis dead and gone,
  She lef to me her ole jawbone.
  Says she, 'Charge up in dem yaller pines,
  And slay dem Yankee Philistines!'"--

ending with the invariable "Bonjour" or "Bienvenu, compatriote," and demoniac "Ha! ha! ha!"

"The memory of the creature is perfectly wonderful," I said. "Many parrots have I seen, but
never one like this before. It must have sprung out of the Arabian Nights."

"I can teach any thing to every thing," digressed Major Favraud, "and without severity; it
is my specialty. I was meant for a trainer of beasts, probably. I will get up an entertainment,
I believe, in opposition to the industrious fleas, called the 'Desperate Doves,' and teach
pigeons to muster, drill, and go through all the military motions. I could do it easily, and
so repair my broken fortunes. I have one already at home that feigns death at the word of command.
I have amused myself for hours at a time with this bird.--Don't say a word, Miss Harz," speaking
low, "I see what you think of it all, but I have had to cheat misery some way or other. It
was a wretched device and waste of existence, though. And when I see that great, distinguished
man, who had such hopes of me as a boy, I feel that I could creep into an auger-hole for sheer
shame of my extinguished promise."

"Not extinguished!" I murmured, "only under a cloud, still destined to be fulfilled."

"Only in the grave," he said, sadly, "with the promise common to all mankind;" and thus by
gloomy glimpses I caught the truth.

We staid that night at the house of an aunt of Madame La Vigne's, who received us cordially,
entertained us sumptuously, and dismissed us graciously.

The next morning at sunrise we again set out for Savannah, into which city we entered before
the noonday heat, finding cool shelter and warm welcome at once under the roof of General Curzon,
the South's most polished gentleman and finished man of letters, of whom it may be truly said
that, "Take him for all in all, we ne'er shall look upon his like again."

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: It need not for one moment be supposed that the opinions of the author are represented
through the extremist Favraud. To her Mr. Bryant stands forth as the high-priest of American
poetry.]

[Footnote 2: The tariff.]

[Footnote 3: Since writing the above, the admirable picture of Mr. Healey has filled this void;
and those who have seen good copies of this work, executed for and by the order of Louis Philippe,
may have a clear idea of that glorious countenance, the like of which we shall not see again.

Perhaps it was from this very personal magnetism of which I have spoken that Healey succeeded
better with the portrait of Mr. Calhoun than any of the others he was sent to this country
to paint.]

[Footnote 4: It was about this time that Mr. Calhoun made his famous anti-tariff crusade throughout
the land, it may be remembered by some of my readers.]

CHAPTER II.

Before leaving the hospitable roof of General Curzon--beneath which I tarried for several days--awaiting
the tardy sailing of the packet-steamer Kosciusko, bound for New York, circumstances determined
me to leave in the hands of my host a desk which I had intended to carry with me, and which
contained most of my treasures. First among these, indisputably, in intrinsic value were my
diamonds--"sole remnant of a past magnificence;" but the miniatures of my father and mother,
and Mabel, in the cases of which locks of twisted hair--brown, and black, and golden, and gray--were
contained and combined (dear, imperishable memorials of vitality in most instances when all
the rest was dust and ashes), and the early letters of my parents, together with the carefully-kept
diary I had written at Beauseincourt, ranked beyond these even in my estimation.

The cause of this deposit of valuables was simply owing to the unstable lock of my trunk, the
condition of which was detected too late to have it repaired before sailing. Madame Curzon
had suggested to me the unsafe nature of such custody for objects of price, if, indeed, I possessed
such at all. I told her then of my diamonds, and it was agreed between us that these, at least,
had better be deposited in the bank of her husband, who would bring them to me himself a few
months later--and on reflection I concluded to add my desk, pictures, and papers, to my more
substantial treasures. These, at least, I felt assured no accident should throw into the hands
of Bainrothe.

On my way to the ship I left the carriage for a moment, in pursuance with this idea, and, followed
by King, the bearer of my large and weighty desk, entered the banking-house of my host, and
was shown at once, by attentive clerks, to his peculiar sanctum. I told him my errand in a
few words.

"Keep it until called for, unless you hear from me in the interval," I had said in allusion
to my deposit, for he acknowledged the chances were slight of his leaving home until the following
year, notwithstanding Madame Curzon's convictions.

"Called for by whom?" he asked, calmly.

"By Miriam Monfort in person or her order," I replied, laughingly, "This is a mystery that,
by-and-by, shall be explained to you."

"I understand something of that already," he rejoined. "Marion has been whispering to the reeds,
you know, or Madame Curzon, the same thing nearly; but let us be earnest, as your time is short,
and mine precious to-day. Life is uncertain, and, young and strong as you are, or seem to be,
you cannot foresee one hour even of the future, or of your own existence. Suppose Miriam Monfort
neither comes in person nor sends her order for its restoration--what, then, is to become of
this treasure-chest of hers?"

"You shall keep it then," I replied, unhesitatingly, "until my little sister reaches her majority,
and cause it to be placed in her own hands, none other--or, stay, let her have it on the day
before her marriage, should this occur earlier than the time mentioned, or when she reaches
her eighteenth year in any case; but, above all things, be careful."

"So many conflicting directions confuse and mystify me, I confess. Come, let me write down
your wishes, and the matter can be arranged formally, which is always best in any case. There,
I think I have the gist of your idea," he said a few moments later, as he pushed over to me
a slip of paper to read and sign, which done, I shook hands with him cordially, preparing to
go. "But your receipt--you have forgotten to take it up!"

"O General Curzon! the whole proceeding seems so ominous," I said, turning back at the door
to receive the proffered scrap, which, in another moment, dropped from my nerveless fingers,
while these, clasped over my streaming eyes, forgot their office.

"My dear young lady," he remonstrated, "I am shocked. What can have occurred to impress you
thus? Not this mere routine of affairs, surely?--Duncan, a glass of water here for Miss Monfort."

"I do not know, I am sure, why I should be so weak for such a trifle," I said, after a few
swallows of ice-water had somewhat restored my equilibrium; "but I do feel very dismally about
this voyage--have done so ever since I left Beauseincourt. This is the last straw on the camel's
back, believe me, General Curzon. You must not reproach yourself in the least--nor me; and
now let me bid you farewell once more, perhaps eternally!"

These words of mine were remembered later in a very different spirit from that in which they
were then received (one of incredulous compassion)--remembered as are ever the last utterances
of the doomed, whether innocent or guilty, in solemn awe and reverential tenderness, not unmingled
with a superstitions faith in presentiment.

"Why, you look bluer than your very obvious veil, bluer than your invisible school-marmish
stockings, bluer than the skies, or a blue bag, or Madame de Staël's 'Corinne,' or Byron's
'dark-blue ocean,'" said Major Favraud, as he assisted me again into the carriage, where Dr.
Durand and Marion awaited me, for, as I have said, we were now on our way to the vessel which
was to bear me and my destinies forever from that lovely Southern land in which I had seen
and suffered so much.

Dr. Durand looked serious at the sight of my woful aspect, and Marion mutely proffered her
vinaigrette, gratefully accepted, as was the good doctor's compassionate silence; but, as usual,
Favraud, after having once gotten fairly under weigh, ran on. "What is the use of bewailing
the inevitable?" he pursued. "We have all seen your penchant for Curzon, and his for you, for
three days past; but Octavia is as tough as lignum-vitæ, I regret to assure you, my dear Miss
Harz, and your chance is as blue as your spirits, or the flames of snap-dragon, or Marion's
eyes. You will have to just put up with the captain, I fear, for even the doctor there is in
harness for life. Southern women, you know, proverbially survive their husbands; and, as the
suttee is out of fashion, they sometimes have to marry Yankees as a dernier ressort of desperation!
Of course, there are occasional sad exceptions"--looking grave for a moment, and glancing at
the black hat-band on the Panama hat he was nursing on his knees, so as to let the breeze blow
through his silky, silver-streaked black hair--"but--but--in short, why will you all look so
doleful? Isn't it bad enough to feel so?"

"The loveliest fade earliest, we all know," and the tears were in his honest, frivolous eyes,
dashed away in the next moment as he exclaimed, eagerly, "Why, there goes the Lamarque equipage,
as I live! I had forgotten all about it. The pleasantest woman in Savannah, young or old, is
to be your compagnon de voyage, Miss Harz, and the most determined widower on record her escort;
a perfect John Rogers of a man, with nine little motherless children, her brother Raguet ('Rag,'
as we called him at school, on account of his prim stiffness, so that 'limber as a rag' seemed
a most preposterous saying in his vicinity). He is handsome, however, and intelligent, a perfect
gentleman, but on the mourners' bench just now, like some others you know of"--heaving a deep
sigh. "His wife, poor thing, died last autumn--a pretty girl in her day was Cornelia Huger!
I was a little weak in that direction once myself--before--that is, before--O doctor! what
a trouble it is to remember!"

And again the small, fleet hand was dashed across the twinkling, tearful eyes of this April
day of a middle-aged man of the world--this modern Mercutio--merry and mournful at once, as
if there were two sides to his every mood, like the famous shield of story. When we reached
the quay the Kosciusko was already getting up her steam, and, in less than an hour afterward,
the friends I loved were gone like dreams, the bustle of departure was over, and, with lifted
canvas and a puffing engine, we were grandly steaming past the noble forts (poor Bertie's broach
and buckle, be it remembered) on our path of pride and power toward the broad Atlantic.

The weather was oppressively hot, and, for the first thirty-six hours, scarcely a breath of
wind lifted us on our way, so that the engine, wholly incompetent to the work of both sails
and machinery, bore us very slowly on our northward ocean-flight. Indeed, the failure of this
engine to do its duty, at first, had sorely disheartened both captain and crew as we found
later, for upon its execution and energies, in the beginning, had rested our entire dependence.

On the evening of the second day's voyage, a sudden and violent thunder-storm occurred, not
unusual in those latitudes; during the raging of which our mainmast was struck by lightning,
and wholly disabled.

The fire was extinguished in the only possible manner, by cutting it away from the decks, letting
it gently down upon them, deluging it, so that our mast lay charred and blackened after its
bath of sea-water, like a mighty serpent stretched along the ship, from stem to stern, and
wrapped loosely in its shrouds. It did us good service later, though not by defying the winds
of heaven, nor spreading forth its snowy sails to catch the tropic breezes.

Before many hours, it was destined to ride the waves in a shape that was certainly never intended
by those who chose it among many others--taper and stately in its group of firs--to be the
chief adornment of a gallant ship, and lift a pointing finger to the stars themselves, as an
index of its might, and, with this exception, the hope of those it served--that of a charred
and blackened life-raft.

The renewed freshness of the atmosphere, and the joyful upspringing of the breezes, alone remained,
at midnight, to tell the story of the recent hurricane.

These tropic breezes came like benevolent fairies, to aid our groaning Titan in his labors.

I can never rid myself for one moment of the idea that an engine really works, with weary,
reluctant strength like a genii slave, waiting vengefully for the time of retaliation, which
sooner or later is sure to come; or of the visionary notion that a graceful, gliding ship,
with all sails set, receives the same pleasure from its own motion and beauty that a snow-white
swan must do "as down she bears before the gale," with her white plumage and stately crest.

I think, if ever I am called to give a toast, it shall be "Sail-ships; may their shadows never
be less!" They are, indeed, a part of the romance of ocean.

The moon was full, in the balmy summer night that succeeded the tempest, and the ship's quarter-deck
was crowded with the passengers of the Kosciusko, enjoying to the utmost, as it seemed, the
delicious, newly-washed atmosphere, the moonlit heavens and sea, the exquisitely-caressing
softness of the tardily-awakened breezes that filled the white sails of the vessel, and fluttered
the silken scarf of the maiden, with the same wooing breath of persuasive, subtle strength.

Around Miss Lamarque, the lady of whom Major Favraud had spoken so admiringly, and to whose
kindness he had committed me, a group had gathered, chiefly of the young, not to be surpassed
in any land for manly bearing, graceful feminine beauty, gayety, wit, and refinement.

There was Helen Oscanyan, fair as a dream of Greece, in her serene, marble perfectness of form
and feature; and the lovely Mollie Cairns, her cousin, small, dark, and sparkling--both under
the care of that stately gentleman, their uncle, Julius Sevère, of Savannah; and there were
the sisters Percy, twins in age and appearance, with voices like brook-ripples, and eyes like
wood-violets, and feet of Chinese minuteness and French perfection--the darlings and only joys
of a mother still beautiful, though sad in her widowhood, and gentle as the dove that mourns
its mate.

There was the brilliant Ralph Maxwell, whose jests, stinging and slight, just glanced over
the surface of society without inflicting a wound, even as the skater's heel glides over ice,
leaving its mark as it goes, yet breaking no crust of frost; and there was the poetic dreamer
Dartmore, with his large, dark eyes, and moonlight face, and manner of suffering serenity,
on his way to put forth for fame, as he fondly believed, his manuscript epic on the "Sorrows
of the South."

All these, and more, were there gathering about the leader of their home-society, on that alien
deck, as securely as though they were sitting in her own drawing-room at "Berthold," on one
of her brilliant reception-evenings.

How could they know--how could they dream the truth--or descry the hidden skeleton at the festival,
wreathed in flowers and veiled with glittering, filmy draperies, which yet put forth its bony
fingers to beckon on and clutch them?

I too was joyous and unconscious as the rest, and for the first time for many days felt the
burden literally heaved rather than lifted away that had oppressed me.

Was I not on my way to him in whose presence alone I lived my true life? and what feeling of
his morbid fancy was there that my hand could not smooth away, when once entwined in his? Beauseincourt,
and all its shadows, had I not put behind me? The sunshine lay before, and in its light and
warmth I should still rejoice, as it was my birthright to do.

I was "fey" that night, as the Scotch say, when an unaccountable lightness of mood precedes
a heavy sorrow, which it so often does, as well as the more usual mood, the presage of gloom.
I felt that I had the power to put aside all ills--to grapple with my fate, and compel back
my lost happiness. Truly my bosom's lord sat lightly on her throne, as of late it had not been
her wont to do.

Against my inclination had I been drawn into the current of that youthful gayety, and now my
bark floated without an effort on the stream. I was in my own element again, and my powers
were all responsive.

The small hours came--the happy group dispersed--not without many interchanges of social compliment,
much badinage, and merry plans for the morrow. The monster Sea-sickness had been defied on
the balmy voyage, save in the brief interval of tempest, and his victors mocked him, baffled
as he was, with their purpose of amusement.

"We shall get up the band to-morrow evening," said Major Ravenel, "and have a dance; the gallop
would go grandly here. See what reach of quarter-deck we have! There are Germans on board who
play in concert violins and wind-instruments."

"Suppose we dress as sea-nymphs," said Honoria Pyne; "enact a masque for old Neptune's benefit?
It would be so complimentary, you know; bring down the house, no doubt, I have a sea-green
tarlatan lying so conveniently. Colonel Latrobe looks exactly like a Triton, with that wondrous
beard. A little alum sprinkled over its red-gold ground would do wonders in the way of effect--would
be gorgeous--wouldn't it, now, Miss Harz?"

"But all that could be done on shore as well, Miss Pyne," I replied, in the way of reminiscence.
"It is a pity to waste our opportunities of observation now, in getting up costumes; and, for
my part, I confess that I have a wholesome dread of these sea-deities, and fear to exasperate
their finny feelings by reducing them to effigies. Thetis is very spiteful, sometimes; and
jealous, too, you remember."

Miss Pyne did not remember, but did not mean to be baffled either, she would let Miss Harz
know, even if that lady did know more about mythology than herself; and, if no one else would
join her, meant to play her rôle of sea-nymph all alone, with Major Latrobe for her Triton
in waiting, tooting upon a conch-shell, and looking lovely! At which compliment, open and above-board,
poor Major Latrobe, who was over head and ears in love with her, and a very ugly man, only
bowed and looked more silly than before, which seemed a work of supererogation.

After the rest were gone, Miss Lamarque and I concluded to promenade on the nearly-deserted
deck, in the moonlight, and let the excitement of the evening die away through the medium of
more serious conversation. She was a woman of forty-five, still graceful and fine-looking,
but bearing few traces of earlier beauty, probably better to behold, in her overripe maturity,
than in the unfolding of her less attractive time of bud and blossom. Self had been laid aside
now (which it never can be until the effervescence of youth and hope are over). She had accepted
her position of old maid and universal benefactress, and sustained it nobly, gracefully. She
was thoroughly well-bred and agreeable, very vivacious, astute, and intelligent, rather than
intellectual, yet she had the capacity (had her training been different) to have been both
of these.

I remember how it chanced that, after a long promenade, during which we had discussed men,
manners, books, customs, costumes, and politics, even (that once tabooed subject for women,
now free to all), with infinite zest and responsiveness that charmed us mutually, so that we
swore allegiance on the strength of this one day's rencontre, like two school-girls or knights
of old--I remember how the dropping of her comb at his feet caused Miss Lamarque to pause,
compelling me to follow her example, by reason of our intertwined arms, in front of the man
at the wheel, as he stooped to raise it and hand it to her with a seaman's bow. His ready politeness,
unusual for one in his station, determined us to cultivate his maritime acquaintance, and in
a short time we had drawn forth the outlines of his story, simple and bare as this was of incident.

His picturesque appearance had impressed us equally during the day, but until now we had not
met in concert about Christian Garth, for such we soon found was the name of our polite pilot.

He was a Jerseyman, he told us, of German descent, married to the girl of his heart, and living
on the coast of that adventurous little State, famous alike for its peaches and wrecks.

"Sall had a stocking full of money," he informed us, silver, and copper, and gold, when he
married her, for her mother had been a famous huckster--and never missed her post in the Philadelphia
market for thirty years, and this was her child's inheritance, and with this money he had fixed
up his old hut, till it looked 'e'en a'most inside like a ship-captain's cabin.'

And now Sall wanted him to stay at home, he informed us, with her and the children, but somehow
or other he could never tarry long at the hearth, for the sea pulled him like it was his mother,
and the spell of the tides was on him, and he must foller even if he went to his own destruction,
like them men that liquor lures to loss, or the love of mermaids.

"All land service is dead when likened to the sea," he said, shaking his great water-dog head,
and looking out lovingly upon his idol. "But ships a'n't like they oncst was, ladies," he added,
"before men put these here heavy iron ingines to work in 'em--it's like cropping a bird's wing
to make a river-boat of a ship, and a burning shame to shorten sails till it looks like a young
gal dressed in breeches or any other onnatural thing--for a sailing-ship and a full-flowing
petticoat always rise up in a true man's mind together--God bless them both, I say."

"To which we cordially say amen, of course," said Miss Lamarque, laughing. "We should have
been at a loss, however, Mr. Garth, but for our engine during the dead calm preceding the storm,
when our ship's sails flapped so lazily about her masts, and she rocked like a baby's cradle
without making progress. It is well the engineer manoeuvred so successfully while we lay fireless
on the low rolling waves; but we are speeding along merrily enough now, to make up for it all--I
take comfort in that--"

"But not exactly in the right direction, though, to suit my stripe," he said, turning his quid
in his mouth us he looked out to leeward, revealing, as he did so, a fine yet rugged profile
relieved against the silvery purple sheen of the moonlit sky.

"Do you see that dark object lying beyond" (our eyes mechanically followed his), "so still
on the water?" and he indicated it with the pipe he held in one sinewy hand--for the native
courtesy of the man had involuntarily proffered us the homage of removing it from his lips,
when we addressed him.

"Yes--what is it? a wreck? a whale? a small volcanic island? Do explain, Mr. Garth," said Miss
Lamarque.

"Nothing but an iceberg, and we are bearing down upon it rather too rapidly, it seems to me."

And so speaking, he turned his wheel in silence warily.

"But you have the command of the helm, and have nothing to do but--"

"Obey orders," he interrupted, grimly. "Ef the captain was to tell me to run the ship to purgatory,
I'd have to do it, you know."

"But surely the captain would not jeopardize the lives of a ship's company, even if he likes
warm latitudes, by ordering you to run foul of an iceberg; and, if he did, you certainly would
not dare to obey him with the fear of God before your eyes?" remonstrated Miss Lamarque, indignantly.
"For my part I shall go to him immediately and desire him to change his course--but after all
I don't believe that dingy black thing is an iceberg at all--an old hen-coop rather, thrown
over from some merchant-ship, or a vast lump of charred wood. You are only trying to alarm us."

"Ef you was to see it close enough, you would find it to shine equal to the diamond on your
hand; but I hope you never will, that's all--I hope you never will, lady! I sot on a peak of
that sort oncst myself for three days in higher latitudes than this here--me and five others,
all that was spared from the wreck of the schooner Delta, and we felt our convoy melting away
beneath us, and courtesying e'en a'most even with the sea, before the merchant-ship Osprey
took us off, half starved, and half frozen, and half roasted all at oncst! Them is onpleasant
rickollections, ladies, and it makes my blood creep to this day to see an iceberg in konsikence;
but a man must do his dooty, whatsomever do betide. It was in the dead of night, and Hans Schuyler
had the wheel, I remember, when we went to pieces on that iceberg, all for disregarding; the
captain's orders; you see, he meant to graze it like!"

"Graze it!" almost shrieked Miss Lamarque. "Did he think he was driving a curricle? Graze it--Heaven,
what rashness!"

"Don't--don't! Mr. Garth," I petitioned; "I shall never sleep a wink on this ship if you continue
your narrative."

"Do--do! Mr. Garth," entreated Miss Lamarque, whose penetration showed her by this time that
the pilot was only playing on our fears, for want of a better instrument for his skill. "I
quite enjoy the idea that you have actually been astride a fragment of the arctic glacier,
and that we may perhaps make the acquaintance of a white bear ourselves when we get near our
iceberg, or a gentle seal. Wouldn't you like one for a pet, Miss Harz?"

"It is very cold," I said, digressively. "I feel the chill of that fragment of Greenland freeze
my marrow. I must go fetch my shawl; but first reassure us, Mr. Garth, if possible."

He laughed. "I have paid you now for making fun of me to-day," he said, saucily. "I saw your
drawing of me in your books, and heard the ladies laughing. I peeped as I passed when Myers
took the helm, and I wanted to see what all the fun was about; then I said to myself, 'I will
give her a skeer for that if I have a chance'--but, all the same, the chill you feel is a real
one, for as sure as death that lump of darkness is an iceberg. I have told you no yarn, as
you will find out to-morrow when you ask the captain. I'll steer you clear of the iceberg though,
ladies, never fear. Hans Schuyler has not got the wheel to-night--you see he was three sheets
in the wind anyhow, and the captain says, 'Hans,' says he, 'don't tech another drop this night,
or we'll never see another mornin' till we are resurrected,' and so he turned into his hammock
and swung himself to sleep--a way he had, for he didn't keer for nothin' where his comfort
was concerned, having been raised up in the Injies."

"Come, Miss Lamarque," I interrupted. "I must not hear another word. 'Macbeth doth murder sleep,'
and I shall be nervous for a month after this. So, good-night, Mr. Garth, and be sure you merit
your first name by taking good care of us while we imitate the example of your worthy captain
and 'swing ourselves to sleep,' or rather let the waves perform that office for us. I shall
make it my care to-morrow morning early, if you still hold the helm, to show you my sketch,
and convince you that it was never made for fun at all, but that it is a real portrait of a
very fine-looking seaman, a real viking in appearance, and somewhat better than one at heart,
I trust. I shall hope to earn your good opinion instead of ill-will, when you have only seen
my sketch."

"You have it already, you have it already, young gal--young miss, I mean," he said, with a
wave of the hand, which meant to be courteous, no doubt, but seemed only defiant. "An' this
much I kin say without injury to Sall--that I'd rather hear you talk and see you smile, as
I has been watchin' of you constant do to-day, than go to the circus in New York, or even to
a Spanish bull-fight, or hear a Fourth-of-July oration, or 'tend camp-meetin'--and that's saying
no little--an' no iceberg shall come near you while Christian Garth lays a hand upon this helm.
But don't be skeered, ladies; no harm will come to the good ship Kosciusko."

"I declare our pilot is quite chivalrous, as far as you are concerned, for I marked his glance,
Miss Harz," said Miss Lamarque, archly, as we turned our faces cabinward, under the protection
of our helmsman's promised vigilance. "See what it is to be young and pretty, and remark the
truth of the old proverb, as exemplified in his case, that 'extremes meet.' Victoria herself
is not more independent of me or my position--established facts as both are in the eyes of
some--than is Christian Garth. To him, this outsider of the world of fashion, I am only a homely
old woman; no prestige comes in to garnish the unvarnished fact--a plain old maid, my dear--with
not even the remembrance of beauty as a consolation, nor its remnant as a sign of past triumphs,
'only this and nothing more,' as that wonderful man Poe makes his raven say. We never find
our level until we go among people who know and care nothing about us, who have never 'heard
of us'--that exordium of most greetings from folks of our own class. It is absolutely refreshing
to be so unaffectedly despised and slighted--it does one a world of good, there is no doubt
of that, especially when one's grandfather was a Revolutionary notability, and other antecedents
of a piece--but men are all alike at heart, only the worldly ones wear flimsy masks, you know,
and pretend to adore intellect and ugliness, when beauty is the only thing they care for--all
a sham, my dear, in any case."

"Yes, all alike," I repeated, making, as I spoke, one mental entire reservation. "All vain
alike, I mean; flatter their vanity ever so little and they are at your very feet, asking 'for
more,' like Oliver Twist; more bread for amour propre, the insatiable! It was that sketch of
mine that wrought the spell, though unintentionally, of course, and the sly fellow knew very
well that it was no caricature--that is, if he peeped, as he pretends--but a tolerably correct
likeness that might have satisfied Sall herself. By-the-by, I have a great mind to bestow it
upon him as a 'sop for Cerberus,' should her jealousy ever be aroused by your reports of his
devotion to me, or admiration rather, most unequivocally avowed, it must be acknowledged. I
really had no intention of injuring Sally, and, if you think it best, will make the amende
honorable by being as cross as possible to him to-morrow."

"No, no, carry out your first intention and conciliate him; for, remember, he has us in the
hollow of his hand. Bestow the picture, by all means, and just as many smiles and compliments
as he can stand, or you can afford to squander; for you are worse than a mermaid, Miss Harz,
for fascination, all the gentlemen say so; and, as to Captain Falconer--"

"They are malignants," I rejoined, ignoring purposely the last clause of the sentence which
I had interrupted; "and you are perfidious to hear them slander me so. I hate fascinating people;
they always make my flesh crawl like serpents. The few I have known have been so very base."
"Good specimens of 'thorough bass,'" she interpolated, laughing.--"I am sure I am glad I have
no attributes of fascination, if a strange old work I met with at Beauseincourt may be considered
responsible. Did you ever see it, Miss Lamarque, you who see every thing? Hieronymus Frascatorius
tells of certain families in Crete who fascinated by praising, and to avert this evil influence
some charm was used consisting of a magic word (I suppose this was typical of humility, though
related as literal). This naïveté on the part of the old chronicler was simply impayable, as
Major Favraud would say, with his characteristic shrug. One Varius related (you see my theme
has full possession of me, and the book is a collation of facts on the subject of fascination
of all kinds, even down to that of the serpent) that a friend of his saw a fascinator with
a look break in two a precious gem in the hands of a lapidary--typical this, I suppose, of
some fond, foolish, female heart. Fire, according to this author, represents the quality of
fascination; and toads and moths are subject to its influence, as well as some higher animals--deer,
for instance, who are hunted successfully with torches; and he relates, further, that in Abyssinia
artificers of pottery and iron are thus fearfully endowed, and are consequently forbidden to
join in the sacred rites of religion, as fire is their chief agent. Isn't this a strange, quaint
volume, to set before a king? and how do you like my lecture delivered extempore?"

"Oh, vastly! but I did not know that was your style before. Don't cultivate it, dear, if you
hope to win manly hearts. Men like to do all the lecturing themselves, and I find it diplomatic
to feign profound ignorance on all subjects outside of a bandbox; it delights them so to enlighten
us. No wonder they fancy us fools when we feign foolishness so admirably--lapwings that we are!"

"But I never do, in such society. My experience is different from yours. I always pretend to
know twice as much as I do, when they are about; it bluffs them off, and they are credulous
sometimes as well as ignorant, notwithstanding their boasted acumen."

"Your lamp of experience needs trimming, my pretty Miriam," she said, shaking her head, "if
you really believe this. They never forgive superiority, assumed or real; none but the noble
ones, I mean; who, of course, are in the minority. Give a pair of tongs pantaloons, and it
asserts itself. Trousers, my dear, are at the root of manly presumption. I discovered that
long ago. A man in petticoats would be as humble as a woman. This is my theory, at least; take
it for what it is worth. And now to sleep, with what heart we may, an iceberg being in our
vicinity;" and, taking my face in her hand, she kissed me cordially. "It is very early in our
acquaintance for such manifestations to be allowable," she said, kindly, "but I am a sort of
spoiled child of society, and dare to be natural. I consider that the best privilege that attaches
to my condition, that of the 'bell-wether' of Savannah ton--the universally-accepted bore!
You know--Favraud has told you, of course; he always characterizes as he goes."

"He has called you the most agreeable woman in Savannah, I remember, young or old, and was
truly glad, on my account, to know that you were on board. Of your brother he spoke very kindly
also, even admiringly."

"Oh, yea, I know; but of Raguet there is little question now. His wife's death has crushed
him. I never saw so changed a man; he is half idiotic, I believe; and I am with him now just
to keep those children from completing the work of destruction. Six little motherless ones--only
think--and as bad as they can possibly be; for poor Lucilla was no manager. Isn't it strange,
the influence those little cottony women get over their husbands? You and I might try forever
to establish such absolute despotism, all in vain. It is your whimpering sort that rule with
the waving of a pocket-handkerchief; but poor, dear little woman, she is powerless now; and
I suppose the next will be like unto her. Raguet would never look at any thing feminine that
hadn't white eyes and pink hair (yellow, I mean, of course)--his style, you know, being dark
and stern, he likes the downy, waxy kind. All this is shockingly egotistical; but the question
is, who that has a spark of individuality is otherwise? Good-night, again, and may all sweet
dreams attend you; for my part, I never dream, being past the dreaming age, and realities fortunately
disappear with daylight; even cross children are wheedled into quietness, and servants forget
to fidget and giggle; and, for mosquitoes, there are bars. Adieu."

And thus we parted, never to meet again in mutual mood like this!

Yet, had the free agency of which some men boast been ours, we had scarcely chosen to face
the awful change--to look into each other's eyes through gathering death-doom!

CHAPTER III.

Before my dreaming eyes was the terror of a hungry, crunching tooth, fixed in the vessel's
side, that of the iceberg, lying black in the moonlight like a great coal crystal, grimly awaiting
our approach, but the reality, as well as the figment, had disappeared when I emerged at sunrise
from the suffocating cabin, to the atmosphere of the cool and quiet quarter-deck, which had
just undergone its matutinal.

Armed with an orange and a biscuit for physical refreshment, I depended on sea and sky for
my mental entertainment; and in my hand I bore a slender scroll, destined as a propitiatory
offering to our offended helmsman.

I was glad to find again at the wheel our pilot of yesterday.

"Your iceberg has disappeared, Mr. Garth," I said, as I extended to him the sketch I had made
of his noble physique the day before, "and here is a picture for your wife, which she will
see was not drawn for fun. Women are sharper than men about such matters. There, I bestow it
not without regret." He received my offering with a smile, and nod of his great curly head,
opened it, gazed long and seriously upon it, and, with the single word "Good," rolled it up
again, and consigned it to some bosom pocket in his flannel shirt, into which it seemed to
glide as a telescope into its case, revealing, as he did so, glimpses of a hairy breast, and
vigorous chest, more admirable for strength than beauty, certainly.

"I will keep it there," he said, "young miss," pressing it closely against his side with his
colossal hand, "until I get safe home to the Jarseys, and to Sall, or go to Davy's locker,
one or other, but which it will be, young gal--young miss, I should be saying--is not for me
to know."

"Nor for anyone," I rejoined, solemnly; "all rests with God."

"With God and our engineer," he resumed, tersely; "them sails is of little account, now the
mainmast is struck away; them floppen petticoats, wat the wind loves to play in and out, layin'
along like a lazy lubber that it is, and leaving its work for others to do. It was a noble
mast, though, while it stood--and you could smell the turpentine blood in its heart to the
very last. It was as limber as a sapling, and never growed brittle, like some wood, with age
and dryness. No storm could splinter it, and it would fling itself over into the high waves
sometimes, rayther than snap and lash them like a whip. But there it lies, burned with the
fire of heaven's wrath, at last, and leaving its fires of hell behind, in the heart of the
Kosciusko."

"You have changed your mind on the subject of engines, Mr. Garth, I am glad to see. Truly,
ours seems to be doing giant's work; now we are flying, to be sure."

"Rushing, not flying, young lady--that's the word; our wings are little use to-day, you see,
such as are left to us. Runnin' for dear life, we'd better say, for that's the truth of the
matter, and may the merciful Lord speed us, and have in his care all helpless ones this day!"

The lifted hand, the bared head, the earnest accents, with which these words were spoken, gave
to this simple utterance of good-will all the solemnity of a benediction or prayer.

I noticed that, after replacing his tarpaulin, the lips of Garth continued to move silently,
then were compressed gravely for a time, while his eye, large, clear, and expressive, was fixed
on space.

"Do you still see an iceberg, Mr. Garth? Do you really apprehend danger for us now?" I asked,
after studying his countenance for a moment, "or, are you again desirous to try the nerves
of your female passengers? I think I must apply to the captain this time for information."

"Yes, danger," he replied, in low, sad tones, ignoring my last remark, or perhaps not hearing
it at all--"danger, compared with which an iceberg might be considered in the light of a heavenly
marcy. There is a chance of grazing one of them snow-bowlders, or of its drifting away from
a ship, when the ripples reach it, or, if the wust comes, a body can scramble overboard, and
manage to live on the top of one of them peaks, or in one of their ice-caves, with a few blankets,
and a little bread and junk and water, fur a space, so as to get a chance of meetin' a ship,
or a schooner; but, when there is something wrong in a ship's heart, there a'n't much hope
for rescue, onless it comes from above."

He hesitated, smiling grimly, rolled his quid, crammed his hat down over his eyes, and again
addressed himself to his wheel, and, for a few moments, I stood beside him silently.

"The ship is leaking, I suppose," I said, at last, "so that you apprehend her loss, perhaps,"
and my heart sank coldly within me, as I spoke; "but, if this be true, why does not the captain
apprise us? No, you are quizzing me again, and very cruelly this time, very unwarrantably."

Yet I did not think exactly as I spoke, strive as I might to believe the man in jest. Too much
solemnity and sorrow both were discernible in his worn and rugged features, hewn grandly as
if from granite, to admit of a hope like this. His words were earnest, and some great calamity
was in store, I could not doubt, or at least he apprehended such. For some time he replied
not, then, slowing pointing to the base of the stricken mainmast, which still showed an elevation
of some inches above the deck, he revealed to me the truth without a word.

As my eyes followed his guiding finger, I saw, with terror unspeakable, a thin blue wavering
smoke-wreath, float upward from the floor, and, after curling feebly about the truncated mast,
disappear in the clear sunlit atmosphere, again to arise from the same point, that of the juncture
of the mast and deck, creeping through some invisible crevice, as it seemed to form itself
eternally in filmy folds, and successively elude the eye as soon as it shaped to sight. I understood
him then. There was fire in the heart of the ship, and I knew the hold was filled with cotton;
it was smouldering slowly, and our safety was a question of time alone!

Pale, transfixed, frozen, I lifted my eyes to the man, who seemed to represent my fate for
the moment. "Was it the lightning?" I asked, after a pause, during which his pitying eye rested
on me drearily. "Did the fire occur in that way?"

"Yes, the lightning it was; and God's hand, which sent the shaft direct, alone can deliver us."

I seemed to hear the voice of Bertie speak these words. Things grew confused; I wavered as
I stood, lifted my hand to my head; the face of Christian Garth grew large and dim, then faded
utterly. I knew no more until I found myself seated on a coil of rope, leaning against the
bulwark, while a young girl stood beside me, fanning and bathing my face, and offering me a
glass of water.

"You are better now," she said, kindly; "the man at the wheel called me as I was passing, and
pointed out your condition, and I led you here, and ran for water. Being up so early is apt
to disagree with some people."

"What are these people crawling about the deck for? Is all hope over, or was it only a dream?"
I asked.

"Oh, you are quite wild yet from your swoon; it is only the calkers stopping up the seams,
one of the captain's queer whims they say; but how they are to dance to-night, those magnificos
I mean, without ruining their slippers with this pitch, I cannot see! Thank Goodness! I belong
to a church, and am not of this party, and don't care on my own account, nor does the captain,
I believe. I was placed under his care at Savannah, and I suppose it is only to stop the ball
that--"

She was interrupted by the approach of the officer under discussion, but he passed us gloomily
and went on to inspect the workmen so unseasonably employed, as it seemed, in a labor that,
save in a case of long voyages, is always performed in port.

His melancholy air, and the preoccupation of his manner, confirmed my worst fears.

Again I sought the Ixion of the vessel, who calmly and stolidly performed his duty as if, indeed,
Fate directed, without a change of feature now, or expression.

"Has the captain no hope of rescue, Mr. Garth?"

"Oh, yes; he thinks we shall meet a ship or two between now and noon--we 'most always do, you
know"--rolling his quid slowly, and hesitating for a while; "keep heart, keep heart! I had
thought from your face you were stronger; besides, the pumps are doing good work in the hold:
who knows what may come of it, who knows?"

Alas! alas! I could not rise to the level of this dim hope. "Think of the burning crowd, the
sheet of flame, the terrible destruction!" I murmured; "I must go now and apprise those poor
wretches below that their time is short; they have a right to know."

His vice-like hand was on my arm. "You do not go a step on such an errand," he muttered. "It
is the captain's business; he will 'tend to it when the time comes, for he is a true man, and
the bravest sailor on the line. He means to do what's right, never fear. It is my dooty to
hold you here until he comes, onless you promise me to be discreet."

"I shall be discreet, never fear--" and his grasp relaxed. I sped me back to the coil of rope
on which I had left my young companion, intending to partake with her there my biscuit and
orange, so needed now for strength.

I found in her stead (for she had departed in the interval) a delicate-looking young woman,
plain and poor, a widow evidently from the style of her shabby mourning and sad expression
of face, bearing in her arms a weird and sickly-looking child, evidently a sufferer from spinal
disease--an infant as to size, but preternaturally old in countenance.

The steady gaze of its large and serious eyes affected me magnetically--eyes that seemed ever
seeking something that still eluded them, and which now appeared to inquire into my very soul.

"Is your little boy ill, madam?" I asked at last; and at the sound of my voice a smile broke
over his small, sallow features, lending them strange beauty, but dying away instantly again
into an expression of startled suspicion.

"Yes, very ill," she answered, clasping him tenderly as he clung to her suddenly. "He has some
settled trouble that no medicine reaches, and you see how small and light he is. Many a twelve
months' babe is heavier than he, yet he is three years old come March next, and he is 'cute
beyond his years, it seems to me."

"You seem very weak and weary," I rejoined. "I noticed you yesterday with interest, sitting
all the time with your boy on your knee. You must need exercise and rest. Go and walk now a
little, while you can;" and I stretched my arms for her baby.

To her surprise, evidently, he came to me willingly--attracted, no doubt, by the gleam of the
watch-chain about my neck, and still further propitiated by a portion of my orange, which he
greedily devoured.

In the mean time the poor, pale mother took a few turns on the quarter-deck, and, disappearing
therefrom a moment, returned with a small supply of cakes and biscuits which she had sought
in the steward's room.

An inspiration of Providence, no doubt, she thought this proceeding later, which at the moment
was only intended to anticipate the delay attendant on all second-class meals.

These cakes, with a pains-taking diligence, if not forethought--peculiar to all feeble animals,
squirrels, sick children, and the like--did he one by one cram and compel into my pocket, unconscious
as I was at the moment of his miser-like proceeding (instinctive, probably), which later I
detected, to his infinite rejoicing. In company with my slender purse, and bunch of useless
keys, a pencil, and a small memorandum-book, they remained perdu until that moment of accidental
discovery arrived which was to test their value and place it "far above that of rubies."

Light as a pithless nut seemed this little creature in my strong, energetic arms, and yet his
mother staggered beneath his weight.

She insisted, however, after a time, on resuming her charge of him, as it was proper she should
do, and then sat beside me, delivering herself of a long string of complaints and grievances,
after the fashion of all second-rate, solitary people when secure of sympathy.

She overrated my benevolence on this occasion, however. I was lost in painful reverie, and
scarcely understood a word of her communication, which I was obliged at last to cut short,
for I had resolved, now that my strength was recruited, on the only visible course remaining
to me--I would seek Miss Lamarque, confide to her the statement of Christian Garth, relate
to her what my eyes had seen, and be guided by her determination and judgment, with those of
her brother, a man of sense, I saw, and whose instincts, no doubt, would all be sharpened by
the jeopardy of his children.

She was sitting up in her state-room when I knocked at the door, still in her berth, the lower
one--from which the upper shelf had been lifted so as to afford her room and air--looking very
Oriental and handsomer than I ever had seen her, in her bright Madras night-turban and fine
white cambric wrapper richly trimmed.

Her face broke into smiles as soon as she beheld me; and she invited me, in a way not to be
resisted, so resolute and yet so kindly was it, to partake with her of the hot coffee her maid
was just handing her in bed, in a small gilded cup, a portion of the service on the stand beside
her.

"It is our Southern custom, you know, Miss Harz--always our café noir before breakfast, as
a safeguard against malaria. To be sure, there is nothing of that sort to be apprehended at
sea, but still habits are inveterate; second nature, as the moralists and copy-books say, as
if there ever could be more than one. What nonsense these wiseacres talk, to be sure! But there
is cream, you see, for those who like it--boiled down and bottled for the use of the children
before leaving home--one of Dominica's notions;" and here the smiling maid, with her little,
respectful courtesy, tendered me a reviving cup of Miss Lamarque's morning beverage, Mocha,
made to the last point of perfection, dripped and filtered over a spirit-lamp by Dominica,
the skillful and neat-handed.

"But you are very pale to-day, my child--what on earth can be the matter?--There, Dominica,
I thought I heard Florry cry! Go and help Caliste get the children ready for a trot upon deck
before breakfast, and don't forget to give each one a gill of cream and a biscuit--or, stay,
twice as much for the two elder before they go up. It may be some time before they get their
regular morning meal.--They have to wait, you know, Miss Harz, which is such rank injustice
where children are concerned. Patience never belongs to unreasoning creatures, unless an instinct,
as with animals; men have to learn its lessons through the teachings of experience--that strictest
of school-masters. Now, you see, I have my lecturing-cap on, and am almost equal to you or
Dr. Lardner in my way. But it takes you to define fascination! I suppose Mrs. Heavyside, however,
could help you there--for nothing short of witchcraft could account to me for her elopement
with that dreary man! To leave her sweet children, too, as if all the men on earth could be
worth to a true mother her teething baby's little toe or finger!"

"Would she never stop--never give one loop-hole for doubt to enter?" I thought.

"But what in the world ails you--has Dunmore, the disconsolate, been making love again? Has
Captain Falconer declared himself too soon? and do you hesitate, on account of Miss Moore?
Don't let that consideration influence you, I beg, for she is the greatest flirt in Savannah,
the truest to the vocation, and I like her for that, anyhow. Whatever a man or woman has to
do, let him or her do earnestly. That isn't exactly Scripture, but near enough, don't you think
so?" and she laughed merrily.

"I have been on deck this morning," I commenced, "Miss Lamarque, and saw Christian Garth, and--"

"He has been terrifying and electrifying you again with his tale of horrors--there, it is all
out. Why, he is as sensational as 'Jane Eyre,' this new English novel I am just reading," drawing
it from under her pillow and holding it aloft as she spoke. "Currer Bell is not more mysteriously
awful, but Garth is not artistic. I detected his intention by the inconsistency of his expression
of face, which bore no part in his narrative, and at once exposed him, you must remember--"

"Oh, yes--but this time--"

"Nonsense, Miriam Harz! the iceberg is gone, I know. Why, what a nervous coward you are, to
be sure, with all that assumed bravery! I am twice as courageous, I do believe, despite appearances;
I really begin to be of opinion that it is safer to be at sea than on land--now what do you
think of that for a heterodoxy?--A second cup? why, of course, and a third, if you want it;
I am delighted you like it. These little Sèvres toys are but thimbles, but I always carry them
about with me by sea and land, and have for years; I feel as if there were luck in them, not
one of the original three has been broken--there--there!--just as I was boasting, too!--never
mind, such accidents will occur; but your pretty pongee dress is sadly stained with the coffee;
besides, as you dropped the cup, it is your luck, not mine; and I want an odd saucer, anyhow,
to feed Desirée out of; she sleeps in that willow basket you see in the corner of the state-room,
Miss Harz, and is lazy, like her mistress, of mornings.--Desirée! Desirée! peep out, can't
you, now you have your long-desired Sèvres saucer to lap milk from?--She won't touch delft,
Miss Harz. She is the most fastidious little creature!"

"Alas! alas!" and I groaned aloud.

"Not taking on about that silly cup, I hope--no; what can it be then, a megrim? No. Well, I
can't imagine any thing worse, to save my life. Here, let me read you this, it is fine--it
is where Jane Eyre feels herself deserted, and this comparison about 'the dried-up channel
of a river' thrills one. Just hear it;" and she was about commencing--

"Not now--not now, Miss Lamarque; stern realities demand our attention. Lay your book aside,
be calm, be firm, but listen to me seriously. Christian Garth informs me, nor he alone--my
own eyes have done the rest--that the cotton in the hold has taken fire from the lightning
yesterday; has been slowly smouldering ever since the mast was struck--and that the ship's
hours are numbered!"

"O God! O God!" and she bowed her head upon her clasped and quivering hands. "But, Captain
Ambrose--he did not tell you so?" looking up suddenly. "Christian Garth, indeed! his impudence
is surprising--another hoax, I suppose," and she tried to smile; "such a coarse creature, too!"

"We shall see, but for the present say nothing; only get up and dress as quickly as you can,
but it is important to be very quiet, for fear of causing confusion. I have promised discretion."

"Call Dominica, then, for me, Miss Harz," gasping and stretching forth her arms. "I can do
nothing for myself--nothing--I am so weak, so helpless. Yet I must believe he is--you are mistaken!"

"I trust it may prove so. But let me assist you; Dominica is best employed making ready the
little ones and giving them food--strengthening them for the struggle. She will be nerveless
if she knows the truth, and you are not in a condition to conceal it."

"Just as you will, then. My trunk--will you be so kind as to unlock it and give me out the
tray--that picture? After that I can get along alone."

I silently did as she desired, and saw her place a covered miniature about her neck before
she arose. Very few minutes sufficed this morning for her toilet--usually a tedious and fastidious
one--her dress, her bonnet, her shawl, were hastily thrown on, her watch secured with the few
jewels lying upon the night-table; the rest of her valuables were with other boxes in the hold,
the repository of all unneeded baggage, and these, of course, she could scarcely hope to save
in case of fire, even if lives were rescued.

Then, together, we went out, just in time to join the little troop of young children and nurses
on their way to the deck. Miss Lamarque did not reply to their tumultuous greeting, but, silently
taking the baby Florry, her namesake, in her arms, kissed her many times. I had told her while,
she was dressing, of the smoke-wreaths about the base of the broken mast, and she believed
in the testimony my eyes had afforded me far more than in the reports of Christian Garth. We
did not encounter Mr. Lamarque when we first went on deck; he had gone forward to smoke, some
one said; but Captain Ambrose was standing alone, telescope in hand, and to him we addressed
ourselves, quietly.

He seemed startled when I disclosed the result of my observation--for I did not choose to commit
the pilot--but he did not attempt to deny the truth of the condition of things, and conjured
us both to entire quiet and composure, and, if possible, to absolute silence. The safety of
five hundred people, he said, depended on our discretion; the ship might not ignite for days,
if at all, he thought, so carefully had the air been excluded from the cotton by the process
of tight calking, so as to seal it almost hermetically; indeed, the fire might be wholly extinguished
by the pumps, which were constantly at work, pouring streams of water around and through the
hold; and a panic would be equal to a fire in any case. Such were his calmness and apparent
faith in his own words, that they did much to allay Miss Lamarque's fears. My own were little
soothed--I never doubted from the beginning what the end would be.

Mr. Lamarque approached us while the conference with the captain was going on, and, under the
seal of secrecy, the condition of affairs was communicated to that gentleman.

I never saw a man so crushed and calm at the same time. His handsome face seemed turned to
stone--he scarcely spoke at all, and made no inquiries. I think his mind, like mine, was made
up to the worst. Yet he commanded himself so far as to go to the breakfast-table and superintend
the meal of his little children, about whom he hung, like a mother-bird who sees the shadow
of a hawk above her brood, from that moment until the dénoûment of the drama separated us two
forever.

Miss Lamarque and I sat down together on a bench, while the host of hungry passengers crowded
down to the cabin at the welcome summons of the bell, and I was aware again of the pale widow
and her patient child standing near me.

A sudden thought occurred to me. This woman, more than any one among us, needed the strengthening
stimulus of good food, and this meal might be her last on shipboard--on earth, perhaps--for
a dull, low, ominous sound began to make itself heard to my ear as soon as the murmur of the
crowd subsided.

"Trust me with your child again while you go down and eat your breakfast in my place to-day.
It is a whim of mine. I have had coffee with this lady in her state-room, and shall not appear
at the table. You may bring me a slice of bread, if you choose, when you come back, and one
for baby. Do not refuse me this favor."

Much pleased at my attention, as I could see, she went to the grand first table, with its high-heaped
salvers of snowy rolls and biscuit, its delicate birds and fowls, its fragrant coffee and tea,
so different from the dregs of the humble board at which her second-class ticket alone entitled
her to appear; and, to save her from possible humiliation, I wrote a line to the steward; so
she feasted, no doubt, in state.

Again I enacted the rôle of self-appointed nurse to a creature that looked more like a fairy
changeling than a flesh-and-blood creation.

"You are a strange woman, Miriam Harz! At such an hour as this, what matters the quality of
food?" said Miss Lamarque, sententiously. "After all, what can that invalid and her child be
to you in any case? They are essentially common and mean. You never saw them before, and may
never see them again."

"In view of such a catastrophe as that before us, all distinctions fade, Miss Lamarque. This
is the last meal any one will take on the ship Kosciusko--she is doomed! The woman might as
well get strength for the chance of saving herself and child. I doubt whether any second table
will be spread to-day!" I spoke with anguish.

"You cannot believe this! Why, after what the captain said, days may go by before any real
danger manifests itself! Ships must pass in the interval--many ships may pass to-day, within
a few hours, ready for our relief, if needed; and see, the smoke has ceased to curl about your
broken main-mast! That shows convincingly that the fire is being gotten under--extinguished,
probably."

"Oh, no! no! no! not with that low, terrible roaring in the hold. The fire is gaining strength,
and our agony will soon he over."

I sat with, clasped hands and bowed head before her, insensible to her words. I suppose she
strove to strengthen me. I think she tried to soothe. Failing in both, she rose and went away,
and in her place came Christian Garth, relieved from the helm, and stood a moment beside me.

"Don't be down-hearted, young gal, an' wait for me. Ef the Lord lets me, I will save you, and
the old lady, too; that is, ef she is your aunt or mother or near of kin."

I shook my head drearily.

"You have no hope, then, Mr. Garth?"

"Hope? yes; the best of hope--the Christian's hope. God can do any thing He pleases, we all
know, and He may stretch forth his hand when all seems dark; but Captain Ambrose is not one
to run a risk of that sort, so he has sent me to work upon a raft--one of two he is making
for the seamen if the wust comes to the wust. But you see, I have been on lost ships afore
now, an' I know there is no larboard nor starboard rules when men are skeered. So I shall make
my raft to hold the womenfolk, for the boats will be for the sailors--mark my word--and them
that's wise will wait till the press is over and take the rafts."

"There are little children," I said; "six of them belonging to that lady and Mr. Lamarque.
Don't forget them, Mr. Garth, and the poor little widow coming now to claim her baby; this
miserable little creature I am holding until she breakfasts. Don't lose sight of these, either,
in the crowd, if, indeed, we are obliged to have recourse to your raft."

"Pray rayther that it may float us all to safety," he said, sternly, "for your best chance
of being saved will be on that raft, if matters go as I think they will. Trust me, for I will
come;" and he passed away just before the little widow came to my side again.

"I came up as soon as I could, to relieve you. I know how cross baby is when he gets restless,
and I was afraid you might tire of him. See! I have brought his bread, and this waiter of tea
and toast for you; now you must take a mouthful."

She knew nothing of our danger, it was plain. "Did you leave the other passengers at table?"
I asked; "the captain, was he there?"

The question was never answered, for the attention of my interlocutor was riveted now, as was
my own, on the companion-way, from which a wild and frightened-looking crowd was densely emerging,
with a confused hum of voices that announced their recognition of their impending danger. The
change of age, of pain, of woe, seemed sealed upon each aspect, as one by one, and phantom-like,
in rapid succession, those who had so lately gone down to feast returned to the upper day,
like grim ghosts coming from a church-yard carnival.

It was a sight to stir the stoutest spirit.

At the close of the repast, the captain had announced the truth, to his passengers, and followed
them now to enjoin them to firmness and efficiency, both so greatly needed at this crisis.

Mounted on the capstan, he addressed them briefly, and not without influence. Such was the
power of his simple and manly bearing over these distracted souls, that even the wildest listened
with decorum.

This was no immigrant-ship, loaded with stolid or desperate men, insensible of high teachings,
and alone desirous of personal safety. Yet the universal instinct asserted itself, and for
the time courtesies were set aside, and family affections were all that were regarded.

Miss Lamarque, pale, yet collected, now stood surrounded by the children of her brother, leaning
upon his arm while the captain spoke. Husbands and wives were together, sisters and brothers,
servants and their masters--each group revealed its several household affinities. We only were
alone--the dreary little widow, whose name I never knew, and Miriam Monfort; and on natural
principles we clung together.

It is true that Miss Lamarque, by many signs, implored me to come to her, but I would not.
It was like intruding on a bed of death, I felt, to break through ties of blood at such a time,
by thrusting a foreign presence amid devoted relatives; and I was too proud, or perhaps too
selfish, to intrude where I must be secondary, unless I took away another's rights.

The captain had promised, in his brief address, to protect his passengers to the utmost of
his power--leaving the result with God. He had entreated them to be calm, and to preserve order--so
essential to safety; had mentioned his confidence that a ship must pass before the catastrophe
could possibly occur; but added that, to prepare for the worst, he had ordered the construction
of two rafts--one for the use of the seamen, the other for the reception of food and necessaries.

His plan was to attach these to the larger boats, and so provide against want; in the certainty,
however, that on such a route relief must soon present itself, in the shape of ship or steamer.

He called on all able to abet his exertions to present themselves forthwith, so that universal
safety might be insured; not only by making the rafts, but the securing of food upon them,
and comforts for the women and children, who represented so large a portion of the passengers.
He answered for the fidelity of his seamen with his life. There was not one among them, he
knew, who would lift a finger to disobey him. He said these words in conclusion:

"And now, if there is any one present sufficiently imbued with the grace of God to fix the
anxious minds of these voyagers in prayer, such at least of them as are powerless otherwise
to aid our exertions, let him appear and minister to their tribulation. This task is not for
me, although the holiest. My duties call me elsewhere."

So adjured, a man, whose wild, fanatical appearance had given rise to the rumor that the famous
"Lorenzo Dow" was on board, sprang on a bulkhead, and commenced to exhort the crowd about him,
from which a file of pale, determined-looking men was slowly emerging to join the seamen at
the other end of the vessel in their efforts for the public weal. But many lingered, either
overcome and paralyzed by the stringency of circumstances, or unequal to exertions from personal
causes--aged men, women, and children, chiefly--and to these the frenzied speaker continued
to address his words of exhortation and warning.

Such a tirade of terrible objurgation I felt was entirely out of place in a scene like this,
and calculated to excite the worst passions of the human mind, instead of persuading it to
serenity and submission, so essential now; for to me the captain's last words represented the
final grace of the preacher, when, with closed eyes and outspread hands, he dismissed his flock
from the temple at the close of the services. From that vessel and all that concerned it we
were virtually enfranchised from that moment--dismissed to destruction, so to speak, by fire
or flood, or rescue from beyond, as the case might be, to life or death, as God willed--for
the ship's mission was accomplished.

I shrank as far as possible from the wild, waving arms, the frenzied eyes, the gaunt and wolfish
aspect, the piercing, agonized voice of the fanatic, who had assumed to himself the solemn
office of soul-comforter in a time of extremity. I saw from a distance his long, lank figure
writhing like a sapling in a storm, as it overtopped the crowd; but his words were lost on
my ear, and I sat leaning back against the bulwark with folded hands, absorbed in my own thoughts,
when a young girl, bursting from the throng, came and threw herself down before me, and buried
her face in my lap, convulsed with sobs. When she looked up, I recognized the young person
who had bathed my face in the morning during my partial swoon--a fair and lovely-looking girl
of about eighteen years, pallid and ill now with excitement.

"Oh, it is so terrible!" she cried; "I cannot--cannot bear it, and he says we are all hopelessly
lost unless we have repented; that there is no death-bed salvation; and this is our death-bed,
you know, for the Spanish ship passed us without stopping, and we scarcely hope to see another.
O cruel, cruel fiends! to pretend they did not understand our signals, and leave us to destruction."

And she clasped her hands in mute and bitter despair--no actress was ever so impressive.

"We must make up our minds to the worst," I said, as calmly as I could. "Then, if God sees
fit to deliver us, we shall be all the more thankful. You must not believe what this ignorant
and panic-stricken man tells you. Think of the thief on the cross whom Christ pardoned in dying."

"Then you hope to be permitted to see God! You dare to hope this?" she asked, gazing into my
very eyes, so closely did she come to me.

"Oh, surely in his own good time! I have done nothing so very wicked, I hope, as to exclude
me from my Father's face forever--have you? Now, don't be frightened; speak calmly."

"I don't know--I don't know. I should be afraid not to call myself desperately wicked at such
a time; he says we all are, you know. We are all miserable sinners."

"It is very abject to talk and feel thus, and I don't believe that God approves of it," I said,
indignantly. "He gives us self-respect, and commands us to cherish it. Such abasement is unworthy
of Christian souls. It is very bitter to die, as young as we are; but, if we have done our
best to serve Him, we need--we ought not to be afraid to meet our God."

She clung to my outstretched hand. She strengthened my spirit by the fullness of her need.
The feeble widow with her child, too, crept close to me, weeping and trembling.

"Do not leave me," she entreated; "let us stay together to the very last."

"Nay, that may be a long time," I answered, smiling feebly, and nerved for the first time to
encouragement; "for the captain will do his best to save his passengers--the women especially,
I cannot doubt; and see what bounteous provision he is making for their support!"

And I pointed to the piles of flour and sugar barrels, the boxes of crackers and of hams, of
figs and raisins, the hampers of wine and ale, which were profusely piled on the quarter-deck
ready for lowering to the rafts.

"He means to take care of us, you see, by the permission of Providence," I said, almost strengthened
by this dependence, "and we will remain calmly together, and drink whatever cup God offers
us--humbly, I hope." Yet, even as I spoke, my heart rebelled against the fiat of my fate, and
the young life within me rose up in fierce conflict with its doom.

At this moment of bitter strife of heart, Mr. Dunmore, the youthful poet of whom I have already
spoken, stood before me.

"I have found you at last," he said, "deputed as I am to do so by Miss Lamarque. It is a point
of honor with her to care for you personally in this crisis. You know Major Favraud placed
you under her care; besides that, her regard for you impels this request. She bids me say--"

I interrupted him hastily.

"This is no time for ceremonials, truly, Mr. Dunmore; yet, had family concurrence been perfect,
it seems to me that her brother might have undertaken this mission. I have no wish to thrust
myself undesired into any household circle at such a crisis."

"He is wholly absorbed with his children."

"As he ought to be, Mr. Dunmore, and, when the time of peril comes, it is of their needs alone
that he will and must think, I am alone in this vessel, as I shall remain. I did not leave
Savannah under Miss Lamarque's care. She is very generous, very considerate, but I will not
embarrass her motions, nor yours, nor any one's. It is the duty of Captain Ambrose to see to
the welfare of his female passengers. I shall not be forgotten among these--"

He stood before me with his knightly head uncovered, his handsome face as calm as though he
were a guest at a festival instead of a patient and interested watcher at a funeral-pyre. His
birth, his breeding, his genius even, asserted themselves in that mortal hour. He was calm,
collected, serious, but not afraid.

"The peril will be great to all, of course," he said, quietly, "but no gentleman will prefer
his own safety to that of the most humble and desolate woman on the ship. To you, Miss Harz,
I devote my energies to-day, to you and these ladies of your party, whoever they may be--,"
bowing gently as he spoke. "I may fail in delivering you from danger, but it shall not be for
want of effort on my part. Believe my words, I have less care for life than most people, and
now let me offer you my escort through that maddened crowd (the rest may follow closely), to
reach Miss Lamarque."

"No, Mr. Dunmore, I must remain just where I am, I have promised myself to do so; this is much;
and these unhappy women--they, like myself, are alone, or seem to be. Should you see fit to
do so, and be willing to be so encumbered, you can return after a lapse of time; but make no
point of this, I entreat you. I think that Captain Ambrose will observe good order and save
his helpless ones first. You know he promised this--"

There was a moment's pause, and movement of eye and hand, and then he spoke again, very softly:

"Yes, and much more that can never be fulfilled, for already the cabin is in flames, the companion-way
is closed, and the fire in the hold is making fearful headway. I have heard the seamen have
sworn to secure the boats; you are strong and resolute--be prepared for the very worst." Then,
speaking in his usual tone, he added: "Since the banner of Spain passed near enough to show
us the rampant lions and castles on its crimson shield, and yet made no sign, I have had little
hope of rescue from a ship. It was ominous!"

"Not intended, then," I said, eagerly. "Oh, I am glad of this, at least, for the honor of human
nature."

"A strange consideration at such a time! You are a study to me, Miss Harz; yours is not apathy,
like mine, but true courage, even in this death-struggle, and I will save you if I can, for
you have a noble soul!"

All further dialogue was cut short by the wild shout that rose from the crowd, the delusive
cry of "A sail, a sail!" and Dunmore rushed with the rest to descry its myth-like form, if
possible. It was some moments before hope again died down to a flat level of despair.

Too remote for signal or trumpet was that distant, white-winged vessel gliding securely on
its path of peace, unconscious of the extremity of the mighty steamer it distinguished dimly,
no doubt, by the aid of telescopes.

However this might have been, for the second time on that day of direst exigency, a ship went
by, observed yet unobserving.

Fainter and fainter grew the accents of the fierce, fanatical preacher; his excitement forsook
him as the danger became more and more imminent.

The crowd broke into groups. Pale, stern men, with rigid features, who had been employed aiding
in the construction of the rafts, returned now to the sides of their wives and children.

Through a vista on the deck I discerned Miss Lamarque, sitting quietly with her youngest nursling
in her arms, beside her brother. His children and slaves were gathered around her knees. Dunmore
was giving her my message, I could not doubt, from the glances she cast in my direction, as
he stood near by. I knew that he would soon turn to come again, but my resolution was fixed.

Captain Ambrose, with a face grown old in half a day, gray, abstracted, wretched, passed and
repassed me several times, telescope in hand.

Ralph Maxwell on the round-house kept constant watch, his attitude dauntless, his face uplifted
and keen, field-glass in hand. His West-Point training stood him in good stead now. Captain
Falconer, a naval officer, had returned to the side of Miss Oscanyan, the woman he had loved
hopelessly for years, and, before the scene closed between us forever, I saw him clasp her
to his bosom; so that trying hour had for some high spirits is crowning consolations, its solace
and reward, and, whatever else was in store, the martyrdom of love was over.

An eager hand caught my shawl. "He is coming back, coming to persuade you to leave us," said
the young girl; "but you have promised not to part from us, and I feel that God will remember
us if we remain together firm and fast, we three."

Then the pale widow spoke in turn: "Let me stay beside you too," she entreated; "it makes me
feel stronger, I am so desolate--" and she bowed her head and wept.

I would have said in the strange, calm bitterness that possessed my soul: "What value has life
to you and your deformed one? Poor, widowed, sickly, and despised, why should you wish to live?
Why encumber me?"

But thoughts like these were not for human utterance now, and we sat together, hand locked
in hand for a time, waiting for the end, as men may wait in years to come, when the earth is
gray with sin, for the coming of the fiery comet that they know is destined to consume them.

For was not this ship our world, penned in as we were on every side, and separated from all
else by an ocean inexorable and illimitable as space, and were not we likewise looking forward
to a fiery doom--our finite, perhaps final, day of judgment?

I could understand then, for the first time, how condemned criminals feel--well, strong, yet
dying! I knew how Walter La Vigne, the self-doomed, had felt, and some passages of Madame Roland's
appeal rose visibly before me, as if written on the air rather than in my memory. I had read
the book at Beauseincourt, and it had powerfully impressed me; and this, I remember, was the
passage that swept across my brain:

"And thou whom I dare not name, wouldst thou mourn to see me preceding thee to a place where
we can love one another without wrong--where nothing will prevent our union--where all pernicious
prejudices, all arbitrary exclusions, all hateful passions, and all tyranny, are silent? I
shall wait for thee, then, and rest!"

So centred were my dying thoughts on Wentworth--so calmly did I await the great change that
men call sudden death!

All this time--a time much briefer than that I have taken in recounting my sensations--the
glorious summer's sun, the sun of morning, was bathing the sea; the ship, with beauty, and
a soft, fresh breeze, was fanning every pallid brow with a caressing, silken wing, that seemed
to mock its wretchedness.

I thought not once of Christian Garth. I had ceased to strain my eyes for a distant sail, to
seek to compromise with my fate or make conditions with my Creator. Dunmore was forgotten.
I was composed to die--not resigned. These things are different; a bitter patience possessed
me that I felt would sustain me to the end, but I was not satisfied that my doom was just or
opportune.

"Farewell, sweet, young, vigorous life!" I moaned aloud. "Farewell, Miriam! It will not be
thou, but a phantom, that shall arise from dead ashes! Farewell, dear hand, that hast served
me long and well!" and I kissed my own right hand. I had not known until that moment how truly
I loved myself. "Sister, lover, farewell! Mother, father, receive me! Gentle Constance, reach
forth thy guiding hand and lead me to my parents! Wentworth, remember me! Saviour, my soul
is thine!"

I bowed my head. I had no more to say. Unwilling I was to die--afraid I was not; for, as I
sat there, my whole life swept before me, as it is said to do before the eyes of the drowning,
and rapidly as one may sweep the gamut on a piano with one introverted finger, and I saw myself
as though I had been another. I had done nothing to make me afraid to meet my God; so, with
closed eyes, I lingered in the shadow, conscious of nothing save exceeding calm, when the grasp
of my gentle friend of the moment aroused me to a sense of what was occurring, and I saw, with
horror indescribable, the fierce flames leaping from the deck, heard the hoarse shouts, beheld
the lurid surging of an agonized and despairing multitude! But above all rang the clear, trumpet-tones
of Captain Ambrose, soon to sink in death:

"To the boats--to the boats! but save the women first--the children--as ye are Christian men!
So help ye, mighty God!"

I heard later how signally this noble charge was disregarded; how utterly self triumphed over
generosity and duty; and how, in enforcing the example all should have followed, Captain Ambrose
lost his valiant, valuable life. But this was thought nothing of then, and I sat patiently
down to perish!

CHAPTER IV.

It was sunset when I first felt able to sit up beneath the awning of sails which provident
hands had stretched above the central platform reserved for the occupancy of the women and
children, spread thick with mattresses on the raft, and look about me understandingly.

We were riding smoothly over the long, low, level billows of that summer sea, sustained beyond
their reach on what seemed a rude barn-floor, composed as this was of the masts, booms, and
yards, roughly lashed together by tarred ropes, no longer needed on the destined ship, and
which had been assigned by the captain for that purpose to Christian Garth.

A mast was erected in the front of this hastily-constructed raft, on three sides of which were
breastworks, with strong, loose ropes attached, so that those who clung to this refuge might
support themselves with comparative safety, or rather have a chance for life, when our "floating
grave" should hang suspended perpendicularly on the steep side of a mountain-billow, or drift
beneath it.

Just below, and surrounding the small, elevated platform on which I found myself when I revived,
stretched on a slender mattress by the side of my feeble widow and her moaning child, were
rows of barrels, firmly fastened by cleats, so as insure, to some degree, not only the preservation
of our food and water, but to form a sort of bulwark of protection for those who occupied the
central portion of the raft.

The young girl, of whom I have spoken as having attached herself to me during the last moments
of my stay on shipboard, and an old negro woman, whose crooning hymns made a strange accompaniment
to the dashing waters, and whose stolid tranquillity seemed to reproach my anguish, were our
only companions on the sort of dais assigned to his female passengers by Christian Garth.

The man himself, to whom we owed our deliverance, stood near his primitive mast, trimming his
sail carefully, and looking out with his far-reaching, sagacious ken over the waste of waters,
into which the blood-red, full-orbed sun seemed dipping, suddenly, as for his night-bath.

A few of the common passengers of the Kosciusko, and a knot of the seamen, comprising not more
than twenty souls, composed the groups, scattered about the roughly yet securely lashed raft,
silent and observant all, as men who face their doom are apt to be.

I looked in vain for one familiar face, and for a moment regretted that I had been withheld,
as by some spell, for whose weird influence I could never sufficiently account, from having
cast my destiny with theirs, who were so much nearer to me in station and congeniality of spirit
than those around me. With Miss Lamarque's hand locked in mine, I should have vied with her,
I felt, in cheerful courage; and the knightly calmness of Dunmore might have sustained my drooping,
fainting soul. These were my peers, and, with them, I should have been better content to be tried.

But the white squall, which had in no way affected us (so small and partial was the sphere
of its influence), had sufficed to separate ours irretrievably from our companion-raft, and
the squadron of boats that had promised not to forsake as. And now the eye of agony was strained
in vain over the weltering waste, for a vestige of those refugees from the Kosciusko--buried,
perhaps, a thousand fathoms deep, by their sudden visitors, beneath the waves of that deadly
Atlantic sea.

Tears rained over my face as I thought of this probability, and, hopeless as I was of rescue,
the almost certain fate of my companion-voyagers fell over me like a pall. "Better, perhaps--far
better had it been"--I thought so then--"had we all perished together in that terrific sheet
of flame that rose up like a dividing barrier between us at the last. Fit emblem of the final
day of doom. Our trials were but begun. What more remained? God in heaven only knew!"

And rapidly, and in panoramic succession, all the fearful adventures of raft and boat that
I had ever read of, or heard related, passed across my mind, ending with that latest, and perhaps
the most fearful of all--the wreck of the Medusa!

The night came down serene and beautiful. As the sun disappeared in ocean, up rose the full-orbed
moon--crimson and magnified by surrounding vapors--that to the practised eye portended future
tempest, calm as the ocean and the heavens then seemed.

The constellations, singularly distinct and splendid, had the power to fix and fascinate my
vision--never felt before--as they shone above me, clear and crystalline as enthroned in space--judges,
and spectators, cold and pitiless as it seemed to me, in the strangeness and forlornness of
my condition--Arcturus, and the Ursas, great and little, and Lyra, and the Corona Borealis,
Berenice, and Hydra, and Cassiopea's chair; these and many more. I marked them all with a calm
scrutiny that belongs to terror in some phases. The stars seemed mocking eyes that night--smiling
and safe in heaven--the moon, a cold and cruel enemy with her vapory train, so grandly sailing
across the cloudless heaven--so careless of our fate--the wreck of a ruined world as many deem
her--veiling in light her inward desolation.

A faint and vapory comet lurked on the horizon--like a ghastly messenger--scarcely discernible
to the human eyes, yet vaguely ominous and suggestive--a spirit-ship it might be--watching
in silence to hear away the souls of those lost at sea!

There was deep stillness--unbroken, save by the lapping and plashing waters. Even the crooning
hymns of the old negro woman had died away; and the moans of the suffering child, and the sobs
of the weary mother, and the eager exclamations of Ada Greene (for such I learned was the name
of my young companion), were, for a season, lost alike in sleep.

Food had been distributed--prayer had been offered--all seemed favorable so far to our preservation.
We were on the track of voyage--the pathway of ships--and the sea was tranquil as a summer
lake; up to this point, the arm of God had been extended over us almost visibly. Would He forsake
us now? I questioned thus, and yet I could not, dare not, hope as others hoped!

The morning came; I woke, aroused by Salva's song, from troubled sleep; and, as I rose to a
sitting posture, a troop of sea-birds that had been swooping overhead, fled with a fiend-like
screaming.

The mother and child were already consuming their scant allowance of food. Ada Greene was standing
self-poised, swaying like a slender reed with the motion of the raft, so as never to lose her
balance, like a young acrobat, with her folded arms, her floating hair, and fair Aurora face,
uplifted to the day.

Over the raft were scattered groups of men taking their morning meal; but, as before, the stalwart
form of Christian Garth was at the helm, or rather, mast and rudder merged in one, which he
controlled with calm, sagacious power.

"Is there a ship in the distance, that you gaze so earnestly?" I asked of the young girl as
I put back my hair that had clustered thickly over my face in my uneasy slumber, and followed
eagerly the direction of her eyes.

"Oh! no; only a school of dolphins; but it is so pretty! Some came quite near just now; the
men were harpooning them; but if we had them we could not cook them, you know, on this miserable
contrivance."

"One we should be very grateful for, Ada, since it is all that lies between us and destruction!"
I answered, sorrowfully, for the levity of her spirit grieved and shocked me.

"I don't know about that; I think we might as well have gone down at once as stay here, and
be roasted and starved. How hot it is to-day! What would I not give for a good glass of ice-water!
Don't look so shocked; we shall be saved, of course. I am not the least afraid about that,
for Mr. Garth says we must see a ship before evening. Don't you mark the flag flying at the
mast-head? He brought it on board on purpose, so that they might not mistake our country (the
packets, I mean), and give us the go-by as that Spanish vessel did! But they do say that was
a pirate; and that, instead of sitting on a plank, we should have been walking a plank by this
time, had they rescued us. I'm rather glad they didn't, though, after all--things couldn't
be much worse than they are, could they, now?--There, I came very near falling, I declare!"

The moans of the sick woman at my side became almost constant toward noon; and she was obliged
to surrender her infant wholly to my charge, for the hæmorrhage of the day before had returned,
and she was fast drifting into unconsciousness. "Water, water!" was the only intelligible cry
that left her lips, and that we had to give was warm and brackish, from the occasional lapping
of the sea against the barrels, into which it oozed insensibly.

The sun shone down hot and brazen, from the lurid heavens, covered with filmy clouds, so equally
overspreading it that a thin, gray veil seemed to interpose between us and its scorching rays,
scarcely tempering them by its diaphanous medium.

Beneath it lay the sea, like a copper shield, smooth and glowing, seething like a boiling caldron,
with its level foam, for the long, low-rolling billows lifted themselves but lazily from Ocean's
breast, and assumed no distinctness of form or motion. Not the faintest breeze came to relieve
the stifling closeness of the atmosphere, or lift the collapsed sail, or furled flag, that
clung around our mast. The air shimmered visibly around us, as though undergoing some transformation
from the heat, some culinary process, through which it was to be rendered unfit for human lips
to breathe. Birds flew low and heavily around the raft, as though their wings met such resistance
as fish find in water, alighting occasionally to pick up languidly morsels of rejected food.

Still the old negro's crooning hymns went on, recommenced with morning light. To my sad heart,
the refrain bore a mournful significance:

  "In the land of the New Jerusalem
  There shall be no more sea."

She sat, a wrinkled hag, with a leering, repulsive face, with her feet planted firmly on her
mattress, her knees elevated, her long, ape-like arms closely embracing these--her fingers,
strung with brass and silver rings, intertwined with snake-like flexibility.

On her head was the inevitable bright-colored handkerchief, the badge of her race, or rather
of her condition in those days, and she wore the decent, blue-cotton frock, which marked her
for a plantation-negro. Large hoops were in her flat, enormous ears, that seemed to suspend
her shoulders as they touched them, drawn up and narrowed as these were, even beyond their
natural hideousness, by her attitude, one which she maintained as stolidly as a dervish.

"You must help us," I said, at last, when the crisis came, and affairs waxed desperate. "You
must take the child, at least, and care for him. See, it requires two persons to sustain his
dying mother--one to wet her lips, one--"

"'Deed, honey," she interrupted, coolly, "you must 'scuse me dis oncst; I has jus' as much
to do as I kin posomply 'complish, in keepin' of myself dry, comfable, and singin' ob my hyme-toones.
We has all to take our chances dis time, an' do for our own selves, black and white; an' I
don't see none ob my own white folks on dis raf', wich I is mighty proud of. Dar, now! I does
b'leve dat is a ship sail way off dar. Does you see it, honey?"

And she pointed to a large white gull, skimming the main at some distance. Disgusted with her
selfishness, I vouchsafed her no farther notice at the time, and her crooning went on during
the whole period of the bitter death-struggle of that poor sufferer, whose name I never knew,
but whose little, deformed waif, the orphan of the raft, remained my heritage.

"You will take care of him," she had said to me, in her last conscious moments, "my baby-boy,
my little--" the name died on her lips, and she never spoke again.

When she was dead, Christian Garth caused her to be wrapped in sail-cloth, weighted with chains,
and, with a brief prayer, consigned to the deep. His superstitious sailor's fears rebelled
against the idea of keeping a corpse on board one moment longer than necessary, so the rites
of sepulture were speedily accomplished.

When I remonstrated, feebly enough it is true, for exhaustion was supervening on long-sustained
effort, at his haste, which, even under the circumstances, seemed to me indecent, he coolly
spoke of it as a measure essential to the good of all.

Talismanic as were these words on such occasion, mine were the lips that murmured the brief
prayer, a portion of the solemn Episcopal grave-service that I chanced to remember, above the
poor, pale corpse, even while my weary arms inclosed the struggling child, who, understanding
nothing of the truth, would fain have plunged after his mother into depths unknown.

A low, long roll of thunder smote on the ear, like a message to the ocean, from the heavens
above, as we saw the waters close greedily over the form of our dead passenger. The men who
had launched the body from the raft looked up and listened fearfully, and Christian Garth hastened
to trim his sail.

It was sunset now, and the clouds gathered so rapidly about the sun, that he sank empalled
in purple to his watery bed, leaving no trace behind to mark his faded splendor.

A sudden breeze sprang up, infinitely refreshing at first to soul and sense, and again the
thunder lumbered and crashed about us. The billows heaved and leaped like steeds just freed
from harness, tossing their white manes; the raft shuddered and reeled with a deadly, sickly
motion, like a creature in strong throes, plunging with frantic suddenness into the troughs
of the waves at one moment, as if impelled by fear, then rallying to their summits, only to
cast itself wildly down again.

All was confusion, dire and terrible. Then burst the storm upon us--rain, wind!

I was conscious of clutching, with one hand, a rope which strained and swayed desperately,
while with the other I grasped the affrighted baby to my breast.

Ada Greene and the old negro woman clung together, hanging to the same cord of safety, flung
to them, to all of us, by the hand of Christian Garth.

The barrels strained and groaned, and broke from their fastenings; the awning was wrenched
from its mooring, and swept away; the bitter brine broke over us and choked our cries; the
anguish of death was upon as without its submission. We struggled instinctively to breathe,
to live; we grappled desperately with circumstances; we fought against our doom.

Suddenly the sea dropped to rest--the storm was spent; a low, sighing, soughing gale swept
around our nucleus of despair, and the surging of the sea was like a bitter funeral-wail. The
air grew cold and chill; one vast, pall-like cloud enveloped the whole face of the unpitying
heavens, that seemed literally "to press down upon our very faces like a roof of black marble."

No moon, no stars, were visible; we had no light of any kind, nor could we ascertain the damage
done until the cold, gray morning broke in gloom and rain upon us. Then it was made plain to
us that our food had all been swept overboard--together with six seamen and five of the passengers.
There remained on the raft only three shuddering women and a little child--and a handful of
weary and discouraged men, sustained and led to a sense of duty by the dauntless master-spirit
of one alone--the presence of Christian Garth, indomitable through, all hardships. So it had
fared with us for six-and-thirty hours of our experience on "our floating grave."

We had been washed from our little platform, which ordinarily lifted us above the lapping of
the sea during the prevalence of the storm--and we regained it now, glad to repose even on
the sea-soaked mattresses bereft of awning. By the mercy of God some glutinous sea-zoophytes
had been tangled among them, and by the help of the brine-soaked biscuit in my pocket (crammed
there, it may be remembered, as a precious hoard for a time of dire necessity, on the morning
of the fire, by the small, cunning fingers of the sickly child), we breakfasted, or rather
broke our fast--we four, the child, the negress, Ada Greene, and I--and life was aroused again
in every breast by means of a briny morsel.

"A cup of coffee would not be amiss just now," said the girl, laughing, "but the Lord knows
we can wait."

There was a strange, bright light in the eyes of the young girl as she spoke these words, and
she was arraying her hair coquettishly with some bunches of sea-weed, which had been cast up
by the storm, and from which the eager, famishing lips of the little boy had been permitted
to suck the gluten before discarding the skeleton stems.

That hair was in itself a grace and glory--rippling from crown to waist in sheeny, golden splendor,
fine as silk, and glossy as the yellow floss threads of pale, ripe Indian-corn--beautiful,
even in its dishevelled and drenched condition, as an artist's dream. Devoid as it was of regular
beauty, the face beneath, with its clear blue eyes, red lips, and pure complexion, the pink
and white that reminds one of a sweet-pea or ocean-shell, had struck me as very lovely from
the first; nothing to support this ground work of excellence had I discovered, however, either
in the form of the head, which was ignoble, or the expression of the face, which was both timid
and defiant, or the tones of the voice, which were shrill and harsh by turns--yet, as my fellow-voyager
and sufferer, I was interested in this young creature, not forgetting, either, her attention
during my pending swoon, of which mention has been made.

"I am going to the party, whatever the preacher may say, and whether Captain Ambrose wills
it or no. I am under his care and protection, you see, to go to New York to my aunt, Madame
Du Vert, the famous milliner, and I am to learn her trade. Her name is Greene, so they call
her Du Vert, to make out that she is French--vert is green, in French, you see; or so they
tell me. Now, Captain Ambrose is a church-member, too, and he does not want dancing on his
ship, and so he made the calkers pitch the deck--that was to break up the ball, you know; but
don't tell any one this for the 'land's sake,'" drawing near to me and whispering strangely,
with her forefinger raised--"or all those proud Southern people would pitch into me--pitch,
you understand?" and she laughed merrily--"their white satin slippers and all!"

"You must not talk so, Ada;" and I took her hand, which was burning.

"Why not? Who are you, to prevent me? I am as good as you any day--or Miss Lamarque either,
or any of those haughty ones--though my father was a negro-trader. Well, whose business was
that but God's? If He don't care, who need care?--An't I right, old mammy?" appealing to the
ancient negress, who had suspended her croon to listen.

"Yes, indeed--that you is, honey; right to upholden your own dad--nebber min' what he did to
serbe the debble. But you looks mighty strange, chile, outen your eyes. Wat dat you sees ober
dar--is it a ship, gal?--or must we--" and her voice sank to a mutter--"must we fall back on
dis picaninny, to keep from starvation?--"

I understood her dreadful suggestion even before the words fully left her cannibal lips, exposing
her yellow fangs; from the glance of her cruel eye in the direction of the child, and the working
of her long, crooked talons, rather than fingers, writhed like knotted serpents; I understood
them with an instinct that made me clutch him closely to my breast, and narrowly watch his
enemy from that hour until the time when my brain failed and my eyes closed in unconsciousness,
and with the determination to plunge with him into the sea rather than devote him to such a
fate or yield to such an alternative as this wretch in human form had more than hinted--even
should the animal instinct, underlying every nature, presume to dictate to reason at the last!

We could but die--that was the very worst that Fate had in store for us--but die in the body!
How infinitely worse that the soul should perish through the selfish sensuousness of cannibalism,
which would degrade life itself below dissolution, even if preserved by such means!

"I am ready now to go to Captain Ambrose for assistance," said Ada Greene, poising herself
before me, and having surrendered or forgotten her first idea, evidently, in the new mania
of the moment. "Of course, he does not intend to leave us here to perish, and he is in the
next cabin--but a step; see how easily I can get to him, and I shall be back before you can
say 'Presto!'"

As nimbly as a sea-gull runs upon the sand, the young creature flew across the now level raft
toward the sea, but a strong hand clutched her as she was about to step overboard, and compelled
her back to her place on the platform, where, bound with cords, she lay raving, until sleep
or unconsciousness mercifully supervened to spare me the spectacle of her agony, which no human
power could alleviate.

Hours passed before this "consummation devoutly to be wished" took effect, and, at the end
of that time, my reeling brain, my fainting energies, warned me that I, too, was probably approaching
some dreadful crisis. With a view to the refreshment its waters could possibly afford my head,
I crept quietly from the platform on which the old negro woman held enforced guard over the
insensible form of Ada Greene, and, still clasping the poor helpless one, so mysteriously thrust
upon my tender mercies, to my bosom, I gained the edge of the raft, unnoticed by Christian
Garth, who might otherwise have apprehended me in turn, and borne me back to my allotted precincts,
and hung above the ocean, so as to suffer its cooling spray to fall unceasingly across my burning
forehead.

From some instinctive prompting I had lashed the poor, frail baby to my girdle with the scarf
of knotted silk I wore about my neck, and, wan and exhausted, he lay upon my shoulder tranquilly
as any Indian papoose might do on its mother's breast. A branch of sea-weed floated past as
I looked down--some gracious mermaid's gift, perhaps, extended by her invisible fingers to
greet our famishing lips--and I caught it eagerly, dividing the welcome nutriment with the
perishing child, now patient from weakness and instinctive consciousness, perhaps, of the entire
uselessness of cries and tears.

Whether the weed was a sort of ocean-hasheesh, or wholesome aliment, I never knew, but certain
it is that, from the moment its juices passed my lips, a strange and delightful quietude stole
over my weary senses, fast lapsing, as these had seemed, into unconsciousness when I left my
place to seek the ocean's brink.

The rays of the declining sun seemed for a moment centred on one spot, immediately before my
impending face, supported as this was on one hand, and my sight followed their lance-like rays
to the very floor of ocean!

As the waters of the Red Sea divided for the passage of Moses and the Israelites, so seemed
these to part for my mental eyes, sundered as they were by a golden sword of infinite splendor.

That power which neither pain nor peril can subdue had possession of me now, and, above all,
the bitter circumstances that surrounded me, and, in the face of danger and of death, imagination
asserted her supremacy. My dream was not of passing ship or harbor gained, or rich repast,
or festival, or clustered grapes and sparkling wines, like other sufferers from shipwreck,
fevered with famine, frenzied with despair; but hasheesh or opium never bestowed so fair, so
strange a vision as that which, in my extremity, was mercifully accorded to me.

My eyes pursued the sea-shaft to its base, as a telescope conducts the mortal gaze to revel
in the stars. Merman and mermaid, nereid and triton, were there, rejoicing in the sunbeams
thus poured upon them through this subtle conduit of ocean, as do the motes of summer in her
rays; but soon these disappeared, a motley crowd, confused and joyous, leaving the vision free
to pierce the depths, glowing with golden light, in search of still greater marvels.

Then I saw outspread before me the streets, the fanes, the towers, the dwellings, of a vast,
deserted city, one of those, I could not doubt, that had existed before the flood, and which
had lain submerged for thousands of centuries; the fretwork of the coral-insect was over all
(that worker against time, so slow, so certain), in one monotonous web of solid snow.

Statues of colossal size, and arches of Titanic strength and power, adorned the portals, the
pass-ways, the temples of this metropolis of ocean, guarded as were these last by the effigies
of griffin and dragon, and winged elephant and lion, and stately mastodon and monstrous ichthyosaurus,
all white as gleaming spar.

Gods and demi-gods of gigantic proportions and majestic aspect were carved on the external
walls of the windowless abodes and fanes; and, from the yawning portal of one of these, a temple
vast as Dendera's self, came forth, fold after fold, even as I seemed to gaze, the monstrous
sea-serpent of which mariners dream, more huge, more loathly, than fancy or experience ever
yet portrayed him. I still behold in memory the stately, fearful head, with its eyes of emerald
fire and sweeping, sea-green mane, as it reared its neck for a moment as if to scale the ladder
the sunbeams had thrown down when first emerging from its temple-cavern; and, later, the mottled,
monstrous body, as coil after coil was gradually unwound, until it seemed at last to lie in
all its loathsome length for roods along the silent, shell-paved streets--the scaly monarch
of that scene of human desolation!

I recall the feeling of security that upheld me to look and to observe every motion of the
reptile of my dream.

"He cannot come to me here," I thought. "The ark is sacred, and God's hand is over it; besides,
I hear the singing of the priests, and the dove is about to be cast forth! Will the raven never
come back? Oh, the sweet olive-branch! It falls so lightly! We are nearing the mountain now,
and we shall soon cast anchor!"

Then, among choral chants of joy and thanksgiving, I seemed to sleep. How long this slumber
lasted, or whether it came at all, I never knew. It is a loving and tender thing in our Creator
to decree to us this curtain of unconsciousness when nerve and strength would otherwise give
way beneath the intensity of suffering--a holy and gentle thing for which we are not half thankful
enough in oar estimate of blessings.

My sleep, or swoon, shielded me from long hours of agony, mental and physical, that must have
become unendurable ere the close. As it was, I knew no more after the sea-shaft closed with
its wondrous and mysterious revelations (which I yet recall with marveling and admiration,
as we are wont to do a pageant of the past), until aroused from lethargy by the hand and voice
of Christian Garth.

It was night. I saw the glimmer of the moonlight on the seas, a tranquil, balmy night; but
some dark object was interposed between me and the stars which, I knew, were shining above,
and the raft lay motionless upon the waters. I was aware, when my senses returned temporarily,
that the bow of a mighty vessel was projected above our frail place of refuge, and that we
were saved. The dove had come at last!

When or how we were lifted to the deck of the ship I knew not, for, having partially revived,
I soon drifted away again into profound lethargy and entire unconsciousness, which for a time
seemed death.

CHAPTER V.

A woman sat sewing near my berth in the state-room in which I found myself; a fan, lying on
a small table at her side, betokened in what manner she had divided her attentions--between
her needle and her helpless charge. I thought, indeed, that I had felt its soft plumes glide
gently across my face in the very moment of my awakening, in the first amazement of which I
but dimly comprehended the circumstances that surrounded me.

"What brought this stranger to my pillow? Who and what was she? Where was I!" These were my
mental queries at the first. Then, as the truth gradually dawned over my sluggish and bewildered
brain, I lay quietly revolving matters, and noticed my self-constituted nurse, and my surroundings,
with the close yet careless observation of a child.

The woman, on whom my gaze was earliest fixed (while her own seemed riveted on the work upon
her knee), was of middle age or beyond it, of medium size, of square and sturdy make, and homely
to the very verge of ugliness. She was dressed plainly, if not commonly, in black, but there
was a general air of decency about her that seemed to place her beyond the sphere of servitude.
She wore spectacles set in tortoise-shell frames, and she wore her iron-gray hair straight
back behind small, funnel-shaped ears, and gathered into the tightest knot behind. Her head
was flat and narrow at the summit, though broad at and above the base of the brain. Her forehead,
wide yet low, was ignoble in expression. The mouth, shaped like a horseshoe, was curved down
at the corners, and was full of sullen resolution. The nose, pinched, yet not pointed, showed
scarcely any nostril, and might as well have been made of wood, for any meaning it betrayed.
Her eyebrows were short, wide, rugged, and irregular, though very black; the cast-down eyes,
of course, so far inscrutable.

She was shaping a flimsy, black-silk dress, and doing it deftly, though it was a marvel to
me how hands so stiff and cramped as hers appeared to be could handle a needle at all.

On one of these gnarled and unlovely fingers she wore a ring which, in the idleness of the
mood that possessed me, I examined listlessly. It was an old-fashioned and slender circle of
gold, so pale that it looked silvery, such as in times long past had commonly been used either
for troth-plight or marriage-vows, surmounted by two small united hearts of the same dull metal
by way of ornament. Mrs. Austin, I remembered, possessed one, the aversion of my childhood,
that seemed its counterpart.

My weary eyes wandered from her at last, to take in the accessories of my chamber, tiny as
this was, and I saw that against the wall were hanging a gentleman's greatcoat and hand-satchel.
Cigars and books were piled on the same table which held the spool and scissors of my companion,
and a pair of cloth slippers, embroidered with colored chenilles and quilted lining, of masculine
size and shape, reposed upon the floor. A cane and umbrella were secured neatly in a small
corner rack. There were no traces, I saw, of feminine occupancy beyond the transient implements
of industry alluded to.

Suddenly, in their languid, listless roving, my eyes encountered those of my attendant fixed
full upon me, while a smile distorted the homely, sallow face, disclosing a set of yellow teeth,
sound, short, and strong, like regular grains of corn.

In those eyes, in that mouth and saffron teeth, lay the whole power and character of this repulsive
and disagreeable physiognomy.

Those feline orbs of mingled gray and green, with their small, pointed pupils, were keen, vigilant,
and observing beyond all eyes it had ever before or since been my lot to encounter. After meeting
their penetrating glance I was not surprised to hear their possessor accost me in clear, metallic
tones, that seemed only the result of her gift of insight, and consistent with it.

"You are awake and yourself again, young lady, I am glad to see! You have slept very quietly
for the last few hours, and your fever is wellnigh broken. Will you have some food now? You
need it; you must be weak."

"Yes, very weak; but not hungry at all. I do not want to eat. Just let me lie quietly awhile.
It is such enjoyment."

She complied silently and judiciously with my request.

After a satisfactory pause, during which I had gradually collected my ideas, I inquired, suddenly:

"How long is it since we were lifted from the raft, and where are the other survivors?"

"All safe, I believe, and on board, well cared for, like yourself. It has been nearly two days
since your raft was overhauled. This was what the captain called it," and she smiled.

"The baby--where is he? I hope he lived."

"Yes, he is at last out of danger, and we have obtained a nurse for him. He would only trouble
you now; but it is very natural you should be anxious about him."

"Yes, he was my principal care on the raft, and I do not wish to lose sight of him. When I
am better, you must let him share my room until we reach our friends."

"Oh, certainly!" and again she smiled her evil smile. "No one, so far as I know of, has any
right or wish to separate you; but, for the present, you are better alone."

"Yes, I am strangely weak--confused, even," and I passed my hand over my blistered face and
dishevelled hair with something of the feeling of the little woman in the story who doubted
her own identity. Alas! there was not even a familiar dog to bark and determine the vexed question,
"Is this I?"

Helpless as an infant, flaccid as the sea-weed when taken from its native element, feeble in
mind from recent suffering, broken in body, I was cast on the mercies of strangers, ignorant,
until they saw me, of my existence, yet not indifferent to it, as their care testified.

"You will take some food now," said the woman, kindly. "Your weakness is not unfavorable, since
it proves the fierce fever broken; but you must hasten to gather strength for what lies before
you. We shall be in port to-morrow."

I put away the spoon with an impatient gesture. "I cannot; it nauseates me but to see it, to
think of it. Strength will come of itself."

"Oh, no; that is impossible. Besides, the doctor has ordered panada, and I am responsible to
him for your safety. Come, now, be reasonable. This is very nice, seasoned with madeira and
nutmeg."

Making a strong effort to overcome my repugnance, I received one spoonful of the proffered
aliment, then sank back on my pillow, soothed and comforted, not more by the unexpectedly good
effects of the compound, than the associations it conjured up, of my sick childhood, of Mrs.
Austin, and of Dr. Pemberton.

"Ah! you smile; that is a good sign," said the woman; "favorable every way. We shall have no
more delirium now, I hope; no more 'bears and serpents' about the berth; no more calls for
'Bertie' and 'Captain Wentworth,' and you will soon be able to tell us all about yourself and
your people--all we want to know."

I most have lapsed again into reverie rather than slumber, from which I was partly aroused
by whispering voices at the door, one of which seemed familiar to me. Yet this fact or fancy
made little impression on me at the moment, feeble and wretched as was my will, undiscriminating
as were my faculties.

And when the door opened, and a lady entered, I did not seek to inquire about her interlocutor.
Respectfully rising from her seat beside me, my companion left it vacant for her, to whom she
introduced me as her mistress, and stood, work in hand, sewing beneath the skylight, while
the new-comer remained in the state-room.

A handsome woman, tall and fashionably attired, apparently between thirty and forty years of
age, square faced, dark-eyed, rosy-cheeked, and with curling hair, approached me with uplifted
hands and eyebrows as I lay gazing calmly upon her; for my food and slumber together had strengthened
and revived me wonderfully in the last few hours, and my senses were again collected.

"Awake, and herself again, as I live, even if we cannot say yet truthfully 'clothed and in
her right mind.'--Eh, Clayton?" with a sneering simper; "and what eyes, what teeth, to be sure!
Then the dreadful redness is going away, though the skin will scale, of course; but no matter
for that; all the fairer in the end. And what a special mercy that her hair is saved!--You
have to thank me for that, young lady. I would not let the ship's doctor touch a strand of
it--not a strand. 'One does not grow a yard and a half of hair in a month, or a year, doctor,'
I observed, 'and a woman might as well be dead at once, or mad, or a man, as have cropped hair
during all the days of her youth.' I had a fellow-feeling, you see! I have magnificent hair
myself, child, as Clayton well knows, for it is her chief trouble on earth, and I would almost
as lief die as lose it."

"Yes, indeed, Lady Anastasia's hair is one of her chief attractions," observed the sympathizing
Clayton, behind her chair.

"So Sir Harry Raymond thought, my dear"--addressing me--"when I married him, ten years ago;
and so somebody else thinks just now, for I am tired of my widowhood, and intend taking on
the conjugal yoke again as soon as I reach--"

"New York," interpolated Mrs. Clayton, hastily and emphatically; clearing her throat slightly,
by way of apology, perhaps, for her officiousness.

"And you shall stand bridesmaid, my dear. Yes, I am determined on it; so never make great eyes
at me. There is a little bit of romance about me that will strike out in spite of all my worldliness;
and it will be so pretty to have an 'ocean-waif' for an attendant--it will read so well in
the papers! I suppose, when you reach your friends, there will be no difficulty about a dress,
and all that sort of thing, meet for the occasion--a very splendid one, I assure you--conducted
without regard to expense; for my fiancé is very rich, I hear, and my own jointure was a liberal
one."

"You do me a great honor," I murmured, conventionally rebelling inwardly at the suggestion.

"Oh, not at all!" was the gracious rejoinder. "I see at a glance, in spite of your misfortunes,
that you are one of us, which is not what I say to everybody. True blood will show under all
circumstances, though there is such an improvement. Did any one ever see the like before? Why,
my dear, you were blistered and black when we picked you up, and afterward sienna-colored;
now you are almost a beauty!"

"I am better--much better, and have a great deal to be thankful for, I feel," I contented myself
with murmuring.

"Of course you have. It was just a chance with you between our ship and death, you know. By-the-by,
what name shall we give our 'treasure-trove?'"

"Miriam for the present, if you please. This is no time nor place for ceremony."

"Well, Miriam it shall be," she repeated with laughing eyes (hers were of that sort which close
and grow Chinese under the pressure of merriment and high cheekbones combined). "Miriam, I
like the name--there is something grand about it."

"But how shall we know where to find your friends when we get to port?" asked my first attendant.
"We must know more than your Christian name for such a purpose. You must place confidence in
us, you must indeed!"

"Be patient with me," I entreated. "I am much too feeble yet to give you the details that may
be necessary. When we reach New York, you shall know every thing: or is it, indeed, to that
place this ship is bound?"

"I thought you knew all about your destination by this time," replied Lady Anastasia Raymond.
"Yes, yes, New York of course!" and again she laughed. "Didn't you hear Clayton say so?"

Just then a sharp tap at the door was answered by Lady Anastasia, who went quickly from beneath
the curtain hung across it (in consideration, no doubt, of the privacy my illness enjoined),
but not before I had caught once, and this time clearly, the tones of a voice that thrilled
to my life, the same that had haunted my delirious fancy, I now remembered, through the last
four-and-twenty hours.

I rose to my elbow impulsively, only to fall back again utterly exhausted.

"Who was that speaking?" I asked, feebly; "can it be possible--" and I wrung my hands.

"It was the ship's doctor," interrupted the woman I had heard called Clayton by her mistress.
"He had not time to do more than inquire about you, I suppose, there are so many ill in the
steerage; but he has been very kind and will probably return."

"I hope so," I rejoined; "I should like to realize that voice as his. It has haunted me very
disagreeably in my dreams, and the tones are those of an old, old acquaintance, one I should
be sorry to see here."

"I do not believe you have an acquaintance on the ship," she said, simply, "Under the circumstances
any such person would certainly have discovered himself; your situation would have moved a
heart of stone."

"But it is sometimes wise for the wicked to lie perdu," I murmured, and conjecture was busy
in my brain. "I should be glad, too, to see the captain of this vessel at his earliest convenience,"
I added, after a pause.

"Will you be so good as to apprise him in person of my earnest wish? It would be a real charity."

"Oh, certainly; but I am afraid he cannot come to-night. It is nearly evening now, and he never
leaves the deck at this hour, nor until very late."

"To-morrow, then, I must insist on this interview, since I reflect about it for several reasons."

"To-morrow he shall come," she said, sententiously; "and now try and sleep again. It is very
necessary you should gather strength, for we shall be in port shortly, when all will be confusion."

I went to sleep, I remember, murmuring to myself: "The hands were the hands of Jacob, but the
voice was the voice of Esau;" and my bewildered faculties found rest until the morning's dawn.

After a hasty toilet made by the careful hands of Mrs. Clayton, a matutinal visit made by Mrs.
or Lady Raymond, who always rose early as she informed me, and a cup of tea, very soothing
to my prostrated nerves, the potentate of the Latona was duly announced.

Our ship's master was a tall, gaunt, sandy-haired man, with steady gray eyes, hard features,
and enormous hands and feet, the first freckled and awkward, the last so long as very nearly
to span the space between his seat (a small Spanish-leather trunk) and the berth I reposed
in. He entered without his hat; and the swoop of the head he made to avoid the entanglement
of the curtain was supposed to do double duty, and serve as a bow to the inmate of his state-room
as well, for his I supposed it to be at the time, and he did not contradict me.

"I hope you find yourself comfortable, marm, on board of my ship."

"And in your state-room, captain!" I interrupted promptly.

"Wall, you see it all belongs to me, kinder," he said, after seating himself, as he rubbed
his huge, projecting knees, plainly indicated through his nankeen trousers, with his capacious,
horny hands. "I'm not very particular, though, where I sleep on shipboard, but at home there's
few more so."

"I thought a captain was more at home on shipboard than anywhere else," I pursued mechanically;
"such is the theory at least."

"Oh, not at all, not at all; when he has a snug nest on land, with a wife and children waiting
to receive him. You might as well talk of a man in the new settlements bein' more at home in
his wagon than in his neat, hewn-log cabin."

"A very good simile, captain, and one that kills the ancient theory outright. Let me thank
you, however, before we proceed further, for all the kindness and attention I have received
in this floating castle of yours, both from you and others. I hope and believe that my companions
in misfortune have fared as well."

"Wall, they have not wanted for nothing as far as I knew--the poor baby in particular;" and,
as he spoke, he roughed his hair with one hand and smiled into my face a huge, honest, gummy
smile, inexpressibly reassuring.

"The man is hideous and repulsive," I thought; "but infinitely preferable, somehow, to the
specimen of English aristocracy and her maid who have constituted themselves so far my guardian
angels"--a twinge of ingratitude here, which I resented instantly by settling my patriotic
prejudices to be at the root of the thing, and rebuking my mistrust sternly though silently.
"Yet that voice--how could I be mistaken?" and again I addressed myself to the task before
me, having gotten through all preliminaries.

While I sat hesitating as to what I should say, so as to both guard against and conceal my
suspicions from the captain's scrutiny, if, indeed, he might be supposed to possess such a
quality, I observed that he drew from his pocket a long slip of newspaper, in which he appeared
to bury himself for a time, when not glancing furtively at me, as if waiting impatiently for
the coming revelation.

"I have sent for you, Captain Van Dorne," I said, at last, in very low and even tones, not
calculated to reach outside ears, however vigilant, and yet not suppressed by any means to
whispers--"I have sent for you," and my heart beat quickly as I spoke, "not merely to thank
you for your hospitable kindness, but because I wish, for reasons that I cannot now explain,
to place myself under your especial care until I reach my friends."

"Certainly, certainly; but you air among your friends already if you could only think so,"
he answered, evasively, still caressing his potato knees with large and outspread hands.

"Do not for one moment deem me unmindful of much kindness, or ungrateful to those who have
bestowed it," I hastened to explain. "Yet I cannot deny that a fear possesses me that among
your passengers may be found one whom I esteem, not without sufficient cause, my greatest enemy."

"Poor thing! poor thing! what put such a strange fancy into your head? An enemy in my ship!
Why, there is not a man on board who would not cut off his right hand rather than harm one
hair of your poor, witless, defenseless head! There was not a dry eye on the deck when you
and the rest wuz lifted from the raft!"

"I understand this prevalence of sympathy for misfortune perfectly, and honor it; yet I have
heard a voice since my immurement in this cabin which must belong"--and I whispered the dreaded
name--"to Mr. Basil Bainrothe!"

As I spoke I eyed him steadily, and I fancied that his cheek flushed and his eye wavered--that
clear and honest eye which had given him a high place in my consideration from the moment I
met its gaze.

"You must have been delirious-like when you conceited you heerd that strange voice," he said,
presently. "I'll send you my passenger-list if you choose, and you can read it over keerfully.
I don't think you'll find that name, though, in its kolynms," shaking his head sagaciously.

"Captain Van Dorne, do you mean to say there is no such passenger in your ship's list as Basil
Bainrothe?" I asked, desperately.

"That's what I mean to say."

"Give me your honor on this point. It is a vital one to me. Your honor!"

He hesitated and looked around. Just at this moment of apparent uncertainty, a slight tap was
heard on the ground-glass eye above us that threw a sullen and unwilling light upon the scene
of our interview. It seemed to nerve him strangely.

"On my word of honor, as an American seaman, I assure you that the name of Basil Bainrothe
is not on the ship's list at this present speaking;" and, as he spoke, he held up his right
hand, adding, as he dropped it, doggedly, "Ef the man's on board I don't know it!"

"It is enough--I believe you, Captain Van Dorne. And now I want to ask you, as a parting grace,
to convey me yourself to the Astor House, and place my watch" (detaching it from my neck as
I spoke) "in the hands of the proprietors as a proof of my honest intentions. For yourself,
I shall seek another opportunity."

"Not at all--not at all!" he interrupted. "Keep your watch, young lady. No such pledge will
be required by them proprietors; and, as to myself, if it had not been for this paper," drawing
from his pocket, and flattening on his knees as he spoke, the slip I had before observed, then
glancing at me sharply, "I could never have believed that such a pretty-spoken, pretty-behaved
young creetur could have been non com. But pshaw! what am I talking about? This paper is as
old as last year's krout! You don't keer nothing about seeing of it, do you, now?" and he crumpled
it in his hand.

"Not unless it concerns me in some way, Captain Van Dorne," I said, coldly. His manner had
suddenly become offensive to me, and I longed to see him depart, having transacted my affairs,
as far, at least, as I deemed it prudent to insist on such transaction.

"It may be," I added, "that, on reaching the port of New York, a friend or friends who expected
me on the Kosciusko may be in waiting to receive me; that is, if the fate of that vessel be
not already known. In that case, I shall not be obliged to avail myself of your services, and
will acquaint you; but, otherwise, promise that you will conduct me from the ship yourself,
either to the hotel or to your wife, as you prefer."

"Wall, I promise you," he said, doggedly, as he prepared literally to undouble his long frame
before executing another dive beneath my door-guarding drapery, and with this brief assurance
I was fain to rest content.

At all events, I was reassured on one subject--those honest eyes, that frank if ugly mouth
had no acquaintance with lies, or the father of them, I saw at once; and the voice of the ship's
doctor had for the nonce deceived my practised ear, overstrung by suspicion--enfeebled by suffering.

So I rested calmly until the afternoon, with Mrs. Clayton sewing silently by my side, when
with a little tap Lady Anastasia (or Mrs. Raymond, as she declared she preferred to be called
by "Americans") entered, bearing a basket in her hand, and wearing on her head a Dunstable
bonnet simply trimmed, which she came, she said, to place, along with other articles of dress,
at my disposal.

It had not occurred to me before that, in order to go on shore respectably clad, some attire
very different from a bed-gown would be essential, and I could but feel grateful for such proofs
of unselfish consideration on the part of strangers, pitying both my indigence and imbecility,
and so expressed myself.

In accordance with their generous intentions, I submitted myself to be arrayed by Mrs. Clayton
and her mistress: first, in the flimsy black silk gown now completed, on which I had seen my
attendant working when I first unclosed my eyes after long unconsciousness, and the measure
of which she had taken, while I lay in this condition, as coolly in all probability as an undertaker
measures a corpse for its shroud; secondly, in a cardinal of the same material, a wrapping
cut in the shape in vogue at that period; thirdly, in certain loosely-fitting boots and gloves
with which I was fain to cover up my naked feet and blistered hands in forma pauperis; and,
lastly, in the collarette and cuffs provided by the economic and considerate Lady Anastasia,
composed of cotton lace! The Dunstable bonnet was hung upon a peg in readiness, and I was kindly
counseled to lie still, "accoutred as I was," and exhausted by means of such accoutrement as
I felt, until evening should find us riding in our harbor.

Then there was a little, low consulting at the door with the renowned "ship's doctor," who
positively refused to approach me because he had just come from a case of ship-fever in the
steerage, which he feared to communicate to one in my precarious state, but who sent in his
imperative orders that I should have soup and sherry-cobbler forthwith, and try and build up
my strength for the time of debarkation--speaking in a low, growling voice divested of its
former clearness, but still strangely resembling that of Basil Bainrothe!

"The poor man is so fagged out," said Mrs. Clayton, as she brought in my broth and wine, "that
his very voice is changed. He is a good soul, and has shown you great interest. Some day you
must send him a present, that is, if you are able; but just now all you have to think of is
getting safe ashore. Lady Anastasia will go to her friends, probably, or to those of the gentleman
she is engaged to; but I do not mean to forsake you until I see you better, and in good hands."

I know not how it was that my heart sank so strangely at this announcement. The woman was kind--tender,
even--and had probably saved my life, and yet her presence to me was a punishment worse than
pain, a positive evil greater than any other.

"I shall go to the Astor House," I faltered. "The captain has promised me his escort thither."

"Yes, yes, I know, he has told me all about it; but your friends may not be in waiting, and
it is simply our duty to see you in their hands. And now drink your sangaree. See, I have broken
a biscuit in the glass, and it is well seasoned with lemon and nutmeg. There, now, that is
right; a few spoonfuls of soup, and you will feel strengthened for your undertaking. I will
sit quietly in the corner until you have your rest."

"No, I prefer to see Christian Garth before I try to sleep--the man who steered our raft--and
the young girl he saved, and the baby--let them all come to me, and we will go on shore together."

I spoke these words with a sort of desperation, as though they contained my last hope of justice
or protection from a fate which, however obscurely, seemed to threaten me, as we feel the thunder-storm
brooding in the tranquil atmosphere of summer.

"Christian Garth!" she repeated, looking at me over her tortoise-shell spectacles, and, quietly
drawing out a snuffbox of the same material, she proceeded to fill her narrow nostrils therewith.
"Why, that shaggy-looking old sailor, and the girl, and the old negro woman and child, went
on shore at daylight this morning. He hailed a Jersey craft, and they all left together. It
is perfectly understood, though, that the child is to be returned to you if you desire its
company, but, if I were situated as you are, and sure of its safety, I would never want to
see it again. It would be better off dead than living anyhow, under the circumstances, poor,
deformed creature--better for both of you."

The words came to me distinctly, yet as if from an immense distance, and I seemed to see the
small chamber lengthening as if it had been a telescope unfolding, and the sallow woman with
her hateful smile and tightly-knotted, brindled hair seated in diminished size and distinctness
at its farthest extremity.

So had I felt on that fearful night when Evelyn had made her revelation and received mine,
and I did not doubt, even in my sinking state, that I was under the influence of a powerful
anodyne.

"Call the ship's doctor--I am dying!" were the last words I remember to have articulated; then
all was dark, and hours went by, of deep, unconscious sleep.

It was night when I felt myself drawn to my feet, and roused to life by the repeated applications
of cold water to my face, "The anodyne was over-powerful," I heard Mrs. Raymond say. "It is
a shame to tamper with such strong medicines."

"Oh, she has strength for any thing!" was Clayton's rejoinder. "I never saw such a constitution--and
he knew what he was doing."

"No doubt of that.--But, dear Miss Miriam, do speak to me. I am so frightened at your lethargic
condition.--I declare I am sorry I ever consented to have any thing to do with this matter!
See how she stands. I cannot think it was right, Clayton, I cannot, indeed; I dislike the whole
drama."

"Do be quiet! She is coming to herself fast, and what will she think of such expressions? You
never had any self-control in your life, and you are playing for great stakes now." These last
words in a hoarse whisper.

"Nonsense! mother."

"Again! How often must I warn you?"

"Well, Clayton, then, now and forever."

"Here! rouse up, little one! We are fast anchored in port, and the captain is waiting for us,
for we go part of the way together, and our escorts have all failed us--yours and mine. Nice
fellows, are they not?"

I sat up and looked about me bewildered; yet I had heard distinctly every word spoken in the
last few minutes, and remembered them for future observance, without having had the power to
move or articulate a remonstrance.

"Now, drink this strong coffee, and all will be well again," said Clayton, putting a cup of
the smoking beverage to my lips, which I swallowed eagerly, instinctively. The effect was instantaneous,
and I was able to speak and stand, as well as hear and comprehend, while my bonnet was being
tied on, and my throat muffled in a veil, by the dexterous fingers of Lady Anastasia.

When this process was completed, she stooped down and kissed me, and I felt a hot tear fall
upon my cheek as she rose again. In the next moment I was clinging to the captain's arm, with
a spasmodic feeling of relief for which I could ill account. We passed across the plank which
connected the ship with the shore in utter darkness, guided by a twinkling light far ahead,
borne by a seaman, reached the dusky quay, with its few flaring lamps, made dim by drizzling
rain and summer mist, and before many minutes we paused before one of a long line of coaches.

The captain handed me in, then, standing before the open door, seemed to await the coming of
some other person before taking his own place--the dreaded Clayton, I knew; but I could not
remonstrate against what seemed an ordinary courtesy, and perhaps a step suggested by his innate
notions of propriety.

At any other time I might have agreed with him; but, feeble as I was, and still bewildered,
my whole object seemed to be to escape from the sphere and power of those women, who had been
most kind to me, yet whom I instinctively dreaded and abhorred.

They came together, the mother and daughter, in their travesty of mistress and maid--enough
of itself to excite suspicion of foul play--and climbed up the rickety steps of the hackney-coach,
rejoicing over their victim. It mattered not; the captain would make the fourth passenger,
and in his shadow I felt there were strength and security.

"What are you waiting for, Captain Van Dorne?" I had just feebly asked, as the door snapped-to,
and the driver mounted his box. A hand was thrust through the window for all reply, and a card
dropped upon my lap, which I hastened to secure in the depths of my pocket. By the merest chance,
I found it there on the morrow, and later I comprehended its import, so mysterious to me at
the moment of perusal.

    "My poor young lady, you must forgive me for disappointing you,
    and hidin' the truth, for your own sake. May God bless and
    restore you, and bring you to a proper sense of his mercies, is
    the prayer of your servant to command,

    "JOSEPH VAN DORNE."

My frame of mind was a very different one when I read this scrawl, from that which bewildered
and oppressed me on that never-to-be-forgotten night of suffering and distress, both mental
and physical. Formed of those elements which readily react, courage and calmness had returned
to me before I read the oracle of our worthy shipmaster; for, in spite of his disastrous dealing
with me on that occasion, misguided as he was by others, I have reason to so consider him.

But now the influence of the drug that had been given me so recently, doubtless through want
of judgment, by the ship's doctor, was felt in every nerve; and, as the carriage rolled up
the stony quay, I clung convulsively to Mrs. Raymond, and buried my face and aching forehead
in her shoulder, with a strange revulsion of feeling.

"You dread the darkness," she said, kindly, putting her arm around me as she spoke; "but it
is only for a time; we shall soon come out into the open lamplight of--"

"Broadway, New York," interrupted Clayton, sententiously; "a very poor sight to see, to one
who has lived abroad. Have you ever crossed the waters, Miss Miriam? But I see you are quite
faint and overcome. Here, smell this ether, that the ship's doctor put up expressly for your
use, and recommended highly as a new restorative much in fashion in Paris."

Had the ship's doctor no name, then, that they never mentioned it, and that he spoke in a demon's
voice? His doses I had proved, and was resolved to take no more of them, and I pushed away
the phial, whose cold glass nose was thrust obtrusively against my own--pushed it away with
all my strength, fast ebbing away as this was, even as I made the effort.

The cruel potion had possession of me, and entered into every fibre of my brain through the
avenues prepared for it by the treacherous anodyne; so that, enervated and intoxicated, I yielded
passively, after a brief struggle, to the power of the then newly-invented sedative, called
chloroform.

When the carriage stopped, or whither it transported me, or who lifted my insensible form to
the chamber prepared for me, I know not--never knew. There was a faint reviving, I remember;
a process of disrobing gone through by the aid of foreign assistance (whose, I recognized not),
then I slumbered profoundly and securely through the entire night, to recover no clearness
of perception until a late hour on the following morning.

CHAPTER VI.

I awoke, as I had done of old, after one of my lethargic seizures, from a deep, unrefreshing
slumber, with a lingering sense about me of drowsiness and even fatigue.

I found myself lying on a broad, canopied bedstead, the massive posts of which were of wrought
rosewood, bare of draperies, as became the season, save at the head-board, behind which a heavy
curtain was dropped of rose-colored damask satin.

Of the same rich material were composed the tester and the lightly-quilted coverlet, thrown
across the foot of the bed, over a fine white Marseilles counterpane.

The chimney immediately opposite to me, as I lay, was of black marble, and, instead of graceful
Greek caryatides, bandaged mummies, or Egyptian figures, supported the heavy shelf that surmounted
the polished grate. In the centre of this massive mantel-slab was placed a huge bronze clock,
and candelabra of the same material graced its corners.

In either recess of this chimney rosewood doors were situated, one of which stood invitingly
ajar, disclosing the bath-room, into which it opened, with its accessories of white marble.

The other, firmly closed, seemed to be the outlet of the chamber--its only one--with the exception
of the four large Venetian windows, two on either side of me as I lay, the sashes of which,
warm as the season was, were drawn closely down.

The furniture of this spacious chamber to which, as if by the touch of a magician's wand, I
found myself transported, was throughout solid and of elegant forms, consisting as it did of
armoire, toilet-table, bookcase, étagère, writing and flower stands, tables and chairs, of
the richest rosewood.

At the foot of my bed was placed a console, supporting a huge Bible and Prayer-book, bound
alike in purple velvet, emblazoned with central suns of gold--an arch-hypocrisy that was not
lost on its object. Freshly-gathered flowers were heaped in the vases of the floral stands,
filling the close, cool room with an overpowering fragrance. The carpet of crimson and white
seemed to the eye what it afterward proved to the foot--thick, soft, and elastic; and harmonized
well with the rich, antique, and consistent furniture.

The sort of microscopic scrutiny that children manifest seemed mine--in my unreasoning, half-convalescent
state; and for a time I observed all that I have described with a listless pleasure, difficult
to analyze, a sort of dreamy acceptance of my condition, the very memory of which exasperated
me, later, almost to self-contempt.

A crimson cord hung at one side of my bed, continued from a bell-wire at some distance, the
tassel of which I touched lightly, and, at the very first signal, Mrs. Clayton appeared through
the hitherto only unopened door, to know and do my bidding.

The clock on the mantel-shelf struck nine as she stood beside me, and made respectful inquiries
concerning my wants and condition; understanding which, she disappeared, to return a few minutes
later, followed by an ancient negress, bearing a silver waiter.

I recognized in this sable assistant (or thought I recognized at a glance) my companion in
shipwreck; but, upon making known my convictions, was met with a prompt denial by the sable
dame herself, who, shaking her head, gave me to understand, in a few broken words, that she
"no understood English--only Spanish tongue!"

Her dress--handsome and Frenchified--her Creole coiffure, and the long gray locks that escaped
from her crimson kerchief bound over her ears, as well as her more refined deportment, did
indeed seem to discredit my first idea, which came at last (notwithstanding these discrepancies)
to be fixed, and proved one link in the long chain of duplicity I untangled later.

At the time, however, I gave it little thought, but partook with what appetite I might of the
choice and delicate repast provided for me, in this truly princely hotel, whose fame I discovered
had not been over trumpeted. On my previous visits to New York, the Astor House had been unfinished,
and had made in its completion a new era certainly in the "tavern-life" of that inhospitable
city of publicans. When the delicious coffee and snowy bread, the eggs of milky freshness,
the golden butter, the savory rice-birds, the appetizing fish, had each and all been merely
tasted and dismissed, and the exquisite China, in which the breakfast was served, duly marveled
at as an unprecedented extravagance on the part even of John Jacob Astor, Mrs. Clayton came
to me with kindly offers of assistance in the performance of my toilet, still a matter of difficulty
in my feeble hands.

My long hair, yet tangled and clogged with sea-water, was to be at last unbound and thoroughly
combed, cleansed, and oiled, so that the black and glossy braids, that had been my chief personal
pride, might again be wound about my head in the old classic fashion.

Then came the bath, with its reviving, rehabilitating process, and lastly I assumed with the
docility of a baby or a pauper the clean and fragrant linen and simple wrapper that had been
mysteriously provided for me by the Lady Anastasia again, I could not doubt.

"All this must end to-day," I said, "when really clothed and in my right mind." I requested
writing-materials and more light to work by, and composed myself to write to Dr. Pemberton
(once again, I knew, in Philadelphia), and request his assistance and protection in getting
home safely, and, if need be, in tracing Captain Wentworth.

"I suppose Captain Van Dorne has been too busy to call," I observed, carelessly, as I prepared
to commence my letter, "and Mrs. Raymond too happy, probably, in getting safe to shore and
her lover, to think of me."

"They have both inquired for you," said Mrs. Clayton, as she arranged pen, ink, and paper,
before me, with her usual precision, while a grim, sardonic smile lingered about her features;
"several have called, but none have been admitted."

"Who have called, Mrs. Clayton! Give me the cards immediately. I must, must know," I rejoined,
eagerly, pausing with extended hand to receive them.

"Oh, there were no cards, and such as want to see you can come again. There, now! write away,
and never trouble your mind about strange people. Have you sufficient light?"

And, as she spoke, she touched a cord which set at right angles with the lower one the upper
inside shutter of another window as she had adjusted the first.

I wrote two hasty notes, one on further consideration to Captain Wentworth himself, who might,
after all, be at that very time in that same hotel--"Quien sabe?" as Favraud used to say with
his significant shrug, which no Frenchman ever excelled or Spaniard equalled (albeit they shrug
severally).

My spirits rose with every word I wrote, and, when I got up from my chair after sealing and
directing my letters, a new and subtle energy seemed to have infused itself through my frame.
"There, I have finished, Mrs. Clayton," I said, putting aside the implements I had been using.
"Now go, if you please, and bring to me the proprietor of this hotel. I will give him my letters
myself, since I have other business to transact with him," and I laid my watch and chain on
the table before me, ready for his hand, not having lost sight of my early resolution. "But,
stay--before you go, be good enough to open the lower shutters and throw up the windows. Cool
as the weather is in this climate, I stifle for air, and this close atmosphere, laden with
fragrance, grows oppressive. Who sent these flowers, by-the-by, Mrs. Clayton? or do they belong
to the magnificence of this idealized hotel?" She made no reply to any thing I had been saying.

By this time, however, she had lowered the upper sashes of the windows about a foot, and the
fresh air of morning was pouring in, curling the paper on the centre table and dispersing the
noisome fragrance of the flowers, in which I detected the morbid supremacy of the tuberose
and jasmine.

"I want to see the streets, the people," I said, approaching one of the windows; "this artistic
light is not at all the thing I need. I have no picture to paint, not even my own face;" and,
finding her unmoved, I undertook to do the requisite work myself.

The sashes were shut away below by inside shutters, which resisted all my efforts to stir them.
After a moment's inspection, I perceived that they were secured by iron screws of great strength
and size; not, in short, meant to be moved or opened at all. Again I essayed to shake them
convulsively one after the other--as you may sometimes see a tiger, made desperate by confinement,
grapple with the inexorable bars of his cage, though certain of failure and defeat.

Overpowered by a sudden dismay that took entire possession of me, I sank into one of the deep
fauteuils that extended its arms very opportunely to receive me, and sat mutely for a moment,
while anguish unutterable, and conjecture too wild to be hazarded in speech, were surging through
my brain.

"I am too weak, I suppose, to open these shutters," I said at last, feebly. "Be good enough
to do it for me, Mrs. Clayton, or cause it to be done immediately."

Was it not strange that up to this very moment no suspicion had clouded my horizon since I
woke in that sumptuous room?

"I cannot transcend my orders by doing any thing of the kind," she said quietly, yet resolutely,
as she pursued her avocation, that of dusting with a bunch of colored plumes the delicate ornaments
of the étagère carefully one by one.

"Your authority! Who has dared to delegate to you what has no existence as far as I am concerned?"
I asked indignantly. "I will go instantly."

"You cannot leave this chamber until you receive outside permission," she interrupted, firmly
planting herself at once between me and the door through which I had seen her enter. "You must
not think to pass through my chamber, Miss Miriam. It is locked without, and there is no other
outlet."

"Woman!" I said, grasping her feebly yet fiercely, by the arm. "Look at me! Raise those feline
eyes to mine, if you dare, and answer me truthfully: What means this mockery! Why have you
been forced on me at all? Where is Captain Van Dorne? What becomes of his promises? What house
is this in which I find myself a prisoner? Speak!"

"You can do nothing to make me angry," she rejoined, calmly. "I know your condition, and pity
and respect it, but I shall certainly fulfill my part of this undertaking. Captain Van Dorne
recognized you as Miss Monfort by the description in the newspaper, as did my mistress, and
for your own welfare we determined to secure you and keep you safe until the return of Mr.
Bainrothe and your sisters from Europe. They will be here shortly, and all you have to do is
to be patient and behave as well as you can until the time comes for your trial;" and she cast
on me a menacing look from her green and quivering pupils, indescribably feline.

My trial! Great Heaven! did they mean to turn the tables, then, and destroy me by anticipating
my evidence? I staggered to a chair and again sat down silent confounded. "Where am I, then!"
I feebly asked at length.

"In the establishment of Dr. Englehart," she made answer, "a private madhouse."

"God of heaven! has it come to this?" I covered my eyes with my hands and sobbed aloud, while
tears of pride and passion rained hotly over my cheeks. This outburst was of short duration.
"I will give them no advantage," I considered. "My violence might be perverted. There are creatures
too cold and crafty to conceive of such a thing as natural emotion, and passion with them means
insanity. Thank God, the very power to feel bears with it the power of self-government, and
is proof of reason. I will be calm, and if my life endures put them thus to shame."--"You say
that I am in the asylum of Dr. Englehart?" I asked, after a pause, during which she had not
ceased to dust the furniture and arrange the bed in its pristine order, speckless, with lace-trimmings,
pillow-cases smooth as glass, and sheets of lawn, and counterpane of snow. "If so, call my
physician hither; I, his patient, have surely a right to his prompt services."--"It is just
possible," I thought, "that interest or compassion may, one or both, still enlist him in my
cause--I can but try."

A slight embarrassment was evidenced in her countenance as I made this request. It vanished
speedily.

"He is absent just at this time," she answered, quickly. "When he returns I will make known
your wish to him, if, indeed, he does not call of his own accord."

"Be done with this shallow farce," I exclaimed, harshly. "It shames humanity. Acknowledge yourself
at once the faithful agent of a tyrant and felon, or a pair of them, and I shall respect you
more. Confess that it was the voice of Basil Bainrothe I heard at my cabin-door, and that Captain
Van Dorne was imposed upon by that specious scoundrel, even to the point of being conscientiously
compelled to falsehood.

"I deny nothing--I acknowledge nothing," she said, deliberately. "You and your friends can
settle this between yourselves when they arrive. Until then, you need not seek to tamper with
me--it will be useless; and I hope you are too much of a lady to be insulting to a person who
has no choice but to do her duty."

She could not more effectually have silenced me, nor more utterly have crushed my hopes. Yet
again I approached her with entreaties.

"I hope you will not refuse to mail my notes, even under these trying circumstances," I said,
extending them to her.

"You can ask Dr. Englehart to do so when he comes," he answered, gently; "for myself, I am
utterly powerless to serve you beyond the walls of this chamber."

"And how long is this close immurement to continue?" I asked again, after another dreary pause.
"Am I not permitted to breathe the external air--to exercise? Is my health to be unconsidered?"

"I know nothing more than I have told you," she replied. "I am directed to furnish you with
every means of comfort--with books, flowers, clothing, musical instrument, even, if you desire
it; but, for the present, you will not leave these walls, and you will see no society. The
doctor has decided that this is best."

"And whence did he derive his authority?"

"Oh, it was all arranged between him and Mr. Bainrothe, your guardeen" (for thus she pronounced
this word, ever hateful to me), "long ago; before he went to France, I suppose. Captain Van
Dorne had nothing to do but hand you over."

"Captain Van Dorne! To think those honest eyes could so deceive me!" and I shook my head wofully.

When I looked up again from reverie, Mrs. Clayton had settled herself to work with a basket
of stockings on her knees, which she appeared to be assorting assiduously.

There she sat, spectacles on nose, thimble on twisted finger, ivory-egg in hand, in active
preparation for that work, woman's par excellence, that alone rivals Penelope's. Surely that
assortment of yellow, ill-mated, half-worn, and holey hose, was a treasure to her, that no
gold could have replaced, in our dreary solitude (none the less dreary for being so luxurious).
I envied her almost the power she seemed to have to merge her mind in things like these; and
saw, for the first time in my life, what advantages might lie in being commonplace.

It was now nearly the end of July. My birthday occurred in the middle of September. I thought
I knew that, as soon as possible after my majority, Mr. Bainrothe's conditions would be laid
before me.

I could not, dared not, believe that my captivity would be lengthened beyond that time. I resolved
that I would condone the past, and go forth penniless, if this were exacted in exchange for
liberty at the end of a month and a half from this time.

Six weeks to wait! Were they not, in the fullness of their power, to crush and baffle me! Six
weary years! For, during all this time, I felt that the unexplained mystery that weighed upon
my life would gather in force and inflexibility. Death would have seemed to have set its seal
upon it, in the estimation of Captain Wentworth, as of all others. He would never know that
the sea, which swallowed up the Kosciusko, had spared the woman he loved, nor receive the explanation
that she alone could give him, of the mystery he deplored.

Before I emerged from my prison, he might be gone to the antipodes, for aught I knew, and a
barrier of eternal silence and absence be interposed between us. So worked my fate! These reflections
continued to haunt and oppress me, by night and day, and life itself seemed a bitter burden
in that interval of rebellious agony, and in that terrible seclusion, where luxury itself became
an additional engine of torture.

Days passed, alternately of leaden apathy and bitter gloom, varied by irrepressible paroxysms
of despair. Whenever I found myself alone, even for a few moments, I paced my room and wept
aloud, or prayed passionately. There were times when I felt that my Creator heard and pitied
me; others when I persuaded myself his ear was closed inexorably against me.

I suffered fearfully--this could not last. The accusation brought against me by my enemies
seemed almost ready to be realized, when my body magnanimously assumed the penalty the soul
was perhaps about to pay, and drifted off to fever.

Then, for the first time, came the man I had until then believed a myth, and sat beside me
in the shadow, and administered to me small, mystic pellets, that he assured me, in low, husky
whispers, and foreign accent, would infallibly cure my malady--my physical one, at least; as
for the mind, its forces, he regretted to add, were beyond such influence!

For a moment, the wild suspicion intruded on my fevered brain that this leech was no other
than Basil Bainrothe himself, disguised for his own dark purposes; but the tall, square, high-shouldered
form that rose before me to depart (taller, by half a head, than the man I suspected of this
fresh deception), and the angular movements and large extremities of Dr. Englehart, dispelled
this delusion forever. After all, might he not be honest, even if a tool of Bainrothe's?

I took the sugared minature pills--the novel medicine he had left for me--faithfully, through
ministry of Mrs. Clayton's, and was benefited by them; and, when he came again, as before,
in the twilight, I was able to be installed in the great cushioned chair he had sent up for
me, and to bear the light of a shaded lamp in one corner of the large apartment.

Dr. Englehart approached me deferentially, and, without divesting himself of the light-kid
gloves which fitted his large hands so closely, he clasped my wrist with his finger and thumb,
and seemed to count my pulses.

"Ver much bettair," was his first remark, made in that disagreeable, harsh, and husky voice
of his, while he bent so near me that the aroma of the tobacco he had been smoking caused me
to cough and turn aside.

Still, I could not see his face, for the immense bushy whiskers he wore, nor his eyes, for
the glasses that covered them, nor his teeth, even, for the long, fierce mustache that swept
his lips; and when, after a brief visit, he rose and was gone again, there remained only in
my mind the image of a huge and hairy horror--a sort of bear of the Blue Mountains, from the
return of which or whom I fervently hoped to be delivered.

"Send him word I am better, Mrs. Clayton," I entreated; "I cannot see him again, he is so repulsive;
and, if you have a woman's heart in your breast, never leave me alone with him, or with Mr.
Bainrothe, when he calls, for one moment--they inspire me equally with terror indescribable,"
and I covered my face to hide its burning blushes.

"Look up, Miss Monfort, and listen to me," said Mrs. Clayton, at last, regarding me keenly,
with her warped forefinger uplifted in her usual admonitory fashion, but with an expression
on her face of interest and sympathy such as I had never witnessed there before. "A new light
has broken just now upon my understanding; I can't tell how or whence it came, but here it
is," pressing her hand to her brow; "I believe you have been misrepresented to me--but that
is neither here nor there. I shall watch you closely and faithfully until we part--all the
more that I do not believe you any more crazy than I am; I half suspected this before, but
I know it now." She paused, then continued: "I should have to tell you my life's secret if
I were to explain to you why Mr. Bainrothe's interests are so dear to me, so vital even, and
I will not conceal from you that I knew your guardeen's good name depends on your confinement
here until you come of age. After that it will only be necessary for you to sign a few papers,
and all will be straight again--no harm or insult is designed. To these I would never have
lent myself in any way--ill as you think of me. And as long as we continue together I will
guard your good name as I would do that of my own dear daughter--that is, if I had one. You
shall receive no visitor alone."

She spoke with a feeling and dignity of which I had scarcely believed her capable, shrewd and
sensible as I knew her to be, and far above the woman she called her mistress, in a certain
retenu of manner and delicacy of deportment, usually inseparable from good-breeding.

I could not then guess how acceptable, to her and the person she was chiefly interested in,
were these signs of my aversion for Basil Bainrothe, and what sure means they were of access
to the only tender spot in the obdurate heart of Rachel Clayton.

Certain it is that, from these expressions, I derived the first consolation that had come to
me in my immurement, and from that hour the solemn farce of keeper and lunatic ceased to be
played between us two.

From such freedom of communication on my jailer's part, I began to hope for additional information,
which never came. It was in vain that I conjured her to tell me where my prison was situated,
whether at the edge of the city, or far away in the country, or to suffer me to have a glimpse
from a window of my vicinity. To all such entreaties she was pitiless, and I was left to that
vague and vain conjecture which so wears the intellect.

In the absence of all possibility of escape, it became a morbid and haunting wish with me to
know my exact locality. That it could be no great distance from the city of New York, if not
within its limits, I felt assured, from the expedition with which my transit from the ship
had been effected.

During the first three weeks of my confinement the deep silence that prevailed about me had
led me to adopt the opinion that I was the occupant of a maison de santé. I had once driven
past one on Staten Island, where a friend of my father's--about whose condition he came to
inquire personally--had been immured for years. I did not alight with him when he left the
carriage to make these inquiries, but I perfectly remembered the old gray stone building, with
its ancient elms, and the impression of gloom and awe it had left on my mind. But this idea
was presently dispelled.

I was awakened one morning, in the fourth week of my sojourn in captivity, by the sound of
chimes long familiar to my ear, the duplicate of which I had not supposed to be in existence.
At first I feared it was some mirage of the ear, so to speak, instead of eye, that reflected
back that fairy melody, which had rung its accompaniment to my whole childhood and youth; but,
when, after the lapse of seven days, it was repeated, I became convinced that its reality was
unquestionable, and that neither impatience nor indignation had so impaired my senses as to
reproduce those sounds through the medium of a fevered imagination.

Were these delicious bells, a recent addition to the cupola of our grim asylum, bestowed by
some benevolent hand that sought to mark and lend enchantment to the holy Sabbath-day--even
for the sake of the irresponsible ones within its walls--or was I indeed--? But of this there
could be no question--I dared not hazard such conjecture lest it drive me mad in reality--I
must not!

I groped in thick darkness, and time itself was only measured now by those sweet chimes, so
like our own, and yet so far away. My very clock one morning was found to have stopped, and
was not again repaired or set in motion. Papers I never saw, had never seen since I came to
dwell in shadow, save that single one so ostentatiously spread before me, announcing the loss
of the Kosciusko and her passengers--a refinement of cruelty, on the part of those who sent
it, worthy of a Japanese.

Rafts had been launched and lost, the survivors stated (the men who had seized the long-boat,
to the exclusion of the women and children); the sea had swallowed all the remainder. A later
statement might refute the first, but even then none could know the truth with regard to my
identity, for would not Basil Bainrothe control the publication as he pleased, and make me
dead if he listed--dead even after the rescue?

Yet Hope would sometimes whisper in her daring moods; "All this shall pass away, and be as
it had not been. Be of good heart, Miriam, and do not let them kill you; live for Mabel--live
for Wentworth!"

Then, with bowed head, and silent, streaming tears, my soul would climb in prayer to the footstool
of the Most High, and the grace, which had never come to me before, fell over me like a mantle
in this sad extremity.

CHAPTER VI.

Unfaltering in her respectful demeanor toward me was Mrs. Clayton from the time of the little
scene I have recently described. What new and sudden light had broken in upon her I never knew,
but I supposed at the time that the flash of conviction had gone home to her mind with regard
to the baseness of Bainrothe and the iniquity of his proceedings, founded on the fear I had
expressed of his solitary presence, and the insight she had gained into my character.

Watching none the less strictly, she gradually relaxed that personal surveillance that is ever
so intolerable to the proud and delicate-minded, and those suggestions that, however well intended,
had been so irritating to me from such a source. She no longer urged me to read, or sew, or
eat, or take exercise; but, retiring into her own work (whence she could observe me at her
pleasure, for her door was always set wide open, and her face turned in my direction), she
employed or feigned to employ herself in her inexhaustible stocking-basket or scollop-work,
either one the last resource of idiocy, as it seemed to me.

Left thus to myself in some degree, I unclosed the leaves of the bookcase, and surveyed its
grim array of "classics"--all new and unmarked by any name, or sign of having been read--and
from them I selected a few worthies, through whose pages I delved drearily and industriously,
and most unprofitably it must be confessed. The only living sensations I received from the
contents of that bookcase were, I am ashamed to acknowledge, from a few odd volumes of memoirs,
and collections of travels that I had happened to find stowed away behind the others. The rest
seemed sermons from the stars.

Captain Cook's voyages and LeVaillant's descriptions did stir me very slightly with their strong
reality, and make me for a few hours forget myself and my captivity; but all the rest prated
at me like parrots, from stately, pragmatical Johnson down to sentimental, maudlin Sterne.

I found them intolerable in the mood in which I was, nothing so exhausting as the abstract!
and closed the book desperately to resume my diary, neglected since the awful events of Beauseincourt,
but always to me a resource in time of trouble and of solitude. Of pens, ink, paper, there
was no lack, and I wrote one day, Penelope-wise, what I destroyed the next. Yet this very "jotting
down" impressed upon my brain the few incidents of my prison-house recorded here, that might
otherwise have faded from my memory in the twilight of monotony.

I had no need to sew. Fair linen and a sufficiency of other plain wearing-apparel, including
summer gowns, I found laid carefully in my drawers, and the creole negress brought in my clothes
well ironed and carefully mended, to be laid away by the orderly hands of Mrs. Clayton.

Once, during the temporary illness of this dragon (whose bed or lair was placed absolutely
across the door of egress from her closet, so as to block the way or make it difficult of access),
the creole, in an unavoidable contingency like this, came with a pile of clothing in her arms
to lay the pieces herself in the bureau, by direction of my jailer, and thus revealed herself.

By the merest accident I had found in the lining of my purse two pieces of gold (the rest of
my money had been spirited away with the belt that contained it, or the leather had been destroyed
by the action of the saltwater), and one of these I hastened to bestow on the attendant, signifying
silence by a gesture as I did so.

I knew this wretch to be wholly selfish and mercenary, from my experience of her on the raft--for
that she was the same negress I had long ceased to doubt--and I determined, while I had an
opportunity of doing so, to enter a wedge of confidence between us in the only possible way.

"Sabra," I whispered, "what became of the young girl, Ada Lee, and the deformed child? It surely
can do no harm to tell me this, and I know you understand me perfectly."

"No, honey, sartinly not; 'sides, I is tired out of speakin' Spanish," in low, mumbling accents.
"Well, den, dat young gal gone to 'tend on Mrs. Raymond, and, as fur de chile, dey pays me
to take kear of dat in dis very house ware you is disposed of. Dat boy gits me a heap of trouble
and onrest of nights, dough, I tells you, honey; but I is well paid, and dey all has der reasons
for letting him stay here, I spec'"--shaking her head sagaciously--"dough dey may be disappinted
yit, when de time comes to testify and swar! De biggest price will carry de day den, chile;
I tells you all," eying the gold held closely in her palm.

I caught eagerly at the idea of the child's presence, though the rest was Greek to my comprehension
until long afterward, when, in untangling a chain of iniquity difficult to match, it formed
one important but additional link.

"Poor little Ernie! I would give so much to see him," I said. "Ask Dr. Englehart to let him
come to see me, Sabra, and some day I will reward you"--all this in the faintest whisper. "But
Mrs. Raymond--where is she? Does she never come here? I desire earnestly to speak with her.
Can't you let her know this? Try, Sabra, for humanity's sake."

At this juncture the head of Mrs. Clayton was thrust forth from its shell, turtle-wise, and
appeared peering at the door-cheek.

"You have been there long enough to make these clothes instead of putting them away, old woman,"
was the sharp rebuke that startled the pretended Dinah to a condition of bustling agitation,
and induced her to shut up one of her own shrivelled hands in closing the drawer, with a force
that made her cry aloud, and, when released, wring it with agony, that drew some words in the
vernacular. "What makes you suppose Miss Monfort wants to hear your chattering, old magpie
that you are?" continued Mrs. Clayton, throwing off her mask. "Now walk very straight, or the
police shall have you next time you steal from a companion. Remember who rescued you on the
Latona, and on what conditions, and take care how you conduct yourself in the future. Do you
understand me?"

After this tirade, which sorely exhausted her, Mrs. Clayton relapsed into silence; and now
it was my time to speak and even scold. I said:

"Now that the Spanish farce is thrown aside, it is hard indeed that I cannot even be allowed
to exchange a few words with a laundress in my solitary condition--hard that I should be pressed
to the wall in this fiendish fashion. This woman was telling me of the presence of a little
child in the house, and I have desired permission to see it by way of diversion and occupation,
I have asked her to apply to Dr. Englehart."

"The child shall come to you, Miss Monfort, whenever you wish," said Mrs. Clayton, with ill-disguised
eagerness. "This woman is not the proper person to apply to, however, and it is natural you
should feel concerned about it, now that you are able to think and feel again. You know, of
course, it is the boy of the wreck."

"Yes, very natural. Its mother died in my arms, if I am not mistaken in the identity of the
child; and fortunately--" I paused here, arrested by some strange instinct of prudence, and
decided not to show further interest in his fate.

He might be inquired for, and traced even, I reflected, and thus my own existence be brought
to light. Selfishly, as well as charitably, would I cherish him. Little children had ever been
a passion with me, but this poor, repulsive thing was the "dernier ressort of desolation."

That very evening I heard the husky and guttural voice of Dr. Englehart in the adjoining chamber,
or rather in the closet of Mrs. Clayton, a mere anteroom originally, as it seemed, to the large
apartment I occupied.

It was very natural that in her ill condition my dragon should seek medical aid, and I paid
no further attention to the propinquity of this unpleasant visitor than I could help--sitting
quietly by my shaded lamp, absorbed in the Psalter, in which I found nightly refuge.

He came in at last, after tapping very lightly on the door-panel, unsolicited and unexpected,
to my presence--the same inscrutable, hirsute horror I had seen before, with his trudging,
scraping walk, his square and stalwart frame, his gloved extremities, his light, blue-glasses,
hat and cane in hand, a being as I felt to chill one's very marrow.

"Is it true vat I hear," he asked, pausing at some distance, "dat you vant to have dat leetle
hompback chilt for a companion, Miss Monfort?"

"It is true, Dr. Englehart."

"And vat can your motif be? Heh? I must study dat for a leetle before I can decide de question,
or even trost him as a human being in your hands."

"Lunatics are rarely governed by motives at all," I replied, "only impulses. I want human companionship,
however, that is all. I sicken in this solitude--I am dying of mental inanition."

"It is true, you look delicate indeed, I am pained to see." The accent, was forgotten here
for a moment, and an expression of real sympathy was perceivable in his low, husky voice. "Command
me in any way dat accords wid my duty," he continued, "yes! de boy shall come! To interest,
to amuse you, is perhaps--to cure!"

"Thank you; I shall await his advent anxiously; be careful not to disappoint me."

"Oh, not for vorlds!"

"You are very kind; I believe, though, that is all we have to say to one another, Dr. Englehart."

"You are bettair, then?" he said, advancing steadily toward me in spite of this dismissal.
"You need no more leetle pill? Are you quite sure of dat?"

"Not now, at least, Dr. Englehart."

"Permit me, then, to feel your pulse vonce more. I shall determine den more perfectly dis vexing
subject of your sanity."

"Thank you; I decline your opinion on a matter so little open to difference. Be good enough
to retire, Dr. Englehart. Let me at least breathe freely in the solitude to which I am consigned."

"I mean no offence, yonge lady," he said, meekly, falling back to the centre-table on which
was burning my shaded astral lamp--for I had left it as he approached, instinctively to seek
the protection of an interposing chair, on the back of which I stood leaning as I spoke.

He, too, remained standing, with one hand pressed firmly backward on the top of the table,
in front of which he poised himself, gesticulating earnestly yet respectfully.

His position was an error of mistaken confidence in his own make-up, such as we see occur every
day among those even long habituated to disguise.

As he stood I distinctly saw a line of light traced between his cheek and one of his bushy
side-whiskers.

That line of light let in a flood of evidence. The man was an impostor, a tool, as criminal
as his employer--not the footprint on the sand was more suggestive to Robinson Crusoe than
that luminous streak to me, nor the cause of wilder conjecture.

Yet I betrayed nothing of my amazement I am convinced, for, after standing silently for a time
and almost in a suppliant attitude before me, Dr. Englehart departed, and for many days I saw
him not again.

An object that looked not unlike a small, solemn owl, stood in the middle of the floor, regarding
me silently when I awoke very early on the following morning.

At a glance I recognized poor little Ernie, and singularly enough, he knew and remembered me
at once.

"Ernie good boy now," he said as he came toward me with his tiny claw extended. "Lady got cake
in pocket, give Ernie some?" Not only did he recall me, it was plain, but the incident that
saved his life, and the rebukes he had received on the raft for his refusal to partake of briny
biscuit, which no persuasion, it may be remembered, had availed to make him taste--even when
devoured by the pangs of hunger. I tried in vain, however, to recall him to some remembrance
of his poor mother. On that point he was invulnerable; the abstract had no charm for him or
meaning. He dealt only in realities and presences.

A new element was infused into my solitude from this time. In this child I lived, breathed,
and had my being, until later events startled my individuality once more into its old currents
of existence. Not that I merged myself entirely in Ernie, sickly, wayward, fitful, ugly little
mite that he was undeniably. Nay, rather did I draw him forcibly into my own sphere of being
and find nutrition in this novel element.

So grudgingly had Nature fulfilled her obligations in the case of this poor stunted infant,
that, at two and a half years of age, he had not the usual complement of teeth due a child
of eighteen months, and was suffering sorely from the pointing up of tardy stomach-teeth through
ulcerated gums.

To attend to and heal his bodily ailments occupied me entirely at first, and finally, finding
him ill cared for, I made him a little pallet on my sofa and kept him with me by night and
day. Surely such devotion as he manifested in return for my scant kindness to him few mothers
have received from their offspring. To sit silently at my feet while I talked to him, or do
my bidding, seemed his chief pleasures, as they might not, could not have been, had he been
strong, and active, and more soundly constituted. As it was, no more loyal creature existed,
nor did the Creator ever enshrine deeper affections or quicker perceptions in any childish
frame. Weird, and wise, and witty as Æsop was this child, like him deformed; and to draw out
his quaint remarks, read him fresh from his Maker's hand--this warped, and tiny, imperfect
volume of humanity--was to me an ever-new puzzle and delight. Severity he had been used to
of late, I saw plainly. He shrank with winking eyes from an uplifted hand, even if the gesture
were one of mere amazement, or affection, and sat patiently, like a little well-trained dog,
when he saw food placed before me, until invited to partake thereof. His manner was wistful
and deprecating even to pathos, and I longed for one burst of passion, one evidence of self-will,
to prove to myself that I, like others he had been recently thrown with, was not the meanest
of all created creatures--a baby's despot!

Oh, better than this the cap and bells, and infant tyranny forever, and the wildest freaks
of baby folly. He suffered silently, as I have seen no other child do, uncomplainingly even,
and at such times would sink into moods of the blackest gloom, like those of an old, gouty
subject. Hypochondria, baby as he was, seemed already to have fixed his fangs upon him. He
had days of profound melancholy, when nothing provoked a smile, and others of bitter, silent
fretting, inconceivably distressing; again there were periods of the wildest joy, only restrained
by that reticence which had become habitual, from positive boisterousness.

All this I could have compelled into subservience, of course, by substituting fear for affection.
It is not a difficult matter for the strong and cunning to cow and crush the spirit of a little
child; no great achievement, after all, nor proof of power, though many boast of it as such.
Strength and hardness of heart are all one requires for this external victory; but human souls
are not to be so governed (God be praised for this!), and love and respect are not to be compelled.

It is the error of all errors to suppose that, because a child has a sickly frame or imperfect
animal organization, it is just or profitable to give it over to its own devices, and consign
it to indolence and ignorance. Alas! the vacancy that begets fretfulness, and crude, capricious
desires, the confusion of images that arises from partial understanding, are far more wearing
to the nerves of an intelligent infant than the small labor the brain undertakes, if any, indeed,
be needed, in mastering ideas properly presented, and suitable to the condition of the sufferer.
One might as well forbid the hand to grasp, the eye to see, nay, more, it will not do to confound
the child of genius with the fool, or to suppose that the one needs not a mental aliment of
which the other is incapable. Feed well the hungry mind, lest it perish of inanition. It is
a sponge in infancy that imbibes ideas without an effort; it is a safety-valve through which
fancy and poetry conduct away foul vapors; it is an alembic, retaining only the pure and valuable
of all that is poured into it, to be stored for future use. It is a lightning-rod that conducts
away from the body all superfluous electricity. It does not harm a sensible child to put it
to study early, but it destroys a dull one. Let your poor soil lie fallow, but harvest your
rich mould, and you shall be repaid, without harm to its fertility.

Ideas were balm to Ernie, even as regarded his physical suffering. His enthusiasm rose above
it and carried him to other spheres.

Some illustrated volumes of "Wilson's Ornithology," which I found in the bookcase, proved to
be oil on troubled waters in Ernie's case; and before long he knew, without an effort, the
name of every bird in the two folios of prints, and would come of his own accord to repeat
and point them out to me.

I found, to my amazement, that, when a cage of canaries was brought in and hung in the bath-room
at my request for his amusement, he discriminated and gravely averred that no birds like those
were to be found in his big book, though yellow hammers and orioles were there in their native
colors, that might have deceived a less observant eye into a delusion as to their identity
with our pretty importation.

Verses, remarkable for rhyme and rhythm both, when repeated to him a few times with scanning
emphasis, took root in that fertile brain which piled his compact forehead so powerfully above
his piercing, deep-set eyes, and fell from his infant lips in silvery melody as effortless
and spontaneous as the trickling of water or the singing of birds in the trees.

Day by day I saw the little, wistful face relaxing from the hard-knot expression, so to speak,
of sour and serious suffering, and assuming something akin to baby joyousness, and the small,
warped figure, so low that it walked under my dropped and level hand, acquiring security of
step and erectness of bearing. I knew little of the treatment required for spinal disease,
but common-sense taught me that, in order to effect a cure, the vertebral column must be relieved
as much as possible from pressure, and allowed to rest. So I persuaded him to lie down a great
part of the time, and contrived for him a little sustaining brace to relieve him when he walked.

I fed him carefully; I bathed him tenderly, and robbed his weary, aching limbs to rest, so
that before many weeks the change was surprising, and the success of my treatment evident to
all who saw him--the comprehensive "all" being myself and two attendants.

Dr. Englehart had been suggested in the beginning by Mrs. Clayton, as his medical attendant,
but rejected by me with a shudder, that seemed conclusive; yet one evening, unsummoned by me,
and as far as I knew by any other, he walked calmly into my apartment, ostensibly to see the
little invalid--his charge as well as mine.

For a moment the extravagant idea possessed me that, in spite of appearances, I had done this
man injustice, and that he came in reality for humane purposes alone; wore his disguise for these.

This delusion was soon dissipated, as with audacity (no doubt characteristic, though not before
evidenced to me), he seated himself complacently and uninvited, and, disposing of his hat and
stick, settled himself down for a tête-à-tête, an affair which, if medical, usually partakes
of the confidential.

"Your little protégé, Miss Monfort," he said, huskily, "seems to be a serious sufferer," and
for a moment dropping his accent while he rubbed his gloved hands together as with an ill-repressed
self-gratification; "come, tell me now what you are doing for his benefit," again artistically
assuming a foreign accentuation.

In a few words I described my course of treatment and its success.

"All very well," he responded, hoarsely, "as far as it goes; but I am convinced that much severer
treatment will he necessaire--"

"I think not," I replied, curtly; "and certainly nothing of the kind will be permitted by me
while I have charge of this poor infant."

"A few leetle pills, then, for both mother and child;" he suggested, humbly.

"You are mistaken if you imagine any relationship to exist between Ernie and myself," I answered,
calmly, never dreaming at the moment of covert or intended insult. "I might as well inform
you at once, that I am Miss, not Mrs. Monfort; you should he guarded how you make mistakes
of that nature."

And my eye flashed fire, I felt, for I now heard him chuckling low in the shadow, in which
he so carefully concealed himself.

"I shall remembair vat you say," he observed, "and try to do bettair next visit; but all dis
time I delay in de execution of my mission here. See, I have brought you von lettair; now vat
will you do to reward me?"

Holding it high above my head, in a manner meant, no doubt, to be playful, and to suggest a
game of snatch, perhaps, such as his peers might have afforded him, he displayed his treasure
to my longing eyes, "but I sat with folded arms.

"If the letter brings me good news, I shall thank you warmly, Dr. Englehart; if not, I shall
try to believe you unconscious of its contents."

"Tanks from your lips would, indeed, seem priceless," he remarked, courteously, as with many
bows and shrugs he laid it on the table before me, bringing his shaggy head by such means much
closer to my hand than I cared to know it should be, under any circumstances.

With a gesture of inexpressible disgust, regretted the next moment, as I reflected that, to
bring me this letter, he might be overstepping common rules, I raised the envelope to the light
and recognized, to my intense disappointment, the well-known characters of Bainrothe's--small,
rigid, neat, constrained.

My heart, which a moment before had beat audibly to my own ear, sank like a stone in my breast,
and I sat for a time holding the letter mutely, uncertain how to proceed. Should I return it
unread, and thus hurl the gauntlet in the traitor's face, or be governed by expedience (word
ever so despised by me of old), and trace the venom of the viper, by his trail, back to his
native den?

After a brief conflict of feeling, I determined on the wiser course--that of self-humiliation
as a measure of profound policy.

I broke the seal, the well-known "dove-and-vulture" effigy which he called in heraldry "The
quarry" and claimed as his rightful crest. Very significantly, indeed, did it strike me now,
though I had jested on the subject so merrily of old with Evelyn and George Gaston.

The letter was of very recent date, and ran as follows--I have the original still, and this
is an exact copy:

"On September 1st, or as soon thereafter as feasible, I shall call to see you, Miriam, in your
retirement, which I am glad to hear has so far been beneficial. Should I find you in a condition
to make conditions, I shall lay before you a very advantageous offer of marriage I had received
for you before your shipwreck. Should you accept this offer, and attach your signature to a
few papers that I shall bring with me (papers important to the respectability of your whole
family as well as my own), I shall at once resign to you your father's house and the guardianship
of Mabel. The chimera that alarmed you to frenzy can have no further existence, either in fact
or fancy. I am about to contract an advantageous marriage with a foreign lady of rank, wealth,
and beauty, to whom I hope soon to introduce you. I need not mention her name, if you are wise.
Be patient and cheerful; cultivate your talents, and take care of your good looks--no woman
can afford to dispense with these, however gifted; and you will soon find yourself as free
as that 'chartered libertine' the air, for which last two words I am afraid you will be malicious
enough to substitute the name you will not find appended, of your true friend and guardian, B.B."

Had Wentworth spoken, then? Did he know of my immurement? Was it his beloved presence, his
dear hand, that were to be made the prize of my silence and submission? Was the bitter pill
of humiliation I was now swallowing to be gilded thus? No, no--a thousand times, no! He was
not the man with whom to make such conditions--the man I loved--nay worshiped almost. He was
of the old heroic mould, that would have preferred any certainty to suspense, and death itself
to an instant's degradation.

He deemed me dead, and the obstacle that had risen between us needed no explanation now. The
waves had swallowed all necessities like this. But, had he known me the inmate of a mad-house,
no bolts or bars would have withheld him from my presence. His own eyes could alone have convinced
him of such ruin as was alleged against me by these friends.

From this survey of my utter helplessness I turned suddenly to confront the deep, dark, salient
eyes of the disciple of Hahnemann, real or pretended, fixed upon me with a glance that even
his blue spectacles could not deprive of its subtle intensity.

Where had I seen before orbs of the same snake-like peculiarity of expression, or caught the
outline of the profile which suddenly riveted my gaze as the light partially revealed it, then
subsided into shadow again! I pondered this question for a moment while Dr. Englehart, silent,
expectant perhaps, stood with his hand tightly grasping the back of a chair, on the seat of
which he reposed one knee, in a position such as defiant school-boys often assume before a
pedagogue.

As I have said, his head and body were again in shadow, as was, indeed, most of the chamber,
for the rays which struggled through the thick ground glass of my astral lamp were as mild
as moonbeams, and as unsatisfactory. But the light fell strong and red beneath the shade, and
the full glare of the astral lamp seemed centred on that pudgy hand, in its inevitable glove,
that had fixed so firm a gripe on the back of the mahogany chair as to strain open one of the
fingers of the tight, tawny kid-glove worn by Dr. Englehart. This had parted slightly just
above the knuckle of the front-finger, and revealed the cotton stuffing within. Nay, more,
the ruby ring with its peculiar device was thus exposed, which graced the slender finger of
the charlatan! I do not apply this term as concerned the profession he affected at all, but
merely (as shall be seen later) as one appropriate to himself individually.

There must be beings of all kinds to constitute a world, philosophers tell us, and he, no doubt,
so long in ignorance of it, had stumbled suddenly on his proper vocation at last. The rôle
he was playing (so far successfully) had doubtless been the occasion of an exquisite delight
to him, unknown to simpler mortals, who masquerade not without dread misgivings of detection.
I for one, when affecting any costume not essentially belonging to me, or covering my face
even with a paper-mask for holiday diversion, have had a feeling of unusual transparency and
obviousness, so to speak, which precluded on my part every thing like a successful maintenance
of the part I was attempting to play. It was as if some mocking voice was saying: "This is
Miriam Monfort, the true Miriam; the person you have known before as such was only making believe--but
the Simon-pure is before you, a volume of folly that all who run may read! Behold her--she
was never half so evident before!"

But to digress thus in the very moment of detection, of recognition, seems irrelevant. The
flash of conviction was as instantaneous in its action in my mind as that of the lightning
when it strikes its object. I stood confounded, yet enlightened, all ablaze!--but the subject
of this discovery did not seem in the least to apprehend it, or to believe it possible, in
his mad, mole-like effrontery of self-sufficiency, that by his own track he could be betrayed.

"Vat ansair shall I bear to Mr. Bainrothe from his vard?" asked the Mercury of my Jove, clasping
his costumed hands together, then dropping them meekly before him. "I vait de reply of Miss
Monfort vid patience. Dere is pen, and ink, and papair, I perceive, on dat table. Be good enough
to write at once your reply to de vise conditions of your excellent guardian."

"You know them, then?" I said, quickly, glancing at him with a derisive scorn that did not
escape his observation.

"I have dat honnair," was the hypocritical reply, accompanied by a profound bow.

"Disgrace, rather," I substituted. "But you have your own stand-point of view, of course. The
shield that to you is white, to me is black as Erebus. You remember the knights of fable?"

"Always the same--always indomitable!" I heard him murmur, so low that it was marvelous how
the words reached my ear, tense as was every sense with disdainful excitement. Yet he simply
said aloud, after his impulsive stage-whisper: "Excuse me! I understand not your allusions.
I pretend not to de classics; my leetle pills--" and he hesitated, or affected to do so.

"Enough--I waive all apologies; they only prolong an interview singularly distasteful to me
for many reasons. You are behind the curtain, I cannot doubt, and understand not only the contents
of that absurd letter, but its unprincipled references. To Basil Bainrothe I will never address
one line; but you may say to him that I scorn him and his conditions. Yet, helpless as I am,
and in his hands, tell him to bring his emancipation papers, and I will sign them, though they
cost me all I possess of property. My sister I will not surrender any longer to his care, nor
my right in her, which, with or without his consent, is perfect when I reach my majority. As
to the suitor to whom he alluded, he had better be allowed to speak for himself when this transaction
is over. I shall then decide very calmly on his merits, tarnished, as these might seem, from
such recommendation."

