THE PRAIRIE

By J. Fenimore Cooper

INTRODUCTION

"The Prairie" was the third in order of Fenimore Cooper's Leatherstocking Tales. Its first
appearance was in the year 1827. The idea of the story had suggested itself to him, we are
told, before he had finished its immediate forerunner, "The Last of the Mohicans." He chose
entirely new scenes for it, "resolved to cross the Mississippi and wander over the desolate
wastes of the remote Western prairies." He had been taking every chance that came of making
a personal acquaintance with the Indian chiefs of the western tribes who were to be encountered
about this period on their way in the frequent Indian embassies to Washington. "He saw much
to command his admiration," says Mrs. Cooper, "in these wild braves... It was a matter of course
that in drawing Indian character he should dwell on the better traits of the picture, rather
than on the coarser and more revolting though more common points. Like West, he could see the
Apollo in the young Mohawk."

When in July, 1826, Cooper landed in England with his wife and family, he carried his Indian
memories and associations with him. They crossed to France, and ascended the Seine by steamboat,
and then settled for a time in Paris. Of their quarters there in the Rue St. Maur, Sarah Fenimore
Cooper writes:

"It was thoroughly French in character. There was a short, narrow, gloomy lane or street, shut
in between lofty dwelling houses, the lane often dark, always filthy, without sidewalks, a
gutter running through the centre, over which, suspended from a rope, hung a dim oil lamp or
two--such was the Rue St. Maur, in the Faubourg St. Germain. It was a gloomy approach certainly.
But a tall porte cochere opened, and suddenly the whole scene changed. Within those high walls,
so forbidding in aspect, there lay charming gardens, gay with parterres of flowers, and shaded
by noble trees, not only those belonging to the house itself, but those of other adjoining
dwellings of the same character--one looked over park-like grounds covering some acres. The
hotel itself, standing on the street, was old, and built on a grand scale; it had been the
home of a French ducal family in the time of Louis XIV. The rooms on the two lower floors were
imposing and spacious; with ceilings of great height, gilded wainscoting and various quaint
little medallion pictures of shepherds and shepherdesses, and other fancies of the time of
Madame de Sevigne. Those little shepherds were supposed to have looked down upon la mere beaute,
and upon la plus jolie fille de France as she danced her incomparable minuets. Those grand
saloons were now devoted to the humble service of a school for young ladies. But on the third
floor, to which one ascended by a fine stone stairway, broad and easy, with elaborate iron
railings, there was a more simple set of rooms, comfortably furnished, where the American family
were pleasantly provided for, in a home of their own. Unwilling to separate from his children,
who were placed at the school, the traveller adopted this plan that he might be near them.
One of the rooms, overlooking the garden, and opening on a small terrace, became his study.
He was soon at work. In his writing-desk lay some chapters of a new novel. The MS. had crossed
the ocean with him, though but little had been added to its pages during the wanderings of
the English and French journeys."

When, some months later, the story appeared, its effect was immediate on both sides the Atlantic.
It is worth note that during his French visit Cooper met Sir Walter Scott. Cooper was born
at Burlington, New Jersey, 15th Sept., 1789, and died at Cooperstown, New York (which took
its name from his father), 14th Sept., 1851.

Ernest Rhys 1907

AUTHOR'S INTRODUCTION

The geological formation of that portion of the American Union, which lies between the Alleghanies
and the Rocky Mountains, has given rise to many ingenious theories. Virtually, the whole of
this immense region is a plain. For a distance extending nearly 1500 miles east and west, and
600 north and south, there is scarcely an elevation worthy to be called a mountain. Even hills
are not common; though a good deal of the face of the country has more or less of that "rolling"
character, which is described in the opening pages of this work.

There is much reason to believe, that the territory which now composes Ohio, Illinois, Indiana,
Michigan, and a large portion of the country west of the Mississippi, lay formerly under water.
The soil of all the former states has the appearance of an alluvial deposit; and isolated rocks
have been found, of a nature and in situations which render it difficult to refute the opinion
that they have been transferred to their present beds by floating ice. This theory assumes
that the Great Lakes were the deep pools of one immense body of fresh water, which lay too
low to be drained by the irruption that laid bare the land.

It will be remembered that the French, when masters of the Canadas and Louisiana, claimed the
whole of the territory in question. Their hunters and advanced troops held the first communications
with the savage occupants, and the earliest written accounts we possess of these vast regions,
are from the pens of their missionaries. Many French words have, consequently, become of local
use in this quarter of America, and not a few names given in that language have been perpetuated.
When the adventurers, who first penetrated these wilds, met, in the centre of the forests,
immense plains, covered with rich verdure or rank grasses, they naturally gave them the appellation
of meadows. As the English succeeded the French, and found a peculiarity of nature, differing
from all they had yet seen on the continent, already distinguished by a word that did not express
any thing in their own language, they left these natural meadows in possession of their title
of convention. In this manner has the word "Prairie" been adopted into the English tongue.

The American prairies are of two kinds. Those which lie east of the Mississippi are comparatively
small, are exceedingly fertile, and are always surrounded by forests. They are susceptible
of high cultivation, and are fast becoming settled. They abound in Ohio, Michigan, Illinois,
and Indiana. They labour under the disadvantages of a scarcity of wood and water,--evils of
a serious character, until art has had time to supply the deficiencies of nature. As coal is
said to abound in all that region, and wells are generally successful, the enterprise of the
emigrants is gradually prevailing against these difficulties.

The second description of these natural meadows lies west of the Mississippi, at a distance
of a few hundred miles from that river, and is called the Great Prairies. They resemble the
steppes of Tartary more than any other known portion of Christendom; being, in fact, a vast
country, incapable of sustaining a dense population, in the absence of the two great necessaries
already named. Rivers abound, it is true; but this region is nearly destitute of brooks and
the smaller water courses, which tend so much to comfort and fertility.

The origin and date of the Great American Prairies form one of natures most majestic mysteries.
The general character of the United States, of the Canadas, and of Mexico, is that of luxuriant
fertility. It would be difficult to find another portion of the world, of the same extent,
which has so little useless land as the inhabited parts of the American Union. Most of the
mountains are arable, and even the prairies, in this section of the republic, are of deep alluvion.
The same is true between the Rocky Mountains and the Pacific. Between the two lies the broad
belt, of comparative desert, which is the scene of this tale, appearing to interpose a barrier
to the progress of the American people westward.

The Great Prairies appear to be the final gathering place of the red men. The remnants of the
Mohicans, and the Delawares, of the Creeks, Choctaws, and Cherokees, are destined to fulfil
their time on these vast plains. The entire number of the Indians, within the Union, is differently
computed, at between one and three hundred thousand souls. Most of them inhabit the country
west of the Mississippi. At the period of the tale, they dwelt in open hostility; national
feuds passing from generation to generation. The power of the republic has done much to restore
peace to these wild scenes, and it is now possible to travel in security, where civilised man
did not dare to pass unprotected five-and-twenty years ago.

The reader, who has perused the two former works, of which this is the natural successor, will
recognise an old acquaintance in the principal character of the story. We have here brought
him to his end, and we trust he will be permitted to slumber in the peace of the just.

J. F. Cooper Paris June 1832

THE PRAIRIE

CHAPTER I.

            I pray thee, shepherd, if that love or gold,
            Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
            Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed.
                                               --As you like it.

Much was said and written, at the time, concerning the policy of adding the vast regions of
Louisiana, to the already immense and but half-tenanted territories of the United States. As
the warmth of controversy however subsided, and party considerations gave place to more liberal
views, the wisdom of the measure began to be generally conceded. It soon became apparent to
the meanest capacity, that, while nature had placed a barrier of desert to the extension of
our population in the west, the measure had made us the masters of a belt of fertile country,
which, in the revolutions of the day, might have become the property of a rival nation. It
gave us the sole command of the great thoroughfare of the interior, and placed the countless
tribes of savages, who lay along our borders, entirely within our control; it reconciled conflicting
rights, and quieted national distrusts; it opened a thousand avenues to the inland trade, and
to the waters of the Pacific; and, if ever time or necessity shall require a peaceful division
of this vast empire, it assures us of a neighbour that will possess our language, our religion,
our institutions, and it is also to be hoped, our sense of political justice.

Although the purchase was made in 1803, the spring of the succeeding year was permitted to
open, before the official prudence of the Spaniard, who held the province for his European
master, admitted the authority, or even of the entrance of its new proprietors. But the forms
of the transfer were no sooner completed, and the new government acknowledged, than swarms
of that restless people, which is ever found hovering on the skirts of American society, plunged
into the thickets that fringed the right bank of the Mississippi, with the same careless hardihood,
as had already sustained so many of them in their toilsome progress from the Atlantic states,
to the eastern shores of the "father of rivers."[*]

   [*] The Mississippi is thus termed in several of the Indian languages.
    The reader will gain a more just idea of the importance of this
    stream, if he recalls to mind the fact, that the Missouri and the
    Mississippi are properly the same river. Their united lengths
    cannot be greatly short of four thousand miles.

Time was necessary to blend the numerous and affluent colonists of the lower province with
their new compatriots; but the thinner and more humble population above, was almost immediately
swallowed in the vortex which attended the tide of instant emigration. The inroad from the
east was a new and sudden out-breaking of a people, who had endured a momentary restraint,
after having been rendered nearly resistless by success. The toils and hazards of former undertakings
were forgotten, as these endless and unexplored regions, with all their fancied as well as
real advantages, were laid open to their enterprise. The consequences were such as might easily
have been anticipated, from so tempting an offering, placed, as it was, before the eyes of
a race long trained in adventure and nurtured in difficulties.

Thousands of the elders, of what were then called the New States[*], broke up from the enjoyment
of their hard-earned indulgences, and were to be seen leading long files of descendants, born
and reared in the forests of Ohio and Kentucky, deeper into the land, in quest of that which
might be termed, without the aid of poetry, their natural and more congenial atmosphere. The
distinguished and resolute forester who first penetrated the wilds of the latter state, was
of the number. This adventurous and venerable patriarch was now seen making his last remove;
placing the "endless river" between him and the multitude his own success had drawn around
him, and seeking for the renewal of enjoyments which were rendered worthless in his eyes, when
trammelled by the forms of human institutions.[+]

    [*] All the states admitted to the American Union, since the
    revolution, are called New States, with the exception of Vermont:
    that had claims before the war; which were not, however, admitted
    until a later day.

    [+] Colonel Boon, the patriarch of Kentucky. This venerable and hardy
    pioneer of civilisation emigrated to an estate three hundred miles
    west of the Mississippi, in his ninety-second year, because he
    found a population of ten to the square mile, inconveniently
    crowded!

In the pursuit of adventures such as these, men are ordinarily governed by their habits or
deluded by their wishes. A few, led by the phantoms of hope, and ambitious of sudden affluence,
sought the mines of the virgin territory; but by far the greater portion of the emigrants were
satisfied to establish themselves along the margins of the larger water-courses, content with
the rich returns that the generous, alluvial, bottoms of the rivers never fail to bestow on
the most desultory industry. In this manner were communities formed with magical rapidity;
and most of those who witnessed the purchase of the empty empire, have lived to see already
a populous and sovereign state, parcelled from its inhabitants, and received into the bosom
of the national Union, on terms of political equality.

The incidents and scenes which are connected with this legend, occurred in the earliest periods
of the enterprises which have led to so great and so speedy a result.

The harvest of the first year of our possession had long been passed, and the fading foliage
of a few scattered trees was already beginning to exhibit the hues and tints of autumn, when
a train of wagons issued from the bed of a dry rivulet, to pursue its course across the undulating
surface, of what, in the language of the country of which we write, is called a "rolling prairie."
The vehicles, loaded with household goods and implements of husbandry, the few straggling sheep
and cattle that were herded in the rear, and the rugged appearance and careless mien of the
sturdy men who loitered at the sides of the lingering teams, united to announce a band of emigrants
seeking for the Elderado of the West. Contrary to the usual practice of the men of their caste,
this party had left the fertile bottoms of the low country, and had found its way, by means
only known to such adventurers, across glen and torrent, over deep morasses and arid wastes,
to a point far beyond the usual limits of civilised habitations. In their front were stretched
those broad plains, which extend, with so little diversity of character, to the bases of the
Rocky Mountains; and many long and dreary miles in their rear, foamed the swift and turbid
waters of La Platte.

The appearance of such a train, in that bleak and solitary place, was rendered the more remarkable
by the fact, that the surrounding country offered so little, that was tempting to the cupidity
of speculation, and, if possible, still less that was flattering to the hopes of an ordinary
settler of new lands.

The meagre herbage of the prairie, promised nothing, in favour of a hard and unyielding soil,
over which the wheels of the vehicles rattled as lightly as if they travelled on a beaten road;
neither wagons nor beasts making any deeper impression, than to mark that bruised and withered
grass, which the cattle plucked, from time to time, and as often rejected, as food too sour,
for even hunger to render palatable.

Whatever might be the final destination of these adventurers, or the secret causes of their
apparent security in so remote and unprotected a situation, there was no visible sign of uneasiness,
uncertainty, or alarm, among them. Including both sexes, and every age, the number of the party
exceeded twenty.

At some little distance in front of the whole, marched the individual, who, by his position
and air, appeared to be the leader of the band. He was a tall, sun-burnt, man, past the middle
age, of a dull countenance and listless manner. His frame appeared loose and flexible; but
it was vast, and in reality of prodigious power. It was, only at moments, however, as some
slight impediment opposed itself to his loitering progress, that his person, which, in its
ordinary gait seemed so lounging and nerveless, displayed any of those energies, which lay
latent in his system, like the slumbering and unwieldy, but terrible, strength of the elephant.
The inferior lineaments of his countenance were coarse, extended and vacant; while the superior,
or those nobler parts which are thought to affect the intellectual being, were low, receding
and mean.

The dress of this individual was a mixture of the coarsest vestments of a husbandman with the
leathern garments, that fashion as well as use, had in some degree rendered necessary to one
engaged in his present pursuits. There was, however, a singular and wild display of prodigal
and ill judged ornaments, blended with his motley attire. In place of the usual deer-skin belt,
he wore around his body a tarnished silken sash of the most gaudy colours; the buck-horn haft
of his knife was profusely decorated with plates of silver; the marten's fur of his cap was
of a fineness and shadowing that a queen might covet; the buttons of his rude and soiled blanket-coat
were of the glittering coinage of Mexico; the stock of his rifle was of beautiful mahogany,
riveted and banded with the same precious metal, and the trinkets of no less than three worthless
watches dangled from different parts of his person. In addition to the pack and the rifle which
were slung at his back, together with the well filled, and carefully guarded pouch and horn,
he had carelessly cast a keen and bright wood-axe across his shoulder, sustaining the weight
of the whole with as much apparent ease, as if he moved, unfettered in limb, and free from
incumbrance.

A short distance in the rear of this man, came a group of youths very similarly attired, and
bearing sufficient resemblance to each other, and to their leader, to distinguish them as the
children of one family. Though the youngest of their number could not much have passed the
period, that, in the nicer judgment of the law, is called the age of discretion, he had proved
himself so far worthy of his progenitors as to have reared already his aspiring person to the
standard height of his race. There were one or two others, of different mould, whose descriptions
must however be referred to the regular course of the narrative.

Of the females, there were but two who had arrived at womanhood; though several white-headed,
olive-skinned faces were peering out of the foremost wagon of the train, with eyes of lively
curiosity and characteristic animation. The elder of the two adults, was the sallow and wrinkled
mother of most of the party, and the younger was a sprightly, active, girl, of eighteen, who
in figure, dress, and mien, seemed to belong to a station in society several gradations above
that of any one of her visible associates. The second vehicle was covered with a top of cloth
so tightly drawn, as to conceal its contents, with the nicest care. The remaining wagons were
loaded with such rude furniture and other personal effects, as might be supposed to belong
to one, ready at any moment to change his abode, without reference to season or distance.

Perhaps there was little in this train, or in the appearance of its proprietors, that is not
daily to be encountered on the highways of this changeable and moving country. But the solitary
and peculiar scenery, in which it was so unexpectedly exhibited, gave to the party a marked
character of wildness and adventure.

In the little valleys, which, in the regular formation of the land, occurred at every mile
of their progress, the view was bounded, on two of the sides, by the gradual and low elevations,
which gave name to the description of prairie we have mentioned; while on the others, the meagre
prospect ran off in long, narrow, barren perspectives, but slightly relieved by a pitiful show
of coarse, though somewhat luxuriant vegetation. From the summits of the swells, the eye became
fatigued with the sameness and chilling dreariness of the landscape. The earth was not unlike
the Ocean, when its restless waters are heaving heavily, after the agitation and fury of the
tempest have begun to lessen. There was the same waving and regular surface, the same absence
of foreign objects, and the same boundless extent to the view. Indeed so very striking was
the resemblance between the water and the land, that, however much the geologist might sneer
at so simple a theory, it would have been difficult for a poet not to have felt, that the formation
of the one had been produced by the subsiding dominion of the other. Here and there a tall
tree rose out of the bottoms, stretching its naked branches abroad, like some solitary vessel;
and, to strengthen the delusion, far in the distance, appeared two or three rounded thickets,
looming in the misty horizon like islands resting on the waters. It is unnecessary to warn
the practised reader, that the sameness of the surface, and the low stands of the spectators,
exaggerated the distances; but, as swell appeared after swell, and island succeeded island,
there was a disheartening assurance that long, and seemingly interminable, tracts of territory
must be passed, before the wishes of the humblest agriculturist could be realised.

Still, the leader of the emigrants steadily pursued his way, with no other guide than the sun,
turning his back resolutely on the abodes of civilisation, and plunging, at each step, more
deeply if not irretrievably, into the haunts of the barbarous and savage occupants of the country.
As the day drew nigher to a close, however, his mind, which was, perhaps, incapable of maturing
any connected system of forethought, beyond that which related to the interests of the present
moment, became, in some slight degree, troubled with the care of providing for the wants of
the hours of darkness.

On reaching the crest of a swell that was a little higher than the usual elevations, he lingered
a minute, and cast a half curious eye, on either hand, in quest of those well known signs,
which might indicate a place, where the three grand requisites of water, fuel and fodder were
to be obtained in conjunction.

It would seem that his search was fruitless; for after a few moments of indolent and listless
examination, he suffered his huge frame to descend the gentle declivity, in the same sluggish
manner that an over fatted beast would have yielded to the downward pressure.

His example was silently followed by those who succeeded him, though not until the young men
had manifested much more of interest, if not of concern in the brief enquiry, which each, in
his turn, made on gaining the same look-out. It was now evident, by the tardy movements both
of beasts and men, that the time of necessary rest was not far distant. The matted grass of
the lower land, presented obstacles which fatigue began to render formidable, and the whip
was becoming necessary to urge the lingering teams to their labour. At this moment, when, with
the exception of the principal individual, a general lassitude was getting the mastery of the
travellers, and every eye was cast, by a sort of common impulse, wistfully forward, the whole
party was brought to a halt, by a spectacle, as sudden as it was unexpected.

The sun had fallen below the crest of the nearest wave of the prairie, leaving the usual rich
and glowing train on its track. In the centre of this flood of fiery light, a human form appeared,
drawn against the gilded background, as distinctly, and seemingly as palpable, as though it
would come within the grasp of any extended hand. The figure was colossal; the attitude musing
and melancholy, and the situation directly in the route of the travellers. But imbedded, as
it was, in its setting of garish light, it was impossible to distinguish its just proportions
or true character.

The effect of such a spectacle was instantaneous and powerful. The man in front of the emigrants
came to a stand, and remained gazing at the mysterious object, with a dull interest, that soon
quickened into superstitious awe. His sons, so soon as the first emotions of surprise had a
little abated, drew slowly around him, and, as they who governed the teams gradually followed
their example, the whole party was soon condensed in one, silent, and wondering group. Notwithstanding
the impression of a supernatural agency was very general among the travellers, the ticking
of gun-locks was heard, and one or two of the bolder youths cast their rifles forward, in readiness
for service.

"Send the boys off to the right," exclaimed the resolute wife and mother, in a sharp, dissonant
voice; "I warrant me, Asa, or Abner will give some account of the creature!"

"It may be well enough, to try the rifle," muttered a dull looking man, whose features, both
in outline and expression, bore no small resemblance to the first speaker, and who loosened
the stock of his piece and brought it dexterously to the front, while delivering this opinion;
"the Pawnee Loups are said to be hunting by hundreds in the plains; if so, they'll never miss
a single man from their tribe."

"Stay!" exclaimed a soft toned, but alarmed female voice, which was easily to be traced to
the trembling lips of the younger of the two women; "we are not altogether; it may be a friend!"

"Who is scouting, now?" demanded the father, scanning, at the same time, the cluster of his
stout sons, with a displeased and sullen eye. "Put by the piece, put by the piece;" he continued,
diverting the other's aim, with the finger of a giant, and with the air of one it might be
dangerous to deny. "My job is not yet ended; let us finish the little that remains, in peace."

The man, who had manifested so hostile an intention, appeared to understand the other's allusion,
and suffered himself to be diverted from his object. The sons turned their inquiring looks
on the girl, who had so eagerly spoken, to require an explanation; but, as if content with
the respite she had obtained for the stranger, she sunk back, in her seat, and chose to affect
a maidenly silence.

In the mean time, the hues of the heavens had often changed. In place of the brightness, which
had dazzled the eye, a gray and more sober light had succeeded, and as the setting lost its
brilliancy, the proportions of the fanciful form became less exaggerated, and finally distinct.
Ashamed to hesitate, now that the truth was no longer doubtful, the leader of the party resumed
his journey, using the precaution, as he ascended the slight acclivity, to release his own
rifle from the strap, and to cast it into a situation more convenient for sudden use.

There was little apparent necessity, however, for such watchfulness. From the moment when it
had thus unaccountably appeared, as it were, between the heavens and the earth, the stranger's
figure had neither moved nor given the smallest evidence of hostility. Had he harboured any
such evil intention, the individual who now came plainly into view, seemed but little qualified
to execute them.

A frame that had endured the hardships of more than eighty seasons, was not qualified to awaken
apprehension, in the breast of one as powerful as the emigrant. Notwithstanding his years,
and his look of emaciation, if not of suffering, there was that about this solitary being,
however, which said that time, and not disease, had laid his hand heavily on him. His form
had withered, but it was not wasted. The sinews and muscles, which had once denoted great strength,
though shrunken, were still visible; and his whole figure had attained an appearance of induration,
which, if it were not for the well known frailty of humanity, would have seemed to bid defiance
to the further approaches of decay. His dress was chiefly of skins, worn with the hair to the
weather; a pouch and horn were suspended from his shoulders; and he leaned on a rifle of uncommon
length, but which, like its owner, exhibited the wear of long and hard service. 

The finest quilts were wrought along designs largely original with the quilters themselves,
who plied their needles in solitary farmhouses and out-of-the-way hamlets to which the influence
of English idea in needlework could not penetrate. In no locality in our country can so many
rare and beautiful quilts be found as in the Middle West.

Many of the best were made during those early days of struggle for mere existence, when they served
the busy housewife as the one precious outlet for her artistic aspirations.

The type of quilt that may be called distinctively American was substantial
in character; the material that entered into its construction was
serviceable, of a good quality of cotton cloth, or handwoven linen,
and the careful work put into it was intended to stand the test of
time.

The coloured materials combined with the white were also enduring, the colours being as nearly
permanent as it was possible to procure. Some cottons were dyed by the quilt makers themselves,
if desirable fast shades could not be readily procured otherwise.

The fundamental idea was to make a quilt that would withstand the greatest possible amount
of wear. Some of the artistic possibilities in both colour and design were often subordinated
to the desire to make quilts as nearly imperishable as possible.

The painstaking needlework required to produce a quilt deserved the best of material for its
foundation.

Silks, satins, velvets, and fine linen and cotton fabrics of delicate
shades were not favoured as quilt material by the old-time needleworkers,
who wrought for service first and beauty afterward.

A most beautiful example of the American quilt at its best is found in the "Indiana Wreath."
Its pleasing design, harmonious colours, and exquisite workmanship
reveal to us the quilter's art in its greatest perfection.

This quilt was made by Miss E. J. Hart, a most versatile and skilful needlewoman, in 1858,
as shown by the small precise figures below the large wreath. The design is exceedingly well
balanced in that the entire quilt surface is uniformly covered and
no one feature is emphasized to the detriment of any other.

The design element of the wreath is a compact group of flowers, fruit,
and leaves, which is repeated ten times in making the complete circle.

The vase filled with drooping sprays, flowers, and conventionalized buds forms an ideal centre
for this wreath. Curving vines intermingled with flowers make a desirable
and graceful border.

This quilt is a little more than two and a half yards square, and the central wreath fills
a space equal to the width of a double bed, for which it was evidently
intended.

Miss Hart displayed unusual ability in choosing and combining the
limited materials at the disposal of the quilt maker in a newly settled
region.

The foundation is fine white muslin; the coloured material is calico,
in the serviceable quality manufactured at that time, and of shades
considered absolutely fast, then known as "oil boiled."

           Only four colours are used in the design:
           green, red, yellow, and pink, the latter having
                                            a small allover printed design in a darker shade.

Miss Hart planned her quilting quite carefully. In the large blank spaces in the corners are
placed special, original designs that have some features of the much-used "feather" pattern.
Aside from these triangular corner designs all the quilting is in small diamonds, which form
a very pleasing background for the effective coloured designs. The maker's name and the date
are closely quilted in white in plain bold-faced type just below
the wreath.

In the centre of the wreath, in neat script in black thread, is quilted the name "Indiana Wreath,"
and all the stitchery of top and quilting is the very perfection of quilt making.

The beautiful white quilts that are treasured as relics of past industry by their fortunate owners
deserve special mention.

They are rare because nowadays no one will expend the large amount of time necessary to complete
one.

The foundation of such a quilt is fine white muslin, or fine homespun and woven linen, with
a very thin interlining. The beauty of the quilt depends upon the design drawn for the quilting
and the fine stitches with which the quilting is done. There is usually a special design planned
for these white quilts which includes a large central panel or pattern, with smaller designs
for the corners embodying some of the ideas of the central panel. Around these decorative sections
the background is so closely quilted as to resemble a woven fabric. This smooth, even background
throws the principal designs into low relief.

After the entire quilt is quilted and removed from the frames, the main design is frequently
further accentuated by having all the most prominent features, such as the leaves and petals of flowers,
stuffed. To accomplish this tiny holes are made on the wrong side of each section of the design
and cotton is pushed in with a large needle until the section is stuffed full and tight. This
tedious process is followed until every leaf and petal stands out in bold relief.

The fashion which has prevailed for many years of dressing beds all in white has no doubt caused
the destruction of many beautiful quilts. The white quilts that have been preserved are now
considered too valuable to be subjected to hard wear. The most exquisite ones were made in
the last of the eighteenth and the beginning of the nineteenth centuries.

It was the rage for white bed coverings that shortened the lives of
many old pieced and patched quilts of good colouring.

The "Country Contributor" tells of her experiences in dressing up the white beds:

"I remember with regret the quilts I wore out, using them white side up in lieu of white Marseilles
spreads. The latter we were far too poor to own; the 'tufted' ones had worn out; and I loathed
the cheap 'honeycombed' cotton things we were forced to use unless we were going to be frankly
'poor' and cover our beds with plain patchwork, made up hurriedly and quilted in simple 'fans'
in plebeian squares, as poor folk who haven't time for elegant stitches
did theirs.

So I used the old quilts, making their fine stitches in intricate patterns serve for the design
in a 'white spread,' turning the white muslin lining up. A beautiful white spread it made, too,
I realize now, more fully than I did then, though I now would know much better than to turn
the wonderful appliqué stars and flowers and wheels from view. Strange, is it not, that we relinquish
so much of life's best joy and pleasure before we know what actually is good?" This fashion
prevails to-day, in some instances insisted upon for sanitary reasons, but it has lost to us
many of the finest examples of quilting that existed because where there were no coloured
patterns to relieve the white expanse, the quilting had to be perfect. If you have a white quilt
treasure it, for competent quilters are no longer numerous and few there are who can reproduce
it.

CHAPTER V

HOW QUILTS ARE MADE

It is only in comparatively recent years that many articles of wearing apparel and house furnishings
have been manufactured outside the home.

One after another, spinning, weaving, shoemaking, candlemaking, tailoring, knitting, and similar tasks
have been taken from the homekeeper because the same articles can be made better and cheaper elsewhere.
The housewife still keeps busy, but is occupied with tasks more to her liking. Among the few
home occupations that have survived is quilting. With many serviceable substitutes it is not
really necessary for women to make quilts now, but the strange fascination about the work holds
their interest. Quilt making has developed and progressed during the very period when textile arts
in the home have declined under the influence of the factory.

More quilts are being made at the present time and over a wider area than ever before.

Quilts, as known and used to-day, may be divided into two general classes, washable and non-washable,
depending upon the materials of which they are made. The methods for constructing each class are
the same, and are so very simple that it seems hardly necessary to
explain them.

The name quilt implies two or more fabrics held together with many stitches. Webster defines a quilt
as "Anything that is quilted, especially as a quilted bedcover or a skirt worn by women; any
cover or garment made by putting wool, cotton, etc., between two cloths and stitching them together."
The verb, to quilt, he defines as "To stitch or to sew together at
frequent intervals in order to confine in place the several layers
of cloth and wadding of which a garment, comforter, etc., may be made.

To stitch or sew in lines or patterns."

The "Encyclopædia Britannica" is a little more explicit and also gives the derivation of the
name, quilt, as follows: "Probably a coverlet for a bed consisting of a mass of feathers, down,
wool, or other soft substances, surrounded by an outer covering of linen, cloth, or other material."
In its earlier days the "quilt" was often made thick and sewed as
a form of mattress.

The term was also given to a stitched, wadded lining for body armour.

"The word came into English from old French cuilte. This is derived from Latin culcitra, a stuffed
mattress or cushion. From the form culcitra came old French cotra, or coutre whence coutre pointe;
this was corrupted into counterpoint, which in turn was changed to counterpane. The word 'pane'
is also from the Latin pannus, a piece of cloth. Thus 'counterpane,' a coverlet for a bed,
and 'quilt' are by origin the same word."

Broadly speaking, from these definitions, any article made up with an interlining may be called
a quilt. However, usage has restricted the meaning of the word until now it is applied to
a single form of bed covering. In the United States the distinction has been carried even farther
and a quilt is understood to be a light weight, closely stitched
bedcover.

    When made thicker, and consequently warmer, it is called a "comfort."

The three necessary parts of a quilt are the top, the lining or back, and the interlining. The
top, which is the important feature, unless the quilting is to be the only ornamentation, may be
a single piece of plain cloth; or it may be pieced together from many small pieces different in size,
colour, and shape, so as to form either simple or fanciful designs. The top may also be adorned
with designs cut from fabrics of varying colours and applied to the foundation with fancy stitches,
or it may be embroidered. The materials may be either cotton, linen,
wool, or silk.

The back is usually of plain material, which requires no description. The interlining, if
the quilting is to be close and elaborate, must be thin. If warmth is desired a thicker interlining
is used and the lines of quilting are spaced farther apart. The design of the top and the quilting
lend themselves very readily to all manner of variations, and as
a result there is an almost infinite variety of quilts.

For convenience in making, nearly every quilt is composed of a number of blocks of regular form and
size which, when joined together, make the body of the quilt. Each of these blocks may have
a design complete in itself, or may be only part of a large and complicated design covering the whole
top of the quilt.

There is a radical distinction between the verbs "to piece" and "to
patch," as used in connection with the making of quilts.

In this instance the former means to join together separate pieces of like material to make sections
or blocks that are in turn set together to form the top of the quilt.

The pieces are usually of uniform shape and size and of contrasting colours. They are sewed together
with a running stitch, making a seam upon the wrong side. The quilt called "Star of the East"
is an excellent example of a pieced quilt in which a number of small pieced sections are united
to form a single design that embraces the entire top of the quilt.

    
    
    Patches are commonly associated with misfortune. The one who
    needs them is unfortunate, and the one who has to sew them on is
usually an object of sympathy, according to a wise old saw: "A hole
may be thought to be an accident of the day, but a patch is a sure
sign of poverty."

But patch quilts belong to a different class than the patches of necessity, and are the aristocrats
of the quilt family, while the pieced quilts came under the heading
of poor relations.

However, this term is a misnomer when applied to some pieced quilts. Many of the "scrap quilts,"
as they are called in some localities, are very pretty when made
from gay pieces--carefully blended--of the various shades of a single
colour.

The stars in the design called "The Unknown Star" are made of a great variety of different patterns
of pink calico, yet the blending is so good that the effect is greatly heightened by the multiplicity
of shades.

Pieced quilts make a special appeal to women who delight in the precise and accurate work necessary
in their construction.

    For those who enjoy making pieced quilts, there is practically no
    limit to the variety of designs available, some of which are as
    intricate as the choicest mosaic. The bold and rather heavy
    design known as "Jacob's Ladder" is a good example of the
    pieced quilt. Another is the "Feathered Star," whose lightness
    and delicacy make it a most charming pattern.

The pieced quilt with one large star in the centre, called by some "The Star of the East" and
by others "The Star of Bethlehem," is a striking example of mathematical exactness in quilt
piecing.

In quilts made after this pattern all the pieces must be exactly the same size and all the seams
must be the same width in order to produce a perfect star.

The French word "appliqué" is frequently used to describe the patched
or laid-on work.

There is no single word in the English language that exactly translates "appliqué." The term
"applied work" comes nearest and is the common English term. By common usage patchwork is
now understood to mean quilt making, and while used indiscriminately for both pieced and patched
quilts, it really belongs to that type where the design is cut from one fabric and applied upon
another. "Sewed on" and "laid quilts" are old terms given to appliqué or patched quilts.

The distinction between "pieced" and "patched" quilts is fittingly
described by Miss Bessie Daingerfield, the Kentuckian who has written
interestingly of her experiences with mountain quilt makers.

She says: "To every mountain woman her piece quilts are her daily interest, but her patch quilts
are her glory.

Even in these days, you women of the low country know a piece quilt
when you see one, and doubtless you learned to sew on a 'four-patch'
square.

But have you among your treasures a patch quilt? The piece quilt, of course, is made of scraps,
and its beauty or ugliness depends upon the material and colours that come to hand, the intricacy
of the design, and one's skill in executing it.

I think much character building must be done while hand and eye coöperate to make, for example,
a star quilt with its endless tiny points for fitting and joining, but a patch quilt is a more
ambitious affair. For this the pattern is cut from the whole piece and appliquéd on unbleached
cotton. The colours used are commonly oil red, oil green, and a certain
rather violent yellow, and sometimes indigo blue.

These and these only are considered reliable enough for a patch quilt, which is made for the
generations that come after. The making of such a quilt is a work
of oriental patience."

    "Appliqué work is thought by some to be an inferior kind of embroidery,
    although it is not. It is not a lower but another kind of needlework
    in which more is made of the stuff than of the stitching. In appliqué
    the craft to the needleworker is not carried to its limit, but,
    on the other hand, it calls for great skill in design. Effective it
    must be: coarse it may be: vulgar it should not be: trivial it can
hardly be: mere prettiness is beyond its scope: but it lends itself
to dignity of design and nobility of treatment."

The foregoing quotation is from "Art in Needlework" by Louis F. Day and Mary Buckle. It is of
interest because it explains how appliqué or "laid-on" needlework ranks with other kinds.

After
all the different parts of a quilt top are either pieced or decorated
with applied designs, they are joined together with narrow seams upon
the wrong side of the quilt.

If a border is included in the design it should harmonize in colour and design with the body
of the quilt. However, in many quilts, borders seem to be "a thing apart" from the remainder
of the top and, apparently, have been added as an afterthought to enlarge the top after the blocks
had been joined. In old quilts a border frequently consisted of simple bands of colours similar
to those found in the body of the quilt, but more often new material entirely different in colour
and quality was added when greater size was desired.

Many old quilts were three yards or more square, generous proportions being very essential
in the old days of broad four-posters heaped with feather beds.

The top being completed, the back or lining, of the same dimensions
as the top, is next made of some light-weight material, usually white
cotton.

The quilt, to quote the usual expression, is then "ready for the frames." In earlier days the
quilting frame could be found in every home, its simple construction
making this possible.

In its usual form it consists of four narrow pieces of wood, two somewhat longer than a quilt, and
two shorter, perhaps half as long, with holes bored in the ends of each piece. These pieces are
made into an oblong frame by fastenings of bolts or pegs, and are commonly supported on the
backs of chairs.

More pretentious frames are made with round pieces for the sides,
and with ends made to stand upon the floor, about the height of a
table, these ends having round holes into which the side pieces fit.

Such a frame is then self-supporting and frequently has a cogwheel attachment to keep the sides
in place and to facilitate the rolling and unrolling of the quilt. The majority of frames are
very plain, but occasionally a diligent quilter is encountered who has one made to suit her
particular requirements, or has received an unusually well-built one as a gift. One old frame
worthy of mention was made of cherry with elaborate scroll designed ends, cherry side bars, and
a set of cogwheels also made of cherry; all finished and polished like a choice piece of furniture.

Each
side bar or roll of the quilting frame is tightly wound with cotton strips or has a piece of muslin
firmly fastened to its entire length, to which is sewed the edges of the lining, one side to
each bar. Then the extra length is rolled up on one side of the frame, and after being tightly stretched,
the wooden pieces are securely fastened. On this stretched lining or back of the quilt, the cotton
or wool used for filling or interlining is spread very carefully and smoothly; then with even greater
care the top is put in place, its edge pinned or basted to the edge
of the lining, and drawn tightly over the cotton. The ends of the
quilt must also be stretched. This is done by pinning pieces of muslin
to the quilt and wrapping them around the ends of the frame. Great
care is required to keep all edges true and to stretch all parts of
the quilt uniformly.

Upon this smooth top the quilting is drawn,
for even the most expert quilters require outlines to quilt by. If
the quilt top is light in colour the design is drawn with faint pencil
lines; if the colours are too dark to show pencil markings, then with
a chalked line. It is a fascinating thing to children to watch the
marking of a quilt with the chalk lines. The firm cord used for this
is drawn repeatedly across a piece of chalk or through powdered starch
until well coated, then held near the quilt, and very tightly stretched,
while a second person draws it up and lets it fly back with a snap,
thus making a straight white line. How closely the lines are drawn
depends wholly upon the ambition and diligence of the quilter. The
lines may be barely a quarter of an inch apart, or may be placed only
close enough together to perform their function of keeping the interlining
in place.

The former was effected by dragging the trunks of a few trees into the intervals left by the
wagons, and along the open space between the vehicles and the thicket, on which, in military
language, the encampment would be said to have rested; thus forming a sort of chevaux-de-frise
on three sides of the position. Within these narrow limits (with the exception of what the
tent contained), both man and beast were now collected; the latter being far too happy in resting
their weary limbs, to give any undue annoyance to their scarcely more intelligent associates.
Two of the young men took their rifles; and, first renewing the priming, and examining the
flints with the utmost care, they proceeded, the one to the extreme right, and the other to
the left, of the encampment, where they posted themselves within the shadows of the thicket;
but in such positions as enabled each to overlook a portion of the prairie.

The trapper loitered about the place, declining to share the straw of the emigrant, until the
whole arrangement was completed; and then, without the ceremony of an adieu, he slowly retired
from the spot.

It was now in the first watch of the night; and the pale, quivering, and deceptive light, from
a new moon, was playing over the endless waves of the prairie, tipping the swells with gleams
of brightness, and leaving the interval land in deep shadow. Accustomed to scenes of solitude
like the present, the old man, as he left the encampment, proceeded alone into the waste, like
a bold vessel leaving its haven to enter on the trackless field of the ocean. He appeared to
move for some time without object, or, indeed, without any apparent consciousness, whither
his limbs were carrying him. At length, on reaching the rise of one of the undulations, he
came to a stand; and, for the first time since leaving the band, who had caused such a flood
of reflections and recollections to crowd upon his mind, the old man became aware of his present
situation. Throwing one end of his rifle to the earth, he stood leaning on the other, again
lost in deep contemplation for several minutes, during which time his hound came and crouched
at his feet. A deep, menacing growl, from the faithful animal, first aroused him from his musing.

"What now, dog?" he said, looking down at his companion, as if he addressed a being of an intelligence
equal to his own, and speaking in a voice of great affection. "What is it, pup? ha! Hector;
what is it nosing, now? It won't do, dog; it won't do; the very fa'ns play in open view of
us, without minding so worn out curs, as you and I. Instinct is their gift, Hector and, they
have found out how little we are to be feared, they have!"

The dog stretched his head upward, and responded to the words of his master by a long and plaintive
whine, which he even continued after he had again buried his head in the grass, as if he held
an intelligent communication with one who so well knew how to interpret dumb discourse.

"This is a manifest warning, Hector!" the trapper continued, dropping his voice, to the tones
of caution and looking warily about him. "What is it, pup; speak plainer, dog; what is it?"

The hound had, however, already laid his nose to the earth, and was silent; appearing to slumber.
But the keen quick glances of his master, soon caught a glimpse of a distant figure, which
seemed, through the deceptive light, floating along the very elevation on which he had placed
himself. Presently its proportions became more distinct, and then an airy, female form appeared
to hesitate, as if considering whether it would be prudent to advance. Though the eyes of the
dog were now to be seen glancing in the rays of the moon, opening and shutting lazily, he gave
no further signs of displeasure.

"Come nigher; we are friends," said the trapper, associating himself with his companion by
long use, and, probably, through the strength of the secret tie that connected them together;
"we are your friends; none will harm you."

Encouraged by the mild tones of his voice, and perhaps led on by the earnestness of her purpose,
the female approached, until she stood at his side; when the old man perceived his visitor
to be the young woman, with whom the reader, has already become acquainted by the name of "Ellen
Wade."

"I had thought you were gone," she said, looking timidly and anxiously around. "They said you
were gone; and that we should never see you again. I did not think it was you!"

"Men are no common objects in these empty fields," returned the trapper, "and I humbly hope,
though I have so long consorted with the beasts of the wilderness, that I have not yet lost
the look of my kind."

"Oh! I knew you to be a man, and I thought I knew the whine of the hound, too," she answered
hastily, as if willing to explain she knew not what, and then checking herself, like one fearful
of having already said too much.

"I saw no dogs, among the teams of your father," the trapper remarked.

"Father!" exclaimed the girl, feelingly, "I have no father! I had nearly said no friend."

The old man turned towards her, with a look of kindness and interest, that was even more conciliating
than the ordinary, upright, and benevolent expression of his weather-beaten countenance.

"Why then do you venture in a place where none but the strong should come?" he demanded. "Did
you not know that, when you crossed the big river, you left a friend behind you that is always
bound to look to the young and feeble, like yourself."

"Of whom do you speak?"

"The law--'tis bad to have it, but, I sometimes think, it is worse to be entirely without it.
Age and weakness have brought me to feel such weakness, at times. Yes--yes, the law is needed,
when such as have not the gifts of strength and wisdom are to be taken care of. I hope, young
woman, if you have no father, you have at least a brother."

The maiden felt the tacit reproach conveyed in this covert question, and for a moment she remained
in an embarrassed silence. But catching a glimpse of the mild and serious features of her companion,
as he continued to gaze on her with a look of interest, she replied, firmly, and in a manner
that left no doubt she comprehended his meaning:

"Heaven forbid that any such as you have seen, should be a brother of mine, or any thing else
near or dear to me! But, tell me, do you then actually live alone, in this desert district,
old man; is there really none here besides yourself?"

"There are hundreds, nay, thousands of the rightful owners of the country, roving about the
plains; but few of our own colour."

"And have you then met none who are white, but us?" interrupted the girl, like one too impatient
to await the tardy explanations of age and deliberation.

"Not in many days--Hush, Hector, hush," he added in reply to a low, and nearly inaudible, growl
from his hound. "The dog scents mischief in the wind! The black bears from the mountains sometimes
make their way, even lower than this. The pup is not apt to complain of the harmless game.
I am not so ready and true with the piece as I used-to-could-be, yet I have struck even the
fiercest animals of the prairie in my time; so, you have little reason for fear, young woman."

The girl raised her eyes, in that peculiar manner which is so often practised by her sex, when
they commence their glances, by examining the earth at their feet, and terminate them by noting
every thing within the power of human vision; but she rather manifested the quality of impatience,
than any feeling of alarm.

A short bark from the dog, however, soon gave a new direction to the looks of both, and then
the real object of his second warning became dimly visible.

CHAPTER III

   Come, come, thou art as hot a Jack in thy mood, as any in Italy;
   and as soon mov'd to be moody, and as soon moody to be moved.
                                             --Romeo and Juliet.

Though the trapper manifested some surprise when he perceived that another human figure was
approaching him, and that, too, from a direction opposite to the place where the emigrant had
made his encampment, it was with the steadiness of one long accustomed to scenes of danger.

"This is a man," he said; "and one who has white blood in his veins, or his step would be lighter.
It will be well to be ready for the worst, as the half-and-halfs,[*] that one meets, in these
distant districts, are altogether more barbarous than the real savage."

    [*] Half-breeds; men born of Indian women by white fathers. This race
    has much of the depravity of civilisation without the virtues of
    the savage.

He raised his rifle while he spoke, and assured himself of the state of its flint, as well
as of the priming by manual examination. But his arm was arrested, while in the act of throwing
forward the muzzle of the piece, by the eager and trembling hands of his companion.

"For God's sake, be not too hasty," she said; "it may be a friend--an acquaintance--a neighbour!"

"A friend!" the old man repeated, deliberately releasing himself, at the same time, from her
grasp. "Friends are rare in any land, and less in this, perhaps, than in another; and the neighbourhood
is too thinly settled to make it likely that he who comes towards us is even an acquaintance."

"But though a stranger, you would not seek his blood!"

The trapper earnestly regarded her anxious and frightened features, and then he dropped the
butt of his rifle on the ground, like one whose purpose had undergone a sudden change.

"No," he said, speaking rather to himself, than to his companion, "she is right; blood is not
to be spilt, to save the life of one so useless, and so near his time. Let him come on; my
skins, my traps, and even my rifle shall be his, if he sees fit to demand them."

"He will ask for neither:--he wants neither," returned the girl; "if he be an honest man, he
will surely be content with his own, and ask for nothing that is the property of another."

The trapper had not time to express the surprise he felt at this incoherent and contradictory
language, for the man who was advancing, was, already, within fifty feet of the place where
they stood.--In the mean time, Hector had not been an indifferent witness of what was passing.
At the sound of the distant footsteps, he had arisen, from his warm bed at the feet of his
master; and now, as the stranger appeared in open view, he stalked slowly towards him, crouching
to the earth like a panther about to take his leap.

"Call in your dog," said a firm, deep, manly voice, in tones of friendship, rather than of
menace; "I love a hound, and should be sorry to do an injury to the animal."

"You hear what is said about you, pup?" the trapper answered; "come hither, fool. His growl
and his bark are all that is left him now; you may come on, friend; the hound is toothless."

The stranger profited by the intelligence. He sprang eagerly forward, and at the next instant
stood at the side of Ellen Wade. After assuring himself of the identity of the latter, by a
hasty but keen glance, he turned his attention, with a quickness and impatience, that proved
the interest he took in the result, to a similar examination of her companion.

"From what cloud have you fallen, my good old man?" he said in a careless, off-hand, heedless
manner that seemed too natural to be assumed: "or do you actually live, hereaway, in the prairies?"

"I have been long on earth, and never I hope nigher to heaven, than I am at this moment," returned
the trapper; "my dwelling, if dwelling I may be said to have, is not far distant. Now may I
take the liberty with you, that you are so willing to take with others? Whence do you come,
and where is your home?"

"Softly, softly; when I have done with my catechism, it will be time to begin with yours. What
sport is this, you follow by moonlight? You are not dodging the buffaloes at such an hour!"

"I am, as you see, going from an encampment of travellers, which lies over yonder swell in
the land, to my own wigwam; in doing so, I wrong no man."

"All fair and true. And you got this young woman to show you the way, because she knows it
so well and you know so little about it yourself!"

"I met her, as I have met you, by accident. For ten tiresome years have I dwelt on these open
fields, and never, before to-night, have I found human beings with white skins on them, at
this hour. If my presence here gives offence, I am sorry; and will go my way. It is more than
likely that when your young friend has told her story, you will be better given to believe mine.

"Friend!" said the youth, lifting a cap of skins from his head, and running his fingers leisurely
through a dense mass of black and shaggy locks, "if I have ever laid eyes on the girl before
to-night, may I--"

"You've said enough, Paul," interrupted the female, laying her hand on his mouth, with a familiarity
that gave something very like the lie direct, to his intended asseveration. "Our secret will
be safe, with this honest old man. I know it by his looks, and kind words."

"Our secret! Ellen, have you forgot--"

"Nothing. I have not forgotten any thing I should remember. But still I say we are safe with
this honest trapper."

"Trapper! is he then a trapper? Give me your hand, father; our trades should bring us acquainted."

"There is little call for handicrafts in this region," returned the other, examining the athletic
and active form of the youth, as he leaned carelessly and not ungracefully, on his rifle; "the
art of taking the creatur's of God, in traps and nets, is one that needs more cunning than
manhood; and yet am I brought to practise it, in my age! But it would be quite as seemly, in
one like you, to follow a pursuit better becoming your years and courage."

"I! I never took even a slinking mink or a paddling musk-rat in a cage; though I admit having
peppered a few of the dark-skin'd devils, when I had much better have kept my powder in the
horn and the lead in its pouch. Not I, old man; nothing that crawls the earth is for my sport."

"What then may you do for a living, friend? for little profit is to be made in these districts,
if a man denies himself his lawful right in the beasts of the fields."

"I deny myself nothing. If a bear crosses my path, he is soon the mere ghost of Bruin. The
deer begin to nose me; and as for the buffaloe, I have kill'd more beef, old stranger, than
the largest butcher in all Kentuck."

"You can shoot, then!" demanded the trapper, with a glow of latent fire, glimmering about his
eyes; "is your hand true, and your look quick?"

"The first is like a steel trap, and the last nimbler than a buck-shot. I wish it was hot noon,
now, grand'ther; and that there was an acre or two of your white swans or of black feathered
ducks going south, over our heads; you or Ellen, here, might set your heart on the finest in
the flock, and my character against a horn of powder, that the bird would be hanging head downwards,
in five minutes, and that too, with a single ball. I scorn a shot-gun! No man can say, he ever
knew me carry one, a rod."

"The lad has good in him! I see it plainly by his manner;" said the trapper, turning to Ellen
with an encouraging air; "I will take it on myself to say, that you are not unwise in meeting
him, as you do. Tell me, lad; did you ever strike a leaping buck atwixt the antlers? Hector;
quiet, pup; quiet. The very name of venison quickens the blood of the cur;--did you ever take
an animal in that fashion, on the long leap?"

"You might just as well ask me, did you ever eat? There is no fashion, old stranger, that a
deer has not been touched by my hand, unless it was when asleep."

"Ay, ay; you have a long and a happy-ay, and an honest life afore you! I am old, and I suppose
I might also say, worn out and useless; but, if it was given me to choose my time, and place,
again,--as such things are not and ought not ever to be given to the will of man--though if
such a gift was to be given me, I would say, twenty and the wilderness! But, tell me; how do
you part with the peltry?"

"With my pelts! I never took a skin from a buck, nor a quill from a goose, in my life! I knock
them over, now and then, for a meal, and sometimes to keep my finger true to the touch; but
when hunger is satisfied, the prairie wolves get the remainder. No--no--I keep to my calling;
which pays me better, than all the fur I could sell on the other side of the big river."

The old man appeared to ponder a little; but shaking his head he soon continued--

"I know of but one business that can be followed here with profit--"

He was interrupted by the youth, who raised a small cup of tin, which dangled at his neck before
the other's eyes, and springing its lid, the delicious odour of the finest flavoured honey,
diffused itself over the organs of the trapper.

"A bee hunter!" observed the latter, with a readiness that proved he understood the nature
of the occupation, though not without some little surprise at discovering one of the other's
spirited mien engaged in so humble a pursuit. "It pays well in the skirts of the settlements,
but I should call it a doubtful trade, in the more open districts."

"You think a tree is wanting for a swarm to settle in! But I know differently; and so I have
stretched out a few hundred miles farther west than common, to taste your honey. And, now,
I have bated your curiosity, stranger, you will just move aside, while I tell the remainder
of my story to this young woman."

"It is not necessary, I'm sure it is not necessary, that he should leave us," said Ellen, with
a haste that implied some little consciousness of the singularity if not of the impropriety
of the request. "You can have nothing to say that the whole world might not hear."

"No! well, may I be stung to death by drones, if I understand the buzzings of a woman's mind!
For my part, Ellen, I care for nothing nor any body; and am just as ready to go down to the
place where your uncle, if uncle you can call one, who I'll swear is no relation, has hoppled
his teams, and tell the old man my mind now, as I shall be a year hence. You have only to say
a single word, and the thing is done; let him like it or not."

"You are ever so hasty and so rash, Paul Hover, that I seldom know when I am safe with you.
How can you, who know the danger of our being seen together, speak of going before my uncle
and his sons?"

"Has he done that of which he has reason to be ashamed?" demanded the trapper, who had not
moved an inch from the place he first occupied.

"Heaven forbid! But there are reasons, why he should not be seen, just now, that could do him
no harm if known; but which may not yet be told. And, so, if you will wait, father, near yonder
willow bush, until I have heard what Paul can possibly have to say, I shall be sure to come
and wish you a good night, before I return to the camp."

The trapper drew slowly aside, as if satisfied with the somewhat incoherent reason Ellen had
given why he should retire. When completely out of ear shot of the earnest and hurried dialogue,
that instantly commenced between the two he had left, the old man again paused, and patiently
awaited the moment when he might renew his conversation with beings in whom he felt a growing
interest, no less from the mysterious character of their intercourse, than from a natural sympathy
in the welfare of a pair so young, and who, as in the simplicity of his heart he was also fain
to believe, were also so deserving. He was accompanied by his indolent, but attached dog, who
once more made his bed at the feet of his master, and soon lay slumbering as usual, with his
head nearly buried in the dense fog of the prairie grass.

It was a spectacle so unusual to see the human form amid the solitude in which he dwelt, that
the trapper bent his eyes on the dim figures of his new acquaintances, with sensations to which
he had long been a stranger. Their presence awakened recollections and emotions, to which his
sturdy but honest nature had latterly paid but little homage, and his thoughts began to wander
over the varied scenes of a life of hardships, that had been strangely blended with scenes
of wild and peculiar enjoyment. The train taken by his thoughts had, already, conducted him,
in imagination, far into an ideal world, when he was, once more suddenly, recalled to the reality
of his situation, by the movements of the faithful hound.

The dog, who, in submission to his years and infirmities, had manifested such a decided propensity
to sleep, now arose, and stalked from out the shadow cast by the tall person of his master,
and looked abroad into the prairie, as if his instinct apprised him of the presence of still
another visitor. Then, seemingly content with his examination, he returned to his comfortable
post and disposed of his weary limbs, with the deliberation and care of one who was no novice
in the art of self-preservation.

"What; again, Hector!" said the trapper in a soothing voice, which he had the caution, however,
to utter in an under tone; "what is it, dog? tell it all to his master, pup; what is it?"

Hector answered with another growl, but was content to continue in his lair. These were evidences
of intelligence and distrust, to which one as practised as the trapper could not turn an inattentive
ear. He again spoke to the dog, encouraging him to watchfulness, by a low guarded whistle.
The animal however, as if conscious of having, already, discharged his duty, obstinately refused
to raise his head from the grass.

"A hint from such a friend is far better than man's advice!" muttered the trapper, as he slowly
moved towards the couple who were yet, too earnestly and abstractedly, engaged in their own
discourse, to notice his approach; "and none but a conceited settler would hear it and not
respect it, as he ought. Children," he added, when nigh enough to address his companions, "we
are not alone in these dreary fields; there are others stirring, and, therefore, to the shame
of our kind, be it said, danger is nigh."

"If one of the lazy sons of Skirting Ishmael is prowling out of his camp to-night," said the
young bee-hunter, with great vivacity, and in tones that might easily have been excited to
a menace, "he may have an end put to his journey sooner than either he or his father is dreaming!"

"My life on it, they are all with the teams," hurriedly answered the girl. "I saw the whole
of them asleep, myself, except the two on watch; and their natures have greatly changed, if
they, too, are not both dreaming of a turkey hunt, or a court-house fight, at this very moment."

"Some beast, with a strong scent, has passed between the wind and the hound, father, and it
makes him uneasy; or, perhaps, he too is dreaming. I had a pup of my own, in Kentuck, that
would start upon a long chase from a deep sleep; and all upon the fancy of some dream. Go to
him, and pinch his ear, that the beast may feel the life within him."

"Not so--not so," returned the trapper, shaking his head as one who better understood the qualities
of his dog.--"Youth sleeps, ay, and dreams too; but age is awake and watchful. The pup is never
false with his nose, and long experience tells me to heed his warnings."

"Did you ever run him upon the trail of carrion?"

"Why, I must say, that the ravenous beasts have sometimes tempted me to let him loose, for
they are as greedy as men, after the venison, in its season; but then I knew the reason of
the dog, would tell him the object!--No--no, Hector is an animal known in the ways of man,
and will never strike a false trail when a true one is to be followed!"

"Ay, ay, the secret is out! you have run the hound on the track of a wolf, and his nose has
a better memory than his master!" said the bee-hunter, laughing.

"I have seen the creatur' sleep for hours, with pack after pack, in open view. A wolf might
eat out of his tray without a snarl, unless there was a scarcity; then, indeed, Hector would
be apt to claim his own."

"There are panthers down from the mountains; I saw one make a leap at a sick deer, as the sun
was setting. Go; go you back to the dog, and tell him the truth, father; in a minute, I--"

He was interrupted by a long, loud, and piteous howl from the hound, which rose on the air
of the evening, like the wailing of some spirit of the place, and passed off into the prairie,
in cadences that rose and fell, like its own undulating surface. The trapper was impressively
silent, listening intently. Even the reckless bee-hunter, was struck with the wailing wildness
of the sounds. After a short pause the former whistled the dog to his side, and turning to
his companions he said with the seriousness, which, in his opinion, the occasion demanded--

"They who think man enjoys all the knowledge of the creatur's of God, will live to be disappointed,
if they reach, as I have done, the age of fourscore years. I will not take upon myself to say
what mischief is brewing, nor will I vouch that, even, the hound himself knows so much; but
that evil is nigh, and that wisdom invites us to avoid it, I have heard from the mouth of one
who never lies. I did think, the pup had become unused to the footsteps of man, and that your
presence made him uneasy; but his nose has been on a long scent the whole evening, and what
I mistook as a notice of your coming, has been intended for something more serious. If the
advice of an old man is, then, worth hearkening to, children, you will quickly go different
ways to your places of shelter and safety."

"If I quit Ellen, at such a moment," exclaimed the youth, "may I--"

"You've said enough!" the girl interrupted, by again interposing a band that might, both by
its delicacy and colour, have graced a far more elevated station in life; "my time is out;
and we must part, at all events--so good night, Paul--father--good night."

"Hist!" said the youth, seizing her arm, as she was in the very act of tripping from his side--"Hist!
do you hear nothing? There are buffaloes playing their pranks, at no great distance--That sound
beats the earth like a herd of the mad scampering devils!"

His two companions listened, as people in their situation would be apt to lend their faculties
to discover the meaning of any doubtful noises, especially, when heard after so many and such
startling warnings. The unusual sounds were unequivocally though still faintly audible. The
youth and his female companion had made several hurried, and vacillating conjectures concerning
their nature, when a current of the night air brought the rush of trampling footsteps, too
sensibly, to their ears, to render mistake any longer possible.

"I am right!" said the bee-hunter; "a panther is driving a herd before him; or may be, there
is a battle among the beasts."

"Your ears are cheats," returned the old man, who, from the moment his own organs had been
able to catch the distant sounds, stood like a statue made to represent deep attention:--"the
leaps are too long for the buffaloe, and too regular for terror. Hist! now they are in a bottom
where the grass is high, and the sound is deadened! Ay, there they go on the hard earth! And
now they come up the swell, dead upon us; they will be here afore you can find a cover!"

"Come, Ellen," cried the youth, seizing his companion by the hand, "let us make a trial for
the encampment."

"Too late! too late!" exclaimed the trapper, "for the creatur's are in open view; and a bloody
band of accursed Siouxes they are, by their thieving look, and the random fashion in which
they ride!"

"Siouxes or devils, they shall find us men!" said the bee-hunter, with a mien as fierce as
if he led a party of superior strength, and of a courage equal to his own.--"You have a piece,
old man, and will pull a trigger in behalf of a helpless, Christian girl!"

"Down, down into the grass--down with ye both," whispered the trapper, intimating to them to
turn aside to the tall weeds, which grew, in a denser body than common, near the place where
they stood. "You've not the time to fly, nor the numbers to fight, foolish boy. Down into the
grass, if you prize the young woman, or value the gift of life!"

His remonstrance, seconded, as it was, by a prompt and energetic action, did not fail to produce
the submission to his order, which the occasion seemed, indeed, imperiously to require. The
moon had fallen behind a sheet of thin, fleecy, clouds, which skirted the horizon, leaving
just enough of its faint and fluctuating light, to render objects visible, dimly revealing
their forms and proportions. The trapper, by exercising that species of influence, over his
companions, which experience and decision usually assert, in cases of emergency, had effectually
succeeded in concealing them in the grass, and by the aid of the feeble rays of the luminary,
he was enabled to scan the disorderly party which was riding, like so many madmen, directly
upon them.

A band of beings, who resembled demons rather than men, sporting in their nightly revels across
the bleak plain, was in truth approaching, at a fearful rate, and in a direction to leave little
hope that some one among them, at least, would not pass over the spot where the trapper and
his companions lay. At intervals, the clattering of hoofs was borne along by the night wind,
quite audibly in their front, and then, again, their progress through the fog of the autumnal
grass, was swift and silent; adding to the unearthly appearance of the spectacle. The trapper,
who had called in his hound, and bidden him crouch at his side, now kneeled in the cover also,
and kept a keen and watchful eye on the route of the band, soothing the fears of the girl,
and restraining the impatience of the youth, in the same breath.

"If there's one, there's thirty of the miscreants!" he said, in a sort of episode to his whispered
comments. "Ay, ay; they are edging towards the river--Peace, pup--peace--no, here they come
this way again--the thieves don't seem to know their own errand! If there were just six of
us, lad, what a beautiful ambushment we might make upon them, from this very spot--it won't
do, it won't do, boy; keep yourself closer, or your head will be seen--besides, I'm not altogether
strong in the opinion it would be lawful, as they have done us no harm.--There they bend again
to the river--no; here they come up the swell--now is the moment to be as still, as if the
breath had done its duty and departed the body."

The old man sunk into the grass while he was speaking, as if the final separation to which
he alluded, had, in his own case, actually occurred, and, at the next instant, a band of wild
horsemen whirled by them, with the noiseless rapidity in which it might be imagined a troop
of spectres would pass. The dark and fleeting forms were already vanished, when the trapper
ventured again to raise his head to a level with the tops of the bending herbage, motioning
at the same time, to his companions to maintain their positions and their silence.

"They are going down the swell, towards the encampment," he continued, in his former guarded
tones; "no, they halt in the bottom, and are clustering together like deer, in council. By
the Lord, they are turning again, and we are not yet done with the reptiles!"

Once more he sought his friendly cover, and at the next instant the dark troop were to be seen
riding, in a disorderly manner, on the very summit of the little elevation on which the trapper
and his companions lay. It was now soon apparent that they had returned to avail themselves
of the height of the ground, in order to examine the dim horizon.

Some dismounted, while others rode to and fro, like men engaged in a local enquiry of much
interest. Happily, for the hidden party, the grass in which they were concealed, not only served
to skreen them from the eyes of the savages, but opposed an obstacle to prevent their horses,
which were no less rude and untrained than their riders, from trampling on them, in their irregular
and wild paces.

At length an athletic and dark looking Indian, who, by his air of authority, would seem to
be the leader, summoned his chiefs about him, to a consultation, which was held mounted. This
body was collected on the very margin of that mass of herbage in which the trapper and his
companions were hid. As the young man looked up and saw the fierce aspect of the group, which
was increasing at each instant by the accession of some countenance and figure, apparently
more forbidding than any which had preceded it, he drew his rifle, by a very natural impulse,
from beneath him, and commenced putting it in a state for service. The female, at his side,
buried her face in the grass, by a feeling that was, possibly, quite as natural to her sex
and habits, leaving him to follow the impulses of his hot blood; but his aged and more prudent
adviser, whispered, sternly, in his ear--

"The tick of the lock is as well known to the knaves, as the blast of a trumpet to a soldier!
lay down the piece--lay down the piece--should the moon touch the barrel, it could not fail
to be seen by the devils, whose eyes are keener than the blackest snake's! The smallest motion,
now, would be sure to bring an arrow among us."

The bee-hunter so far obeyed as to continue immovable and silent. But there was still sufficient
light to convince his companion, by the contracted brow and threatening eye of the young man,
that a discovery would not bestow a bloodless victory on the savages. Finding his advice disregarded,
the trapper took his measures accordingly, and awaited the result with a resignation and calmness
that were characteristic of the individual.

In the mean time, the Siouxes (for the sagacity of the old man was not deceived in the character
of his dangerous neighbours) had terminated their council, and were again dispersed along the
ridge of land as if they sought some hidden object.

"The imps have heard the hound!" whispered the trapper, "and their ears are too true to be
cheated in the distance. Keep close, lad, keep close; down with your head to the very earth,
like a dog that sleeps."

"Let us rather take to our feet, and trust to manhood," returned his impatient companion.

He would have proceeded; but feeling a hand laid rudely on his shoulder, he turned his eyes
upward, and beheld the dark and savage countenance of an Indian gleaming full upon him. Notwithstanding
the surprise and the disadvantage of his attitude, the youth was not disposed to become a captive
so easily. Quicker than the flash of his own gun he sprang upon his feet, and was throttling
his opponent with a power that would soon have terminated the contest, when he felt the arms
of the trapper thrown round his body, confining his exertions by a strength very little inferior
to his own. Before he had time to reproach his comrade for this apparent treachery, a dozen
Siouxes were around them, and the whole party were compelled to yield themselves as prisoners.

CHAPTER IV

           --With much more dismay,
           I view the fight, than those that make the fray.
                                           --Merchant of Venice.

The unfortunate bee-hunter and his companions had become the captives of a people, who might,
without exaggeration, be called the Ishmaelites of the American deserts. From time immemorial,
the hands of the Siouxes had been turned against their neighbours of the prairies, and even
at this day, when the influence and authority of a civilised government are beginning to be
felt around them, they are considered a treacherous and dangerous race. At the period of our
tale, the case was far worse; few white men trusting themselves in the remote and unprotected
regions where so false a tribe was known to dwell.

Notwithstanding the peaceable submission of the trapper, he was quite aware of the character
of the band into whose hands he had fallen. It would have been difficult, however, for the
nicest judge to have determined whether fear, policy, or resignation formed the secret motive
of the old man, in permitting himself to be plundered as he did, without a murmur. So far from
opposing any remonstrance to the rude and violent manner in which his conquerors performed
the customary office, he even anticipated their cupidity, by tendering to the chiefs such articles
as he thought might prove the most acceptable. On the other hand Paul Hover, who had been literally
a conquered man, manifested the strongest repugnance to submit to the violent liberties that
were taken with his person and property. He even gave several exceedingly unequivocal demonstrations
of his displeasure during the summary process, and would, more than once, have broken out in
open and desperate resistance, but for the admonitions and entreaties of the trembling girl,
who clung to his side, in a manner so dependent, as to show the youth, that her hopes were
now placed, no less on his discretion, than on his disposition to serve her.

The Indians had, however, no sooner deprived the captives of their arms and ammunition, and
stripped them of a few articles of dress of little use, and perhaps of less value, than they
appeared disposed to grant them a respite. Business of greater moment pressed on their hands,
and required their attention. Another consultation of the chiefs was convened, and it was apparent,
by the earnest and vehement manner of the few who spoke, that the warriors conceived their
success as yet to be far from complete.

"It will be well," whispered the trapper, who knew enough of the language he heard to comprehend
perfectly the subject of the discussion, "if the travellers who lie near the willow brake are
not awoke out of their sleep by a visit from these miscreants. They are too cunning to believe
that a woman of the 'pale-faces' is to be found so far from the settlements, without having
a white man's inventions and comforts at hand."

"If they will carry the tribe of wandering Ishmael to the Rocky Mountains," said the young
bee-hunter, laughing in his vexation with a sort of bitter merriment, "I may forgive the rascals."

"Paul! Paul!" exclaimed his companion in a tone of reproach, "you forget all! Think of the
dreadful consequences!"

"Ay, it was thinking of what you call consequences, Ellen, that prevented me from putting the
matter, at once, to yonder red-devil, and making it a real knock-down and drag-out! Old trapper,
the sin of this cowardly business lies on your shoulders! But it is no more than your daily
calling, I reckon, to take men, as well as beasts, in snares."

"I implore you, Paul, to be calm--to be patient."

"Well, since it is your wish, Ellen," returned the youth, endeavouring to swallow his spleen,
"I will make the trial; though, as you ought to know, it is part of the religion of a Kentuckian
to fret himself a little at a mischance."

"I fear your friends in the other bottom will not escape the eyes of the imps!" continued the
trapper, as coolly as though he had not heard a syllable of the intervening discourse. "They
scent plunder; and it would be as hard to drive a hound from his game, as to throw the varmints
from its trail."

"Is there nothing to be done?" asked Ellen, in an imploring manner, which proved the sincerity
of her concern.

"It would be an easy matter to call out, in so loud a voice as to make old Ishmael dream that
the wolves were among his flock," Paul replied; "I can make myself heard a mile in these open
fields, and his camp is but a short quarter from us."

"And get knocked on the head for your pains," returned the trapper. "No, no; cunning must match
cunning, or the hounds will murder the whole family."

"Murder! no--no murder. Ishmael loves travel so well, there would be no harm in his having
a look at the other sea, but the old fellow is in a bad condition to take the long journey!
I would try a lock myself before he should be quite murdered."

"His party is strong in number, and well armed; do you think it will fight?"

"Look here, old trapper: few men love Ishmael Bush and his seven sledge-hammer sons less than
one Paul Hover; but I scorn to slander even a Tennessee shotgun. There is as much of the true
stand-up courage among them, as there is in any family that was ever raised in Kentuck, itself.
They are a long-sided and a double-jointed breed; and let me tell you, that he who takes the
measure of one of them on the ground, must be a workman at a hug."

"Hist! The savages have done their talk, and are about to set their accursed devices in motion.
Let us be patient; something may yet offer in favour of your friends."

"Friends! call none of the race a friend of mine, trapper, if you have the smallest regard
for my affection! What I say in their favour is less from love than honesty."

"I did not know but the young woman was of the kin," returned the other, a little drily--"but
no offence should be taken, where none was intended."

The mouth of Paul was again stopped by the hand of Ellen, who took on herself to reply, in
her conciliating tones: "we should be all of a family, when it is in our power to serve each
other. We depend entirely on your experience, honest old man, to discover the means to apprise
our friends of their danger."

"There will be a real time of it," muttered the bee-hunter, laughing, "if the boys get at work,
in good earnest, with these red skins!"

He was interrupted by a general movement which took place among the band. The Indians dismounted
to a man, giving their horses in charge to three or four of the party, who were also intrusted
with the safe keeping of the prisoners. They then formed themselves in a circle around a warrior,
who appeared to possess the chief authority; and at a given signal the whole array moved slowly
and cautiously from the centre in straight and consequently in diverging lines. Most of their
dark forms were soon blended with the brown covering of the prairie; though the captives, who
watched the slightest movement of their enemies with vigilant eyes, were now and then enabled
to discern a human figure, drawn against the horizon, as some one, more eager than the rest,
rose to his greatest height in order to extend the limits of his view. But it was not long
before even these fugitive glimpses of the moving, and constantly increasing circle, were lost,
and uncertainty and conjecture were added to apprehension. In this manner passed many anxious
and weary minutes, during the close of which the listeners expected at each moment to hear
the whoop of the assailants and the shrieks of the assailed, rising together on the stillness
of the night. But it would seem, that the search which was so evidently making, was without
a sufficient object; for at the expiration of half an hour the different individuals of the
band began to return singly, gloomy and sullen, like men who were disappointed.

"Our time is at hand," observed the trapper, who noted the smallest incident, or the slightest
indication of hostility among the savages: "we are now to be questioned; and if I know any
thing of the policy of our case, I should say it would be wise to choose one among us to hold
the discourse, in order that our testimony may agree. And furthermore, if an opinion from one
as old and as worthless as a hunter of fourscore, is to be regarded, I would just venture to
say, that man should be the one most skilled in the natur' of an Indian, and that he should
also know something of their language.--Are you acquainted with the tongue of the Siouxes, friend?"

"Swarm your own hive," returned the discontented bee-hunter. "You are good at buzzing, old
trapper, if you are good at nothing else."

"'Tis the gift of youth to be rash and heady," the trapper calmly retorted. "The day has been,
boy, when my blood was like your own, too swift and too hot to run quietly in my veins. But
what will it profit to talk of silly risks and foolish acts at this time of life! A grey head
should cover a brain of reason, and not the tongue of a boaster."

"True, true," whispered Ellen; "and we have other things to attend to now! Here comes the Indian
to put his questions."

The girl, whose apprehensions had quickened her senses, was not deceived. She was yet speaking
when a tall, half naked savage, approached the spot where they stood, and after examining the
whole party as closely as the dim light permitted, for more than a minute in perfect stillness,
he gave the usual salutation in the harsh and guttural tones of his own language. The trapper
replied as well as he could, which it seems was sufficiently well to be understood. In order
to escape the imputation of pedantry we shall render the substance, and, so far as it is possible,
the form of the dialogue that succeeded, into the English tongue.

"Have the pale-faces eaten their own buffaloes, and taken the skins from all their own beavers,"
continued the savage, allowing the usual moment of decorum to elapse, after the words of greeting,
before he again spoke, "that they come to count how many are left among the Pawnees?"

"Some of us are here to buy, and some to sell," returned the trapper; "but none will follow,
if they hear it is not safe to come nigh the lodge of a Sioux."

"The Siouxes are thieves, and they live among the snow; why do we talk of a people who are
so far, when we are in the country of the Pawnees?"

"If the Pawnees are the owners of this land, then white and red are here by equal right."

"Have not the pale-faces stolen enough from the red men, that you come so far to carry a lie?
I have said that this is a hunting-ground of my tribe."

"My right to be here is equal to your own," the trapper rejoined, with undisturbed coolness;
"I do not speak as I might--it is better to be silent. The Pawnees and the white men are brothers,
but a Sioux dare not show his face in the village of the Loups."

"The Dahcotahs are men!" exclaimed the savage, fiercely; forgetting in his anger to maintain
the character he had assumed, and using the appellation of which his nation was most proud;
"the Dahcotahs have no fear! Speak; what brings you so far from the villages of the pale-faces?"

"I have seen the sun rise and set on many councils, and have heard the words of wise men. Let
your chiefs come, and my mouth shall not be shut."

"I am a great chief!" said the savage, affecting an air of offended dignity. "Do you take me
for an Assiniboine? Weucha is a warrior often named, and much believed!"

"Am I a fool not to know a burnt-wood Teton?" demanded the trapper, with a steadiness that
did great credit to his nerves. "Go; it is dark, and you do not see that my head is grey!"

The Indian now appeared convinced that he had adopted too shallow an artifice to deceive one
so practised as the man he addressed, and he was deliberating what fiction he should next invent,
in order to obtain his real object, when a slight commotion among the band put an end at once
to all his schemes. Casting his eyes behind him, as if fearful of a speedy interruption, he
said, in tones much less pretending than those he had first resorted to--

"Give Weucha the milk of the Long-knives, and he will sing your name in the ears of the great
men of his tribe."

"Go," repeated the trapper, motioning him away, with strong disgust. "Your young men are speaking
of Mahtoree. My words are for the ears of a chief."

The savage cast a look at the other, which, notwithstanding the dim light, was sufficiently
indicative of implacable hostility. He then stole away among his fellows, anxious to conceal
the counterfeit he had attempted to practise, no less than the treachery he had contemplated
against a fair division of the spoils, from the man named by the trapper, whom he now also
knew to be approaching, by the manner in which his name passed from one to another, in the
band. He had hardly disappeared before a warrior of powerful frame advanced out of the dark
circle, and placed himself before the captives, with that high and proud bearing for which
a distinguished Indian chief is ever so remarkable. He was followed by all the party, who arranged
themselves around his person, in a deep and respectful silence.

"The earth is very large," the chief commenced, after a pause of that true dignity which his
counterfeit had so miserably affected; "why can the children of my great white father never
find room on it?"

"Some among them have heard that their friends in the prairies are in want of many things,"
returned the trapper; "and they have come to see if it be true. Some want, in their turns,
what the red men are willing to sell, and they come to make their friends rich, with powder
and blankets."

"Do traders cross the big river with empty hands?"

"Our hands are empty because your young men thought we were tired, and they have lightened
us of our load. They were mistaken; I am old, but I am still strong."

"It cannot be. Your load has fallen in the prairies. Show my young men the place, that they
may pick it up before the Pawnees find it."

"The path to the spot is crooked, and it is night. The hour is come for sleep," said the trapper,
with perfect composure. "Bid your warriors go over yonder hill; there is water and there is
wood; let them light their fires and sleep with warm feet. When the sun comes again I will
speak to you."

A low murmur, but one that was clearly indicative of dissatisfaction, passed among the attentive
listeners, and served to inform the old man that he had not been sufficiently wary in proposing
a measure that he intended should notify the travellers in the brake of the presence of their
dangerous neighbours. Mahtoree, however, without betraying, in the slightest degree, the excitement
which was so strongly exhibited by his companions, continued the discourse in the same lofty
manner as before.

"I know that my friend is rich," he said; "that he has many warriors not far off, and that
horses are plentier with him, than dogs among the red-skins."

"You see my warriors, and my horses."

"What! has the woman the feet of a Dahcotah, that she can walk for thirty nights in the prairies,
and not fall! I know the red men of the woods make long marches on foot, but we, who live where
the eye cannot see from one lodge to another, love our horses."

The trapper now hesitated, in his turn. He was perfectly aware that deception, if detected,
might prove dangerous; and, for one of his pursuits and character, he was strongly troubled
with an unaccommodating regard for the truth. But, recollecting that he controlled the fate
of others as well as of himself, he determined to let things take their course, and to permit
the Dahcotah chief to deceive himself if he would.

"The women of the Siouxes and of the white men are not of the same wigwam," he answered evasively.
"Would a Teton warrior make his wife greater than himself? I know he would not; and yet my
ears have heard that there are lands where the councils are held by squaws."

Another slight movement in the dark circle apprised the trapper that his declaration was not
received without surprise, if entirely without distrust. The chief alone seemed unmoved; nor
was he disposed to relax from the loftiness and high dignity of his air.

"My white fathers who live on the great lakes have declared," he said, "that their brothers
towards the rising sun are not men; and now I know they did not lie! Go--what is a nation whose
chief is a squaw! Are you the dog and not the husband of this woman?"

"I am neither. Never did I see her face before this day. She came into the prairies because
they had told her a great and generous nation called the Dahcotahs lived there, and she wished
to look on men. The women of the pale-faces, like the women of the Siouxes, open their eyes
to see things that are new; but she is poor, like myself, and she will want corn and buffaloes,
if you take away the little that she and her friend still have."

"My ears listen to many wicked lies!" exclaimed the Teton warrior, in a voice so stern that
it startled even his red auditors. "Am I a woman? Has not a Dahcotah eyes? Tell me, white hunter;
who are the men of your colour, that sleep near the fallen trees?"

As he spoke, the indignant chief pointed in the direction of Ishmael's encampment, leaving
the trapper no reason to doubt, that the superior industry and sagacity of this man had effected
a discovery, which had eluded the search of the rest of his party. Notwithstanding his regret
at an event that might prove fatal to the sleepers, and some little vexation at having been
so completely outwitted, in the dialogue just related, the old man continued to maintain his
air of inflexible composure.

"It may be true," he answered, "that white men are sleeping in the prairie. If my brother says
it, it is true; but what men thus trust to the generosity of the Tetons, I cannot tell. If
there be strangers asleep, send your young men to wake them up, and let them say why they are
here; every pale-face has a tongue." The chief shook his head with a wild and fierce smile,
answering abruptly, as he turned away to put an end to the conference--

"The Dahcotahs are a wise race, and Mahtoree is their chief! He will not call to the strangers,
that they may rise and speak to him with their carabines. He will whisper softly in their ears.
When this is done, let the men of their own colour come and awake them!"

As he uttered these words, and turned on his heel, a low and approving laugh passed around
the dark circle, which instantly broke its order and followed him to a little distance from
the stand of the captives, where those who might presume to mingle opinions with so great a
warrior again gathered about him in consultation. Weucha profited by the occasion to renew
his importunities; but the trapper, who had discovered how great a counterfeit he was, shook
him off in displeasure. An end was, however, more effectually put to the annoyance of this
malignant savage, by a mandate for the whole party, including men and beasts, to change their
positions. The movement was made in dead silence, and with an order that would have done credit
to more enlightened beings. A halt, however, was soon made; and when the captives had time
to look about them, they found they were in view of the low, dark outline of the copse, near
which lay the slumbering party of Ishmael.

Here another short but grave and deliberative consultation was held.

The beasts, which seemed trained to such covert and silent attacks, were once more placed under
the care of keepers, who, as before, were charged with the duty of watching the prisoners.
The mind of the trapper was in no degree relieved from the uneasiness which was, at each instant,
getting a stronger possession of him, when he found Weucha was placed nearest to his own person,
and, as it appeared by the air of triumph and authority he assumed, at the head of the guard
also. The savage, however, who doubtless had his secret instructions, was content, for the
present, with making a significant gesture with his tomahawk, which menaced death to Ellen.
After admonishing in this expressive manner his male captives of the fate that would instantly
attend their female companion, on the slightest alarm proceeding from any of the party, he
was content to maintain a rigid silence. This unexpected forbearance, on the part of Weucha,
enabled the trapper and his two associates to give their undivided attention to the little
that might be seen of the interesting movements which were passing in their front.

Mahtoree took the entire disposition of the arrangements on himself. He pointed out the precise
situation he wished each individual to occupy, like one intimately acquainted with the qualifications
of his respective followers, and he was obeyed with the deference and promptitude with which
an Indian warrior is wont to submit to the instructions of his chief, in moments of trial.
Some he despatched to the right, and others to the left. Each man departed with the noiseless
and quick step peculiar to the race, until all had assumed their allotted stations, with the
exception of two chosen warriors, who remained nigh the person of their leader. When the rest
had disappeared, Mahtoree turned to these select companions, and intimated by a sign that the
critical moment had arrived, when the enterprise he contemplated was to be put in execution.

Each man laid aside the light fowling-piece, which, under the name of a carabine, he carried
in virtue of his rank; and divesting himself of every article of exterior or heavy clothing,
he stood resembling a dark and fierce looking statue, in the attitude, and nearly in the garb,
of nature. Mahtoree assured himself of the right position of his tomahawk, felt that his knife
was secure in its sheath of skin, tightened his girdle of wampum and saw that the lacing of
his fringed and ornamental leggings was secure, and likely to offer no impediment to his exertions.
Thus prepared at all points, and ready for his desperate undertaking, the Teton gave the signal
to proceed.

The three advanced in a line with the encampment of the travellers, until, in the dim light
by which they were seen, their dusky forms were nearly lost to the eyes of the prisoners. Here
they paused, looking around them like men who deliberate and ponder long on the consequences
before they take a desperate leap. Then sinking together, they became lost in the grass of
the prairie.

It is not difficult to imagine the distress and anxiety of the different spectators of these
threatening movements. Whatever might be the reasons of Ellen for entertaining no strong attachment
to the family in which she has first been seen by the reader, the feelings of her sex, and,
perhaps, some lingering seeds of kindness, predominated. More than once she felt tempted to
brave the awful and instant danger that awaited such an offence, and to raise her feeble, and,
in truth, impotent voice in warning. So strong, indeed, and so very natural was the inclination,
that she would most probably have put it in execution, but for the often repeated though whispered
remonstrances of Paul Hover. In the breast of the young bee-hunter himself, there was a singular
union of emotions. His first and chiefest solicitude was certainly in behalf of his gentle
and dependent companion; but the sense of her danger was mingled, in the breast of the reckless
woodsman, with a consciousness of a high and wild, and by no means an unpleasant, excitement.
Though united to the emigrants by ties still less binding than those of Ellen, he longed to
hear the crack of their rifles, and, had occasion offered, he would gladly have been among
the first to rush to their rescue. There were, in truth, moments when he felt in his turn an
impulse, that was nearly resistless, to spring forward and awake the unconscious sleepers;
but a glance at Ellen would serve to recall his tottering prudence, and to admonish him of
the consequences. The trapper alone remained calm and observant, as if nothing that involved
his personal comfort or safety had occurred. His ever-moving, vigilant eyes, watched the smallest
change, with the composure of one too long inured to scenes of danger to be easily moved, and
with an expression of cool determination which denoted the intention he actually harboured,
of profiting by the smallest oversight on the part of the captors.

In the mean time the Teton warriors had not been idle. Profiting by the high fog which grew
in the bottoms, they had wormed their way through the matted grass, like so many treacherous
serpents stealing on their prey, until the point was gained, where an extraordinary caution
became necessary to their further advance. Mahtoree, alone, had occasionally elevated his dark,
grim countenance above the herbage, straining his eye-balls to penetrate the gloom which skirted
the border of the brake. In these momentary glances he gained sufficient knowledge, added to
that he had obtained in his former search, to be the perfect master of the position of his
intended victims, though he was still profoundly ignorant of their numbers, and of their means
of defence.

His efforts to possess himself of the requisite knowledge concerning these two latter and essential
points were, however, completely baffled by the stillness of the camp, which lay in a quiet
as deep as if it were literally a place of the dead. Too wary and distrustful to rely, in circumstances
of so much doubt, on the discretion of any less firm and crafty than himself, the Dahcotah
bade his companions remain where they lay, and pursued the adventure alone.

The progress of Mahtoree was now slow, and to one less accustomed to such a species of exercise,
it would have proved painfully laborious. But the advance of the wily snake itself is not more
certain or noiseless than was his approach. He drew his form, foot by foot, through the bending
grass, pausing at each movement to catch the smallest sound that might betray any knowledge,
on the part of the travellers, of his proximity. He succeeded, at length, in dragging himself
out of the sickly light of the moon, into the shadows of the brake, where not only his own
dark person was much less liable to be seen, but where the surrounding objects became more
distinctly visible to his keen and active glances.

Here the Teton paused long and warily to make his observations, before he ventured further.
His position enabled him to bring the whole encampment, with its tent, wagons, and lodges,
into a dark but clearly marked profile; furnishing a clue by which the practised warrior was
led to a tolerably accurate estimate of the force he was about to encounter. Still an unnatural
silence pervaded the spot, as if men suppressed even the quiet breathings of sleep, in order
to render the appearance of their confidence more evident. The chief bent his head to the earth,
and listened intently. He was about to raise it again, in disappointment, when the long drawn
and trembling respiration of one who slumbered imperfectly met his ear. The Indian was too
well skilled in all the means of deception to become himself the victim of any common artifice.
He knew the sound to be natural, by its peculiar quivering, and he hesitated no longer.

A man of nerves less tried than those of the fierce and conquering Mahtoree would have been
keenly sensible of all the hazard he incurred. The reputation of those hardy and powerful white
adventurers, who so often penetrated the wilds inhabited by his people, was well known to him;
but while he drew nigher, with the respect and caution that a brave enemy never fails to inspire,
it was with the vindictive animosity of a red man, jealous and resentful of the inroads of
the stranger.

Turning from the line of his former route, the Teton dragged himself directly towards the margin
of the thicket. When this material object was effected in safety, he arose to his seat, and
took a better survey of his situation. A single moment served to apprise him of the place where
the unsuspecting traveller lay. The reader will readily anticipate that the savage had succeeded
in gaining a dangerous proximity to one of those slothful sons of Ishmael, who were deputed
to watch over the isolated encampment of the travellers.

When certain that he was undiscovered, the Dahcotah raised his person again, and bending forward,
he moved his dark visage above the face of the sleeper, in that sort of wanton and subtle manner
with which the reptile is seen to play about its victim before it strikes. Satisfied at length,
not only of the condition but of the character of the stranger, Mahtoree was in the act of
withdrawing his head, when a slight movement of the sleeper announced the symptoms of reviving
consciousness. The savage seized the knife which hung at his girdle, and in an instant it was
poised above the breast of the young emigrant. Then changing his purpose, with an action as
rapid as his own flashing thoughts, he sunk back behind the trunk of the fallen tree against
which the other reclined, and lay in its shadow, as dark, as motionless, and apparently as
insensible as the wood itself.

The slothful sentinel opened his heavy eyes, and gazing upward for a moment at the hazy heavens,
he made an extraordinary exertion, and raised his powerful frame from the support of the log.
Then he looked about him, with an air of something like watchfulness, suffering his dull glances
to run over the misty objects of the encampment until they finally settled on the distant and
dim field of the open prairie. Meeting with nothing more attractive than the same faint outlines
of swell and interval, which every where rose before his drowsy eyes, he changed his position
so as completely to turn his back on his dangerous neighbour, and suffered his person to sink
sluggishly down into its former recumbent attitude. A long, and, on the part of the Teton,
an anxious and painful silence succeeded, before the deep breathing of the traveller again
announced that he was indulging in his slumbers. The savage was, however, far too jealous of
a counterfeit to trust to the first appearance of sleep. But the fatigues of a day of unusual
toil lay too heavy on the sentinel to leave the other long in doubt. Still the motion with
which Mahtoree again raised himself to his knees was so noiseless and guarded, that even a
vigilant observer might have hesitated to believe he stirred. The change was, however, at length
effected, and the Dahcotah chief then bent again over his enemy, without having produced a
noise louder than that of the cotton-wood leaf which fluttered at his side in the currents
of the passing air.

Mahtoree now felt himself master of the sleeper's fate. At the same time that he scanned the
vast proportions and athletic limbs of the youth, in that sort of admiration which physical
excellence seldom fails to excite in the breast of a savage, he coolly prepared to extinguish
the principle of vitality which could alone render them formidable. After making himself sure
of the seat of life, by gently removing the folds of the intervening cloth, he raised his keen
weapon, and was about to unite his strength and skill in the impending blow, when the young
man threw his brawny arm carelessly backward, exhibiting in the action the vast volume of its
muscles.

The sagacious and wary Teton paused. It struck his acute faculties that sleep was less dangerous
to him, at that moment, than even death itself might prove. The smallest noise, the agony of
struggling, with which such a frame would probably relinquish its hold of life, suggested themselves
to his rapid thoughts, and were all present to his experienced senses. He looked back into
the encampment, turned his head into the thicket, and glanced his glowing eyes abroad into
the wild and silent prairies. Bending once more over the respited victim, he assured himself
that he was sleeping heavily, and then abandoned his immediate purpose in obedience alone to
the suggestions of a more crafty policy.

The retreat of Mahtoree was as still and guarded as had been his approach. He now took the
direction of the encampment, stealing along the margin of the brake, as a cover into which
he might easily plunge at the smallest alarm. The drapery of the solitary hut attracted his
notice in passing. After examining the whole of its exterior, and listening with painful intensity,
in order to gather counsel from his ears, the savage ventured to raise the cloth at the bottom,
and to thrust his dark visage beneath. It might have been a minute before the Teton chief drew
back, and seated himself with the whole of his form without the linen tenement. Here he sat,
seemingly brooding over his discovery, for many moments, in rigid inaction. Then he resumed
his crouching attitude, and once more projected his visage beyond the covering of the tent.
His second visit to the interior was longer, and, if possible, more ominous than the first.
But it had, like every thing else, its termination, and the savage again withdrew his glaring
eyes from the secrets of the place.

Mahtoree had drawn his person many yards from the spot, in his slow progress towards the cluster
of objects which pointed out the centre of the position, before he again stopped. He made another
pause, and looked back at the solitary little dwelling he had left, as if doubtful whether
he should not return. But the chevaux-de-frise of branches now lay within reach of his arm,
and the very appearance of precaution it presented, as it announced the value of the effects
it encircled, tempted his cupidity, and induced him to proceed.

The passage of the savage, through the tender and brittle limbs of the cotton-wood, could be
likened only to the sinuous and noiseless winding of the reptiles which he imitated. When he
had effected his object, and had taken an instant to become acquainted with the nature of the
localities within the enclosure, the Teton used the precaution to open a way through which
he might make a swift retreat. Then raising himself on his feet, he stalked through the encampment,
like the master of evil, seeking whom and what he should first devote to his fell purposes.
He had already ascertained the contents of the lodge in which were collected the woman and
her young children, and had passed several gigantic frames, stretched on different piles of
brush, which happily for him lay in unconscious helplessness, when he reached the spot occupied
by Ishmael in person. It could not escape the sagacity of one like Mahtoree, that he had now
within his power the principal man among the travellers. He stood long hovering above the recumbent
and Herculean form of the emigrant, keenly debating in his own mind the chances of his enterprise,
and the most effectual means of reaping its richest harvest.

He sheathed the knife, which, under the hasty and burning impulse of his thoughts, he had been
tempted to draw, and was passing on, when Ishmael turned in his lair, and demanded roughly
who was moving before his half-opened eyes. Nothing short of the readiness and cunning of a
savage could have evaded the crisis. Imitating the gruff tones and nearly unintelligible sounds
he heard, Mahtoree threw his body heavily on the earth, and appeared to dispose himself to
sleep. Though the whole movement was seen by Ishmael, in a sort of stupid observation, the
artifice was too bold and too admirably executed to fail. The drowsy father closed his eyes,
and slept heavily, with this treacherous inmate in the very bosom of his family.

It was necessary for the Teton to maintain the position he had taken, for many long and weary
minutes, in order to make sure that he was no longer watched. Though his body lay so motionless,
his active mind was not idle. He profited by the delay to mature a plan which he intended should
put the whole encampment, including both its effects and their proprietors, entirely at his
mercy. The instant he could do so with safety, the indefatigable savage was again in motion.
He took his way towards the slight pen which contained the domestic animals, worming himself
along the ground in his former subtle and guarded manner.

The first animal he encountered among the beasts occasioned a long and hazardous delay. The
weary creature, perhaps conscious, through its secret instinct, that in the endless wastes
of the prairies its surest protector was to be found in man, was so exceedingly docile as quietly
to submit to the close examination it was doomed to undergo. The hand of the wandering Teton
passed over the downy coat, the meek countenance, and the slender limbs of the gentle creature,
with untiring curiosity; but he finally abandoned the prize, as useless in his predatory expeditions,
and offering too little temptation to the appetite. As soon, however, as he found himself among
the beasts of burden, his gratification was extreme, and it was with difficulty that he restrained
the customary ejaculations of pleasure that were more than once on the point of bursting from
his lips. Here he lost sight of the hazards by which he had gained access to his dangerous
position; and the watchfulness of the wary and long practised warrior was momentarily forgotten
in the exultation of the savage.

CHAPTER V

            Why, worthy father, what have we to lose?
                    --The law
            Protects us not. Then why should we be tender
            To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us!
            Play judge and executioner.
                                                    --Cymbeline.

While the Teton thus enacted his subtle and characteristic part, not a sound broke the stillness
of the surrounding prairie. The whole band lay at their several posts, waiting, with the well-known
patience of the natives, for the signal which was to summon them to action. To the eyes of
the anxious spectators who occupied the little eminence, already described as the position
of the captives, the scene presented the broad, solemn view of a waste, dimly lighted by the
glimmering rays of a clouded moon. The place of the encampment was marked by a gloom deeper
than that which faintly shadowed out the courses of the bottoms, and here and there a brighter
streak tinged the rolling summits of the ridges. As for the rest, it was the deep, imposing
quiet of a desert.

But to those who so well knew how much was brooding beneath this mantle of stillness and night,
it was a scene of high and wild excitement. Their anxiety gradually increased, as minute after
minute passed away, and not the smallest sound of life arose out of the calm and darkness which
enveloped the brake. The lower sides were bored and hafted with stone cocks. These hogsheads
painted with a royal coat of arms displayed the names of their drinks, the contents, and the prices
on colored labels and stated that they were to be purchased by the
cask, by the bottle or by the glass.

In the passage between these rows of casks, under the gas jets which flared at one end of an
ugly iron-gray chandelier, tables covered with baskets of Palmers biscuits, hard and salty cakes,
plates piled with mince pies and sandwiches concealing strong, mustardy concoctions under their
unsavory covers, succeeded each other between a row of seats and as far as the end of this cellar
which was lined with still more hogsheads carrying tiny barrels on
their tops, resting on their sides and bearing their names stamped
with hot metal into the oak.

    An odor of alcohol assailed Des Esseintes upon taking a seat in this
room heavy with strong wines.

He looked about him. Here, the tuns were placed in a straight line, exhibiting the whole series
of ports, the sweet or sour wines the color of mahogany or amaranth, and distinguished by such
laudatory epithets as old port, light delicate, Cockburn's very fine,
magnificent old Regina.

There, protruding formidable abdomens pressed closely against each other, huge casks contained
the martial Spanish wines, sherry and its derivatives, the san lucar,
pasto, pale dry, oloroso and amontilla.

The cellar was filled with people.

Leaning on his elbows on a corner of the table, Des Esseintes sat waiting for his glass of port
ordered of a gentleman who was opening explosive sodas contained in oval bottles which recalled,
while exaggerating, the capsules of gelatine and gluten used by pharmacies to conceal the taste
of certain medicines.

Englishmen were everywhere,--awkward pale clergymen garbed in black from head to foot, with soft
hats, laced shoes, very long coats dotted in the front with tiny buttons, clean-shaved chins,
round spectacles, greasy flat hair; faces of tripe dealers and mastiff
snouts with apoplectic necks, ears like tomatoes, vinous cheeks, blood-shot
crazy eyes, whiskers that looked like those of some big monkeys; farther
away, at the end of the wine store, a long row of tow-headed individuals,
their chins covered with white hair like the end of an artichoke,
reading, through a microscope, the tiny roman type of an English newspaper;
opposite him, a sort of American commodore, dumpy and thick-set, with
smoked skin and bulbous nose, was sleeping, a cigar planted in the
hairy aperture of his mouth.

Opposite were frames hanging on the wall enclosing advertisements of Champagne, the trade marks
of Perrier and Roederer, Heidsieck and Mumm, and a hooded head of a monk, with the name of Dom
Perignon, Rheims, written in Gothic characters.

A certain enervation enveloped Des Esseintes in this guard house atmosphere; stunned by the prattle
of the Englishmen conversing among themselves, he fell into a revery, evoking, before the purple
port which filled the glasses, the creatures of Dickens that love this drink so very much,
imaginatively peopling the cellar with new personages, seeing here,
the white head of hair and the ruddy complexion of Mr. Wickfield;
there, the phlegmatic, crafty face and the vengeful eye of Mr. Tulkinghorn,
the melancholy solicitor in Bleak House.

Positively, all of them broke away from his memory and installed themselves in the Bodega, with
their peculiar characteristics and their betraying gestures. His memories, brought to life by his
recent readings, attained a startling precision.

The city of the romancer, the house illumined and warmed, so perfectly tended and isolated, the
bottles poured slowly by little Dorrit and Dora Copperfield and Tom Pinch's sister, appeared
to him sailing like an ark in a deluge of mire and soot. Idly he wandered through this imaginary
London, happy to be sheltered, as he listened to the sinister shrieks
of tugs plying up and down the Thames.

His glass was empty. Despite the heavy fumes in this cellar, caused by the cigars and pipes, he
experienced a cold shiver when he returned to the reality of the damp and fetid weather.

He called for a glass of amontillado, and suddenly, beside this pale, dry wine, the lenitive, sweetish
stories of the English author were routed, to be replaced by the pitiless revulsives and the grievous
irritants of Edgar Allen Poe; the cold nightmares of The Cask of Amontillado, of the man immured
in a vault, assailed him; the ordinary placid faces of American and English drinkers who occupied
the room, appeared to him to reflect involuntary frightful thoughts,
to be harboring instinctive, odious plots.

Then he perceived that he was left alone here and that the dinner hour was near. He payed
his bill, tore himself from his seat and dizzily gained the door. He received a wet slap in
the face upon leaving the place. The street lamps moved their tiny fans of flame which failed
to illuminate; the sky had dropped to the very houses. Des Esseintes viewed the arcades of the
rue de Rivoli, drowned in the gloom and submerged by water, and it seemed to him that he was in
the gloomy tunnel under the Thames. Twitchings of his stomach recalled him to reality. He regained
his carriage, gave the driver the address of the tavern in the rue d'Amsterdam near the station,
and looked at his watch: seven o'clock. He had just time to eat dinner; the train would not leave
until ten minutes of nine, and he counted on his fingers, reckoning
the hours of travel from Dieppe to Newhaven, saying to himself: "If
the figures of the timetable are correct, I shall be at London tomorrow
at twelve-thirty."

The fiacre stopped in front of the tavern. Once more, Des Esseintes alighted and entered a long
dark plain room, divided into partitions as high as a man's waist,--a series of compartments resembling
stalls. In this room, wider towards the door, many beer pumps stood on a counter, near hams having
the color of old violins, red lobsters, marinated mackerel, with onions and carrots, slices of
lemon, bunches of laurel and thym, juniper berries and long peppers swimming in thick sauce.

One
of these boxes was unoccupied. He took it and called a young black-suited man who bent forward,
muttering something in a jargon he could not understand. While the cloth was being laid, Des
Esseintes viewed his neighbors.

They were islanders, just as at the Bodega, with cold faience eyes, crimson complexions, thoughtful
or haughty airs. They were reading foreign newspapers.

The only ones eating were unescorted women in pairs, robust English
women with boyish faces, large teeth, ruddy apple cheeks, long hands
and legs.

They attacked, with genuine ardor, a rumpsteak pie, a warm meat dish
cooked in mushroom sauce and covered with a crust, like a pie.

After having lacked appetite for such a long time, he remained amazed in the presence of these
hearty eaters whose voracity whetted his hunger.

He ordered oxtail soup and enjoyed it heartily. Then he glanced at the menu for the fish,
ordered a haddock and, seized with a sudden pang of hunger at the
sight of so many people relishing their food, he ate some roast beef
and drank two pints of ale, stimulated by the flavor of a cow-shed
which this fine, pale beer exhaled.

His hunger persisted. He lingered over a piece of blue Stilton cheese, made quick work of a
rhubarb tart, and to vary his drinking, quenched his thirst with porter, that dark beer which
smells of Spanish licorice but which does not have its sugary taste.

He breathed deeply. Not for years had he eaten and drunk so much. This change of habit, this
choice of unexpected and solid food had awakened his stomach from
its long sleep.

He leaned back in his chair, lit a cigarette and prepared to sip his coffee into which gin
had been poured.

The rain continued to fall. He heard it patter on the panes which formed a ceiling at the end
of the room; it fell in cascades down the spouts. No one was stirring in the room. Everybody,
utterly weary, was indulging himself in front of his wine glass.

Tongues were now wagging freely. As almost all the English men and women raised their eyes as they
spoke, Des Esseintes concluded that they were talking of the bad weather; not one of them laughed.
He threw a delighted glance on their suits whose color and cut did not perceivably differ from
that of others, and he experienced a sense of contentment in not being out of tune in this
environment, of being, in some way, though superficially, a naturalized
London citizen.

Then he suddenly started. "And what about the train?" he asked himself. He glanced at his watch:
ten minutes to eight. "I still have nearly a half-hour to remain here." Once more, he began to
muse upon the plan he had conceived.

In his sedentary life, only two countries had ever attracted him: Holland and England.

He had satisfied the first of his desires. Unable to keep away, one fine day he had left Paris
and visited the towns of the Low Lands, one by one.

In short, nothing but cruel disillusions had resulted from this trip. He had fancied a Holland
after the works of Teniers and Steen, of Rembrandt and Ostade, in his usual way imagining rich,
unique and incomparable Ghettos, had thought of amazing kermesses,
continual debauches in the country sides, intent for a view of that
patriarchal simplicity, that jovial lusty spirit celebrated by the
old masters.

Certainly, Haarlem and Amsterdam had enraptured him. The unwashed people, seen in their country
farms, really resembled those types painted by Van Ostade, with their uncouth children and
their old fat women, embossed with huge breasts and enormous bellies.

But of the unrestrained joys, the drunken family carousals, not a whit. He had to admit that
the Dutch paintings at the Louvre had misled him. They had simply served as a springing board for
his dreams. He had rushed forward on a false track and had wandered into capricious visions, unable
to discover in the land itself, anything of that real and magical country which he had hoped
to behold, seeing nothing at all, on the plots of ground strewn with barrels, of the dances
of petticoated and stockinged peasants crying for very joy, stamping
their feet out of sheer happiness and laughing loudly.

Decidedly nothing of all this was visible. Holland was a country just like any other country,
and what was more, a country in no wise primitive, not at all simple,
for the Protestant religion with its formal hypocricies and solemn
rigidness held sway here.

The memory of that disenchantment returned to him.

Once more he glanced at his watch: ten minutes still separated him from the train's departure.
"It is about time to ask for the bill and leave," he told himself.

He felt an extreme heaviness in his stomach and through his body. "Come!" he addressed himself,
"let us drink and screw up our courage." He filled a glass of brandy, while asking for the reckoning.
An individual in black suit and with a napkin under one arm, a sort of majordomo with a bald
and sharp head, a greying beard without moustaches, came forward. A pencil rested behind his ear
and he assumed an attitude like a singer, one foot in front of the other; he drew a note book
from his pocket, and without glancing at his paper, his eyes fixed
on the ceiling, near a chandelier, wrote while counting.

"There you are!" he said, tearing the sheet from his note book and giving it to Des Esseintes who
looked at him with curiosity, as though he were a rare animal. What a surprising John Bull,
he thought, contemplating this phlegmatic person who had, because of his shaved mouth, the appearance
of a wheelsman of an American ship.

At this moment, the tavern door opened.

Several persons entered bringing with them an odor of wet dog to
which was blent the smell of coal wafted by the wind through the opened
door.

Des Esseintes was incapable of moving a limb. A soft warm languor
prevented him from even stretching out his hand to light a cigar.

He told himself: "Come now, let us get up, we must take ourselves off." Immediate objections
thwarted his orders. What is the use of moving, when one can travel on a chair so magnificently?
Was he not even now in London, whose aromas and atmosphere and inhabitants, whose food and utensils
surrounded him?

For what could he hope, if not new disillusionments, as had happened
to him in Holland?

He had but sufficient time to race to the station. An overwhelming aversion for the trip, an
imperious need of remaining tranquil, seized him with a more and more obvious and stubborn
strength. Pensively, he let the minutes pass, thus cutting off all retreat, and he said to
himself, "Now it would be necessary to rush to the gate and crowd
into the baggage room!

What ennui! What a bore that would be!" Then he repeated to himself once more, "In fine, I
have experienced and seen all I wished to experience and see. I have been filled with English
life since my departure. I would be mad indeed to go and, by an awkward trip, lose those imperishable
sensations. How stupid of me to have sought to disown my old ideas, to have doubted the efficacy
of the docile phantasmagories of my brain, like a very fool to have thought of the necessity,
of the curiosity, of the interest of an excursion!"

"Well!" he exclaimed, consulting his watch, "it is now time to return home."

This time, he arose and left, ordered the driver to bring him back
to the Sceaux station, and returned with his trunks, packages, valises,
rugs, umbrellas and canes, to Fontenay, feeling the physical stimulation
and the moral fatigue of a man coming back to his home after a long
and dangerous voyage.

Chapter 12

During the days following his return, Des Esseintes contemplated his books and experienced, at the
thought that he might have been separated from them for a long period, a satisfaction as complete
as that which comes after a protracted absence.

Under the touch of this sentiment, these objects possessed a renewed
novelty to his mind, and he perceived in them beauties forgotten since
the time he had purchased them.

Everything there, books, bric-a-brac and furniture, had an individual charm for him. His bed seemed
the softer by comparison with the hard bed he would have occupied in London. The silent, discreet
ministrations of his servants charmed him, exhausted as he was at
the thought of the loud loquacity of hotel attendants.

The methodical organization of his life made him feel that it was especially to be envied since
the possibility of traveling had become imminent.

He steeped himself in this bath of habitude, to which artificial regrets
insinuated a tonic quality.

But his books chiefly preoccupied him. He examined them, re-arranged them on the shelves, anxious
to learn if the hot weather and the rains had damaged the bindings
and injured the rare paper.

He began by moving all his Latin books; then he arranged in a new order the special works of
Archelaus, Albert le Grand, Lully and Arnaud de Villanova treating of cabbala and the occult
sciences; finally he examined his modern books, one by one, and was happy to perceive that
all had remained intact.

This collection had cost him a considerable sum of money.

He would not suffer, in his library, the books he loved to resemble other similar volumes, printed
on cotton paper with the watermarks of Auvergne.

Formerly in Paris he had ordered made, for himself alone, certain volumes which specially engaged
mechanics printed from hand presses. Sometimes, he applied to Perrin of Lyons, whose graceful,
clear type was suitable for archaic reprints of old books. At other times he dispatched orders
to England or to America for the execution of modern literature and the works of the present century.
Still again, he applied to a house in Lille, which for centuries had possessed a complete set
of Gothic characters; he also would send requisitions to the old Enschede printing house of
Haarlem whose foundry still has the stamps and dies of certain antique letters.

He had followed the same method in selecting his papers. Finally growing weary of the snowy Chinese
and the nacreous and gilded Japanese papers, the white Whatmans, the brown Hollands, the buff-colored
Turkeys and Seychal Mills, and equally disgusted with all mechanically
manufactured sheets, he had ordered special laid paper in the mould,
from the old plants of Vire which still employ the pestles once in
use to grind hemp.

To introduce a certain variety into his collection, he had repeatedly brought from London prepared
stuffs, paper interwoven with hairs, and as a mark of his disdain
for bibliophiles, he had a Lubeck merchant prepare for him an improved
candle paper of bottle-blue tint, clear and somewhat brittle, in the
pulp of which the straw was replaced by golden spangles resembling
those which dot Danzig brandy.

Under these circumstances he had succeeded in procuring unique books,
adopting obsolete formats which he had bound by Lortic, by Trautz-Bauzonnet
or Chambolle, by the successors of Cape, in irreproachable covers
of old silk, stamped cow hide, Cape goat skin, in full bindings with
compartments and in mosaic designs, protected by tabby or moire watered
silk, ecclesiastically ornamented with clasps and corners, and sometimes
even enamelled by Gruel Engelmann with silver oxide and clear enamels.

Thus, with the marvelous episcopal lettering used in the old house
of Le Clere, he had Baudelaire's works printed in a large format recalling
that of ancient missals, on a very light and spongy Japan paper, soft
as elder pith and imperceptibly tinted with a light rose hue through
its milky white.

This edition, limited to one copy, printed with a velvety black Chinese ink, had been covered
outside and then recovered within with a wonderful genuine sow skin, chosen among a thousand,
the color of flesh, its surface spotted where the hairs had been and adorned with black silk
stamped in cold iron in miraculous designs by a great artist.

That day, Des Esseintes took this incomparable book from his shelves and handled it devotedly,
once more reading certain pieces which seemed to him, in this simple but inestimable frame,
more than ordinarily penetrating.

His admiration for this writer was unqualified. According to him, until Baudelaire's advent
in literature, writers had limited themselves to exploring the surfaces of the soul or to penetrating
into the accessible and illuminated caverns, restoring here and there the layers of capital
sins, studying their veins, their growths, and noting, like Balzac for example, the layers of
strata in the soul possessed by the monomania of a passion, by ambition,
by avarice, by paternal stupidity, or by senile love.

What had been treated heretofore was the abundant health of virtues and of vices, the tranquil
functioning of commonplace brains, and the practical reality of contemporary ideas, without any
ideal of sickly depravation or of any beyond. In short, the discoveries of those analysts had stopped
at the speculations of good or evil classified by the Church.

    It was the simple investigation, the conventional examination of a
    botanist minutely observing the anticipated development of normal
    efflorescence abounding in the natural earth.
    
    Baudelaire had gone farther. He had descended to the very bowels
    of the inexhaustible mine, had involved his mind in abandoned and
unfamiliar levels, and come to those districts of the soul where monstrous
vegetations of thought extend their branches.

There, near those confines, the haunt of aberrations and of sickness, of the mystic lockjaw, the warm
fever of lust, and the typhoids and vomits of crime, he had found,
brooding under the gloomy clock of Ennui, the terrifying spectre of
the age of sentiments and ideas.

He had revealed the morbid psychology
of the mind which has attained the October of its sensations, recounted
the symptoms of souls summoned by grief and licensed by spleen, and
shown the increasing decay of impressions while the enthusiasms and
beliefs of youth are enfeebled and the only thing remaining is the
arid memory of miseries borne, intolerances endured and affronts suffered
by intelligences oppressed by a ridiculous destiny.

He had pursued
all the phases of that lamentable autumn, studying the human creature,
quick to exasperation, ingenious in deceiving himself, compelling
his thoughts to cheat each other so as to suffer the more keenly,
and frustrating in advance all possible joy by his faculty of analysis
and observation.

Then, in this vexed sensibility of the soul, in
this ferocity of reflection that repels the restless ardor of devotions
and the well-meaning outrages of charity, he gradually saw arising
the horror of those senile passions, those ripe loves, where one person
yields while the other is still suspicious, where lassitude denies
such couples the filial caresses whose apparent youthfulness seems
new, and the maternal candors whose gentleness and comfort impart,
in a sense, the engaging remorse of a vague incest. "I was passing from the States on the sea-shore
into these far regions, when I cross'd the trail of his army, and I fell in, on his rear, just
as a looker-on; but when they got to blows, the crack of my rifle was heard among the rest,
though to my shame it may be said, I never knew the right of the quarrel as well as a man of
threescore and ten should know the reason of his acts afore he takes mortal life, which is
a gift he never can return!"

"Come, stranger," said the emigrant, his rugged nature a good deal softened when he found that
they had fought on the same side in the wild warfare of the west, "it is of small account,
what may be the ground-work of the disturbance, when it's a Christian ag'in a savage. We shall
hear more of this horse-stealing to-morrow; to-night we can do no wiser or safer thing than
to sleep."

So saying, Ishmael deliberately led the way back towards his rifled encampment, and ushered
the man, whose life a few minutes before had been in real jeopardy from his resentment, into
the presence of his family. Here, with a very few words of explanation, mingled with scarce
but ominous denunciations against the plunderers, he made his wife acquainted with the state
of things on the prairie, and announced his own determination to compensate himself for his
broken rest, by devoting the remainder of the night to sleep.

The trapper gave his ready assent to the measure, and adjusted his gaunt form on the pile of
brush that was offered him, with as much composure as a sovereign could resign himself to sleep,
in the security of his capital and surrounded by his armed protectors. The old man did not
close his eyes, however, until he had assured himself that Ellen Wade was among the females
of the family, and that her relation, or lover, whichever he might be, had observed the caution
of keeping himself out of view: after which he slept, though with the peculiar watchfulness
of one long accustomed to vigilance, even in the hours of deepest night.

CHAPTER VI

         He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd,
         As it were too peregrinate, as I may call it.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The Anglo-American is apt to boast, and not without reason, that his nation may claim a descent
more truly honourable than that of any other people whose history is to be credited. Whatever
might have been the weaknesses of the original colonists, their virtues have rarely been disputed.
If they were superstitious, they were sincerely pious, and, consequently, honest. The descendants
of these simple and single-minded provincials have been content to reject the ordinary and
artificial means by which honours have been perpetuated in families, and have substituted a
standard which brings the individual himself to the ordeal of the public estimation, paying
as little deference as may be to those who have gone before him. This forbearance, self-denial,
or common sense, or by whatever term it may be thought proper to distinguish the measure, has
subjected the nation to the imputation of having an ignoble origin. Were it worth the enquiry,
it would be found that more than a just proportion of the renowned names of the mother-country
are, at this hour, to be found in her ci-devant colonies; and it is a fact well known to the
few who have wasted sufficient time to become the masters of so unimportant a subject, that
the direct descendants of many a failing line, which the policy of England has seen fit to
sustain by collateral supporters, are now discharging the simple duties of citizens in the
bosom of this republic. The hive has remained stationary, and they who flutter around the venerable
straw are wont to claim the empty distinction of antiquity, regardless alike of the frailty
of their tenement and of the enjoyments of the numerous and vigorous swarms that are culling
the fresher sweets of a virgin world. But as this is a subject which belongs rather to the
politician and historian than to the humble narrator of the homebred incidents we are about
to reveal, we must confine our reflections to such matters as have an immediate relation to
the subject of the tale.

Although the citizen of the United States may claim so just an ancestry, he is far from being
exempt from the penalties of his fallen race. Like causes are well known to produce like effects.
That tribute, which it would seem nations must ever pay, by way of a weary probation, around
the shrine of Ceres, before they can be indulged in her fullest favours, is in some measure
exacted in America, from the descendant instead of the ancestor. The march of civilisation
with us, has a strong analogy to that of all coming events, which are known "to cast their
shadows before." The gradations of society, from that state which is called refined to that
which approaches as near barbarity as connection with an intelligent people will readily allow,
are to be traced from the bosom of the States, where wealth, luxury and the arts are beginning
to seat themselves, to those distant, and ever-receding borders which mark the skirts, and
announce the approach, of the nation, as moving mists precede the signs of day.

Here, and here only, is to be found that widely spread, though far from numerous class, which
may be at all likened to those who have paved the way for the intellectual progress of nations,
in the old world. The resemblance between the American borderer and his European prototype
is singular, though not always uniform. Both might be called without restraint; the one being
above, the other beyond the reach of the law--brave, because they were inured to dangers--proud,
because they were independent, and vindictive, because each was the avenger of his own wrongs.
It would be unjust to the borderer to pursue the parallel much farther. He is irreligious,
because he has inherited the knowledge that religion does not exist in forms, and his reason
rejects mockery. He is not a knight, because he has not the power to bestow distinctions; and
he has not the power, because he is the offspring and not the parent of a system. In what manner
these several qualities are exhibited, in some of the most strongly marked of the latter class,
will be seen in the course of the ensuing narrative.

Ishmael Bush had passed the whole of a life of more than fifty years on the skirts of society.
He boasted that he had never dwelt where he might not safely fell every tree he could view
from his own threshold; that the law had rarely been known to enter his clearing, and that
his ears had never willingly admitted the sound of a church bell. His exertions seldom exceeded
his wants, which were peculiar to his class, and rarely failed of being supplied. He had no
respect for any learning except that of the leech; because he was ignorant of the application
of any other intelligence than such as met the senses. His deference to this particular branch
of science had induced him to listen to the application of a medical man, whose thirst for
natural history had led him to the desire of profiting by the migratory propensities of the
squatter. This gentleman he had cordially received into his family, or rather under his protection,
and they had journeyed together, thus far through the prairies, in perfect harmony: Ishmael
often felicitating his wife on the possession of a companion, who would be so serviceable in
their new abode, wherever it might chance to be, until the family were thoroughly "acclimated."
The pursuits of the naturalist frequently led him, however, for days at a time, from the direct
line of the route of the squatter, who rarely seemed to have any other guide than the sun.
Most men would have deemed themselves fortunate to have been absent on the perilous occasion
of the Sioux inroad, as was Obed Bat, (or as he was fond of hearing himself called, Battius,)
M.D. and fellow of several cis-Atlantic learned societies--the adventurous gentleman in question.

Although the sluggish nature of Ishmael was not actually awakened, it was sorely pricked by
the liberties which had just been taken with his property. He slept, however, for it was the
hour he had allotted to that refreshment, and because he knew how impotent any exertions to
recover his effects must prove in the darkness of midnight. He also knew the danger of his
present situation too well to hazard what was left in pursuit of that which was lost. Much
as the inhabitants of the prairies were known to love horses, their attachment to many other
articles, still in the possession of the travellers, was equally well understood. It was a
common artifice to scatter the herds, and to profit by the confusion. But Mahtoree had, as
it would seem in this particular undervalued the acuteness of the man he had assailed. The
phlegm with which the squatter learned his loss, has already been seen, and it now remains
to exhibit the results of his more matured determinations.

Though the encampment contained many an eye that was long unclosed, and many an ear that listened
greedily to catch the faintest evidence of any new alarm, it lay in deep quiet during the remainder
of the night. Silence and fatigue finally performed their accustomed offices, and before the
morning all but the sentinels were again buried in sleep. How well these indolent watchers
discharged their duties, after the assault, has never been known, inasmuch as nothing occurred
to confirm or to disprove their subsequent vigilance.

Just as day, however, began to dawn, and a grey light was falling from the heavens, on the
dusky objects of the plain, the half startled, anxious, and yet blooming countenance of Ellen
Wade was reared above the confused mass of children, among whom she had clustered on her stolen
return to the camp. Arising warily she stepped lightly across the recumbent bodies, and proceeded
with the same caution to the utmost limits of the defences of Ishmael. Here she listened, as
if she doubted the propriety of venturing further. The pause was only momentary, however; and
long before the drowsy eyes of the sentinel, who overlooked the spot where she stood, had time
to catch a glimpse of her active form, it had glided along the bottom, and stood on the summit
of the nearest eminence.

Ellen now listened intently anxious to catch some other sound, than the breathing of the morning
air, which faintly rustled the herbage at her feet. She was about to turn in disappointment
from the enquiry, when the tread of human feet making their way through the matted grass met
her ear. Springing eagerly forward, she soon beheld the outlines of a figure advancing up the
eminence, on the side opposite to the camp. She had already uttered the name of Paul, and was
beginning to speak in the hurried and eager voice with which female affection is apt to greet
a friend, when, drawing back, the disappointed girl closed her salutation by coldly adding--"I
did not expect, Doctor, to meet you at this unusual hour."

"All hours and all seasons are alike, my good Ellen, to the genuine lover of nature,"--returned
a small, slightly made, but exceedingly active man, dressed in an odd mixture of cloth and
skins, a little past the middle age, and who advanced directly to her side, with the familiarity
of an old acquaintance; "and he who does not know how to find things to admire by this grey
light, is ignorant of a large portion of the blessings he enjoys."

"Very true," said Ellen, suddenly recollecting the necessity of accounting for her own appearance
abroad at that unseasonable hour; "I know many who think the earth has a pleasanter look in
the night, than when seen by the brightest sunshine."

"Ah! Their organs of sight must be too convex! But the man who wishes to study the active habits
of the feline race, or the variety, albinos, must, indeed, be stirring at this hour. I dare
say, there are men who prefer even looking at objects by twilight, for the simple reason, that
they see better at that time of the day."

"And is this the cause why you are so much abroad in the night?"

"I am abroad at night, my good girl, because the earth in its diurnal revolutions leaves the
light of the sun but half the time on any given meridian, and because what I have to do cannot
be performed in twelve or fifteen consecutive hours. Now have I been off two days from the
family, in search of a plant, that is known to exist on the tributaries of La Platte, without
seeing even a blade of grass that is not already enumerated and classed."

"You have been unfortunate, Doctor, but--"

"Unfortunate!" echoed the little man, sideling nigher to his companion, and producing his tablets
with an air in which exultation struggled, strangely, with an affectation of self-abasement.
"No, no, Ellen, I am any thing but unfortunate. Unless, indeed, a man may be so called, whose
fortune is made, whose fame may be said to be established for ever, whose name will go down
to posterity with that of Buffon--Buffon! a mere compiler: one who flourishes on the foundation
of other men's labours. No; pari passu with Solander, who bought his knowledge with pain and
privations!"

"Have you discovered a mine, Doctor Bat?"

"More than a mine; a treasure coined, and fit for instant use, girl.--Listen! I was making
the angle necessary to intersect the line of your uncle's march, after my fruitless search,
when I heard sounds like the explosion produced by fire arms--"

"Yes," exclaimed Ellen, eagerly, "we had an alarm--"

"And thought I was lost," continued the man of science too much bent on his own ideas, to understand
her interruption. "Little danger of that! I made my own base, knew the length of the perpendicular
by calculation, and to draw the hypothenuse had nothing to do but to work my angle. I supposed
the guns were fired for my benefit, and changed my course for the sounds--not that I think
the sense more accurate, or even as accurate as a mathematical calculation, but I feared that
some of the children might need my services."

"They are all happily--"

"Listen," interrupted the other, already forgetting his affected anxiety for his patients,
in the greater importance of the present subject. "I had crossed a large tract of prairie--for
sound is conveyed far where there is little obstruction--when I heard the trampling of feet,
as if bisons were beating the earth. Then I caught a distant view of a herd of quadrupeds,
rushing up and down the swells--animals, which would have still remained unknown and undescribed,
had it not been for a most felicitous accident! One, and he a noble specimen of the whole!
was running a little apart from the rest. The herd made an inclination in my direction, in
which the solitary animal coincided, and this brought him within fifty yards of the spot where
I stood. I profited by the opportunity, and by the aid of steel and taper, I wrote his description
on the spot. I would have given a thousand dollars, Ellen, for a single shot from the rifle
of one of the boys!"

"You carry a pistol, Doctor, why didn't you use it?" said the half inattentive girl, anxiously
examining the prairie, but still lingering where she stood, quite willing to be detained.

"Ay, but it carries nothing but the most minute particles of lead, adapted to the destruction
of the larger insects and reptiles. No, I did better than to attempt waging a war, in which
I could not be the victor. I recorded the event; noting each particular with the precision
necessary to science. You shall hear, Ellen; for you are a good and improving girl, and by
retaining what you learn in this way, may yet be of great service to learning, should any accident
occur to me. Indeed, my worthy Ellen, mine is a pursuit, which has its dangers as well as that
of the warrior. This very night," he continued, glancing his eye behind him, "this awful night,
has the principle of life, itself, been in great danger of extinction!"

"By what?"

"By the monster I have discovered. It approached me often, and ever as I receded, it continued
to advance. I believe nothing but the little lamp, I carried, was my protector. I kept it between
us, whilst I wrote, making it serve the double purpose of luminary and shield. But you shall
hear the character of the beast, and you may then judge of the risks we promoters of science
run in behalf of mankind."

The naturalist raised his tablets to the heavens, and disposed himself to read as well as he
could, by the dim light they yet shed upon the plain; premising with saying--

"Listen, girl, and you shall hear, with what a treasure it has been my happy lot to enrich
the pages of natural history!"

"Is it then a creature of your forming?" said Ellen, turning away from her fruitless examination,
with a sudden lighting of her sprightly blue eyes, that showed she knew how to play with the
foible of her learned companion.

"Is the power to give life to inanimate matter the gift of man? I would it were! You should
speedily see a Historia Naturalis Americana, that would put the sneering imitators of the Frenchman,
De Buffon, to shame! A great improvement might be made in the formation of all quadrupeds;
especially those in which velocity is a virtue. Two of the inferior limbs should be on the
principle of the lever; wheels, perhaps, as they are now formed; though I have not yet determined
whether the improvement might be better applied to the anterior or posterior members, inasmuch
as I am yet to learn whether dragging or shoving requires the greatest muscular exertion. A
natural exudation of the animal might assist in overcoming the friction, and a powerful momentum
be obtained. But all this is hopeless--at least for the present!"--he added, raising his tablets
again to the light, and reading aloud; "Oct. 6, 1805. that's merely the date, which I dare
say you know better than I--mem. Quadruped; seen by star-light, and by the aid of a pocket-lamp,
in the prairies of North America--see Journal for Latitude and Meridian. Genus--unknown; therefore
named after the discoverer, and from the happy coincidence of being seen in the evening--Vespertilio
Horribilis, Americanus. Dimensions (by estimation)--Greatest length, eleven feet; height, six
feet; head, erect; nostrils, expansive; eyes, expressive and fierce; teeth, serrated and abundant;
tail, horizontal, waving, and slightly feline; feet, large and hairy; talons, long, curvated,
dangerous; ears, inconspicuous; horns, elongated, diverging, and formidable; colour, plumbeous-ashy,
with fiery spots; voice, sonorous, martial, and appalling; habits, gregarious, carnivorous,
fierce, and fearless. There," exclaimed Obed, when he had ended this sententious but comprehensive
description, "there is an animal, which will be likely to dispute with the lion his title to
be called the king of the beasts!"

"I know not the meaning of all you have said, Doctor Battius," returned the quick-witted girl,
who understood the weakness of the philosopher, and often indulged him with a title he loved
so well to hear; "but I shall think it dangerous to venture far from the camp, if such monsters
are prowling over the prairies."

"You may well call it prowling," returned the naturalist, nestling still closer to her side,
and dropping his voice to such low and undignified tones of confidence, as conveyed a meaning
still more pointed than he had intended. "I have never before experienced such a trial of the
nervous system; there was a moment, I acknowledge, when the fortiter in re faltered before
so terrible an enemy; but the love of natural science bore me up, and brought me off in triumph!"

"You speak a language so different from that we use in Tennessee," said Ellen, struggling to
conceal her laughter, "that I hardly know whether I understand your meaning. If I am right,
you wish to say you were chicken-hearted."

"An absurd simile drawn from an ignorance of the formation of the biped. The heart of a chicken
has a just proportion to its other organs, and the domestic fowl is, in a state of nature,
a gallant bird. Ellen," he added, with a countenance so solemn as to produce an impression
on the attentive girl, "I was pursued, hunted, and in a danger that I scorn to dwell on--what's
that?"

Ellen started; for the earnestness and simple sincerity of her companion's manner had produced
a certain degree of credulity, even on her buoyant mind. Looking in the direction indicated
by the Doctor, she beheld, in fact, a beast coursing over the prairie, and making a straight
and rapid approach to the very spot they occupied. The day was not yet sufficiently advanced
to enable her to distinguish its form and character, though enough was discernible to induce
her to imagine it a fierce and savage animal.

"It comes! it comes!" exclaimed the Doctor, fumbling, by a sort of instinct, for his tablets,
while he fairly tottered on his feet under the powerful efforts he made to maintain his ground.
"Now, Ellen, has fortune given me an opportunity to correct the errors made by star-light,--hold,--ashy-plumbeous,--no
ears,--horns, excessive." His voice and hand were both arrested by a roar, or rather a shriek
from the beast, that was sufficiently terrific to appal even a stouter heart than that of the
naturalist. The cries of the animal passed over the prairie in strange cadences, and then succeeded
a deep and solemn silence, that was only broken by an uncontrolled fit of merriment from the
more musical voice of Ellen Wade. In the mean time the naturalist stood like a statue of amazement,
permitting a well-grown ass, against whose approach he no longer offered his boasted shield
of light, to smell about his person, without comment or hinderance.

"It is your own ass," cried Ellen, the instant she found breath for words; "your own patient,
hard working, hack!"

The Doctor rolled his eyes from the beast to the speaker, and from the speaker to the beast;
but gave no audible expression of his wonder.

"Do you refuse to know an animal that has laboured so long in your service?" continued the
laughing girl. "A beast, that I have heard you say a thousand times, has served you well, and
whom you loved like a brother!"

"Asinus Domesticus!" ejaculated the Doctor, drawing his breath like one who had been near suffocation.
"There is no doubt of the genus; and I will always maintain that the animal is not of the species,
equus. This is undeniably Asinus himself, Ellen Wade; but this is not the Vespertilio Horribilis
of the prairies! Very different animals, I can assure you, young woman, and differently characterized
in every important particular. That, carnivorous," he continued, glancing his eye at the open
page of his tablets; "this, granivorous; habits, fierce, dangerous; habits, patient, abstemious;
ears, inconspicuous; ears, elongated; horns, diverging, &c., horns, none!"

He was interrupted by another burst of merriment from Ellen, which served, in some measure,
to recall him to his recollection.

"The image of the Vespertilio was on the retina," the astounded enquirer into the secrets of
nature observed, in a manner that seemed a little apologetic, "and I was silly enough to mistake
my own faithful beast for the monster. Though even now I greatly marvel to see this animal
running at large!"

Ellen then proceeded to explain the history of the attack and its results. She described, with
an accuracy that might have raised suspicions of her own movements in the mind of one less
simple than her auditor, the manner in which the beasts burst out of the encampment, and the
headlong speed with which they had dispersed themselves over the open plain. Although she forebore
to say as much in terms, she so managed as to present before the eyes of her listener the strong
probability of his having mistaken the frightened drove for savage beasts, and then terminated
her account by a lamentation for their loss, and some very natural remarks on the helpless
condition in which it had left the family. The naturalist listened in silent wonder, neither
interrupting her narrative nor suffering a single exclamation of surprise to escape him. The
keen-eyed girl, however, saw that as she proceeded, the important leaf was torn from the tablets,
in a manner which showed that their owner had got rid of his delusion at the same instant.
From that moment the world has heard no more of the Vespertilio Horribilis Americanus, and
the natural sciences have irretrievably lost an important link in that great animated chain
which is said to connect earth and heaven, and in which man is thought to be so familiarly
complicated with the monkey.

When Dr. Bat was put in full possession of all the circumstances of the inroad, his concern
immediately took a different direction. He had left sundry folios, and certain boxes well stored
with botanical specimens and defunct animals, under the good keeping of Ishmael, and it immediately
struck his acute mind, that marauders as subtle as the Siouxes would never neglect the opportunity
to despoil him of these treasures. Nothing that Ellen could say to the contrary served to appease
his apprehensions, and, consequently, they separated; he to relieve his doubts and fears together,
and she to glide, as swiftly and silently as she had just before passed it, into the still
and solitary tent.

CHAPTER VII

               What! fifty of my followers, at a clap!
                                                         --Lear.

The day had now fairly opened on the seemingly interminable waste of the prairie. The entrance
of Obed at such a moment into the camp, accompanied as it was by vociferous lamentations over
his anticipated loss, did not fail to rouse the drowsy family of the squatter. Ishmael and
his sons, together with the forbidding looking brother of his wife, were all speedily afoot;
and then, as the sun began to shed his light on the place, they became gradually apprised of
the extent of their loss.

Ishmael looked round upon the motionless and heavily loaded vehicles with his teeth firmly
compressed, cast a glance at the amazed and helpless group of children, which clustered around
their sullen but desponding mother, and walked out upon the open land, as if he found the air
of the encampment too confined. He was followed by several of the men, who were attentive observers,
watching the dark expression of his eye as the index of their own future movements. The whole
proceeded in profound and moody silence to the summit of the nearest swell, whence they could
command an almost boundless view of the naked plains. Here nothing was visible but a solitary
buffaloe, that gleaned a meagre subsistence from the decaying herbage, at no great distance,
and the ass of the physician, who profited by his freedom to enjoy a meal richer than common.

"Yonder is one of the creatures left by the villains to mock us," said Ishmael, glancing his
eye towards the latter, "and that the meanest of the stock. This is a hard country to make
a crop in, boys; and yet food must be found to fill many hungry mouths!"

"The rifle is better than the hoe, in such a place as this," returned the eldest of his sons,
kicking the hard and thirsty soil on which he stood, with an air of contempt. "It is good for
such as they who make their dinner better on beggars' beans than on homminy. A crow would shed
tears if obliged by its errand to fly across the district."

"What say you, trapper?" returned the father, showing the slight impression his powerful heel
had made on the compact earth, and laughing with frightful ferocity. "Is this the quality of
land a man would choose who never troubles the county clerk with title deeds?"

"There is richer soil in the bottoms," returned the old man calmly, "and you have passed millions
of acres to get to this dreary spot, where he who loves to till the 'arth might have received
bushels in return for pints, and that too at the cost of no very grievous labour. If you have
come in search of land, you have journeyed hundreds of miles too far, or as many leagues too
little."

"There is then a better choice towards the other Ocean?" demanded the squatter, pointing in
the direction of the Pacific.

"There is, and I have seen it all," was the answer of the other, who dropped his rifle to the
earth, and stood leaning on its barrel, like one who recalled the scenes he had witnessed with
melancholy pleasure. "I have seen the waters of the two seas! On one of them was I born, and
raised to be a lad like yonder tumbling boy. America has grown, my men, since the days of my
youth, to be a country larger than I once had thought the world itself to be. Near seventy
years I dwelt in York, province and state together:--you've been in York, 'tis like?"

"Not I--not I; I never visited the towns; but often have heard the place you speak of named.
'Tis a wide clearing there, I reckon."

"Too wide! too wide! They scourge the very 'arth with their axes. Such hills and hunting-grounds
as I have seen stripped of the gifts of the Lord, without remorse or shame! I tarried till
the mouths of my hounds were deafened by the blows of the chopper, and then I came west in
search of quiet. It was a grievous journey that I made; a grievous toil to pass through falling
timber and to breathe the thick air of smoky clearings, week after week, as I did! 'Tis a far
country too, that state of York from this!"

"It lies ag'in the outer edge of old Kentuck, I reckon; though what the distance may be I never
knew."

"A gull would have to fan a thousand miles of air to find the eastern sea. And yet it is no
mighty reach to hunt across, when shade and game are plenty! The time has been when I followed
the deer in the mountains of the Delaware and Hudson, and took the beaver on the streams of
the upper lakes in the same season, but my eye was quick and certain at that day, and my limbs
were like the legs of a moose! The dam of Hector," dropping his look kindly to the aged hound
that crouched at his feet, "was then a pup, and apt to open on the game the moment she struck
the scent. She gave me a deal of trouble, that slut, she did!"

"Your hound is old, stranger, and a rap on the head would prove a mercy to the beast."

"The dog is like his master," returned the trapper, without appearing to heed the brutal advice
the other gave, "and will number his days, when his work amongst the game is over, and not
before. To my eye things seem ordered to meet each other in this creation. 'Tis not the swiftest
running deer that always throws off the hounds, nor the biggest arm that holds the truest rifle.
Look around you, men; what will the Yankee Choppers say, when they have cut their path from
the eastern to the western waters, and find that a hand, which can lay the 'arth bare at a
blow, has been here and swept the country, in very mockery of their wickedness. They will turn
on their tracks like a fox that doubles, and then the rank smell of their own footsteps will
show them the madness of their waste. Howsomever, these are thoughts that are more likely to
rise in him who has seen the folly of eighty seasons, than to teach wisdom to men still bent
on the pleasures of their kind! You have need, yet, of a stirring time, if you think to escape
the craft and hatred of the burnt-wood Indians. They claim to be the lawful owners of this
country, and seldom leave a white more than the skin he boasts of, when once they get the power,
as they always have the will, to do him harm."

"Old man," said Ishmael sternly, "to which people do you belong? You have the colour and speech
of a Christian, while it seems that your heart is with the redskins."

"To me there is little difference in nations. The people I loved most are scattered as the
sands of the dry river-beds fly before the fall hurricanes, and life is too short to make use
and custom with strangers, as one can do with such as he has dwelt amongst for years. Still
am I a man without the cross of Indian blood; and what is due from a warrior to his nation,
is owing by me to the people of the States; though little need have they, with their militia
and their armed boats, of help from a single arm of fourscore."

"Since you own your kin, I may ask a simple question. Where are the Siouxes who have stolen
my cattle?"

"Where is the herd of buffaloes, which was chased by the panther across this plain, no later
than the morning of yesterday? It is as hard--"

"Friend," said Dr. Battius, who had hitherto been an attentive listener, but who now felt a
sudden impulse to mingle in the discourse, "I am grieved when I find a venator or hunter, of
your experience and observation, following the current of vulgar error. The animal you describe
is in truth a species of the bos ferus, (or bos sylvestris, as he has been happily called by
the poets,) but, though of close affinity, it is altogether distinct from the common bubulus.
Bison is the better word; and I would suggest the necessity of adopting it in future, when
you shall have occasion to allude to the species."

"Bison or buffaloe, it makes but little matter. The creatur' is the same, call it by what name
you will, and--"

"Pardon me, venerable venator; as classification is the very soul of the natural sciences,
the animal or vegetable must, of necessity, be characterised by the peculiarities of its species,
which is always indicated by the name--"

"Friend," said the trapper, a little positively, "would the tail of a beaver make the worse
dinner for calling it a mink; or could you eat of the wolf, with relish, because some bookish
man had given it the name of venison?"

As these questions were put with no little earnestness and some spirit, there was every probability
that a hot discussion would have succeeded between two men, of whom one was so purely practical
and the other so much given to theory, had not Ishmael seen fit to terminate the dispute, by
bringing into view a subject that was much more important to his own immediate interests.

"Beavers' tails and minks' flesh may do to talk about before a maple fire and a quiet hearth,"
interrupted the squatter, without the smallest deference to the interested feelings of the
disputants; "but something more than foreign words, or words of any sort, is now needed. Tell
me, trapper, where are your Siouxes skulking?"

"It would be as easy to tell you the colours of the hawk that is floating beneath yonder white
cloud! When a red-skin strikes his blow, he is not apt to wait until he is paid for the evil
deed in lead."

"Will the beggarly savages believe they have enough, when they find themselves master of all
the stock?"

"Natur' is much the same, let it be covered by what skin it may. Do you ever find your longings
after riches less when you have made a good crop, than before you were master of a kernel of
corn? If you do, you differ from what the experience of a long life tells me is the common
cravings of man."

"Speak plainly, old stranger," said the squatter, striking the butt of his rifle heavily on
the earth, his dull capacity finding no pleasure in a discourse that was conducted in so obscure
allusions; "I have asked a simple question, and one I know well that you can answer."

"You are right, you are right. I can answer, for I have too often seen the disposition of my
kind to mistake it, when evil is stirring. When the Siouxes have gathered in the beasts, and
have made sure that you are not upon their heels, they will be back nibbling like hungry wolves
to take the bait they have left or it may be, they'll show the temper of the great bears, that
are found at the falls of the Long River, and strike at once with the paw, without stopping
to nose their prey."

"You have then seen the animals you mention!" exclaimed Dr. Battius, who had now been thrown
out of the conversation quite as long as his impatience could well brook, and who approached
the subject with his tablets ready opened, as a book of reference. "Can you tell me if what
you encountered was of the species, ursus horribilis--with the ears, rounded--front, arquated--eyes--destitute
of the remarkable supplemental lid--with six incisores, one false, and four perfect molares--"

"Trapper, go on, for we are engaged in reasonable discourse," interrupted Ishmael; "you believe
we shall see more of the robbers."

"Nay--nay--I do not call them robbers, for it is the usage of their people, and what may be
called the prairie law."

"I have come five hundred miles to find a place where no man can ding the words of the law
in my ears," said Ishmael, fiercely, "and I am not in a humour to stand quietly at a bar, while
a red-skin sits in judgment. I tell you, trapper, if another Sioux is seen prowling around
my camp, wherever it may be, he shall feel the contents of old Kentuck," slapping his rifle,
in a manner that could not be easily misconstrued, "though he wore the medal of Washington,[*]
himself. I call the man a robber who takes that which is not his own."

    [*] The American government creates chiefs among the western tribes,
    and decorates them with silver medals hearing the impression of
    the different presidents. That of Washington is the most prized.

"The Teton, and the Pawnee, and the Konza, and men of a dozen other tribes, claim to own these
naked fields."

"Natur' gives them the lie in their teeth. The air, the water, and the ground, are free gifts
to man, and no one has the power to portion them out in parcels. Man must drink, and breathe,
and walk,--and therefore each has a right to his share of 'arth. Why do not the surveyors of
the States set their compasses and run their lines over our heads as well as beneath our feet?
Why do they not cover their shining sheep-skins with big words, giving to the landholder, or
perhaps he should be called air holder, so many rods of heaven, with the use of such a star
for a boundary-mark, and such a cloud to turn a mill?"

As the squatter uttered his wild conceit, he laughed from the very bottom of his chest, in
scorn. The deriding but frightful merriment passed from the mouth of one of his ponderous sons
to that of the other, until it had made the circuit of the whole family.

"Come, trapper," continued Ishmael, in a tone of better humour, like a man who feels that he
has triumphed, "neither of us, I reckon, has ever had much to do with title-deeds, or county
clerks, or blazed trees; therefore we will not waste words on fooleries. You ar' a man that
has tarried long in this clearing, and now I ask your opinion, face to face, without fear or
favour, if you had the lead in my business, what would you do?"

The old man hesitated, and seemed to give the required advice with deep reluctance. As every
eye, however, was fastened on him, and whichever way he turned his face, he encountered a look
riveted on the lineaments of his own working countenance, he answered in a low, melancholy, tone--

"I have seen too much mortal blood poured out in empty quarrels, to wish ever to hear an angry
rifle again. Ten weary years have I sojourned alone on these naked plains, waiting for my hour,
and not a blow have I struck ag'in an enemy more humanised than the grizzly bear."

"Ursus horribilis," muttered the Doctor.

The speaker paused at the sound of the other's voice, but perceiving it was no more than a
sort of mental ejaculation, he continued in the same strain--

"More humanised than the grizzly hear, or the panther of the Rocky Mountains; unless the beaver,
which is a wise and knowing animal, may be so reckoned. What would I advise? Even the female
buffaloe will fight for her young!"

"It never then shall be said, that Ishmael Bush has less kindness for his children than the
bear for her cubs!"

"And yet this is but a naked spot for a dozen men to make head in, ag'in five hundred."

"Ay, it is so," returned the squatter, glancing his eye towards his humble camp; "but something
might be done, with the wagons and the cotton-wood."

The trapper shook his head incredulously, and pointed across the rolling plain in the direction
of the west, as he answered--

"A rifle would send a bullet from these hills into your very sleeping-cabins; nay, arrows from
the thicket in your rear would keep you all burrowed, like so many prairie dogs: it wouldn't
do, it wouldn't do. Three long miles from this spot is a place, where as I have often thought
in passing across the desert, a stand might be made for days and weeks together, if there were
hearts and hands ready to engage in the bloody work."

Another low, deriding laugh passed among the young men, announcing, in a manner sufficiently
intelligible, their readiness to undertake a task even more arduous. The squatter himself eagerly
seized the hint which had been so reluctantly extorted from the trapper, who by some singular
process of reasoning had evidently persuaded himself that it was his duty to be strictly neutral.
A few direct and pertinent enquiries served to obtain the little additional information that
was necessary, in order to make the contemplated movement, and then Ishmael, who was, on emergencies,
as terrifically energetic, as he was sluggish in common, set about effecting his object without
delay.

Notwithstanding the industry and zeal of all engaged, the task was one of great labour and
difficulty. The loaded vehicles were to be drawn by hand across a wide distance of plain without
track or guide of any sort, except that which the trapper furnished by communicating his knowledge
of the cardinal points of the compass. In accomplishing this object, the gigantic strength
of the men was taxed to the utmost, nor were the females or the children spared a heavy proportion
of the toil. While the sons distributed themselves about the heavily loaded wagons, and drew
them by main strength up the neighbouring swell, their mother and Ellen, surrounded by the
amazed group of little ones, followed slowly in the rear, bending under the weight of such
different articles as were suited to their several strengths.

Ishmael himself superintended and directed the whole, occasionally applying his colossal shoulder
to some lagging vehicle, until he saw that the chief difficulty, that of gaining the level
of their intended route, was accomplished. Then he pointed out the required course, cautioning
his sons to proceed in such a manner that they should not lose the advantage they had with
so much labour obtained, and beckoning to the brother of his wife, they returned together to
the empty camp.

Throughout the whole of this movement, which occupied an hour of time, the trapper had stood
apart, leaning on his rifle, with the aged hound slumbering at his feet, a silent but attentive
observer of all that passed. Occasionally, a smile lighted his hard, muscular, but wasted features,
like a gleam of sunshine flitting across a ragged ruin, and betrayed the momentary pleasure
he found in witnessing from time to time the vast power the youths discovered. Then, as the
train drew slowly up the ascent, a cloud of thought and sorrow threw all into the shade again,
leaving the expression of his countenance in its usual state of quiet melancholy. As vehicle
after vehicle left the place of the encampment, he noted the change, with increasing attention;
seldom failing to cast an enquiring look at the little neglected tent, which, with its proper
wagon, still remained as before, solitary and apparently forgotten. The summons of Ishmael
to his gloomy associate had, however, as it would now seem, this hitherto neglected portion
of his effects for its object.

First casting a cautious and suspicious glance on every side of him, the squatter and his companion
advanced to the little wagon, and caused it to enter within the folds of the cloth, much in
the manner that it had been extricated the preceding evening. They both then disappeared behind
the drapery, and many moments of suspense succeeded, during which the old man, secretly urged
by a burning desire to know the meaning of so much mystery, insensibly drew nigh to the place,
until he stood within a few yards of the proscribed spot. The agitation of the cloth betrayed
the nature of the occupation of those whom it concealed, though their work was conducted in
rigid silence. It would appear that long practice had made each of the two acquainted with
his particular duty; for neither sign nor direction of any sort was necessary from Ishmael,
in order to apprise his surly associate of the manner in which he was to proceed. In less time
than has been consummated in relating it, the interior portion of the arrangement was completed,
when the men re-appeared without the tent. Too busy with his occupation to heed the presence
of the trapper, Ishmael began to release the folds of the cloth from the ground, and to dispose
of them in such a manner around the vehicle, as to form a sweeping train to the new form the
little pavilion had now assumed. The arched roof trembled with the occasional movement of the
light vehicle which, it was now apparent, once more supported its secret burden. Just as the
work was ended the scowling eye of Ishmael's assistant caught a glimpse of the figure of the
attentive observer of their movements. Dropping the shaft, which he had already lifted from
the ground preparatory to occupying the place that was usually filled by an animal less reasoning
and perhaps less dangerous than himself, he bluntly exclaimed--

"I am a fool, as you often say! But look for yourself: if that man is not an enemy, I will
disgrace father and mother, call myself an Indian, and go hunt with the Siouxes!"

The cloud, as it is about to discharge the subtle lightning, is not more dark nor threatening,
than the look with which Ishmael greeted the intruder. He turned his head on every side of
him, as if seeking some engine sufficiently terrible to annihilate the offending trapper at
a blow; and then, possibly recollecting the further occasion he might have for his counsel,
he forced himself to say, with an appearance of moderation that nearly choked him--

"Stranger, I did believe this prying into the concerns of others was the business of women
in the towns and settlements, and not the manner in which men, who are used to live where each
has room for himself, deal with the secrets of their neighbours. To what lawyer or sheriff
do you calculate to sell your news?"

"I hold but little discourse except with one and then chiefly of my own affairs," returned
the old man, without the least observable apprehension, and pointing imposingly upward; "a
Judge; and Judge of all. Little does he need knowledge from my hands, and but little will your
wish to keep any thing secret from him profit you, even in this desert."

The mounting tempers of his unnurtured listeners were rebuked by the simple, solemn manner
of the trapper. Ishmael stood sullen and thoughtful; while his companion stole a furtive and
involuntary glance at the placid sky, which spread so wide and blue above his head, as if he
expected to see the Almighty eye itself beaming from the heavenly vault. But impressions of
a serious character are seldom lasting on minds long indulged in forgetfulness. The hesitation
of the squatter was consequently of short duration. The language, however, as well as the firm
and collected air of the speaker, were the means of preventing much subsequent abuse, if not
violence.

"It would be showing more of the kindness of a friend and comrade," Ishmael returned, in a
tone sufficiently sullen to betray his humour, though it was no longer threatening, "had your
shoulder been put to the wheel of one of yonder wagons, instead of edging itself in here, where
none are wanted but such as are invited."

"I can put the little strength that is left me," returned the trapper, "to this, as well as
to another of your loads."

"Do you take us for boys!" exclaimed Ishmael, laughing, half in ferocity and half in derision,
applying his powerful strength at the same time to the little vehicle, which rolled over the
grass with as much seeming facility as if it were drawn by its usual team.

The trapper paused, and followed the departing wagon with his eye, marvelling greatly as to
the nature of its concealed contents, until it had also gained the summit of the eminence,
and in its turn disappeared behind the swell of the land. Then he turned to gaze at the desolation
of the scene around him. The absence of human forms would have scarce created a sensation in
the bosom of one so long accustomed to solitude, had not the site of the deserted camp furnished
such strong memorials of its recent visitors, and as the old man was quick to detect, of their
waste also. He cast his eye upwards, with a shake of the head, at the vacant spot in the heavens
which had so lately been filled by the branches of those trees that now lay stripped of their
verdure, worthless and deserted logs, at his feet.

"Ay," he muttered to himself, "I might have know'd it--I might have know'd it! Often have I
seen the same before; and yet I brought them to the spot myself, and have now sent them to
the only neighbourhood of their kind within many long leagues of the spot where I stand. This
is man's wish, and pride, and waste, and sinfulness! He tames the beasts of the field to feed
his idle wants; and, having robbed the brutes of their natural food, he teaches them to strip
the 'arth of its trees to quiet their hunger."

A rustling in the low bushes which still grew, for some distance, along the swale that formed
the thicket on which the camp of Ishmael had rested, caught his ear, at the moment, and cut
short the soliloquy. The habits of so many years, spent in the wilderness, caused the old man
to bring his rifle to a poise, with something like the activity and promptitude of his youth;
but, suddenly recovering his recollection, he dropped it into the hollow of his arm again,
and resumed his air of melancholy resignation.

"Come forth, come forth!" he said aloud: "be ye bird, or be ye beast, ye are safe from these
old hands. I have eaten and I have drunk: why should I take life, when my wants call for no
sacrifice? It will not be long afore the birds will peck at eyes that shall not see them, and
perhaps light on my very bones; for if things like these are only made to perish, why am I
to expect to live for ever? Come forth, come forth; you are safe from harm at these weak hands."

"Thank you for the good word, old trapper!" cried Paul Hover, springing actively forward from
his place of concealment. "There was an air about you, when you threw forward the muzzle of
the piece, that I did not like; for it seemed to say that you were master of all the rest of
the motions."

"You are right, you are right!" cried the trapper, laughing with inward self-complacency at
the recollection of his former skill. "The day has been when few men knew the virtues of a
long rifle, like this I carry, better than myself, old and useless as I now seem. You are right,
young man; and the time was, when it was dangerous to move a leaf within ear-shot of my stand;
or," he added, dropping his voice, and looking serious, "for a Red Mingo to show an eyeball
from his ambushment. You have heard of the Red Mingos?"

"I have heard of minks," said Paul, taking the old man by the arm, and gently urging him towards
the thicket as he spoke; while, at the same time, he cast quick and uneasy glances behind him,
in order to make sure he was not observed. "Of your common black minks; but none of any other
colour."

"Lord! Lord!" continued the trapper, shaking his head, and still laughing, in his deep but
quiet manner; "the boy mistakes a brute for a man! Though, a Mingo is little better than a
beast; or, for that matter, he is worse, when rum and opportunity are placed before his eyes.
There was that accursed Huron, from the upper lakes, that I knocked from his perch among the
rocks in the hills, back of the Hori--"

His voice was lost in the thicket, into which he had suffered himself to be led by Paul while
speaking, too much occupied by thoughts which dwelt on scenes and acts that had taken place
half a century earlier in the history of the country, to offer the smallest resistance.

CHAPTER VIII

   Now they are clapper-clawing one another; I'll go look on. That
   dissembling abominable varlet, Diomed, has got that same scurvy,
   doting, foolish young knave in his helm.
                                         --Troilus and Cressida.

It is necessary, in order that the thread of the narrative should not be spun to a length which
might fatigue the reader, that he should imagine a week to have intervened between the scene
with which the preceding chapter closed and the events with which it is our intention to resume
its relation in this. The season was on the point of changing its character; the verdure of
summer giving place more rapidly to the brown and party-coloured livery of the fall.[*] The
heavens were clothed in driving clouds, piled in vast masses one above the other, which whirled
violently in the gusts; opening, occasionally, to admit transient glimpses of the bright and
glorious sight of the heavens, dwelling in a magnificence by far too grand and durable to be
disturbed by the fitful efforts of the lower world. Beneath, the wind swept across the wild
and naked prairies, with a violence that is seldom witnessed in any section of the continent
less open. It would have been easy to have imagined, in the ages of fable, that the god of
the winds had permitted his subordinate agents to escape from their den, and that they now
rioted, in wantonness, across wastes, where neither tree, nor work of man, nor mountain, nor
obstacle of any sort, opposed itself to their gambols.

    [*] The Americans call the autumn the "fall," from the fall of the
    leaf.

Though nakedness might, as usual, be given as the pervading character of the spot, whither
it is now necessary to transfer the scene of the tale, it was not entirely without the signs
of human life. Amid the monotonous rolling of the prairie, a single naked and ragged rock arose
on the margin of a little watercourse, which found its way, after winding a vast distance through
the plains, into one of the numerous tributaries of the Father of Rivers. A swale of low land
lay near the base of the eminence; and as it was still fringed with a thicket of alders and
sumack, it bore the signs of having once nurtured a feeble growth of wood. The trees themselves
had been transferred, however, to the summit and crags of the neighbouring rocks. On this elevation
the signs of man, to which the allusion just made applies, were to be found.

Seen from beneath, there were visible a breast-work of logs and stones, intermingled in such
a manner as to save all unnecessary labour, a few low roofs made of bark and boughs of trees,
an occasional barrier, constructed like the defences on the summit, and placed on such points
of the acclivity as were easier of approach than the general face of the eminence; and a little
dwelling of cloth, perched on the apex of a small pyramid, that shot up on one angle of the
rock, the white covering of which glimmered from a distance like a spot of snow, or, to make
the simile more suitable to the rest of the subject, like a spotless and carefully guarded
standard, which was to be protected by the dearest blood of those who defended the citadel
beneath. It is hardly necessary to add, that this rude and characteristic fortress was the
place where Ishmael Bush had taken refuge, after the robbery of his flocks and herds.

On the day to which the narrative is advanced, the squatter was standing near the base of the
rocks, leaning on his rifle, and regarding the sterile soil that supported him with a look
in which contempt and disappointment were strongly blended.

"'Tis time to change our natur's," he observed to the brother of his wife, who was rarely far
from his elbow; "and to become ruminators, instead of people used to the fare of Christians
and free men. I reckon, Abiram, you could glean a living among the grasshoppers: you ar' an
active man, and might outrun the nimblest skipper of them all."

"The country will never do," returned the other, who relished but little the forced humour
of his kinsman; "and it is well to remember that a lazy traveller makes a long journey."

"Would you have me draw a cart at my heels, across this desert for weeks,--ay, months?" retorted
Ishmael, who, like all of his class, could labour with incredible efforts on emergencies, but
who too seldom exerted continued industry, on any occasion, to brook a proposal that offered
so little repose. "It may do for your people, who live in settlements, to hasten on to their
houses; but, thank Heaven! my farm is too big for its owner ever to want a resting-place."

"Since you like the plantation, then, you have only to make your crop."

"That is easier said than done, on this corner of the estate. I tell you, Abiram, there is
need of moving, for more reasons than one. You know I'm a man that very seldom enters into
a bargain, but who always fulfils his agreements better than your dealers in wordy contracts
written on rags of paper. If there's one mile, there ar' a hundred still needed to make up
the distance for which you have my honour."

As he spoke, the squatter glanced his eye upward at the little tenement of cloth which crowned
the summit of his ragged fortress. The look was understood and answered by the other; and by
some secret influence, which operated either through their interests or feelings, it served
to re-establish that harmony between them, which had just been threatened with something like
a momentary breach.

"I know it, and feel it in every bone of my body. But I remember the reason, why I have set
myself on this accursed journey too well to forget the distance between me and the end. Neither
you nor I will ever be the better for what we have done, unless we thoroughly finish what is
so well begun. Ay, that is the doctrine of the whole world, I judge: I heard a travelling preacher,
who was skirting it down the Ohio, a time since, say, if a man should live up to the faith
for a hundred years, and then fall from his work a single day, he would find the settlement
was to be made for the finishing blow that he had put to his job, and that all the bad, and
none of the good, would come into the final account."

"And you believed the hungry hypocrite!"

"Who said that I believed it?" retorted Abiram with a bullying look, that betrayed how much
his fears had dwelt on the subject he affected to despise. "Is it believing to tell what a
roguish--And yet, Ishmael, the man might have been honest after all! He told us that the world
was, in truth, no better than a desert, and that there was but one hand that could lead the
most learned man through all its crooked windings. Now, if this be true of the whole, it may
be true of a part."

"Abiram, out with your grievances like a man," interrupted the squatter, with a hoarse laugh.
"You want to pray! But of what use will it be, according to your own doctrine, to serve God
five minutes and the devil an hour? Harkee, friend; I'm not much of a husband-man, but this
I know to my cost; that to make a right good crop, even on the richest bottom, there must be
hard labour; and your {snufflers} liken the 'arth to a field of corn, and the men, who live
on it, to its yield. Now I tell you, Abiram, that you are no better than a thistle or a mullin;
yea, ye ar' wood of too open a pore to be good even to burn!"

The malign glance, which shot from the scowling eye of Abiram, announced the angry character
of his feelings, but as the furtive look quailed, immediately, before the unmoved, steady,
countenance of the squatter, it also betrayed how much the bolder spirit of the latter had
obtained the mastery over his craven nature.

Content with his ascendency, which was too apparent, and had been too often exerted on similar
occasions, to leave him in any doubt of its extent, Ishmael coolly continued the discourse,
by adverting more directly to his future plans.

"You will own the justice of paying every one in kind," he said; "I have been robbed of my
stock, and I have a scheme to make myself as good as before, by taking hoof for hoof; or for
that matter, when a man is put to the trouble of bargaining for both sides, he is a fool if
he don't pay himself something in the way of commission."

As the squatter made this declaration in a tone which was a little excited by the humour of
the moment, four or five of his lounging sons, who had been leaning against the foot of the
rock, came forward with the indolent step so common to the family.

"I have been calling Ellen Wade, who is on the rock keeping the look-out, to know if there
is any thing to be seen," observed the eldest of the young men; "and she shakes her head, for
an answer. Ellen is sparing of her words for a woman; and might be taught manners at least,
without spoiling her good looks."

Ishmael cast his eye upward to the place, where the offending, but unconscious girl was holding
her anxious watch. She was seated at the edge of the uppermost crag, by the side of the little
tent, and at least two hundred feet above the level of the plain. Little else was to be distinguished,
at that distance, but the outline of her form, her fair hair streaming in the gusts beyond
her shoulders, and the steady and seemingly unchangeable look that she had riveted on some
remote point of the prairie.

"What is it, Nell?" cried Ishmael, lifting his powerful voice a little above the rushing of
the element. "Have you got a glimpse of any thing bigger than a burrowing barker?"

The lips of the attentive Ellen parted; she rose to the utmost height her small stature admitted,
seeming still to regard the unknown object; but her voice, if she spoke at all, was not sufficiently
loud to be heard amid the wind.

"It ar' a fact that the child sees something more uncommon than a buffaloe or a prairie dog!"
continued Ishmael. "Why, Nell, girl, ar' ye deaf? Nell, I say;--I hope it is an army of red-skins
she has in her eye; for I should relish the chance to pay them for their kindness, under the
favour of these logs and rocks!"

As the squatter accompanied his vaunt with corresponding gestures, and directed his eyes to
the circle of his equally confident sons while speaking, he drew their gaze from Ellen to himself;
but now, when they turned together to note the succeeding movements of their female sentinel,
the place which had so lately been occupied by her form was vacant.

"As I am a sinner," exclaimed Asa, usually one of the most phlegmatic of the youths, "the girl
is blown away by the wind!"

Something like a sensation was exhibited among them, which might have denoted that the influence
of the laughing blue eyes, flaxen hair, and glowing cheeks of Ellen, had not been lost on the
dull natures of the young men; and looks of amazement, mingled slightly with concern, passed
from one to the other as they gazed, in dull wonder, at the point of the naked rock.

"It might well be!" added another; "she sat on a slivered stone, and I have been thinking of
telling her she was in danger for more than an hour."

"Is that a riband of the child, dangling from the corner of the hill below?" cried Ishmael;
"ha! who is moving about the tent? have I not told you all--"

"Ellen! 'tis Ellen!" interrupted the whole body of his sons in a breath; and at that instant
she re-appeared to put an end to their different surmises, and to relieve more than one sluggish
nature from its unwonted excitement. As Ellen issued from beneath the folds of the tent, she
advanced with a light and fearless step to her former giddy stand, and pointed toward the prairie,
appearing to speak in an eager and rapid voice to some invisible auditor.

"Nell is mad!" said Asa, half in contempt and yet not a little in concern. "The girl is dreaming
with her eyes open; and thinks she sees some of them fierce creatur's, with hard names, with
which the Doctor fills her ears."

"Can it be, the child has found a scout of the Siouxes?" said Ishmael, bending his look toward
the plain; but a low, significant whisper from Abiram drew his eyes quickly upward again, where
they were turned just in time to perceive that the cloth of the tent was agitated by a motion
very evidently different from the quivering occasioned by the wind. "Let her, if she dare!"
the squatter muttered in his teeth. "Abiram; they know my temper too well to play the prank
with me!"

"Look for yourself! if the curtain is not lifted, I can see no better than the owl by daylight."

Ishmael struck the breach of his rifle violently on the earth, and shouted in a voice that
might easily have been heard by Ellen, had not her attention still continued rapt on the object
which so unaccountably attracted her eyes in the distance.

"Nell!" continued the squatter, "away with you, fool! will you bring down punishment on your
own head? Why, Nell!--she has forgotten her native speech; let us see if she can understand
another language."

Ishmael threw his rifle to his shoulder, and at the next moment it was pointed upward at the
summit of the rock. Before time was given for a word of remonstrance, it had sent forth its
contents, in its usual streak of bright flame. Ellen started like the frightened chamois, and
uttering a piercing scream, she darted into the tent, with a swiftness that left it uncertain
whether terror or actual injury had been the penalty of her offence.

The action of the squatter was too sudden and unexpected to admit of prevention, but the instant
it was done, his sons manifested, in an unequivocal manner, the temper with which they witnessed
the desperate measure. Angry and fierce glances were interchanged, and a murmur of disapprobation
was uttered by the whole, in common.

"What has Ellen done, father," said Asa, with a degree of spirit, which was the more striking
from being unusual, "that she should be shot at like a straggling deer, or a hungry wolf?"

"Mischief," deliberately returned the squatter; but with a cool expression of defiance in his
eye that showed how little he was moved by the ill-concealed humour of his children. "Mischief,
boy; mischief! take you heed that the disorder don't spread."

"It would need a different treatment in a man, than in yon screaming girl!"

"Asa, you ar' a man, as you have often boasted; but remember I am your father, and your better."

"I know it well; and what sort of a father?"

"Harkee, boy: I more than half believe that your drowsy head let in the Siouxes. Be modest
in speech, my watchful son, or you may have to answer yet for the mischief your own bad conduct
has brought upon us."

"I'll stay no longer to be hectored like a child in petticoats. You talk of law, as if you
knew of none, and yet you keep me down, as though I had not life and wants of my own. I'll
stay no longer to be treated like one of your meanest cattle!"

"The world is wide, my gallant boy, and there's many a noble plantation on it, without a tenant.
Go; you have title deeds signed and sealed to your hand. Few fathers portion their children
better than Ishmael Bush; you will say that for me, at least, when you get to be a wealthy
landholder."

"Look! father, look!" exclaimed several voices at once, seizing with avidity, an opportunity
to interrupt a dialogue which threatened to become more violent.

"Look!" repeated Abiram, in a voice which sounded hollow and warning; "if you have time for
any thing but quarrels, Ishmael, look!"

The squatter turned slowly from his offending son, and cast an eye, that still lowered with
deep resentment upward; but which, the instant it caught a view of the object that now attracted
the attention of all around him, changed its expression to one of astonishment and dismay.

A female stood on the spot, from which Ellen had been so fearfully expelled. Her person was
of the smallest size that is believed to comport with beauty, and which poets and artists have
chosen as the beau ideal of feminine loveliness. Her dress was of a dark and glossy silk, and
fluttered like gossamer around her form. Long, flowing, and curling tresses of hair, still
blacker and more shining than her robe, fell at times about her shoulders, completely enveloping
the whole of her delicate bust in their ringlets; or at others streaming in the wind. The elevation
at which she stood prevented a close examination of the lineaments of a countenance which,
however, it might be seen was youthful, and, at the moment of her unlooked-for appearance,
eloquent with feeling. So young, indeed, did this fair and fragile being appear, that it might
be doubted whether the age of childhood was entirely passed. One small and exquisitely moulded
hand was pressed on her heart, while with the other she made an impressive gesture, which seemed
to invite Ishmael, if further violence was meditated, to direct it against her bosom.

The silent wonder, with which the group of borderers gazed upward at so extraordinary a spectacle,
was only interrupted as the person of Ellen was seen emerging with timidity from the tent,
as if equally urged, by apprehensions in behalf of herself and the fears which she felt on
account of her companion, to remain concealed and to advance. She spoke, but her words were
unheard by those below, and unheeded by her to whom they were addressed. The latter, however,
as if content with the offer she had made of herself as a victim to the resentment of Ishmael,
now calmly retired, and the spot she had so lately occupied became vacant, leaving a sort of
stupid impression on the spectators beneath, not unlike that which it might be supposed would
have been created had they just been gazing at some supernatural vision.

More than a minute of profound silence succeeded, during which the sons of Ishmael still continued
gazing at the naked rock in stupid wonder. Then, as eye met eye, an expression of novel intelligence
passed from one to the other, indicating that to them, at least, the appearance of this extraordinary
tenant of the pavilion was as unexpected as it was incomprehensible. At length Asa, in right
of his years, and moved by the rankling impulse of the recent quarrel, took on himself the
office of interrogator. Instead, however, of braving the resentment of his father, of whose
fierce nature, when aroused, he had had too frequent evidence to excite it wantonly, he turned
upon the cowering person of Abiram, observing with a sneer--

"This then is the beast you were bringing into the prairies for a decoy! I know you to be a
man who seldom troubles truth, when any thing worse may answer, but I never knew you to outdo
yourself so thoroughly before. The newspapers of Kentuck have called you a dealer in black
flesh a hundred times, but little did they reckon that you drove the trade into white families."

"Who is a kidnapper?" demanded Abiram, with a blustering show of resentment. "Am I to be called
to account for every lie they put in print throughout the States? Look to your own family,
boy; look to yourselves. The very stumps of Kentucky and Tennessee cry out ag'in ye! Ay, my
tonguey gentleman, I have seen father and mother and three children, yourself for one, published
on the logs and stubs of the settlements, with dollars enough for reward to have made an honest
man rich, for--"

He was interrupted by a back-handed but violent blow on the mouth, that caused him to totter,
and which left the impression of its weight in the starting blood and swelling lips.

"Asa," said the father, advancing with a portion of that dignity with which the hand of Nature
seems to have invested the parental character, "you have struck the brother of your mother!"

"I have struck the abuser of the whole family," returned the angry youth; "and, unless he teaches
his tongue a wiser language, he had better part with it altogether, as the unruly member. I'm
no great performer with the knife, but, on an occasion, could make out, myself, to cut off
a slande--"

"Boy, twice have you forgotten yourself to-day. Be careful that it does not happen the third
time. When the law of the land is weak, it is right the law of nature should be strong. You
understand me, Asa; and you know me. As for you, Abiram, the child has done you wrong, and
it is my place to see you righted. Remember; I tell you justice shall be done; it is enough.
But you have said hard things ag'in me and my family. If the hounds of the law have put their
bills on the trees and stumps of the clearings, it was for no act of dishonesty as you know,
but because we maintain the rule that 'arth is common property. No, Abiram; could I wash my
hands of things done by your advice, as easily as I can of the things done by the whisperings
of the devil, my sleep would be quieter at night, and none who bear my name need blush to hear
it mentioned. Peace, Asa, and you too, man; enough has been said. Let us all think well before
any thing is added, that may make what is already so bad still more bitter."

Ishmael waved his hand with authority, as he ended, and turned away with the air of one who
felt assured, that those he had addressed would not have the temerity to dispute his commands.
Asa evidently struggled with himself to compel the required obedience, but his heavy nature
quietly sunk into its ordinary repose, and he soon appeared again the being he really was;
dangerous, only, at moments, and one whose passions were too sluggish to be long maintained
at the point of ferocity. Not so with Abiram. While there was an appearance of a personal conflict,
between him and his colossal nephew, his mien had expressed the infallible evidences of engrossing
apprehension, but now, that the authority as well as gigantic strength of the father were interposed
between him and his assailant, his countenance changed from paleness to a livid hue, that bespoke
how deeply the injury he had received rankled in his breast. Like Asa, however, he acquiesced
in the decision of the squatter; and the appearance, at least, of harmony was restored again
among a set of beings, who were restrained by no obligations more powerful than the frail web
of authority with which Ishmael had been able to envelope his children.

One effect of the quarrel had been to divert the thoughts of the young men from their recent
visitor. With the dispute, that succeeded the disappearance of the fair stranger, all recollection
of her existence appeared to have vanished. A few ominous and secret conferences, it is true,
were held apart, during which the direction of the eyes of the different speakers betrayed
their subject; but these threatening symptoms soon disappeared, and the whole party was again
seen broken into its usual, listless, silent, and lounging groups.

"I will go upon the rock, boys, and look abroad for the savages," said Ishmael shortly after,
advancing towards them with a mien which he intended should be conciliating, at the same time
that it was authoritative.

"If there is nothing to fear, we will go out on the plain; the day is too good to be lost in
words, like women in the towns wrangling over their tea and sugared cakes."

Without waiting for approbation or dissent, the squatter advanced to the base of the rock,
which formed a sort of perpendicular wall, nearly twenty feet high around the whole acclivity.
Ishmael, however, directed his footsteps to a point where an ascent might be made through a
narrow cleft, which he had taken the precaution to fortify with a breast-work of cottonwood
logs, and which, in its turn, was defended by a chevaux-de-frise of the branches of the same
tree. Here an armed man was usually kept, as at the key of the whole position, and here one
of the young men now stood, indolently leaning against the rock, ready to protect the pass,
if it should prove necessary, until the whole party could be mustered at the several points
of defence.

From this place the squatter found the ascent still difficult, partly by nature and partly
by artificial impediments, until he reached a sort of terrace, or, to speak more properly,
the plain of the elevation, where he had established the huts in which the whole family dwelt.
These tenements were, as already mentioned, of that class which are so often seen on the borders,
and such as belonged to the infancy of architecture; being simply formed of logs, bark, and
poles. The area on which they stood contained several hundred square feet, and was sufficiently
elevated above the plain greatly to lessen if not to remove all danger from Indian missiles.
Here Ishmael believed he might leave his infants in comparative security, under the protection
of their spirited mother, and here he now found Esther engaged at her ordinary domestic employments,
surrounded by her daughters, and lifting her voice, in declamatory censure, as one or another
of the idle fry incurred her displeasure, and far too much engrossed with the tempest of her
own conversation to know any thing of the violent scene which had been passing below.

"A fine windy place you have chosen for the camp, Ishmael!" she commenced, or rather continued,
by merely diverting the attack from a sobbing girl of ten, at her elbow, to her husband. "My
word! if I haven't to count the young ones every ten minutes, to see they are not flying away
among the buzzards, or the ducks. Why do ye all keep hovering round the rock, like lolloping
reptiles in the spring, when the heavens are beginning to be alive with birds, man. D'ye think
mouths can be filled, and hunger satisfied, by laziness and sleep!"

"You'll have your say, Eester," said the husband, using the provincial pronunciation of America
for the name, and regarding his noisy companions, with a look of habitual tolerance rather
than of affection. "But the birds you shall have, if your own tongue don't frighten them to
take too high a flight. Ay, woman," he continued, standing on the very spot whence he had so
rudely banished Ellen, which he had by this time gained, "and buffaloe too, if my eye can tell
the animal at the distance of a Spanish league."

"Come down; come down, and be doing, instead of talking. A talking man is no better than a
barking dog. I shall hang out the cloth, if any of the red-skins show themselves, in time to
give you notice. But, Ishmael, what have you been killing, my man; for it was your rifle I
heard a few minutes agone, unless I have lost my skill in sounds."

"Poh! 'twas to frighten the hawk you see sailing above the rock."

"Hawk, indeed! at your time of day to be shooting at hawks and buzzards, with eighteen open
mouths to feed. Look at the bee, and at the beaver, my good man, and learn to be a provider.
Why, Ishmael! I believe my soul," she continued, dropping the tow she was twisting on a distaff,
"the man is in that tent ag'in! More than half his time is spent about the worthless, good-for-nothing--"

The sudden re-appearance of her husband closed the mouth of the wife; and, as the former descended
to the place where Esther had resumed her employment, she was content to grumble forth her
dissatisfaction, instead of expressing it in more audible terms.

The dialogue that now took place between the affectionate pair was sufficiently succinct and
expressive. The woman was at first a little brief and sullen in her answers, but care for her
family soon rendered her more complaisant. As the purport of the conversation was merely an
engagement to hunt during the remainder of the day, in order to provide the chief necessary
of life, we shall not stop to record it.

With this resolution, then, the squatter descended to the plain and divided his forces into
two parts, one of which was to remain as a guard with the fortress, and the other to accompany
him to the field. He warily included Asa and Abiram in his own party, well knowing that no
authority short of his own was competent to repress the fierce disposition of his headlong
son, if fairly awakened. When these arrangements were completed, the hunters sallied forth,
separating at no great distance from the rock, in order to form a circle about the distant
herd of buffaloes.

CHAPTER IX

                         Priscian a little scratch'd;
                 'Twill serve.
                                           --Love's Labour Lost.

Having made the reader acquainted with the manner in which Ishmael Bush had disposed of his
family, under circumstances that might have proved so embarrassing to most other men, we shall
again shift the scene a few short miles from the place last described, preserving, however,
the due and natural succession of time. At the very moment that the squatter and his sons departed
in the manner mentioned in the preceding chapter, two men were intently occupied in a swale
that lay along the borders of a little run, just out of cannon-shot from the encampment, discussing
the merits of a savoury bison's hump, that had been prepared for their palates with the utmost
attention to the particular merits of that description of food. The choice morsel had been
judiciously separated from the adjoining and less worthy parts of the beast, and, enveloped
in the hairy coating provided by nature, it had duly undergone the heat of the customary subterraneous
oven, and was now laid before its proprietors in all the culinary glory of the prairies. So
far as richness, delicacy, and wildness of flavour, and substantial nourishment were concerned,
the viand might well have claimed a decided superiority over the meretricious cookery and laboured
compounds of the most renowned artist; though the service of the dainty was certainly achieved
in a manner far from artificial. It would appear that the two fortunate mortals, to whose happy
lot it fell to enjoy a meal in which health and appetite lent so keen a relish to the exquisite
food of the American deserts, were far from being insensible of the advantage they possessed.

The one, to whose knowledge in the culinary art the other was indebted for his banquet, seemed
the least disposed of the two to profit by his own skill. He ate, it is true, and with a relish;
but it was always with the moderation with which age is apt to temper the appetite. No such
restraint, however, was imposed on the inclination of his companion. In the very flower of
his days and in the vigour of manhood, the homage that he paid to the work of his more aged
friend's hands was of the most profound and engrossing character. As one delicious morsel succeeded
another he rolled his eyes towards his companion, and seemed to express that gratitude which
he had not speech to utter, in looks of the most benignant nature.

"Cut more into the heart of it, lad," said the trapper, for it was the venerable inhabitant
of those vast wastes, who had served the bee-hunter with the banquet in question; "cut more
into the centre of the piece; there you will find the genuine riches of natur'; and that without
need from spices, or any of your biting mustard to give it a foreign relish."

"If I had but a cup of metheglin," said Paul, stopping to perform the necessary operation of
breathing, "I should swear this was the strongest meal that was ever placed before the mouth
of man!"

"Ay, ay, well you may call it strong!" returned the other, laughing after his peculiar manner,
in pure satisfaction at witnessing the infinite contentment of his companion; "strong it is,
and strong it makes him who eats it! Here, Hector," tossing the patient hound, who was watching
his eye with a wistful look, a portion of the meat, "you have need of strength, my friend,
in your old days as well as your master. Now, lad, there is a dog that has eaten and slept
wiser and better, ay, and that of richer food, than any king of them all! and why? because
he has used and not abused the gifts of his Maker. He was made a hound, and like a hound has
he feasted. Then did He create men; but they have eaten like famished wolves! A good and prudent
dog has Hector proved, and never have I found one of his breed false in nose or friendship.
Do you know the difference between the cookery of the wilderness and that which is found in
the settlements? No; I see plainly you don't, by your appetite; then I will tell you. The one
follows man, the other natur'. One thinks he can add to the gifts of the Creator, while the
other is humble enough to enjoy them; therein lies the secret."

"I tell you, trapper," said Paul, who was very little edified by the morality with which his
associate saw fit to season their repast, "that, every day while we are in this place, and
they are likely to be many, I will shoot a buffaloe and you shall cook his hump!"

"I cannot say that, I cannot say that. The beast is good, take him in what part you will, and
it was to be food for man that he was fashioned; but I cannot say that I will be a witness
and a helper to the waste of killing one daily."

"The devil a bit of waste shall there be, old man. If they all turn out as good as this, I
will engage to eat them clean myself, even to the hoofs;--how now, who comes here! some one
with a long nose, I will answer; and one that has led him on a true scent, if he is following
the trail of a dinner."

The individual who interrupted the conversation, and who had elicited the foregoing remark
of Paul, was seen advancing along the margin of the run with a deliberate pace, in a direct
line for the two revellers. As there was nothing formidable nor hostile in his appearance,
the bee-hunter, instead of suspending his operations, rather increased his efforts, in a manner
which would seem to imply that he doubted whether the hump would suffice for the proper entertainment
of all who were now likely to partake of the delicious morsel. With the trapper, however, the
case was different. His more tempered appetite was already satisfied, and he faced the new
comer with a look of cordiality, that plainly evinced how very opportune he considered his arrival.

"Come on, friend," he said, waving his hand, as he observed the stranger to pause a moment,
apparently in doubt. "Come on, I say, if hunger be your guide, it has led you to a fitting
place. Here is meat, and this youth can give you corn, parch'd till it be whiter than the upland
snow; come on, without fear. We are not ravenous beasts, eating of each other, but Christian
men, receiving thankfully that which the Lord hath seen fit to give."

"Venerable hunter," returned the Doctor, for it was no other than the naturalist on one of
his daily exploring expeditions, "I rejoice greatly at this happy meeting; we are lovers of
the same pursuits, and should be friends."

"Lord, Lord!" said the old man, laughing, without much deference to the rules of decorum, in
the philosopher's very face, "it is the man who wanted to make me believe that a name could
change the natur' of a beast! Come, friend; you are welcome, though your notions are a little
blinded with reading too many books. Sit ye down, and, after eating of this morsel, tell me,
if you can, the name of the creatur' that has bestowed on you its flesh for a meal?"

The eyes of Doctor Battius (for we deem it decorous to give the good man the appellation he
most preferred) sufficiently denoted the satisfaction with which he listened to this proposal.
The exercise he had taken, and the sharpness of the wind, proved excellent stimulants; and
Paul himself had hardly been in better plight to do credit to the trapper's cookery, than was
the lover of nature, when the grateful invitation met his ears. Indulging in a small laugh,
which his exertions to repress reduced nearly to a simper, he took the indicated seat by the
old man's side, and made the customary dispositions to commence his meal without further ceremony.

"I should be ashamed of my profession," he said, swallowing a morsel of the hump with evident
delight, slily endeavouring at the same time to distinguish the peculiarities of the singed
and defaced skin, "I ought to be ashamed of my profession, were there beast, or bird, on the
continent of America, that I could not tell by some one of the many evidences which science
has enlisted in her cause. This--then--the food is nutritious and savoury--a mouthful of your
corn, friend, if you please?"

Paul, who continued eating with increasing industry, looking askaunt not unlike a dog when
engaged in the same agreeable pursuit, threw him his pouch, without deeming it at all necessary
to suspend his own labours.

"You were saying, friend, that you have many ways of telling the creatur'?"--observed the attentive
trapper.

"Many; many and infallible. Now, the animals that are carnivorous are known by their incisores."

"Their what?" demanded the trapper.

"The teeth with which nature has furnished them for defence, and in order to tear their food.
Again--"

"Look you then for the teeth of this creatur'," interrupted the trapper, who was bent on convincing
a man who had presumed to enter into competition with himself, in matters pertaining to the
wilds, of gross ignorance; "turn the piece round and find your inside-overs."

The Doctor complied, and of course without success; though he profited by the occasion to take
another fruitless glance at the wrinkled hide.

"Well, friend, do you find the things you need, before you can pronounce the creatur' a duck
or a salmon?"

"I apprehend the entire animal is not here?"

"You may well say as much," cried Paul, who was now compelled to pause from pure repletion;
"I will answer for some pounds of the fellow, weighed by the truest steel-yards west of the
Alleghanies. Still you may make out to keep soul and body together, with what is left," reluctantly
eyeing a piece large enough to feed twenty men, but which he felt compelled to abandon from
satiety; "cut in nigher to the heart, as the old man says, and you will find the riches of
the piece."

"The heart!" exclaimed the Doctor, inwardly delighted to learn there was a distinct organ to
be submitted to his inspection. "Ay, let me see the heart--it will at once determine the character
of the animal--certes this is not the cor--ay, sure enough it is--the animal must be of the
order belluae, from its obese habits!"

He was interrupted by a long and hearty, but still a noiseless fit of merriment, from the trapper,
which was considered so ill-timed by the offended naturalist, as to produce an instant cessation
of speech, if not a stagnation of ideas.

"Listen to his beasts' habits and belly orders," said the old man, delighted with the evident
embarrassment of his rival; "and then he says it is not the core! Why, man, you are farther
from the truth than you are from the settlements, with all your bookish laming and hard words;
which I have, once for all, said cannot be understood by any tribe or nation east of the Rocky
Mountains. Beastly habits or no beastly habits, the creatur's are to be seen cropping the prairies
by tens of thousands, and the piece in your hand is the core of as juicy a buffaloe-hump as
stomach need crave!"

"My aged companion," said Obed, struggling to keep down a rising irascibility, that he conceived
would ill comport with the dignity of his character, "your system is erroneous, from the premises
to the conclusion; and your classification so faulty, as utterly to confound the distinctions
of science. The buffaloe is not gifted with a hump at all; nor is his flesh savoury and wholesome,
as I must acknowledge it would seem the subject before us may well be characterised--"

"There I'm dead against you, and clearly with the trapper," interrupted Paul Hover. "The man
who denies that buffaloe beef is good, should scorn to eat it!"[*]

    [*] It is scarcely necessary to tell the reader, that the animal so
    often alluded to in this book, and which is vulgarly called the
    buffaloe, is in truth the bison; hence so many contretemps
    between the men of the prairies and the men of science.

The Doctor, whose observation of the bee-hunter had hitherto been exceedingly cursory, stared
at the new speaker with a look which denoted something like recognition.

"The principal characteristics of your countenance, friend," he said, "are familiar; either
you, or some other specimen of your class, is known to me."

"I am the man you met in the woods east of the big river, and whom you tried to persuade to
line a yellow hornet to his nest: as if my eye was not too true to mistake any other animal
for a honey-bee, in a clear day! We tarried together a week, as you may remember; you at your
toads and lizards, and I at my high-holes and hollow trees: and a good job we made of it between
us! I filled my tubs with the sweetest honey I ever sent to the settlements, besides housing
a dozen hives; and your bag was near bursting with a crawling museum. I never was bold enough
to put the question to your face, stranger, but I reckon you are a keeper of curiosities?"[*]

    [*] The pursuit of a bee-hunter is not uncommon, on the skirts of
    American society, though it is a little embellished here. When the
    bees are seen sucking the flowers, their pursuer contrives to
    capture one or two. He then chooses a proper spot, and suffering
    one to escape, the insect invariably takes its flight towards the
    hive. Changing his ground to a greater or less distance according
    to circumstances, the bee-hunter then permits another to escape.
    Having watched the courses of the bees, which is technically
    called lining, he is enabled to calculate the intersecting angle
    of the two lines, which is the hive.

"Ay! that is another of their wanton wickednesses!" exclaimed the trapper. "They slay the buck,
and the moose, and the wild cat, and all the beasts that range the woods, and stuffing them
with worthless rags, and placing eyes of glass into their heads, they set them up to be stared
at, and call them the creatur's of the Lord; as if any mortal effigy could equal the works
of his hand!"

"I know you well," returned the Doctor, on whom the plaint of the old man produced no visible
impression. "I know you," offering his hand cordially to Paul; "it was a prolific week, as
my herbal and catalogues shall one day prove. Ay, I remember you well, young man. You are of
the class, mammalia; order, primates; genus, homo; species, Kentucky." Pausing to smile at
his own humour, the naturalist proceeded. "Since our separation, I have journeyed far, having
entered into a compactum or agreement with a certain man named Ishmael--"

"Bush!" interrupted the impatient and reckless Paul. "By the Lord, trapper, this is the very
blood-letter that Ellen told me of!"

"Then Nelly has not done me credit for what I trust I deserve," returned the single-minded
Doctor, "for I am not of the phlebotomising school at all; greatly preferring the practice
which purifies the blood instead of abstracting it."

"It was a blunder of mine, good stranger; the girl called you a skilful man."

"Therein she may have exceeded my merits," Dr. Battius continued, bowing with sufficient meekness.
"But Ellen is a good, and a kind, and a spirited girl, too. A kind and a sweet girl I have
ever found Nell Wade to be!"

"The devil you have!" cried Paul, dropping the morsel he was sucking, from sheer reluctance
to abandon the hump, and casting a fierce and direct look into the very teeth of the unconscious
physician. "I reckon, stranger, you have a mind to bag Ellen, too!"

"The riches of the whole vegetable and animal world united, would not tempt me to harm a hair
of her head! I love the child, with what may he called amor naturalis--or rather paternus--the
affection of a father."

"Ay--that, indeed, is more befitting the difference in your years," Paul coolly rejoined, stretching
forth his hand to regain the rejected morsel. "You would be no better than a drone at your
time of day, with a young hive to feed and swarm."

"Yes, there is reason, because there is natur', in what he says," observed the trapper: "but,
friend, you have said you were a dweller in the camp of one Ishmael Bush?"

"True; it is in virtue of a compactum--"

"I know but little of the virtue of packing, though I follow trapping, in my old age, for a
livelihood. They tell me that skins are well kept in the new fashion; but it is long since
I have left off killing more than I need for food and garments. I was an eye-witness, myself,
of the manner in which the Siouxes broke into your encampment, and drove off the cattle; stripping
the poor man you call Ishmael of his smallest hoofs, counting even the cloven feet."

"Asinus excepted," muttered the Doctor, who by this time was discussing his portion of the
hump, in utter forgetfulness of all its scientific attributes. "Asinus domesticus Americanus
excepted."

"I am glad to hear that so many of them are saved, though I know not the value of the animals
you name; which is nothing uncommon, seeing how long it is that I have been out of the settlements.
But can you tell me, friend, what the traveller carries under the white cloth, he guards with
teeth as sharp as a wolf that quarrels for the carcass the hunter has left?"

"You've heard of it!" exclaimed the other, dropping the morsel he was conveying to his mouth
in manifest surprise.

"Nay, I have heard nothing; but I have seen the cloth, and had like to have been bitten for
no greater crime than wishing to know what it covered."

"Bitten! then, after all, the animal must be carnivorous! It is too tranquil for the ursus
horridus; if it were the canis latrans, the voice would betray it. Nor would Nelly Wade be
so familiar with any of the genus ferae. Venerable hunter! the solitary animal confined in
that wagon by day, and in the tent at night, has occasioned me more perplexity of mind than
the whole catalogue of quadrupeds besides: and for this plain reason; I did not know how to
class it."

"You think it a ravenous beast?"

"I know it to be a quadruped: your own danger proves it to be carnivorous."

During this broken explanation, Paul Hover had sat silent and thoughtful, regarding each speaker
with deep attention. But, suddenly moved by the manner of the Doctor, the latter had scarcely
time to utter his positive assertion, before the young man bluntly demanded--

"And pray, friend, what may you call a quadruped?"

"A vagary of nature, wherein she has displayed less of her infinite wisdom than is usual. Could
rotary levers be substituted for two of the limbs, agreeably to the improvement in my new order
of phalangacrura, which might be rendered into the vernacular as lever-legged, there would
be a delightful perfection and harmony in the construction. But, as the quadruped is now formed,
I call it a mere vagary of nature; no other than a vagary."

"Harkee, stranger! in Kentucky we are but small dealers in dictionaries. Vagary is as hard
a word to turn into English as quadruped."

"A quadruped is an animal with four legs--a beast."

"A beast! Do you then reckon that Ishmael Bush travels with a beast caged in that wagon?"

"I know it, and lend me your ear--not literally, friend," observing Paul to start and look
surprised, "but figuratively, through its functions, and you shall hear. I have already made
known that, in virtue of a compactum, I journey with the aforesaid Ishmael Bush; but though
I am bound to perform certain duties while the journey lasts, there is no condition which says
that the said journey shall be sempiternum, or eternal. Now, though this region may scarcely
be said to be wedded to science, being to all intents a virgin territory as respects the enquirer
into natural history, still it is greatly destitute of the treasures of the vegetable kingdom.
I should, therefore, have tarried some hundreds of miles more to the eastward, were it not
for the inward propensity that I feel to have the beast in question inspected and suitably
described and classed. For that matter," he continued, dropping his voice, like one who imparts
an important secret, "I am not without hopes of persuading Ishmael to let me dissect it."

"You have seen the creature?"

"Not with the organs of sight; but with much more infallible instruments of vision: the conclusions
of reason, and the deductions of scientific premises. I have watched the habits of the animal,
young man; and can fearlessly pronounce, by evidence that would be thrown away on ordinary
observers, that it is of vast dimensions, inactive, possibly torpid, of voracious appetite,
and, as it now appears by the direct testimony of this venerable hunter, ferocious and carnivorous!"

"I should be better pleased, stranger," said Paul, on whom the Doctor's description was making
a very sensible impression, "to be sure the creature was a beast at all."

"As to that, if I wanted evidence of a fact, which is abundantly apparent by the habits of
the animal, I have the word of Ishmael himself. A reason can be given for my smallest deductions.
I am not troubled, young man, with a vulgar and idle curiosity, but all my aspirations after
knowledge, as I humbly believe, are, first, for the advancement of learning, and, secondly,
for the benefit of my fellow-creatures. I pined greatly in secret to know the contents of the
tent, which Ishmael guarded so carefully, and which he had covenanted that I should swear,
(jurare per deos) not to approach nigher than a defined number of cubits, for a definite period
of time. Your jusjurandum, or oath, is a serious matter, and not to be dealt in lightly; but,
as my expedition depended on complying, I consented to the act, reserving to myself at all
times the power of distant observation. It is now some ten days since Ishmael, pitying the
state in which he saw me, a humble lover of science, imparted the fact that the vehicle contained
a beast, which he was carrying into the prairies as a decoy, by which he intends to entrap
others of the same genus, or perhaps species. Since then, my task has been reduced simply to
watch the habits of the animal, and to record the results. When we reach a certain distance
where these beasts are said to abound, I am to have the liberal examination of the specimen."

Paul continued to listen, in the most profound silence, until the Doctor concluded his singular
but characteristic explanation; then the incredulous bee-hunter shook his head, and saw fit
to reply, by saying--

"Stranger, old Ishmael has burrowed you in the very bottom of a hollow tree, where your eyes
will be of no more use than the sting of a drone. I, too, know something of that very wagon,
and I may say that I have lined the squatter down into a flat lie. Harkee, friend; do you think
a girl, like Ellen Wade, would become the companion of a wild beast?"

"Why not? why not?" repeated the naturalist; "Nelly has a taste, and often listens with pleasure
to the treasures that I am sometimes compelled to scatter in this desert. Why should she not
study the habits of any animal, even though it were a rhinoceros?"

"Softly, softly," returned the equally positive, and, though less scientific, certainly, on
this subject, better instructed bee-hunter; "Ellen is a girl of spirit, and one too that knows
her own mind, or I'm much mistaken; but with all her courage and brave looks, she is no better
than a woman after all. Haven't I often had the girl crying--"

"You are an acquaintance, then, of Nelly's?"

"The devil a bit. But I know woman is woman; and all the books in Kentucky couldn't make Ellen
Wade go into a tent alone with a ravenous beast!"

"It seems to me," the trapper calmly observed, "that there is something dark and hidden in
this matter. I am a witness that the traveller likes none to look into the tent, and I have
a proof more sure than what either of you can lay claim to, that the wagon does not carry the
cage of a beast. Here is Hector, come of a breed with noses as true and faithful as a hand
that is all-powerful has made any of their kind, and had there been a beast in the place, the
hound would long since have told it to his master."

"Do you pretend to oppose a dog to a man! brutality to learning! instinct to reason!" exclaimed
the Doctor in some heat. "In what manner, pray, can a hound distinguish the habits, species,
or even the genus of an animal, like reasoning, learned, scientific, triumphant man!"

"In what manner!" coolly repeated the veteran woodsman. "Listen; and if you believe that a
schoolmaster can make a quicker wit than the Lord, you shall be made to see how much you're
mistaken. Do you not hear something move in the brake? it has been cracking the twigs these
five minutes. Now tell me what the creatur' is?"

"I hope nothing ferocious!" exclaimed the Doctor, who still retained a lively impression of
his {rencounter} with the vespertilio horribilis. "You have rifles, friends; would it not be
prudent to prime them? for this fowling piece of mine is little to be depended on."

"There may be reason in what he says," returned the trapper, so far complying as to take his
piece from the place where it had lain during the repast, and raising its muzzle in the air.
"Now tell me the name of the creatur'?"

"It exceeds the limits of earthly knowledge! Buffon himself could not tell whether the animal
was a quadruped, or of the order, serpens! a sheep, or a tiger!"

"Then was your buffoon a fool to my Hector! Here: pup!--What is it, dog?--Shall we run it down,
pup--or shall we let it pass?"

The hound, which had already manifested to the experienced trapper, by the tremulous motion
of his ears, his consciousness of the proximity of a strange animal, lifted his head from his
fore paws and slightly parted his lips, as if about to show the remnants of his teeth. But,
suddenly abandoning his hostile purpose, he snuffed the air a moment, gaped heavily, shook
himself, and peaceably resumed his recumbent attitude.

"Now, Doctor," cried the trapper, triumphantly, "I am well convinced there is neither game
nor ravenous beast in the thicket; and that I call substantial knowledge to a man who is too
old to be a spendthrift of his strength, and yet who would not wish to be a meal for a panther!"

The dog interrupted his master by a growl, but still kept his head crouched to the earth.

"It is a man!" exclaimed the trapper, rising. "It is a man, if I am a judge of the creatur's
ways. There is but little said atwixt the hound and me, but we seldom mistake each other's
meaning!"

Paul Hover sprang to his feet like lightning; and, throwing forward his rifle, he cried in
a voice of menace--

"Come forward, if a friend; if an enemy, stand ready for the worst!"

"A friend, a white man, and, I hope, a Christian," returned a voice from the thicket; which
opened at the same instant, and at the next the speaker made his appearance.

CHAPTER X

                     Go apart, Adam, and thou shalt hear
             How he will shake me up.
                                               --As you like it.

It is well known, that even long before the immense regions of Louisiana changed their masters
for the second, and, as it is to be hoped, for the last time, its unguarded territory was by
no means safe from the inroads of white adventurers. The semi-barbarous hunters from the Canadas,
the same description of population, a little more enlightened, from the States, and the metiffs
or half-breeds, who claimed to be ranked in the class of white men, were scattered among the
different Indian tribes, or gleaned a scanty livelihood in solitude, amid the haunts of the
beaver and the bison; or, to adopt the popular nomenclature of the country of the buffaloe.[*]

    [*] In addition to the scientific distinctions which mark the two
    species, it may be added, with due deference to Dr. Battius, that a
    much more important particular is the fact, that while the former
    of these animals is delicious and nourishing food, the latter is
    scarcely edible.

It was, therefore, no unusual thing for strangers to encounter each other in the endless wastes
of the west. By signs, which an unpractised eye would pass unobserved, these borderers knew
when one of his fellows was in his vicinity, and he avoided or approached the intruder as best
comported with his feelings or his interests. Generally, these interviews were pacific; for
the whites had a common enemy to dread, in the ancient and perhaps more lawful occupants of
the country; but instances were not rare, in which jealousy and cupidity had caused them to
terminate in scenes of the most violent and ruthless treachery. The meeting of two hunters
on the American desert, as we find it convenient sometimes to call this region, was consequently
somewhat in the suspicious and wary manner in which two vessels draw together in a sea that
is known to be infested with pirates. While neither party is willing to betray its weakness,
by exhibiting distrust, neither is disposed to commit itself by any acts of confidence, from
which it may be difficult to recede.

Such was, in some degree, the character of the present interview. The stranger drew nigh deliberately;
keeping his eyes steadily fastened on the movements of the other party, while he purposely
created little difficulties to impede an approach which might prove too hasty. On the other
hand, Paul stood playing with the lock of his rifle, too proud to let it appear that three
men could manifest any apprehension of a solitary individual, and yet too prudent to omit,
entirely, the customary precautions. The principal reason of the marked difference which the
two legitimate proprietors of the banquet made in the receptions of their guests, was to be
explained by the entire difference which existed in their respective appearances.

While the exterior of the naturalist was decidedly pacific, not to say abstracted, that of
the new comer was distinguished by an air of vigour, and a front and step which it would not
have been difficult to have at once pronounced to be military.

He wore a forage-cap of fine blue cloth, from which depended a soiled tassel in gold, and which
was nearly buried in a mass of exuberant, curling, jet-black hair. Around his throat he had
negligently fastened a stock of black silk. His body was enveloped in a hunting-shirt of dark
green, trimmed with the yellow fringes and ornaments that were sometimes seen among the border-troops
of the Confederacy. Beneath this, however, were visible the collar and lapels of a jacket,
similar in colour and cloth to the cap. His lower limbs were protected by buckskin leggings,
and his feet by the ordinary Indian moccasins. A richly ornamented, and exceedingly dangerous
straight dirk was stuck in a sash of red silk net-work; another girdle, or rather belt, of
uncoloured leather contained a pair of the smallest sized pistols, in holsters nicely made
to fit, and across his shoulder was thrown a short, heavy, military rifle; its horn and pouch
occupying the usual places beneath his arms. At his back he bore a knapsack, marked by the
well known initials that have since gained for the government of the United States the good-humoured
and quaint appellation of Uncle Sam.

"I come in amity," the stranger said, like one too much accustomed to the sight of arms to
be startled at the ludicrously belligerent attitude which Dr. Battius had seen fit to assume.
"I come as a friend; and am one whose pursuits and wishes will not at all interfere with your own."

"Harkee, stranger," said Paul Hover, bluntly; "do you understand lining a bee from this open
place into a wood, distant, perhaps, a dozen miles?"

"The bee is a bird I have never been compelled to seek," returned the other, laughing; "though
I have, too, been something of a fowler in my time."

"I thought as much," exclaimed Paul, thrusting forth his hand frankly, and with the true freedom
of manner that marks an American borderer. "Let us cross fingers. You and I will never quarrel
about the comb, since you set so little store by the honey. And now, if your stomach has an
empty corner, and you know how to relish a genuine dew-drop when it falls into your very mouth,
there lies the exact morsel to put into it. Try it, stranger; and having tried it, if you don't
call it as snug a fit as you have made since--How long ar' you from the settlements, pray?"

"'Tis many weeks, and I fear it may be as many more before I can return. I will, however, gladly
profit by your invitation, for I have fasted since the rising of yesterday's sun, and I know
too well the merits of a bison's bump to reject the food."

"Ah! you ar' acquainted with the dish! Well, therein you have the advantage of me, in setting
out, though I think I may say we could now start on equal ground. I should be the happiest
fellow between Kentucky and the Rocky Mountains, if I had a snug cabin, near some old wood
that was filled with hollow trees, just such a hump every day as that for dinner, a load of
fresh straw for hives, and little El--"

"Little what?" demanded the stranger, evidently amused with the communicative and frank disposition
of the bee-hunter.

"Something that I shall have one day, and which concerns nobody so much as myself," returned
Paul, picking the flint of his rifle, and beginning very cavalierly to whistle an air well
known on the waters of the Mississippi.

During this preliminary discourse the stranger had taken his seat by the side of the hump,
and was already making a serious inroad on its relics. Dr. Battius, however, watched his movements
with a jealousy, still more striking than the cordial reception which the open-hearted Paul
had just exhibited.

But the doubts, or rather apprehensions, of the naturalist were of a character altogether different
from the confidence of the bee-hunter. He had been struck with the stranger's using the legitimate,
instead of the perverted name of the animal off which he was making his repast; and as he had
been among the foremost himself to profit by the removal of the impediments which the policy
of Spain had placed in the way of all explorers of her trans-Atlantic dominions, whether bent
on the purposes of commerce, or, like himself, on the more laudable pursuits of science, he
had a sufficiency of every-day philosophy to feel that the same motives, which had so powerfully
urged himself to his present undertaking, might produce a like result on the mind of some other
student of nature. Here, then, was the prospect of an alarming rivalry, which bade fair to
strip him of at least a moiety of the just rewards of all his labours, privations, and dangers.
Under these views of his character, therefore, it is not at all surprising that the native
meekness of the naturalist's disposition was a little disturbed, and that he watched the proceedings
of the other with such a degree of vigilance as he believed best suited to detect his sinister
designs.

"This is truly a delicious repast," observed the unconscious young stranger, for both young
and handsome he was fairly entitled to be considered; "either hunger has given a peculiar relish
to the viand, or the bison may lay claim to be the finest of the ox family!"

"Naturalists, sir, are apt, when they speak familiarly, to give the cow the credit of the genus,"
said Dr. Battius, swelling with secret distrust, and clearing his throat, before speaking,
much in the manner that a duellist examines the point of the weapon he is about to plunge into
the body of his foe. "The figure is more perfect; as the bos, meaning the ox, is unable to
perpetuate his kind; and the bos, in its most extended meaning, or vacca, is altogether the
nobler animal of the two."

The Doctor uttered this opinion with a certain air, that he intended should express his readiness
to come at once, to any of the numerous points of difference which he doubted not existed between
them; and he now awaited the blow of his antagonist, intending that his next thrust should
be still more vigorous. But the young stranger appeared much better disposed to partake of
the good cheer, with which he had been so providentially provided, than to take up the cudgels
of argument on this, or on any other of the knotty points which are so apt to furnish the lovers
of science with the materials of a mental joust.

"I dare say you are very right, sir," he replied, with a most provoking indifference to the
importance of the points he conceded. "I dare say you are quite right; and that vacca would
have been the better word."

"Pardon me, sir; you are giving a very wrong construction to my language, if you suppose I
include, without many and particular qualifications, the bibulus Americanus, in the family
of the vacca. For, as you well know, sir--or, as I presume I should say, Doctor; you have the
medical diploma, no doubt?"

"You give me credit for an honour I cannot claim," interrupted the other.

"An under-graduate!--or perhaps your degrees have been taken in some other of the liberal sciences?"

"Still wrong, I do assure you."

"Surely, young man, you have not entered on this important--I may say, this awful service,
without some evidence of your fitness for the task! Some commission by which you can assert
an authority to proceed, or by which you may claim an affinity and a communion with your fellow-workers
in the same beneficent pursuits!"

"I know not by what means, or for what purposes, you have made yourself master of my objects!"
exclaimed the youth, reddening and rising with a quickness which manifested how little he regarded
the grosser appetites, when a subject nearer his heart was approached. "Still, sir, your language
is incomprehensible. That pursuit, which in another might perhaps be justly called beneficent,
is, in me, a dear and cherished duty; though why a commission should be demanded or needed
is, I confess, no less a subject of surprise."

"It is customary to be provided with such a document," returned the Doctor, gravely; "and,
on all suitable occasions to produce it, in order that congenial and friendly minds may, at
once, reject unworthy suspicions, and stepping over, what may be called the elements of discourse,
come at once to those points which are desiderata to both."

"It is a strange request!" the youth muttered, turning his frowning eye from one to the other,
as if examining the characters of his companions, with a view to weigh their physical powers.
Then, putting his hand into his bosom, he drew forth a small box, and extending it with an
air of dignity towards the Doctor, he continued--"You will find by this, sir, that I have some
right to travel in a country which is now the property of the American States."

"What have we here!" exclaimed the naturalist, opening the folds of a large parchment. "Why,
this is the sign-manual of the philosopher, Jefferson! The seal of state! Countersigned by
the minister of war! Why this is a commission creating Duncan Uncas Middleton a captain of
artillery!"

"Of whom? of whom?" repeated the trapper, who had sat regarding the stranger, during the whole
discourse, with eyes that seemed greedily to devour each lineament. "How is the name? did you
call him Uncas?--Uncas! Was it Uncas?"

"Such is my name," returned the youth, a little haughtily. "It is the appellation of a native
chief, that both my uncle and myself bear with pride; for it is the memorial of an important
service done my family by a warrior in the old wars of the provinces."

"Uncas! did ye call him Uncas?" repeated the trapper, approaching the youth and parting the
dark curls which clustered over his brow, without the slightest resistance on the part of their
wondering owner. "Ah my eyes are old, and not so keen as when I was a warrior myself; but I
can see the look of the father in the son! I saw it when he first came nigh, but so many things
have since passed before my failing sight, that I could not name the place where I had met
his likeness! Tell me, lad, by what name is your father known?"

"He was an officer of the States in the war of the revolution, of my own name of course; my
mother's brother was called Duncan Uncas Heyward."

"Still Uncas! still Uncas!" echoed the other, trembling with eagerness. "And his father?"

"Was called the same, without the appellation of the native chief. It was to him, and to my
grandmother, that the service of which I have just spoken was rendered."

"I know'd it! I know'd it!" shouted the old man, in his tremulous voice, his rigid features
working powerfully, as if the names the other mentioned awakened some long dormant emotions,
connected with the events of an anterior age. "I know'd it! son or grandson, it is all the
same; it is the blood, and 'tis the look! Tell me, is he they call'd Duncan, without the Uncas--is
he living?"

The young man shook his head sorrowfully, as he replied in the negative.

"He died full of days and of honours. Beloved, happy, and bestowing happiness!"

"Full of days!" repeated the trapper, looking down at his own meagre, but still muscular hands.
"Ah! he liv'd in the settlements, and was wise only after their fashions. But you have often
seen him; and you have heard him discourse of Uncas, and of the wilderness?"

"Often! he was then an officer of the king; but when the war took place between the crown and
her colonies, my grandfather did not forget his birthplace, but threw off the empty allegiance
of names, and was true to his proper country; he fought on the side of liberty."

"There was reason in it; and what is better, there was natur'! Come, sit ye down beside me,
lad; sit ye down, and tell me of what your grand'ther used to speak, when his mind dwelt on
the wonders of the wilderness."

The youth smiled, no less at the importunity than at the interest manifested by the old man;
but as he found there was no longer the least appearance of any violence being contemplated,
he unhesitatingly complied.

"Give it all to the trapper by rule, and by figures of speech," said Paul, very coolly taking
his seat on the other side of the young soldier. "It is the fashion of old age to relish these
ancient traditions, and, for that matter, I can say that I don't dislike to listen to them myself."

Middleton smiled again, and perhaps with a slight air of derision; but, good-naturedly turning
to the trapper, he continued--

"It is a long, and might prove a painful story. Bloodshed and all the horrors of Indian cruelty
and of Indian warfare are fearfully mingled in the narrative."

"Ay, give it all to us, stranger," continued Paul; "we are used to these matters in Kentuck,
and, I must say, I think a story none the worse for having a few scalps in it!"

"But he told you of Uncas, did he?" resumed the trapper, without regarding the slight interruptions
of the bee-hunter, which amounted to no more than a sort of by-play. "And what thought he and
said he of the lad, in his parlour, with the comforts and ease of the settlements at his elbow?"

"I doubt not he used a language similar to that he would have adopted in the woods, and had
he stood face to face, with his friend--"

"Did he call the savage his friend; the poor, naked, painted warrior? he was not too proud
then to call the Indian his friend?"

"He even boasted of the connection; and as you have already heard, bestowed a name on his first-born,
which is likely to be handed down as an heir-loom among the rest of his descendants."

"It was well done! like a man: ay! and like a Christian, too! He used to say the Delaware was
swift of foot--did he remember that?"

"As the antelope! Indeed, he often spoke of him by the appellation of Le Cerf Agile, a name
he had obtained by his activity."

"And bold, and fearless, lad!" continued the trapper, looking up into the eyes of his companion,
with a wistfulness that bespoke the delight he received in listening to the praises of one,
whom it was so very evident, he had once tenderly loved.

"Brave as a blooded hound! Without fear! He always quoted Uncas and his father, who from his
wisdom was called the Great Serpent, as models of heroism and constancy."

"He did them justice! he did them justice! Truer men were not to be found in tribe or nation,
be their skins of what colour they might. I see your grand'ther was just, and did his duty,
too, by his offspring! 'Twas a perilous time he had of it, among them hills, and nobly did
he play his own part! Tell me, lad, or officer, I should say,--since officer you be,--was this
all?"

"Certainly not; it was, as I have said, a fearful tale, full of moving incidents, and the memories
both of my grandfather and of my grandmother--"

"Ah!" exclaimed the trapper, tossing a hand into the air as his whole countenance lighted with
the recollections the name revived. "They called her Alice! Elsie or Alice; 'tis all the same.
A laughing, playful child she was, when happy; and tender and weeping in her misery! Her hair
was shining and yellow, as the coat of the young fawn, and her skin clearer than the purest
water that drips from the rock. Well do I remember her! I remember her right well!"

The lip of the youth slightly curled, and he regarded the old man with an expression, which
might easily have been construed into a declaration that such were not his own recollections
of his venerable and revered ancestor, though it would seem he did not think it necessary to
say as much in words. He was content to answer--

"They both retained impressions of the dangers they had passed, by far too vivid easily to
lose the recollection of any of their fellow-actors."

The trapper looked aside, and seemed to struggle with some deeply innate feeling; then, turning
again towards his companion, though his honest eyes no longer dwelt with the same open interest,
as before, on the countenance of the other, he continued--

"Did he tell you of them all? Were they all red-skins, but himself and the daughters of Munro?"

"No. There was a white man associated with the Delawares. A scout of the English army, but
a native of the provinces."

"A drunken worthless vagabond, like most of his colour who harbour with the savages, I warrant
you!"

"Old man, your grey hairs should caution you against slander. The man I speak of was of great
simplicity of mind, but of sterling worth. Unlike most of those who live a border life, he
united the better, instead of the worst, qualities of the two people. He was a man endowed
with the choicest and perhaps rarest gift of nature; that of distinguishing good from evil.
His virtues were those of simplicity, because such were the fruits of his habits, as were indeed
his very prejudices. In courage he was the equal of his red associates; in warlike skill, being
better instructed, their superior. 'In short, he was a noble shoot from the stock of human
nature, which never could attain its proper elevation and importance, for no other reason,
than because it grew in the forest:' such, old hunter, were the very words of my grandfather,
when speaking of the man you imagine so worthless!"

The eyes of the trapper had sunk to the earth, as the stranger delivered this character in
the ardent tones of generous youth. He played with the ears of his hound; fingered his own
rustic garment, and opened and shut the pan of his rifle, with hands that trembled in a manner
that would have implied their total unfitness to wield the weapon. When the other had concluded,
he hoarsely added--

"Your grand'ther didn't then entirely forget the white man!"

"So far from that, there are already three among us, who have also names derived from that scout."

"A name, did you say?" exclaimed the old man, starting; "what, the name of the solitary, unl'arned
hunter? Do the great, and the rich, and the honoured, and, what is better still, the just,
do they bear his very, actual name?"

"It is borne by my brother, and by two of my cousins, whatever may be their titles to be described
by the terms you have mentioned."

"Do you mean the actual name itself; spelt with the very same letters, beginning with an N
and ending with an L?"

"Exactly the same," the youth smilingly replied. "No, no, we have forgotten nothing that was
his. I have at this moment a dog brushing a deer, not far from this, who is come of a hound
that very scout sent as a present after his friends, and which was of the stock he always used
himself: a truer breed, in nose and foot, is not to be found in the wide Union."

"Hector!" said the old man, struggling to conquer an emotion that nearly suffocated him, and
speaking to his hound in the sort of tones he would have used to a child, "do ye hear that,
pup! your kin and blood are in the prairies! A name--it is wonderful--very wonderful!"

Nature could endure no more. Overcome by a flood of unusual and extraordinary sensations, and
stimulated by tender and long dormant recollections, strangely and unexpectedly revived, the
old man had just self-command enough to add, in a voice that was hollow and unnatural, through
the efforts he made to command it--

"Boy, I am that scout; a warrior once, a miserable trapper now!" when the tears broke over
his wasted cheeks, out of fountains that had long been dried, and, sinking his face between
his knees, he covered it decently with his buckskin garment, and sobbed aloud.

The spectacle produced correspondent emotions in his companions. Paul Hover had actually swallowed
each syllable of the discourse as they fell alternately from the different speakers, his feelings
keeping equal pace with the increasing interest of the scene. Unused to such strange sensations,
he was turning his face on every side of him, to avoid he knew not what, until he saw the tears
and heard the sobs of the old man, when he sprang to his feet, and grappling his guest fiercely
by the throat, he demanded by what authority he had made his aged companion weep. A flash of
recollection crossing his brain at the same instant, he released his hold, and stretching forth
an arm in the very wantonness of gratification, he seized the Doctor by the hair, which instantly
revealed its artificial formation, by cleaving to his hand, leaving the white and shining poll
of the naturalist with a covering no warmer than the skin.

"What think you of that, Mr. Bug-gatherer?" he rather shouted than cried: "is not this a strange
bee to line into his hole?"

"'Tis remarkable! wonderful! edifying!" returned the lover of nature, good-humouredly recovering
his wig, with twinkling eyes and a husky voice. "'Tis rare and commendable. Though I doubt
not in the exact order of causes and effects."

With this sudden outbreaking, however, the commotion instantly subsided; the three spectators
clustering around the trapper with a species of awe, at beholding the tears of one so aged.

"It must be so, or how could he be so familiar with a history that is little known beyond my
own family," at length the youth observed, not ashamed to acknowledge how much he had been
affected, by unequivocally drying his own eyes.

"True!" echoed Paul; "if you want any more evidence I will swear to it! I know every word of
it myself to be true as the gospel!"

"And yet we had long supposed him dead!" continued the soldier. "My grandfather had filled
his days with honour, and he had believed himself the junior of the two."

"It is not often that youth has an opportunity of thus looking down on the weakness of age!"
the trapper observed, raising his head, and looking around him with composure and dignity.
"That I am still here, young man, is the pleasure of the Lord, who has spared me until I have
seen fourscore long and laborious years, for his own secret ends. That I am the man I say,
you need not doubt; for why should I go to my grave with so cheap a lie in my mouth?"

"I do not hesitate to believe; I only marvel that it should be so! But why do I find you, venerable
and excellent friend of my parents, in these wastes, so far from the comforts and safety of
the lower country?"

"I have come into these plains to escape the sound of the axe; for here surely the chopper
can never follow! But I may put the like question to yourself. Are you of the party which the
States have sent into their new purchase, to look after the natur' of the bargain they have made?"

"I am not. Lewis is making his way up the river, some hundreds of miles from this. I come on
a private adventure."

"Though it is no cause of wonder, that a man whose strength and eyes have failed him as a hunter,
should be seen nigh the haunts of the beaver, using a trap instead of a rifle, it is strange
that one so young and prosperous, and bearing the commission of the Great Father, should be
moving among the prairies, without even a camp-colourman to do his biddings!"

"You would think my reasons sufficient did you know them, as know them you shall if you are
disposed to listen to my story. I think you all honest, and men who would rather aid than betray
one bent on a worthy object."

"Come, then, and tell us at your leisure," said the trapper, seating himself, and beckoning
to the youth to follow his example. The latter willingly complied; and after Paul and the Doctor
had disposed of themselves to their several likings, the new comer entered into a narrative
of the singular reasons which had led him so far into the deserts.

CHAPTER XI

              So foul a sky clears not without a storm.
                                                    --King John.

In the mean time the industrious and irreclaimable hours continued their labours. The sun,
which had been struggling through such masses of vapour throughout the day, fell slowly in
a streak of clear sky, and thence sunk gloriously into the gloomy wastes, as he is wont to
settle into the waters of the ocean. The vast herds which had been grazing among the wild pastures
of the prairies, gradually disappeared, and the endless flocks of aquatic birds, that were
pursuing their customary annual journey from the virgin lakes of the north towards the gulf
of Mexico, ceased to fan that air, which had now become loaded with dew and vapour. In short,
the shadows of night fell upon the rock, adding the mantle of darkness to the other dreary
accompaniments of the place.

As the light began to fail, Esther collected her younger children at her side, and placing
herself on a projecting point of her insulated fortress, she sat patiently awaiting the return
of the hunters. Ellen Wade was at no great distance, seeming to keep a little aloof from the
anxious circle, as if willing to mark the distinction which existed in their characters.

"Your uncle is, and always will be, a dull calculator, Nell," observed the mother, after a
long pause in a conversation that had turned on the labours of the day; "a lazy hand at figures
and foreknowledge is that said Ishmael Bush! Here he sat lolloping about the rock from light
till noon, doing nothing but scheme--scheme--scheme--with seven as noble boys at his elbows
as woman ever gave to man; and what's the upshot? why, night is setting in, and his needful
work not yet ended."

"It is not prudent, certainly, aunt," Ellen replied, with a vacancy in her air, that proved
how little she knew what she was saying; "and it is setting a very bad example to his sons."

"Hoity, toity, girl! who has reared you up as a judge over your elders, ay, and your betters,
too! I should like to see the man on the whole frontier, who sets a more honest example to
his children than this same Ishmael Bush! Show me, if you can, Miss Fault-finder, but not fault-mender,
a set of boys who will, on occasion, sooner chop a piece of logging and dress it for the crop,
than my own children; though I say it myself, who, perhaps, should be silent; or a cradler
that knows better how to lead a gang of hands through a field of wheat, leaving a cleaner stubble
in his track, than my own good man! Then, as a father, he is as generous as a lord; for his
sons have only to name the spot where they would like to pitch, and he gives 'em a deed of
the plantation, and no charge for papers is ever made!"

As the wife of the squatter concluded, she raised a hollow, taunting laugh, that was echoed
from the mouths of several juvenile imitators, whom she was training to a life as shiftless
and lawless as her own; but which, notwithstanding its uncertainty, was not without its secret
charms.

"Holloa! old Eester;" shouted the well-known voice of her husband, from the plain beneath;
"ar' you keeping your junkets, while we are finding you in venison and buffaloe beef? Come
down--come down, old girl, with all your young; and lend us a hand to carry up the meat;--why,
what a frolic you ar' in, woman! Come down, come down, for the boys are at hand, and we have
work here for double your number."

Ishmael might have spared his lungs more than a moiety of the effort they were compelled to
make in order that he should be heard. He had hardly uttered the name of his wife, before the
whole of the crouching circle rose in a body, and tumbling over each other, they precipitated
themselves down the dangerous passes of the rock with ungovernable impatience. Esther followed
the young fry with a more measured gait; nor did Ellen deem it wise, or rather discreet, to
remain behind. Consequently, the whole were soon assembled at the base of the citadel, on the
open plain.

Here the squatter was found, staggering under the weight of a fine fat buck, attended by one
or two of his younger sons. Ahiram quickly appeared, and before many minutes had elapsed, most
of the hunters dropped in, singly and in pairs, each man bringing with him some fruits of his
prowess in the field.

"The plain is free from red-skins, to-night at least," said Ishmael, after the bustle of reception
had a little subsided; "for I have scoured the prairie for many long miles, on my own feet,
and I call myself a judge of the print of an Indian moccasin. So, old woman, you can give us
a few steaks of the venison, and then we will sleep on the day's work."

"I'll not swear there are no savages near us," said Abiram. "I, too, know something of the
trail of a red-skin; and, unless my eyes have lost some of their sight, I would swear, boldly,
that there ar' Indians at hand. But wait till Asa comes in. He pass'd the spot where I found
the marks, and the boy knows something of such matters too."

"Ay, the boy knows too much of many things," returned Ishmael, gloomily. "It will be better
for him when he thinks he knows less. But what matters it, Hetty, if all the Sioux tribes,
west of the big river, are within a mile of us; they will find it no easy matter to scale this
rock, in the teeth of ten bold men."

"Call 'em twelve at once, Ishmael; call 'em twelve!" cried his termagant assistant. "For if
your moth-gathering, bug-hunting friend, can be counted a man, I beg you will set me down as
two. I will not turn my back to him, with the rifle or the shot-gun; and for courage!--the
yearling heifer, that them skulking devils the Tetons stole, was the biggest coward among us
all, and after her came your drivelling Doctor. Ah! Ishmael, you rarely attempt a regular trade
but you come out the loser; and this man, I reckon, is the hardest bargain among them all!
Would you think it, the fellow ordered me a blister around my mouth, because I complained of
a pain in the foot?"

"It is a pity, Eester," the husband coolly answered, "that you did not take it; I reckon it
would have done considerable good. But, boys, if it should turn out as Ahiram thinks, that
there are Indians near us, we may have to scamper up the rock, and lose our suppers after all;
therefore we will make sure of the game, and talk over the performances of the Doctor when
we have nothing better to do."

The hint was taken; and in a few minutes, the exposed situation in which the family was collected,
was exchanged for the more secure elevation of the rock. Here Esther busied herself, working
and scolding with equal industry, until the repast was prepared; when she summoned her husband
to his meal in a voice as sonorous as that with which the Imam reminds the Faithful of a more
important duty.

When each had assumed his proper and customary place around the smoking viands, the squatter
set the example by beginning to partake of a delicious venison steak, prepared like the hump
of the bison, with a skill that rather increased than concealed its natural properties. A painter
would gladly have seized the moment, to transfer the wild and characteristic scene to the canvass.

The reader will remember that the citadel of Ishmael stood insulated, lofty, ragged, and nearly
inaccessible. A bright flashing fire that was burning on the centre of its summit, and around
which the busy group was clustered, lent it the appearance of some tall Pharos placed in the
centre of the deserts, to light such adventurers as wandered through their broad wastes. The
flashing flame gleamed from one sun-burnt countenance to another, exhibiting every variety
of expression, from the juvenile simplicity of the children, mingled as it was with a shade
of the wildness peculiar to their semi-barbarous lives, to the dull and immovable apathy that
dwelt on the features of the squatter, when unexcited. Occasionally a gust of wind would fan
the embers; and, as a brighter light shot upwards, the little solitary tent was seen as it
were suspended in the gloom of the upper air. All beyond was enveloped, as usual at that hour,
in an impenetrable body of darkness.

"It is unaccountable that Asa should choose to be out of the way at such a time as this," Esther
pettishly observed. "When all is finished and to rights, we shall have the boy coming up, grumbling
for his meal, and hungry as a bear after his winter's nap. His stomach is as true as the best
clock in Kentucky, and seldom wants winding up to tell the time, whether of day or night. A
desperate eater is Asa, when a-hungered by a little work!"

Ishmael looked sternly around the circle of his silent sons, as if to see whether any among
them would presume to say aught in favour of the absent delinquent. But now, when no exciting
causes existed to arouse their slumbering tempers, it seemed to be too great an effort to enter
on the defence of their rebellious brother. Abiram, however, who, since the pacification, either
felt, or affected to feel, a more generous interest in his late adversary, saw fit to express
an anxiety, to which the others were strangers--

"It will be well if the boy has escaped the Tetons!" he muttered. "I should be sorry to have
Asa, who is one of the stoutest of our party, both in heart and hand, fall into the power of
the red devils."

"Look to yourself, Abiram; and spare your breath, if you can use it only to frighten the woman
and her huddling girls. You have whitened the face of Ellen Wade, already; who looks as pale
as if she was staring to-day at the very Indians you name, when I was forced to speak to her
through the rifle, because I couldn't reach her ears with my tongue. How was it, Nell! you
have never given the reason of your deafness?"

The colour of Ellen's cheek changed as suddenly as the squatter's piece had flashed on the
occasion to which he alluded, the burning glow suffusing her features, until it even mantled
her throat with its fine healthful tinge. She hung her head abashed, but did not seem to think
it necessary to reply.

Ishmael, too sluggish to pursue the subject, or content with the pointed allusion he had just
made, rose from his seat on the rock, and stretching his heavy frame, like a well-fed and fattened
ox, he announced his intention to sleep. Among a race who lived chiefly for the indulgence
of the natural wants, such a declaration could not fail of meeting with sympathetic dispositions.
One after another disappeared, each seeking his or her rude dormitory; and, before many minutes,
Esther, who by this time had scolded the younger fry to sleep, found herself, if we except
the usual watchman below, in solitary possession of the naked rock.

Whatever less valuable fruits had been produced in this uneducated woman by her migratory habits,
the great principle of female nature was too deeply rooted ever to be entirely eradicated.
Of a powerful, not to say fierce temperament, her passions were violent and difficult to be
smothered. But, however she might and did abuse the accidental prerogatives of her situation,
love for her offspring, while it often slumbered, could never be said to become extinct. She
liked not the protracted absence of Asa. Too fearless herself to have hesitated an instant
on her own account about crossing the dark abyss, into which she now sat looking with longing
eyes, her busy imagination, in obedience to this inextinguishable sentiment, began to conjure
nameless evils on account of her son. It might be true, as Abiram had hinted, that he had become
a captive to some of the tribes who were hunting the buffaloe in that vicinity, or even a still
more dreadful calamity might have befallen. So thought the mother, while silence and darkness
lent their aid to the secret impulses of nature.

Agitated by these reflections, which put sleep at defiance, Esther continued at her post, listening
with that sort of acuteness which is termed instinct in the animals a few degrees below her
in the scale of intelligence, for any of those noises which might indicate the approach of
footsteps. At length, her wishes had an appearance of being realised, for the long desired
sounds were distinctly audible, and presently she distinguished the dim form of a man at the
base of the rock.

"Now, Asa, richly do you deserve to be left with an earthen bed this blessed night!" the woman
began to mutter, with a revolution in her feelings, that will not be surprising to those who
have made the contradictions that give variety to the human character a study. "And a hard
one I've a mind it shall be! Why Abner; Abner; you Abner, do you sleep? Let me not see you
dare to open the hole, till I get down. I will know who it is that wishes to disturb a peaceable,
ay, and an honest family too, at such a time in the night as this!"

"Woman!" exclaimed a voice, that intended to bluster, while the speaker was manifestly a little
apprehensive of the consequences; "Woman, I forbid you on pain of the law to project any of
your infernal missiles. I am a citizen, and a freeholder, and a graduate of two universities;
and I stand upon my rights! Beware of malice prepense, of chance-medley, and of manslaughter.
It is I--your amicus; a friend and inmate. I--Dr. Obed Battius."

"Who?" demanded Esther, in a voice that nearly refused to convey her words to the ears of the
anxious listener beneath. "Did you say it was not Asa?"

"Nay, I am neither Asa, nor Absalom, nor any of the Hebrew princes, but Obed, the root and
stock of them all. Have I not said, woman, that you keep one in attendance who is entitled
to a peaceable as well as an honourable admission? Do you take me for an animal of the class
amphibia, and that I can play with my lungs as a blacksmith does with his bellows?"

The naturalist might have expended his breath much longer, without producing any desirable
result, had Esther been his only auditor. Disappointed and alarmed, the woman had already sought
her pallet, and was preparing, with a sort of desperate indifference, to compose herself to
sleep. Abner, the sentinel below, however, had been aroused from an exceedingly equivocal situation
by the outcry; and as he had now regained sufficient consciousness to recognise the voice of
the physician, the latter was admitted with the least possible delay. Dr. Battius bustled through
the narrow entrance, with an air of singular impatience, and was already beginning to mount
the difficult ascent, when catching a view of the porter, he paused, to observe with an air
that he intended should be impressively admonitory--

"Abner, there are dangerous symptoms of somnolency about thee! It is sufficiently exhibited
in the tendency to hiation, and may prove dangerous not only to yourself, but to all thy father's
family."

"You never made a greater mistake, Doctor," returned the youth, gaping like an indolent lion;
"I haven't a symptom, as you call it, about any part of me; and as to father and the children,
I reckon the small-pox and the measles have been thoroughly through the breed these many months
ago."

Content with his brief admonition, the naturalist had surmounted half the difficulties of the
ascent before the deliberate Abner ended his justification. On the summit, Obed fully expected
to encounter Esther, of whose linguacious powers he had too often been furnished with the most
sinister reproofs, and of which he stood in an awe too salutary to covet a repetition of the
attacks. The reader can foresee that he was to be agreeably disappointed. Treading lightly,
and looking timidly over his shoulder, as if he apprehended a shower of something, even more
formidable than words, the Doctor proceeded to the place which had been allotted to himself
in the general disposition of the dormitories.

Instead of sleeping, the worthy naturalist sat ruminating over what he had both seen and heard
that day, until the tossing and mutterings which proceeded from the cabin of Esther, who was
his nearest neighbour, advertised him of the wakeful situation of its inmate. Perceiving the
necessity of doing something to disarm this female Cerberus, before his own purpose could be
accomplished, the Doctor, reluctant as he was to encounter her tongue, found himself compelled
to invite a colloquial communication.

"You appear not to sleep, my very kind and worthy Mrs. Bush," he said, determined to commence
his applications with a plaster that was usually found to adhere; "you appear to rest badly,
my excellent hostess; can I administer to your ailings?"

"What would you give me, man?" grumbled Esther; "a blister to make me sleep?"

"Say rather a cataplasm. But if you are in pain, here are some cordial drops, which, taken
in a glass of my own cognac, will give you rest, if I know aught of the materia medica."

The Doctor, as he very well knew, had assailed Esther on her weak side; and, as he doubted
not of the acceptable quality of his prescription, he sat himself at work, without unnecessary
delay, to prepare it. When he made his offering, it was received in a snappish and threatening
manner, but swallowed with a facility that sufficiently proclaimed how much it was relished.
The woman muttered her thanks, and her {leech} reseated himself in silence, to await the operation
of the dose. In less than half an hour the breathing of Esther became so profound, and, as
the Doctor himself might have termed it, so very abstracted, that had he not known how easy
it was to ascribe this new instance of somnolency to the powerful dose of opium with which
he had garnished the brandy, he might have seen reason to distrust his own prescription. With
the sleep of the restless woman, the stillness became profound and general.

Then Dr. Battius saw fit to arise, with the silence and caution of the midnight robber, and
to steal out of his own cabin, or rather kennel, for it deserved no better name, towards the
adjoining dormitories. Here he took time to assure himself that all his neighbours were buried
in deep sleep. Once advised of this important fact, he hesitated no longer, but commenced the
difficult ascent which led to the upper pinnacle of the rock. His advance, though abundantly
guarded, was not entirely noiseless; but while he was felicitating himself on having successfully
effected his object, and he was in the very act of placing his foot on the highest ledge a
hand was laid upon the skirts of his coat, which as effectually put an end to his advance,
as if the gigantic strength of Ishmael himself had pinned him to the earth.

"Is there sickness in the tent," whispered a soft voice in his very ear, "that Dr. Battius
is called to visit it at such an hour?"

So soon as the heart of the naturalist had returned from its hasty expedition into his throat,
as one less skilled than Dr. Battius in the formation of the animal would have been apt to
have accounted for the extraordinary sensation with which he received this unlooked-for interruption,
he found resolution to reply; using, as much in terror as in prudence, the same precaution
in the indulgence of his voice.

"My worthy Nelly! I am greatly rejoiced to find it is no other than thee. Hist! child, hist!
Should Ishmael gain a knowledge of our plans, he would not hesitate to cast us both from this
rock, upon the plain beneath. Hist! Nelly, hist!"

As the Doctor delivered his injunctions between the intervals of his ascent, by the time they
were concluded, both he and his auditor had gained the upper level.

"And now, Dr. Battius," the girl gravely demanded, "may I know the reason why you have run
so great a risk of flying from this place, without wings, and at the certain expense of your neck?"

"Nothing shall be concealed from thee, worthy and trusty Nelly--but are you certain that Ishmael
will not awake?"

"No fear of him; he will sleep until the sun scorches his eyelids. The danger is from my aunt."

"Esther sleepeth!" the Doctor sententiously replied. "Ellen, you have been watching on this
rock, to-day?"

"I was ordered to do so."

"And you have seen the bison, and the antelope, and the wolf, and the deer, as usual; animals
of the orders, pecora, belluae, and ferae."

"I have seen the creatures you named in English, but I know nothing of the Indian languages."

"There is still an order that I have not named, which you have also seen. The primates--is
it not true?"

"I cannot say. I know no animal by that name."

"Nay, Ellen, you confer with a friend. Of the genus, homo, child?"

"Whatever else I may have had in view, I have not seen the vespertilio horribi--"

"Hush, Nelly, thy vivacity will betray us! Tell me, girl, have you not seen certain bipeds,
called men, wandering about the prairies?"

"Surely. My uncle and his sons have been hunting the buffaloe, since the sun began to fall."

"I must speak in the vernacular, to be comprehended. Ellen, I would say of the species, Kentucky."

Though Ellen reddened like the rose, her blushes were concealed by the darkness. She hesitated
an instant, and then summoned sufficient spirit to say, decidedly--

"If you wish to speak in parables, Doctor Battius, you must find another listener. Put your
questions plainly in English, and I will answer them honestly in the same tongue."

"I have been journeying in this desert, as thou knowest, Nelly, in quest of animals that have
been hidden from the eyes of science, until now. Among others, I have discovered a primates,
of the genus, homo; species, Kentucky; which I term, Paul--"

"Hist, for the sake of mercy!" said Ellen; "speak lower, Doctor, or we shall be ruined."

"Hover; by profession a collector of the apes, or bee," continued the other. "Do I use the
vernacular now,--am I understood?"

"Perfectly, perfectly," returned the girl, breathing with difficulty, in her surprise. "But
what of him? did he tell you to mount this rock?--he knows nothing, himself; for the oath I
gave my uncle has shut my mouth."

"Ay, but there is one that has taken no oath, who has revealed all. I would that the mantle
which is wrapped around the mysteries of nature, were as effectually withdrawn from its hidden
treasures! Ellen! Ellen! the man with whom I have unwittingly formed a compactum, or agreement,
is sadly forgetful of the obligations of honesty! Thy uncle, child."

"You mean Ishmael Bush, my father's brother's widow's husband," returned the offended girl,
a little proudly.--"Indeed, indeed, it is cruel to reproach me with a tie that chance has formed,
and which I would rejoice so much to break for ever!"

The humbled Ellen could utter no more, but sinking on a projection of the rock, she began to
sob in a manner that rendered their situation doubly critical. The Doctor muttered a few words,
which he intended as an apologetic explanation, but before he had time to complete his laboured
vindication, she arose and said with decision--

"I did not come here to pass my time in foolish tears, nor you to try to stop them. What then
has brought you hither?"

"I must see the inmate of that tent."

"You know what it contains?"

"I am taught to believe I do; and I bear a letter, which I must deliver with my own hands.
If the animal prove a quadruped, Ishmael is a true man--if a biped, fledged or unfledged, I
care not, he is false, and our compactum at an end!"

Ellen made a sign for the Doctor to remain where he was, and to be silent. She then glided
into the tent, where she continued many minutes, that proved exceedingly weary and anxious
to the expectant without, but the instant she returned, she took him by the arm, and together
they entered beneath the folds of the mysterious cloth.

CHAPTER XII

              Pray God the Duke of York excuse himself!
                                                --King Henry VI.

The mustering of the borderers on the following morning was silent, sullen, and gloomy. The
repast of that hour was wanting in the inharmonious accompaniment with which Esther ordinarily
enlivened their meals; for the effects of the powerful opiate the Doctor had administered still
muddled her intellects. The young men brooded over the absence of their elder brother, and
the brows of Ishmael himself were knit, as he cast his scowling eyes from one to the other,
like a man preparing to meet and to repel an expected assault on his authority. In the midst
of this family distrust, Ellen and her midnight confederate, the naturalist, took their usual
places among the children, without awakening suspicion or exciting comment. The only apparent
fruits of the adventure in which they had been engaged, were occasional upliftings of the eyes,
on the part of the Doctor, which were mistaken by the observers for some of his scientific
contemplations of the heavens, but which, in reality, were no other than furtive glances at
the fluttering walls of the proscribed tent.

At length the squatter, who had waited in vain for some more decided manifestation of the expected
rising among his sons, resolved to make a demonstration of his own intentions.

"Asa shall account to me for this undutiful conduct!" he observed. "Here has the livelong night
gone by, and he out-lying on the prairie, when his hand and his rifle might both have been
wanted in a brush with the Siouxes, for any right he had to know the contrary."

"Spare your breath, good man," retorted his wife; "be saving of your breath; for you may have
to call long enough for the boy before he will answer!"

"It ar' a fact, that some men be so womanish, as to let the young master the old! But, you,
old Esther, should know better than to think such will ever be the nature of things in the
family of Ishmael Bush."

"Ah! you are a hectorer with the boys, when need calls! I know it well, Ishmael; and one of
your sons have you driven from you, by your temper; and that, too, at a time when he is most
wanted." 

You need to know that this battle is only an episode of a famous war, that in it we achieved a great
victory, and that in its time it won us the admiration of the European people. Admittedly,
these are times long past, because people have well forgotten both about our defeats and about
our triumphs.

In spite of this, the Polish soldier will never forget about the Battle of Stoczek.

After the revolution of the 29th of November(1), I decided to join
the ranks, and I pondered, whether to the infantry, or to the cavalry?

To make a definite choice, I ran through the streets of Warsaw, eyeing closely the uniforms of several
regiments. I stopped ahead of a battalion of grenadiers, who marched in tight rows, silently,
in order and seriously. Each moustachiod, with chevrons on his shoulders.

These were the remains of the Napoleonic legions. As they passed, they were yielded to with the
utmost respect, and they were whispering in the crowd: “There are my soldiers! there are our
defenders!” I envy them, I thought, it’s a beautiful thing to be
a grenadier!

And I approached the division, and having taken the place beside the drummer, I marched in
the grenadiers’ step, singling out the commander, to whom I immediately wished to offer my services.

Suddenly,
on the other side of the street, a new military meteor appeared to me. He was a Krakus(2) on a white
horse, in a white sukmana(3), in a red cap with a white feather, which cut like a swan through black
waves of crowding townsfolk. He turned his horse beautifully; he welcomed pedestrians with a
nod, with cavalrymen squeezed hands, and to beautiful ladies, standing
in windows, sent grateful kisses.

All eyes turned towards him; men clapped, women smiled in silence; and the beautiful Krakus
became the god of the moment.

It came to my mind right away, that a Krakus’ uniform at my age and
height would suit me better, and so my true calling manifested itself:
God had made me a Krakus!

So I turned in the direction of the cavalry barracks; but halfway across the road I fell into the
immeasurable crowd who captured me into itself and bore towards the tollbooths. The people
pressed to meet the newly approaching rows. A stranger figure rode at the front; it was it is an
old Capuchin in habit and on a horse, in one hand a lance and the other blessing people with a
cross, who kissed his legs. Behind the Capuchin followed a thousand archers from the Augustów forests.
They had slung double-barrelled guns and badger skin bags with claws
and bared teeth, whitening on green jackets.

Another thousand villagers, armed with crooked scythes and axes, brought up the rear of the procession.
Never had the entrance of the most beautiful regiments, even the entrance of Prince Józef at the
head of victorious legions, aroused such enthusiasm, as this, with
which the people of Warsaw greeted badger skin bags and bark clogs.

Now there wasn’t applause, or smiles, but shouts, thundering hurrah! and blessings, mixed with
loud crying. Because the people, surprised by their own instincts,
could seize the noble and beautiful side of the image.

At the sight of these priests, of these farmers who had left monastic cells and their forests,
in order to beat the enemies of the homeland, people understood the whole horror of danger,
and also comprehended with complete trust that it was the only means of defense.

I was overcome by a sudden temptation to steal immediately behind the scythe or double-barrelled
gun and to join the row with the peasants in order to share with them the triumphant entry to
the capital. But how to do it? how to fit myself in with the bold and taunting movements of
Mazowian scythe-bearers, or the grim expressions and wild shooters from the Nieman? How to
match them in the height and breadth of their backs? amongst these
giants I would look like a rabbit among wolves.

So what will I do with myself? Should I be a Krakus, or a grenadier! This uncertainty cost me dearly.

A colonel of my acquaintance met me in passing, and patting me on
the shoulder, said: “I am in command of a guerrilla unit; some of
my people have already left for the field, I myself am setting off
today from Warsaw, I need gunners; perhaps you know where I can find
them?”

“I know about one,” I said, assuming a military posture; “you
need a gunner, here you have him!”

“Agreed!” the colonel said, “put
on a uniform and be at my place this evening at ten o’clock exactly,
do you understand?”

Soldiers were being recruited in this manner
during the uprising.

That day at eleven at night I marched in uniform by the cannons.

During the march we trained ourselves in the use of weapons, and
I added so much urgency, that after three days I was appointed sergeant
and a cannon was placed under my orders.

The envious claimed that I had owed my rank to the colonel’s peculiar considerations.

After all, I myself was surprised, confused and almost ashamed at such a sudden promotion. My head
spun and only after a few hours of astonishment did I start to feel the influence of my new
dignity.

Involuntarily I adopted a martial and more serious face; having gravely stretched my right hand, I
laid it on my property, on the muzzle of the cannon. This large piece of bronze, I thought
to myself, will be a pillar in the temple of my fame; will be the first step in my knightly
profession, or perhaps even lead me to the throne! A well aimed cannon often settles the fate
of a war. And how did Napoleon get his start, if not as a gunner? Full of these dreams I fell in
love with my bronze cannon as if with a young girl and from then on I was always beside her. I
examined her defects and attributes, I debated character and got to know most precisely her entire
composition and nature; physical as moral. She is so well engraved in my memory, that I could
paint her portrait from memory. I knew sound of her voice so well that I could have recognised
it amongst the roar of the liveliest cannonade, even if it were Leipzig, or Ostrołęka. My beloved
cannon! what happened to you? into whose hands did you fall? Certainly nobody will caress you
as I did… Only that thought comforts me. She was admittedly a little eight pounder, but to
me she was huge, as she was pregnant with my entire future. As well as well settled, simple to
manoeuvre and with a strangely accurate shot. A whole day was barely enough for me in fulfilling
my duties by the beloved cannon, and at night I didn’t stop thinking
about the object of my love.

And so, one night I dreamed of battle, and who did I see opposite me? Field Marshall von Diebitsch!
At once I take aim—poof! and my cannon ball cuts him in two. I took off, to tear off his head
and carry it still warm to our Commander-in-Chief, Prince Radziwiłł; but the corpse of von
Diebitsch was so heavily defended, that until I awoke completely into reality, instead of the
head of the Muscovite leader, I held the head of the gunner sleeping
opposite me.

Another night a worse thing happened to me: I dreamed that the Muscovite cavalry fell on us unexpectedly;
they killed me in advance, then cut down my gunners, and finally a Muscovite cuirassier mounted
my cannon like a horse and started to plug it, looking at me with contemptuous eyes. Then I felt
all the torments of the husband of Lucretia and the torments of the father of Virginia. Although
I was already a cold and stiff corpse, nevertheless I gathered all
my strength to give some sign of life and adjusting to myself, I managed
at last to scream so strongly, that I both woke myself and alarmed
the entire camp.

Having jumped to my feet, and just as day was beginning to break, my eyes seek my cannon and
I see with no little joy, that she’s there, that she sits free and calm on her carriage.

Her open jaws seemed to draw the coolness of the morning, and the gleaming surface reflected the
first rays of sunshine. I lay down again on the wet ground, but this time as a precaution I held
on to a spoke.

So passed a whole week, my first week after marrying the beautiful eight pounder: the honeymoon
of an artillery sergeant, the happiest week of my life! I kept busy every moment, in the belief
that I had already achieved the purpose of my existence in world;
my soul went completely into the beloved cannon.

Meanwhile we drew closer and closer to the banks of the Vistula; ice was already giving way
in many places and here and there you could see water appearing. Our colonel, with a long
pole in his hand, was first to go through the ice, wading in the
water up to his knees, then he ordered us to follow him.

Follow him with our cannons over such weak ice? At this order I went pale as death, because
our entire military future could drown. In the end we passed happily and we stopped on the opposite
bank with the shout: Long live Poland!

That same evening saw the joining of the corps, with the front sent from Warsaw. They awaited
us impatiently; because young soldiers have an elevated opinion of the power of artillery,
and it worried them very much that on the eve of the expected battle they had no cannons.
Having heard the rattle of cannon wheels, the whole camp lost possession
of itself in joy: “our artillery approaches!

Long live the artillery!” they called from all sides and ran to meet us, and placed us in the
centre of the camp.

We also enthusiastically greeted our comrades. Until then marching in loneliness, now we were
in a crowd of brave soldiers, whose number gave itself significance to the eye. That raised our
confidence. Only altogether there weren’t more than twelve squadrons, filling a wide area. Proudly
we looked at a forest of stuck lances, on which new flags sparkled
with colours, still not knowing blood or dust.

After a cheerful and grand supper we lay down to sleep, swung with the sound of military music
and the singing of the mazurka.

At dawn, when our corps entered the village, mixed shouts reached us. We pulled in; they sent
for reconnaissance and it turned out that these were shouts of victory! The first triumph! You
should have seen, how pleased we were with them. These Cossacks, bearded, disarmed, walked with
heads lowered and with sour expressions.

As they went by us, our young soldiers jeered at them, cursed or threatened. And I had a desire
to do the same, but the duty attached to the rank didn’t permit it, so severely reprimanding
them, I said: “Poles! respect misfortune! The fate of war is often doubtful! Death to our enemies!
Mercy to the conquered! Long live Poland!”

The soldiers calmed down, taken aback by the nobility of my emotions
and sententious eloquence.

For some time my attention turned to one old gunner, riding beside me, who constantly climbed
in his stirrups, lifted his head, neck craned over the shoulders of his comrades.

“What are you looking at, Mateusz?”

“At those beasts, sergeant, may the hangman take them”… and pointed his finger at hills, which
were ahead of us. I saw then, how something was blackening the hilltop. Where they bushes,
or the caps of the Muscovite infantry? I didn’t have time to look longer, because the officers
came running, calling with all their might: “Forward artillery! stand in position!” We moved, every
horse jumping. A cannon shot and the ball, having killed one of our horses, rained earth on us
and flew onwards, ricocheting. We occupied the hill, directly opposite the enemy, who doubled
fire.

A wide plain, surrounded by bushes and forest, stretched before us. In the centre of it, on the
hill, rolled a Muscovite battery of twelve heavy gauge cannons who
powdered us with cannon balls and grenades.

Behind the battery you could see thick ranks of cavalry, standing motionless. Our cavalry similarly
stood calmly, leaving time for the operations of the artillery.

I noticed that soldiers of different weapons throughout the battle preserved the stance and
the facial expression characteristic of themselves. And as the artilleryman has neither the
cavalry’s extravagance, nor the infantry’s impatience, but attentive to command, fast and accurate
amid all the commotion, appearing calm, though his eyes burned with the smoke, bloodshot, eyebrows
furrowed, face pale, mouth clenched, speech short and hard, expressing fierce, suppressed
and concentrated fury.

In the middle of this fire, even though death swept past their heads, they didn’t stop making jokes;
every time each cannon ball ricocheted, the young soldiers made a point of talking to it, and
to give it advice. A ricocheting cannon ball can be seen from afar, as it jumps across the field,
so if it was going to one side, to the left, they were calling to
it: “Where are you going, blind man! get to the right!” and if it
was going straight, they encouraged it: “good, good!” and so they
spoke to it until it fell right in the middle of the enemy line and
then they were applauding it.

I don’t know now, how many hours that cannonade lasted.

Although we passed each other feverishly beside the cannon, in the same way this play lasted
too long, to not wish for nightfall.

The Russian artillery had an obvious advantage over us, both in numbers, and in cannon gauge.
They had already hit a few of our people, many were wounded, but everyone, although extremely
tired, equally didn’t sink in spirits and nobody even thought about retreat.

Suddenly from the left cannons roared horribly. The Muscovites had
placed a new battery right there, which fired at us from the side.

We turned two of our cannons against this new threat, with whom we needed to chat; but our
position was becoming more and more unpleasant, because six field cannons to answer twenty
heavy gauge cannons is no small matter!

Our soldiers, at the sight of this imbalance of power, seemed to be stirred. Now their movements
weakened, now our shots happened less frequently, and what’s more the anecdotes and jokes ceased
completely.

It seems that our commander was waiting until the Muscovites separated their forces, in order
to profit from that moment and strike them; I suppose, although they aren’t tempting themselves
to debate the battle plan.

I only know that at the most critical moment we heard from the left a horse’s hoofbeat, rushing
at a gallop and a few minutes later that second battery went silent, when it was conquered.

Our commander turned around and dashed to the main strength of our troops, calling: “Forward at
a trot! everyone forward!” And our entire cavalry, drawn up in two
rows, moved out, passing our battery.

“They’re going to charge!” cried our gunners and at once we ceased firing. How did it look?
The young lancers with eager gaze, fevered face, burst impatiently forward, but advised or unadvised
they still needed to obey the strict orders of the commander, who still repeated: “Trot! forward!
trot!” You could see from the movement of the flags, how feverishly
the soldiers’ hands were twitching.

In the end the trumpets sounded, flags descended and now they kicked themselves off towards the
enemy. “Forward! Gallop! everyone forward!”

They took off—we stayed by our cannons, doing nothing, and even thinking nothing. The artillery
recently so busy and noisy, now seemed to be petrified.

Our souls flew far and rested on the tips of the lances. Now the Muscovites are close! Already
the Muscovite ranks are deploying, in order to receive them.

The gunners climbed on the gun carriages, on the ammunition carts and stare into space, looking
ahead with gaping mouths; it was so quiet that you could hear the flight of a fly. Each of
us felt, that on this clash hung our fate, the fate of our army,
perhaps even our homeland!

It was a moment of expectation and terrible uncertainty, luckily lasting only a few minutes.
Our cavalry clashed with the Muscovites on the high ground, both lines clashed with each other
and mixed.

In the whole of this mass it boiled and the whole mass disappeared,
like a dust cloud driven by the wind.

I don’t know who, but someone among us shouted at the top of his lungs—that shout broke the
deathly silence, because he proclaimed victory, however nobody accompanied
him.

Because we, young soldiers, still we weren’t understanding, nor guessing the outcome of this
battle, but besides that we feared to yield to premature joy. “Wait!” someone or other said—“as
yet there’s nothing certain; nothing to be seen, everyone seems to have disappeared!”

Finally, the part of the mass that we could see, as it vanished from our sight, started to come
towards us. By their colours we recognised our lancers and by the war cry: Poland Is Not Yet
Lost.(4)

Now there’s no doubt, victory is ours! The approaching mass presented a peculiar spectacle. In
it you could see a lot of foot soldiers with diverse weapons, in addition wagons, ammunition
carts, artillery pieces… There were Muscovite prisoners, captured with the artillery and the
whole encampment.

I wouldn’t be able to describe our joy, this frantic joy! How can it be! their whole artillery!
this mighty artillery in our hands. We rushed headlong upon these cans, pressing them, caressing
them, and I myself for a moment forgot about my love, the eight-pounder.

Beautiful they were, these Russian cannons, so huge, new, well mounted
and stocked with everything.

“Look, sergeant” the gunner Mateusz called out “look at what red, shining cannons these cursed
Muscovites(5) have!”

I started with a delicate hand to stroke the polished bronze surface, and everyone repeated in
chorus: “Oh, but how these muscovite cans do shine!” “and what a calibre” noticed one gunner,
“that’s the calibre for me!” “that’s no peashooter!”

I started measuring
the muzzle of the cannon, and the soldiers repeated: “those jaws are
no joke!”

Then, when we started examining the harness, then again
they called as a choir: “Oh, what sturdy straps those cursed Muscovites
have!”

Nobody will guess in the end, what caused us the greatest
joy; it was none other than ordinary oats, taken as spoils.

Our cavalry didn’t have any more fodder, but the Muscovites had it in ample amounts; their
wagons, caissons, gun carriages even, were full of oats. Soldiers rushed on them hungrily, filling
sacks with them, cartridge cases, pockets, and saying that they had
never seen such beautiful oats.

The leader rode up and at the sight of him a shout of enthusiasm and
worship thundered.

Perhaps he was very tired, because despite a cool day, sweat flowed from him in drops.

We surrounded him in a dense crowd. Amid the general commotion and bursts of joy, he alone
was calm and silent, though visibly moved.

“My children,” he said to us, “I promised to lead you to the enemy; you promised to beat him—and
so both you and I have kept our words.”

Such was our memorable day at Stoczek. With night falling stories began by the camp’s bonfires,
there were no listeners, because everyone spoke; everyone bravely
acquitted themselves in battle, everyone had jokes—because everyone
was happy.

If that blessed hour comes to me, that I can again fight for my country, to see the Muscovite army
in panic, to seek out my beloved eight pounder and to hurl cannon
balls from it at golden roofs of the Tsarist capital city, then I
will call myself happy; but even then I wouldn’t be able to feel that,
which I experienced in the first battle, in the memorable Battle of
Stoczek.

1 1831.

2 A soldier of the Cracovian cavalary. “Krakus” is an alternative name of Krak, the legendary
founder of Cracow, and is used to refer to an inhabitant of the city.

3 A type of tunic, of Turkish influence, typical of Cracow.

4 The first line of “Dąbrowski’s Mazurka”, now the National Anthem of Poland.
5 Untranslatable: Mateusz here uses the non-human form, echoing his
earlier use of “beasts” Then arose two loud and piercing cries,
in quick succession, which were followed by a quiet, still more awful and appalling.

"Come back, come back, my children!" cried the woman, the feelings of a mother getting the
ascendency.

But her voice was hushed, and every faculty seemed frozen with horror, as at that instant the
bushes once more parted, and the two adventurers re-appeared, pale, and nearly insensible themselves,
and laid at her feet the stiff and motionless body of the lost Asa, with the marks of a violent
death but too plainly stamped on every pallid lineament.

The dogs uttered a long and closing howl, and then breaking off together, they disappeared
on the forsaken trail of the deer. The flight of birds wheeled upward into the heavens, filling
the air with their complaints at having been robbed of a victim which, frightful and disgusting
as it was, still bore too much of the impression of humanity to become the prey of their obscene
appetites.

"Stand back! stand off, the whole of ye!" said Esther hoarsely to the crowd, which pressed
too closely on the corpse; "I am his mother, and my right is better than that of ye all! Who
has done this? Tell me, Ishmael, Abiram, Abner! open your mouths and your hearts, and let God's
truth and no other issue from them. Who has done this bloody deed?"

Her husband made no reply, but stood, leaning on his rifle, looking sadly, but with an unaltered
eye, at the mangled remains of his son. Not so the mother, she threw herself on the earth,
and receiving the cold and ghastly head into her lap, she sat contemplating those muscular
features, on which the death-agony was still horridly impressed, in a silence far more expressive
than any language of lamentation could have proved.

The voice of the woman was frozen in grief. In vain Ishmael attempted a few words of rude consolation;
she neither listened nor answered. Her sons gathered about her in a circle, and expressed,
after their uncouth manner, their sympathy in her sorrow, as well as their sense of their own
loss, but she motioned them away, impatiently with her hand. At times her fingers played in
the matted hair of the dead, and at others they lightly attempted to smooth the painfully expressive
muscles of its ghastly visage, as the hand of the mother is seen lingering fondly about the
features of her sleeping child. Then starting from their revolting office, her hands would
flutter around her, and seem to seek some fruitless remedy against the violent blow, which
had thus suddenly destroyed the child in whom she had not only placed her greatest hopes, but
so much of her maternal pride. While engaged in the latter incomprehensible manner, the lethargic
Abner turned aside, and swallowing the unwonted emotions which were rising in his own throat,
he observed--

"Mother means that we should look for the signs, that we may know in what manner Asa has come
by his end."

"We owe it to the accursed Siouxes!" answered Ishmael: "twice have they put me deeply in their
debt! The third time, the score shall be cleared!"

But, not content with this plausible explanation, and, perhaps, secretly glad to avert their
eyes from a spectacle which awakened so extraordinary and unusual sensations in their sluggish
bosoms, the sons of the squatter turned away in a body from their mother and the corpse, and
proceeded to make the enquiries which they fancied the former had so repeatedly demanded. Ishmael
made no objections; but, though he accompanied his children while they proceeded in the investigation,
it was more with the appearance of complying with their wishes, at a time when resistance might
not be seemly, than with any visible interest in the result. As the borderers, notwithstanding
their usual dulness, were well instructed in most things connected with their habits of life,
an enquiry, the success of which depended so much on signs and evidences that bore so strong
a resemblance to a forest trail, was likely to be conducted with skill and acuteness. Accordingly,
they proceeded to the melancholy task with great readiness and intelligence.

Abner and Enoch agreed in their accounts as to the position in which they had found the body.
It was seated nearly upright, the back supported by a mass of matted brush, and one hand still
grasping a broken twig of the alders. It was most probably owing to the former circumstance
that the body had escaped the rapacity of the carrion birds, which had been seen hovering above
the thicket, and the latter proved that life had not yet entirely abandoned the hapless victim
when he entered the brake. The opinion now became general, that the youth had received his
death-wound in the open prairie, and had dragged his enfeebled form into the cover of the thicket
for the purpose of concealment. A trail through the bushes confirmed this opinion. It also
appeared, on examination, that a desperate struggle had taken place on the very margin of the
thicket. This was sufficiently apparent by the trodden branches, the deep impressions on the
moist ground, and the lavish flow of blood.

"He has been shot in the open ground and come here for a cover," said Abiram; "these marks
would clearly prove it. The boy has been set upon by the savages in a body, and has fou't like
a hero as he was, until they have mastered his strength, and then drawn him to the bushes."

To this probable opinion there was now but one dissenting voice, that of the slow-minded Ishmael,
who demanded that the corpse itself should be examined in order to obtain a more accurate knowledge
of its injuries. On examination, it appeared that a rifle bullet had passed directly through
the body of the deceased, entering beneath one of his brawny shoulders, and making its exit
by the breast. It required some knowledge in gun-shot wounds to decide this delicate point,
but the experience of the borderers was quite equal to the scrutiny; and a smile of wild, and
certainly of singular satisfaction, passed among the sons of Ishmael, when Abner confidently
announced that the enemies of Asa had assailed him in the rear.

"It must be so," said the gloomy but attentive squatter. "He was of too good a stock and too
well trained, knowingly to turn the weak side to man or beast! Remember, boys, that while the
front of manhood is to your enemy, let him be who or what he may, you ar' safe from cowardly
surprise. Why, Eester, woman! you ar' getting beside yourself; with picking at the hair and
the garments of the child! Little good can you do him now, old girl."

"See!" interrupted Enoch, extricating from the fragments of cloth the morsel of lead which
had prostrated the strength of one so powerful; "here is the very bullet!"

Ishmael took it in his hand and eyed it long and closely.

"There's no mistake," at length he muttered through his compressed teeth. "It is from the pouch
of that accursed trapper. Like many of the hunters he has a mark in his mould, in order to
know the work his rifle performs; and here you see it plainly--six little holes, laid crossways."

"I'll swear to it!" cried Abiram, triumphantly. "He show'd me his private mark, himself, and
boasted of the number of deer he had laid upon the prairies with these very bullets! Now, Ishmael,
will you believe me when I tell you the old knave is a spy of the red-skins?"

The lead passed from the hand of one to that of another, and unfortunately for the reputation
of the old man, several among them remembered also to have seen the aforesaid private bullet-marks,
during the curious examination which all had made of his accoutrements. In addition to this
wound, however, were many others of a less dangerous nature, all of which were supposed to
confirm the supposed guilt of the trapper.

The traces of many different struggles were to be seen, between the spot where the first blood
was spilt and the thicket to which it was now generally believed Asa had retreated, as a place
of refuge. These were interpreted into so many proofs of the weakness of the murderer, who
would have sooner despatched his victim, had not even the dying strength of the youth rendered
him formidable to the infirmities of one so old. The danger of drawing some others of the hunters
to the spot, by repeated firing, was deemed a sufficient reason for not again resorting to
the rifle, after it had performed the important duty of disabling the victim. The weapon of
the dead man was not to be found, and had doubtless, together with many other less valuable
and lighter articles, that he was accustomed to carry about his person, become a prize to his
destroyer.

But what, in addition to the tell-tale bullet, appeared to fix the ruthless deed with peculiar
certainty on the trapper, was the accumulated evidence furnished by the trail; which proved,
notwithstanding his deadly hurt, that the wounded man had still been able to make a long and
desperate resistance to the subsequent efforts of his murderer. Ishmael seemed to press this
proof with a singular mixture of sorrow and pride: sorrow, at the loss of a son, whom in their
moments of amity he highly valued; and pride, at the courage and power he had manifested to
his last and weakest breath.

"He died as a son of mine should die," said the squatter, gleaning a hollow consolation from
so unnatural an exultation: "a dread to his enemy to the last, and without help from the law!
Come, children; we have the grave to make, and then to hunt his murderer."

The sons of the squatter set about their melancholy office, in silence and in sadness. An excavation
was made in the hard earth, at a great expense of toil and time, and the body was wrapped in
such spare vestments as could be collected among the labourers. When these arrangements were
completed, Ishmael approached the seemingly unconscious Esther, and announced his intention
to inter the dead. She heard him, and quietly relinquished her grasp of the corpse, rising
in silence to follow it to its narrow resting place. Here she seated herself again at the head
of the grave, watching each movement of the youths with eager and jealous eyes. When a sufficiency
of earth was laid upon the senseless clay of Asa, to protect it from injury, Enoch and Abner
entered the cavity, and trode it into a solid mass, by the weight of their huge frames, with
an appearance of a strange, not to say savage, mixture of care and indifference. This well-known
precaution was adopted to prevent the speedy exhumation of the body by some of the carnivorous
beasts of the prairie, whose instinct was sure to guide them to the spot. Even the rapacious
birds appeared to comprehend the nature of the ceremony, for, mysteriously apprised that the
miserable victim was now about to be abandoned by the human race, they once more began to make
their airy circuits above the place, screaming, as if to frighten the kinsmen from their labour
of caution and love.

Ishmael stood, with folded arms, steadily watching the manner in which this necessary duty
was performed, and when the whole was completed, he lifted his cap to his sons, to thank them
for their services, with a dignity that would have become one much better nurtured. Throughout
the whole of a ceremony, which is ever solemn and admonitory, the squatter had maintained a
grave and serious deportment. His vast features were visibly stamped with an expression of
deep concern; but at no time did they falter, until he turned his back, as he believed for
ever, on the grave of his first-born. Nature was then stirring powerfully within him, and the
muscles of his stern visage began to work perceptibly. His children fastened their eyes on
his, as if to seek a direction to the strange emotions which were moving their own heavy natures,
when the struggle in the bosom of the squatter suddenly ceased, and, taking his wife by the
arm, he raised her to her feet as if she had been an infant, saying, in a voice that was perfectly
steady, though a nice observer would have discovered that it was kinder than usual--

"Eester, we have now done all that man and woman can do. We raised the boy, and made him such
as few others were like, on the frontiers of America; and we have given him a grave. Let us
go our way."

The woman turned her eyes slowly from the fresh earth, and laying her hands on the shoulders
of her husband, stood, looking him anxiously in the eyes.

"Ishmael! Ishmael!" she said, "you parted from the boy in your wrath!"

"May the Lord pardon his sins freely as I have forgiven his worst misdeeds!" calmly returned
the squatter: "woman, go you back to the rock and read your Bible; a chapter in that book always
does you good. You can read, Eester; which is a privilege I never did enjoy."

"Yes, yes," muttered the woman, yielding to his strength, and suffering herself to be led,
though with strong reluctance from the spot. "I can read; and how have I used the knowledge!
But he, Ishmael, he has not the sin of wasted l'arning to answer for. We have spared him that,
at least! whether it be in mercy, or in cruelty, I know not."

Her husband made no reply, but continued steadily to lead her in the direction of their temporary
abode. When they reached the summit of the swell of land, which they knew was the last spot
from which the situation of the grave of Asa could be seen, they all turned, as by common concurrence,
to take a farewell view of the place. The little mound itself was not visible; but it was frightfully
indicated by the flock of screaming birds which hovered above. In the opposite direction a
low, blue hillock, in the skirts of the horizon, pointed out the place where Esther had left
the rest of her young, and served as an attraction to draw her reluctant steps from the last
abode of her eldest born. Nature quickened in the bosom of the mother at the sight; and she
finally yielded the rights of the dead, to the more urgent claims of the living.

The foregoing occurrences had struck a spark from the stern tempers of a set of beings so singularly
moulded in the habits of their uncultivated lives, which served to keep alive among them the
dying embers of family affection. United to their parents by ties no stronger than those which
use had created, there had been great danger, as Ishmael had foreseen, that the overloaded
hive would swarm, and leave him saddled with the difficulties of a young and helpless brood,
unsupported by the exertions of those, whom he had already brought to a state of maturity.
The spirit of insubordination, which emanated from the unfortunate Asa, had spread among his
juniors; and the squatter had been made painfully to remember the time when, in the wantonness
of his youth and vigour, he had, reversing the order of the brutes, cast off his own aged and
failing parents, to enter into the world unshackled and free. But the danger had now abated,
for a time at least; and if his authority was not restored with all its former influence, it
was admitted to exist, and to maintain its ascendency a little longer.

It is true that his slow-minded sons, even while they submitted to the impressions of the recent
event, had glimmerings of terrible distrusts, as to the manner in which their elder brother
had met with his death. There were faint and indistinct images in the minds of two or three
of the oldest, which portrayed the father himself, as ready to imitate the example of Abraham,
without the justification of the sacred authority which commanded the holy man to attempt the
revolting office. But then, these images were so transient, and so much obscured in intellectual
mists, as to leave no very strong impressions, and the tendency of the whole transaction, as
we have already said, was rather to strengthen than to weaken the authority of Ishmael.

In this disposition of mind, the party continued their route towards the place whence they
had that morning issued on a search which had been crowned with so melancholy a success. The
long and fruitless march which they had made under the direction of Abiram, the discovery of
the body, and its subsequent interment, had so far consumed the day, that by the time their
steps were retraced across the broad track of waste which lay between the grave of Asa and
the rock, the sun had fallen far below his meridian altitude. The hill had gradually risen
as they approached, like some tower emerging from the bosom of the sea, and when within a mile,
the minuter objects that crowned its height came dimly into view.

"It will be a sad meeting for the girls!" said Ishmael, who, from time to time, did not cease
to utter something which he intended should be consolatory to the bruised spirit of his partner.
"Asa was much regarded by all the young; and seldom failed to bring in from his hunts something
that they loved."

"He did, he did," murmured Esther; "the boy was the pride of the family. My other children
are as nothing to him!"

"Say not so, good woman," returned the father, glancing his eye a little proudly at the athletic
train which followed, at no great distance, in the rear". Say not so, old Eester, for few fathers
and mothers have greater reason to be boastful than ourselves."

"Thankful, thankful," muttered the humbled woman; "ye mean thankful, Ishmael!"

"Then thankful let it be, if you like the word better, my good girl,--but what has become of
Nelly and the young? The child has forgotten the charge I gave her, and has not only suffered
the children to sleep, but, I warrant you, is dreaming of the fields of Tennessee at this very
moment. The mind of your niece is mainly fixed on the settlements, I reckon."

"Ay, she is not for us; I said it, and thought it, when I took her, because death had stripped
her of all other friends. Death is a sad worker in the bosom of families, Ishmael! Asa had
a kind feeling to the child, and they might have come one day into our places, had things been
so ordered."

"Nay, she is not gifted for a frontier wife, if this is the manner she is to keep house while
the husband is on the hunt. Abner, let off your rifle, that they may know we ar' coming. I
fear Nelly and the young ar' asleep." The young man complied with an alacrity that manifested
how gladly he would see the rounded, active figure of Ellen, enlivening the ragged summit of
the rock. But the report was succeeded by neither signal nor answer of any sort. For a moment,
the whole party stood in suspense, awaiting the result, and then a simultaneous impulse caused
the whole to let off their pieces at the same instant, producing a noise which might not fail
to reach the ears of all within so short a distance.

"Ah! there they come at last!" cried Abiram, who was usually among the first to seize on any
circumstance which promised relief from disagreeable apprehensions.

"It is a petticoat fluttering on the line," said Esther; "I put it there myself."

"You ar' right; but now she comes; the jade has been taking her comfort in the tent!"

"It is not so," said Ishmael, whose usually inflexible features were beginning to manifest
the uneasiness he felt. "It is the tent itself blowing about loosely in the wind. They have
loosened the bottom, like silly children as they ar', and unless care is had, the whole will
come down!"

The words were scarcely uttered before a rushing blast of wind swept by the spot where they
stood, raising the dust in little eddies, in its progress; and then, as if guided by a master
hand, it quitted the earth, and mounted to the precise spot on which all eyes were just then
riveted. The loosened linen felt its influence and tottered; but regained its poise, and, for
a moment, it became tranquil. The cloud of leaves next played in circling revolutions around
the place, and then descended with the velocity of a swooping hawk, and sailed away into the
prairie in long straight lines, like a flight of swallows resting on their expanded wings.
They were followed for some distance by the snow-white tent, which, however, soon fell behind
the rock, leaving its highest peak as naked as when it lay in the entire solitude of the desert.

"The murderers have been here!" moaned Esther. "My babes! my babes!"

For a moment even Ishmael faltered before the weight of so unexpected a blow. But shaking himself,
like an awakened lion, he sprang forward, and pushing aside the impediments of the barrier,
as if they had been feathers, he rushed up the ascent with an impetuosity which proved how
formidable a sluggish nature may become, when thoroughly aroused.

CHAPTER XIV

                Whose party do the townsmen yet admit?
                                                    --King John.

In order to preserve an even pace between the incidents of the tale, it becomes necessary to
revert to such events as occurred during the ward of Ellen Wade.

For the few first hours, the cares of the honest and warm-hearted girl were confined to the
simple offices of satisfying the often-repeated demands which her younger associates made on
her time and patience, under the pretences of hunger, thirst, and all the other ceaseless wants
of captious and inconsiderate childhood. She had seized a moment from their importunities to
steal into the tent, where she was administering to the comforts of one far more deserving
of her tenderness, when an outcry among the children recalled her to the duties she had momentarily
forgotten.

"See, Nelly, see!" exclaimed half a dozen eager voices; "yonder ar' men; and Phoebe says that
they ar' Sioux-Indians!"

Ellen turned her eyes in the direction in which so many arms were already extended, and, to
her consternation, beheld several men, advancing manifestly and swiftly in a straight line
towards the rock. She counted four, but was unable to make out any thing concerning their characters,
except that they were not any of those who of right were entitled to admission into the fortress.
It was a fearful moment for Ellen. Looking around, at the juvenile and frightened flock that
pressed upon the skirts of her garments, she endeavoured to recall to her confused faculties
some one of the many tales of female heroism, with which the history of the western frontier
abounded. In one, a stockade had been successfully defended by a single man, supported by three
or four women, for days, against the assaults of a hundred enemies. In another, the women alone
had been able to protect the children, and the less valuable effects of their absent husbands;
and a third was not wanting, in which a solitary female had destroyed her sleeping captors
and given liberty not only to herself, but to a brood of helpless young. This was the case
most nearly assimilated to the situation in which Ellen now found herself; and, with flushing
cheeks and kindling eyes, the girl began to consider, and to prepare her slender means of defence.

She posted the larger girls at the little levers that were to cast the rocks on the assailants,
the smaller were to be used more for show than any positive service they could perform, while,
like any other leader, she reserved her own person, as a superintendent and encourager of the
whole. When these dispositions were made, she endeavoured to await the issue, with an air of
composure, that she intended should inspire her assistants with the confidence necessary to
ensure success.

Although Ellen was vastly their superior in that spirit which emanates from moral qualities,
she was by no means the equal of the two eldest daughters of Esther, in the important military
property of insensibility to danger. Reared in the hardihood of a migrating life, on the skirts
of society, where they had become familiarised to the sights and dangers of the wilderness,
these girls promised fairly to become, at some future day, no less distinguished than their
mother for daring, and for that singular mixture of good and evil, which, in a wider sphere
of action, would probably have enabled the wife of the squatter to enrol her name among the
remarkable females of her time. Esther had already, on one occasion, made good the log tenement
of Ishmael against an inroad of savages; and on another, she had been left for dead by her
enemies, after a defence that, with a more civilised foe, would have entitled her to the honours
of a liberal capitulation. These facts, and sundry others of a similar nature, had often been
recapitulated with suitable exultation in the presence of her daughters, and the bosoms of
the young Amazons were now strangely fluctuating between natural terror and the ambitious wish
to do something that might render them worthy of being the children of such a mother. It appeared
that the opportunity for distinction, of this wild character, was no longer to be denied them.

The party of strangers was already within a hundred rods of the rock. Either consulting their
usual wary method of advancing, or admonished by the threatening attitudes of two figures,
who had thrust forth the barrels of as many old muskets from behind the stone entrenchment,
the new comers halted, under favour of an inequality in the ground, where a growth of grass
thicker than common offered the advantage of concealment. From this spot they reconnoitred
the fortress for several anxious, and to Ellen, interminable minutes. Then one advanced singly,
and apparently more in the character of a herald than of an assailant.

"Phoebe, do you fire," and "no, Hetty, you," were beginning to be heard between the half-frightened
and yet eager daughters of the squatter, when Ellen probably saved the advancing stranger from
some imminent alarm, if from no greater danger, by exclaiming--

"Lay down the muskets; it is Dr. Battius!"

Her subordinates so far complied, as to withdraw their hands from the locks, though the threatening
barrels still maintained the portentous levels. The naturalist, who had advanced with sufficient
deliberation to note the smallest hostile demonstration of the garrison, now raised a white
handkerchief on the end of his fusee, and came within speaking distance of the fortress. Then,
assuming what he intended should be an imposing and dignified semblance of authority, he blustered
forth, in a voice that might have been heard at a much greater distance--

"What, ho! I summon ye all, in the name of the Confederacy of the United Sovereign States of
North America, to submit yourselves to the laws."

"Doctor or no Doctor; he is an enemy, Nelly; hear him! hear him! he talks of the law."

"Stop! stay till I hear his answer!" said the nearly breathless Ellen, pushing aside the dangerous
weapons which were again pointed in the direction of the shrinking person of the herald.

"I admonish and forewarn ye all," continued the startled Doctor, "that I am a peaceful citizen
of the before named Confederacy, or to speak with greater accuracy, Union, a supporter of the
Social Compact, and a lover of good order and amity;" then, perceiving that the danger was,
at least, temporarily removed, he once more raised his voice to the hostile pitch,--"I charge
ye all, therefore, to submit to the laws."

"I thought you were a friend," Ellen replied; "and that you travelled with my uncle, in virtue
of an agreement--"

"It is void! I have been deceived in the very premises, and, I hereby pronounce, a certain
compactum, entered into and concluded between Ishmael Bush, squatter, and Obed Battius, M.D.,
to be incontinently null and of non-effect. Nay, children, to be null is merely a negative
property, and is fraught with no evil to your worthy parent; so lay aside the fire-arms, and
listen to the admonitions of reason. I declare it vicious--null--abrogated. As for thee, Nelly,
my feelings towards thee are not at all given to hostility; therefore listen to that which
I have to utter, nor turn away thine ears in the wantonness of security. Thou knowest the character
of the man with whom thou dwellest, young woman, and thou also knowest the danger of being
found in evil company. Abandon, then, the trifling advantages of thy situation, and yield the
rock peaceably to the will of those who accompany me--a legion, young woman--I do assure you
an invincible and powerful legion! Render, therefore, the effects of this lawless and wicked
squatter,--nay, children, such disregard of human life, is frightful in those who have so recently
received the gift, in their own persons! Point those dangerous weapons aside, I entreat of
you; more for your own sakes, than for mine. Hetty, hast thou forgotten who appeased thine
anguish when thy auricular nerves were tortured by the colds and damps of the naked earth!
and thou, Phoebe, ungrateful and forgetful Phoebe! but for this very arm, which you would prostrate
with an endless paralysis, thy incisores would still be giving thee pain and sorrow! Lay, then,
aside thy weapons, and hearken to the advice of one who has always been thy friend. And now,
young woman," still keeping a jealous eye on the muskets which the girl had suffered to be
diverted a little from their aim,--"and now, young woman, for the last, and therefore the most
solemn asking: I demand of thee the surrender of this rock, without delay or resistance, in
the joint names of power, of justice, and of the--" law he would have added; but recollecting
that this ominous word would again provoke the hostility of the squatter's children, he succeeded
in swallowing it in good season, and concluded with the less dangerous and more convertible
term of "reason."

This extraordinary summons failed, however, of producing the desired effect. It proved utterly
unintelligible to his younger listeners, with the exception of the few offensive terms, already
sufficiently distinguished, and though Ellen better comprehended the meaning of the herald,
she appeared as little moved by his rhetoric as her companions. At those passages which he
intended should be tender and affecting, the intelligent girl, though tortured by painful feelings,
had even manifested a disposition to laugh, while to the threats she turned an utterly insensible
ear.

"I know not the meaning of all you wish to say, Dr. Battius," she quietly replied, when he
had ended; "but I am sure if it would teach me to betray my trust, it is what I ought not to
hear. I caution you to attempt no violence, for let my wishes be what they may, you see I am
surrounded by a force that can easily put me down, and you know, or ought to know, too well
the temper of this family, to trifle in such a matter with any of its members, let them be
of what sex or age they may."

"I am not entirely ignorant of human character," returned the naturalist, prudently receding
a little from the position, which he had, until now, stoutly maintained at the very base of
the hill. "But here comes one who may know its secret windings still better than I."

"Ellen! Ellen Wade," cried Paul Hover, who had advanced to his elbow, without betraying any
of that sensitiveness which had so manifestly discomposed the Doctor; "I didn't expect to find
an enemy in you!"

"Nor shall you, when you ask that, which I can grant without treachery. You know that my uncle
has trusted his family to my care, and shall I so far betray the trust as to let in his bitterest
enemies to murder his children, perhaps, and to rob him of the little which the Indians have left?"

"Am I a murderer--is this old man--this officer of the States," pointing to the trapper and
his newly discovered friend, both of whom by this time stood at his side, "is either of these
likely to do the things you name?"

"What is it then you ask of me?" said Ellen, wringing her hands, in excessive doubt.

"The beast! nothing more nor less than the squatter's hidden, ravenous, dangerous beast!"

"Excellent young woman," commenced the young stranger, who had so lately joined himself to
the party on the prairie--but his mouth was immediately stopped by a significant sign from
the trapper, who whispered in his ear--

"Let the lad be our spokesman. Natur' will work in the bosom of the child, and we shall gain
our object, in good time."

"The whole truth is out, Ellen," Paul continued, "and we have lined the squatter into his most
secret misdoings. We have come to right the wronged and to free the imprisoned; now, if you
are the girl of a true heart, as I have always believed, so far from throwing straws in our
way, you will join in the general swarming, and leave old Ishmael and his hive to the bees
of his own breed."

"I have sworn a solemn oath--"

"A compactum which is entered into through ignorance, or in duresse, is null in the sight of
all good moralists," cried the Doctor.

"Hush, hush," again the trapper whispered; "leave it all to natur' and the lad!"

"I have sworn in the sight and by the name of Him who is the founder and ruler of all that
is good, whether it be in morals or in religion," Ellen continued, "neither to reveal the contents
of that tent, nor to help its prisoner to escape. We are both solemnly, terribly, sworn; our
lives perhaps have been the gift we received for the promises. It is true you are masters of
the secret, but not through any means of ours; nor do I know that I can justify myself, for
even being neutral, while you attempt to invade the dwelling of my uncle in this hostile manner."

"I can prove beyond the power of refutation," the naturalist eagerly exclaimed, "by Paley,
Berkeley, ay, even by the immortal Binkerschoek, that a compactum, concluded while one of the
parties, be it a state or be it an individual, is in durance--"

"You will ruffle the temper of the child, with your abusive language," said the cautious trapper,
"while the lad, if left to human feelings, will bring her down to the meekness of a fawn. Ah!
you are like myself, little knowing in the natur' of hidden kindnesses!"

"Is this the only vow you have taken, Ellen?" Paul continued in a tone which, for the gay,
light-hearted bee-hunter, sounded dolorous and reproachful. "Have you sworn only to this? are
the words which the squatter says, to be as honey in your mouth, and all other promises like
so much useless comb?"

The paleness, which had taken possession of the usually cheerful countenance of Ellen, was
hid in a bright glow, that was plainly visible even at the distance at which she stood. She
hesitated a moment, as if struggling to repress something very like resentment, before she
answered with all her native spirit--

"I know not what right any one has to question me about oaths and promises, which can only
concern her who has made them, if, indeed, any of the sort you mention have ever been made
at all. I shall hold no further discourse with one who thinks so much of himself, and takes
advice merely of his own feelings."

"Now, old trapper, do you hear that!" said the unsophisticated bee-hunter, turning abruptly
to his aged friend. "The meanest insect that skims the heavens, when it has got its load, flies
straight and honestly to its nest or hive, according to its kind; but the ways of a woman's
mind are as knotty as a gnarled oak, and more crooked than the windings of the Mississippi!"

"Nay, nay, child," said the trapper, good-naturedly interfering in behalf of the offending
Paul, "you are to consider that youth is hasty, and not overgiven to thought. But then a promise
is a promise, and not to be thrown aside and forgotten, like the hoofs and horns of a buffaloe."

"I thank you for reminding me of my oath," said the still resentful Ellen, biting her pretty
nether lip with vexation; "I might else have proved forgetful!"

"Ah! female natur' is awakened in her," said the old man, shaking his head in a manner to show
how much he was disappointed in the result; "but it manifests itself against the true spirit!"

"Ellen!" cried the young stranger, who until now had been an attentive listener to the parley,
"since Ellen is the name by which you are known--"

"They often add to it another. I am sometimes called by the name of my father."

"Call her Nelly Wade at once," muttered Paul; "it is her rightful name, and I care not if she
keeps it for ever!"

"Wade, I should have added," continued the youth. "You will acknowledge that, though bound
by no oath myself, I at least have known how to respect those of others. You are a witness
yourself that I have forborne to utter a single call, while I am certain it could reach those
ears it would gladden so much. Permit me then to ascend the rock, singly; I promise a perfect
indemnity to your kinsman, against any injury his effects may sustain."

Ellen seemed to hesitate, but catching a glimpse of Paul, who stood leaning proudly on his
rifle, whistling, with an appearance of the utmost indifference, the air of a boating song,
she recovered her recollection in time to answer,--

"I have been left the captain of the rock, while my uncle and his sons hunt, and captain will
I remain till he returns to receive back the charge."

"This is wasting moments that will not soon return, and neglecting an opportunity that may
never occur again," the young soldier gravely remarked. "The sun is beginning to fall already,
and many minutes cannot elapse before the squatter and his savage brood will be returning to
their huts."

Doctor Battius cast a glance behind him, and took up the discourse, by saying--

"Perfection is always found in maturity, whether it be in the animal or in the intellectual
world. Reflection is the mother of wisdom, and wisdom the parent of success. I propose that
we retire to a discreet distance from this impregnable position, and there hold a convocation,
or council, to deliberate on what manner we may sit down regularly before the place; or, perhaps,
by postponing the siege to another season, gain the aid of auxiliaries from the inhabited countries,
and thus secure the dignity of the laws from any danger of a repulse."

"A storm would be better," the soldier smilingly answered, measuring the height and scanning
all its difficulties with a deliberate eye; "'twould be but a broken arm or a bruised head
at the worst."

"Then have at it!" shouted the impetuous bee-hunter, making a spring that at once put him out
of danger from shot, by carrying him beneath the projecting ledge on which the garrison was
posted; "now do your worst, young devils of a wicked breed; you have but a moment to work your
mischief!"

"Paul! rash Paul!" shrieked Ellen; "another step and the rocks will crush you! they hang by
but a thread, and these girls are ready and willing to let them fall!"

"Then drive the accursed swarm from the hive; for scale the rock I will, though I find it covered
with hornets."

"Let her if she dare!" tauntingly cried the eldest of the girls, brandishing a musket with
a mien and resolution that would have done credit to her Amazonian dam. "I know you, Nelly
Wade; you are with the lawyers in your heart, and if you come a foot nigher, you shall have
frontier punishment. Put in another pry, girls; in with it! I should like to see the man, of
them all, that dare come up into the camp of Ishmael Bush, without asking leave of his children!"

"Stir not, Paul; for your life keep beneath the rock!"

Ellen was interrupted by the same bright vision, which on the preceding day had stayed another
scarcely less portentous tumult, by exhibiting itself on the same giddy height, where it was
now seen.

"In the name of Him, who commandeth all, I implore you to pause--both you, who so madly incur
the risk, and you, who so rashly offer to take that which you never can return!" said a voice,
in a slightly foreign accent, that instantly drew all eyes upward.

"Inez!" cried the officer, "do I again see you! mine shall you now be, though a million devils
were posted on this rock. Push up, brave woodsman, and give room for another!"

The sudden appearance of the figure from the tent had created a momentary stupor among the
defendants of the rock, which might, with suitable forbearance, have been happily improved;
but startled by the voice of Middleton, the surprised Phoebe discharged her musket at the female,
scarcely knowing whether she aimed at the life of a mortal or at some being which belonged
to another world. Ellen uttered a cry of horror, and then sprang after her alarmed or wounded
friend, she knew not which, into the tent.

During this moment of dangerous by-play, the sounds of a serious attack were very distinctly
audible beneath. Paul had profited by the commotion over his head to change his place so far,
as to make room for Middleton. The latter was followed by the naturalist, who, in a state of
mental aberration, produced by the report of the musket, had instinctively rushed towards the
rocks for cover. The trapper remained where he was last seen, an unmoved but close observer
of the several proceedings. Though averse to enter into actual hostilities, the old man was,
however, far from being useless. Favoured by his position, he was enabled to apprise his friends
of the movements of those who plotted their destruction above, and to advise and control their
advance accordingly.

In the mean time, the children of Esther were true to the spirit they had inherited from their
redoubtable mother. The instant they found themselves delivered from the presence of Ellen
and her unknown companion, they bestowed an undivided attention on their more masculine and
certainly more dangerous assailants, who by this time had made a complete lodgment among the
crags of the citadel. The repeated summons to surrender, which Paul uttered in a voice that
he intended should strike terror in their young bosoms, were as little heeded as were the calls
of the trapper to abandon a resistance, which might prove fatal to some among them, without
offering the smallest probability of eventual success. Encouraging each other to persevere,
they poised the fragments of rocks, prepared the lighter missiles for immediate service, and
thrust forward the barrels of the muskets with a business-like air, and a coolness, that would
have done credit to men practised in warfare.

"Keep under the ledge," said the trapper, pointing out to Paul the manner in which he should
proceed; "keep in your foot more, lad--ah! you see the warning was not amiss! had the stone
struck it, the bees would have had the prairies to themselves. Now, namesake of my friend;
Uncas, in name and spirit! now, if you have the activity of Le Cerf Agile, you may make a far
leap to the right, and gain twenty feet, without danger. Beware the bush--beware the bush!
'twill prove a treacherous hold! Ah! he has done it; safely and bravely has he done it! Your
turn comes next, friend; that follows the fruits of natur'. Push you to the left, and divide
the attention of the children. Nay, girls, fire,--my old ears are used to the whistling of
lead; and little reason have I to prove a doe-heart, with fourscore years on my back." He shook
his head with a melancholy smile, but without flinching in a muscle, as the bullet, which the
exasperated Hetty fired, passed innocently at no great distance from the spot where he stood.
"It is safer keeping in your track than dodging when a weak finger pulls the trigger," he continued
"but it is a solemn sight to witness how much human natur' is inclined to evil, in one so young!
Well done, my man of beasts and plants! Another such leap, and you may laugh at all the squatter's
bars and walls. The Doctor has got his temper up! I see it in his eye, and something good will
come of him! Keep closer, man--keep closer."

The trapper, though he was not deceived as to the state of Dr. Battius' mind, was, however,
greatly in error as to the exciting cause. While imitating the movements of his companions,
and toiling his way upward with the utmost caution, and not without great inward tribulation,
the eye of the naturalist had caught a glimpse of an unknown plant, a few yards above his head,
and in a situation more than commonly exposed to the missiles which the girls were unceasingly
hurling in the direction of the assailants. Forgetting, in an instant, every thing but the
glory of being the first to give this jewel to the catalogues of science, he sprang upward
at the prize with the avidity with which the sparrow darts upon the butterfly. The rocks, which
instantly came thundering down, announced that he was seen; and for a moment, while his form
was concealed in the cloud of dust and fragments which followed the furious descent, the trapper
gave him up for lost; but the next instant he was seen safely seated in a cavity formed by
some of the projecting stones which had yielded to the shock, holding triumphantly in his hand
the captured stem, which he was already devouring with delighted, and certainly not unskilful,
eyes. Paul profited by the opportunity. Turning his course, with the quickness of thought,
he sprang to the post which Obed thus securely occupied, and unceremoniously making a footstool
of his shoulder, as the latter stooped over his treasure, he bounded through the breach left
by the fallen rock, and gained the level. He was followed by Middleton, who joined him in seizing
and disarming the girls. In this manner a bloodless and complete victory was obtained over
that citadel which Ishmael had vainly flattered himself might prove impregnable.

CHAPTER XV

              So smile the heavens upon this holy act,
              That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
                                                   --Shakspeare.

It is proper that the course of the narrative should be stayed, while we revert to those causes,
which have brought in their train of consequences, the singular contest just related. The interruption
must necessarily be as brief as we hope it may prove satisfactory to that class of readers,
who require that no gap should be left by those who assume the office of historians, for their
own fertile imaginations to fill.

Among the troops sent by the government of the United States, to take possession of its newly
acquired territory in the west, was a detachment led by a young soldier who has become so busy
an actor in the scenes of our legend. The mild and indolent descendants of the ancient colonists
received their new compatriots without distrust, well knowing that the transfer raised them
from the condition of subjects, to the more enviable distinction of citizens in a government
of laws. The new rulers exercised their functions with discretion, and wielded their delegated
authority without offence. In such a novel intermixture, however, of men born and nurtured
in freedom, and the compliant minions of absolute power, the catholic and the protestant, the
active and the indolent, some little time was necessary to blend the discrepant elements of
society. In attaining so desirable an end, woman was made to perform her accustomed and grateful
office. The barriers of prejudice and religion were broken through by the irresistible power
of the master-passion, and family unions, ere long, began to cement the political tie which
had made a forced conjunction, between people so opposite in their habits, their educations,
and their opinions.

Middleton was among the first, of the new possessors of the soil, who became captive to the
charms of a Louisianian lady. In the immediate vicinity of the post he had been directed to
occupy, dwelt the chief of one of those ancient colonial families, which had been content to
slumber for ages amid the ease, indolence, and wealth of the Spanish provinces. He was an officer
of the crown, and had been induced to remove from the Floridas, among the French of the adjoining
province, by a rich succession of which he had become the inheritor. The name of Don Augustin
de Certavallos was scarcely known beyond the limits of the little town in which he resided,
though he found a secret pleasure himself in pointing it out, in large scrolls of musty documents,
to an only child, as enrolled among the former heroes and grandees of Old and of New Spain.
This fact, so important to himself and of so little moment to any body else, was the principal
reason, that while his more vivacious Gallic neighbours were not slow to open a frank communion
with their visiters, he chose to keep aloof, seemingly content with the society of his daughter,
who was a girl just emerging from the condition of childhood into that of a woman.

The curiosity of the youthful Inez, however, was not so inactive. She had not heard the martial
music of the garrison, melting on the evening air, nor seen the strange banner, which fluttered
over the heights that rose at no great distance from her father's extensive grounds, without
experiencing some of those secret impulses which are thought to distinguish the sex. Natural
timidity, and that retiring and perhaps peculiar lassitude, which forms the very groundwork
of female fascination, in the tropical provinces of Spain, held her in their seemingly indissoluble
bonds; and it is more than probable, that had not an accident occurred, in which Middleton
was of some personal service to her father, so long a time would have elapsed before they met,
that another direction might have been given to the wishes of one, who was just of an age to
be alive to all the power of youth and beauty.

Providence--or if that imposing word is too just to be classical, fate--had otherwise decreed.
The haughty and reserved Don Augustin was by far too observant of the forms of that station,
on which he so much valued himself, to forget the duties of a gentleman. Gratitude, for the
kindness of Middleton, induced him to open his doors to the officers of the garrison, and to
admit of a guarded but polite intercourse. Reserve gradually gave way before the propriety
and candour of their spirited young leader, and it was not long ere the affluent planter rejoiced
as much as his daughter, whenever the well known signal, at the gate, announced one of these
agreeable visits from the commander of the post.

It is unnecessary to dwell on the impression which the charms of Inez produced on the soldier,
or to delay the tale in order to write a wire-drawn account of the progressive influence that
elegance of deportment, manly beauty, and undivided assiduity and intelligence were likely
to produce on the sensitive mind of a romantic, warm-hearted, and secluded girl of sixteen.
It is sufficient for our purpose to say that they loved, that the youth was not backward to
declare his feelings, that he prevailed with some facility over the scruples of the maiden,
and with no little difficulty over the objections of her father, and that before the province
of Louisiana had been six months in the possession of the States, the officer of the latter
was the affianced husband of the richest heiress on the banks of the Mississippi.

Although we have presumed the reader to be acquainted with the manner in which such results
are commonly attained, it is not to be supposed that the triumph of Middleton, either over
the prejudices of the father or over those of the daughter, was achieved without difficulty.
Religion formed a stubborn and nearly irremovable obstacle with both. The devoted man patiently
submitted to a formidable essay, father Ignatius was deputed to make in order to convert him
to the true faith. The effort on the part of the worthy priest was systematic, vigorous, and
long sustained. A dozen times (it was at those moments when glimpses of the light, sylphlike
form of Inez flitted like some fairy being past the scene of their conferences) the good father
fancied he was on the eve of a glorious triumph over infidelity; but all his hopes were frustrated
by some unlooked-for opposition, on the part of the subject of his pious labours. So long as
the assault on his faith was distant and feeble, Middleton, who was no great proficient in
polemics, submitted to its effects with the patience and humility of a martyr; but the moment
the good father, who felt such concern in his future happiness, was tempted to improve his
vantage ground by calling in the aid of some of the peculiar subtilties of his own creed, the
young man was too good a soldier not to make head against the hot attack. He came to the contest,
it is true, with no weapons more formidable than common sense, and some little knowledge of
the habits of his country as contrasted with that of his adversary; but with these homebred
implements he never failed to repulse the father with something of the power with which a nervous
cudgel player would deal with a skilful master of the rapier, setting at nought his passados
by the direct and unanswerable arguments of a broken head and a shivered weapon.

Before the controversy was terminated, an inroad of Protestants had come to aid the soldier.
The reckless freedom of such among them, as thought only of this life, and the consistent and
tempered piety of others, caused the honest priest to look about him in concern. The influence
of example on one hand, and the contamination of too free an intercourse on the other, began
to manifest themselves, even in that portion of his own flock, which he had supposed to be
too thoroughly folded in spiritual government ever to stray. It was time to turn his thoughts
from the offensive, and to prepare his followers to resist the lawless deluge of opinion, which
threatened to break down the barriers of their faith. Like a wise commander, who finds he has
occupied too much ground for the amount of his force, he began to curtail his outworks. The
relics were concealed from profane eyes; his people were admonished not to speak of miracles
before a race that not only denied their existence, but who had even the desperate hardihood
to challenge their proofs; and even the Bible itself was prohibited, with terrible denunciations,
for the triumphant reason that it was liable to be misinterpreted.

In the mean time, it became necessary to report to Don Augustin, the effects his arguments
and prayers had produced on the heretical disposition of the young soldier. No man is prone
to confess his weakness, at the very moment when circumstances demand the utmost efforts of
his strength. By a species of pious fraud, for which no doubt the worthy priest found his absolution
in the purity of his motives, he declared that, while no positive change was actually wrought
in the mind of Middleton, there was every reason to hope the entering wedge of argument had
been driven to its head, and that in consequence an opening was left, through which, it might
rationally be hoped, the blessed seeds of a religious fructification would find their way,
especially if the subject was left uninterruptedly to enjoy the advantage of catholic communion.

Don Augustin himself was now seized with the desire of proselyting. Even the soft and amiable
Inez thought it would be a glorious consummation of her wishes, to be a humble instrument of
bringing her lover into the bosom of the true church. The offers of Middleton were promptly
accepted, and, while the father looked forward impatiently to the day assigned for the nuptials,
as to the pledge of his own success, the daughter thought of it with feelings in which the
holy emotions of her faith were blended with the softer sensations of her years and situation.

The sun rose, the morning of her nuptials, on a day so bright and cloudless, that Inez hailed
it as a harbinger of future happiness. Father Ignatius performed the offices of the church,
in a little chapel attached to the estate of Don Augustin; and long ere the sun had begun to
fall, Middleton pressed the blushing and timid young Creole to his bosom, his acknowledged
and unalienable wife. It had pleased the parties to pass the day of the wedding in retirement,
dedicating it solely to the best and purest affections, aloof from the noisy and heartless
rejoicings of a compelled festivity.

Middleton was returning through the grounds of Don Augustin, from a visit of duty to his encampment,
at that hour in which the light of the sun begins to melt into the shadows of evening, when
a glimpse of a robe, similar to that in which Inez had accompanied him to the altar, caught
his eye through the foliage of a retired arbour. He approached the spot, with a delicacy that
was rather increased than diminished by the claim she had perhaps given him to intrude on her
private moments; but the sounds of her soft voice, which was offering up prayers, in which
he heard himself named by the dearest of all appellations, overcame his scruples, and induced
him to take a position where he might listen without the fear of detection. It was certainly
grateful to the feelings of a husband to be able in this manner to lay bare the spotless soul
of his wife, and to find that his own image lay enshrined amid its purest and holiest aspirations.
His self-esteem was too much flattered not to induce him to overlook the immediate object of
the petitioner. While she prayed that she might become the humble instrument of bringing him
into the flock of the faithful, she petitioned for forgiveness, on her own behalf, if presumption
or indifference to the counsel of the church had caused her to set too high a value on her
influence, and led her into the dangerous error of hazarding her own soul by espousing a heretic.
There was so much of fervent piety, mingled with so strong a burst of natural feeling, so much
of the woman blended with the angel, in her prayers, that Middleton could have forgiven her,
had she termed him a Pagan, for the sweetness and interest with which she petitioned in his favour.

The young man waited until his bride arose from her knees, and then he joined her, as if entirely
ignorant of what had occurred.

"It is getting late, my Inez," he said, "and Don Augustin would be apt to reproach you with
inattention to your health, in being abroad at such an hour. What then am I to do, who am charged
with all his authority, and twice his love?"

"Be like him in every thing," she answered, looking up in his face, with tears in her eyes,
and speaking with emphasis; "in every thing. Imitate my father, Middleton, and I can ask no
more of you."

"Nor for me, Inez? I doubt not that I should be all you can wish, were I to become as good
as the worthy and respectable Don Augustin. But you are to make some allowances for the infirmities
and habits of a soldier. Now let us go and join this excellent father."

"Not yet," said his bride, gently extricating herself from the arm, that he had thrown around
her slight form, while he urged her from the place. "I have still another duty to perform,
before I can submit so implicitly to your orders, soldier though you are. I promised the worthy
Inesella, my faithful nurse, she who, as you heard, has so long been a mother to me, Middleton--I
promised her a visit at this hour. It is the last, as she thinks, that she can receive from
her own child, and I cannot disappoint her. Go you then to Don Augustin; in one short hour
I will rejoin you."

"Remember it is but an hour!"

"One hour," repeated Inez, as she kissed her hand to him; and then blushing, ashamed at her
own boldness, she darted from the arbour, and was seen for an instant gliding towards the cottage
of her nurse, in which, at the next moment, she disappeared.

Middleton returned slowly and thoughtfully to the house, often bending his eyes in the direction
in which he had last seen his wife, as if he would fain trace her lovely form, in the gloom
of the evening, still floating through the vacant space. Don Augustin received him with warmth,
and for many minutes his mind was amused by relating to his new kinsman plans for the future.
The exclusive old Spaniard listened to his glowing but true account of the prosperity and happiness
of those States, of which he had been an ignorant neighbour half his life, partly in wonder,
and partly with that sort of incredulity with which one attends to what he fancies are the
exaggerated descriptions of a too partial friendship.

In this manner the hour for which Inez had conditioned passed away, much sooner than her husband
could have thought possible, in her absence. At length his looks began to wander to the clock,
and then the minutes were counted, as one rolled by after another and Inez did not appear.
The hand had already made half of another circuit, around the face of the dial, when Middleton
arose and announced his determination to go and offer himself, as an escort to the absentee.
He found the night dark, and the heavens charged with threatening vapour, which in that climate
was the infallible forerunner of a gust. Stimulated no less by the unpropitious aspect of the
skies, than by his secret uneasiness, he quickened his pace, making long and rapid strides
in the direction of the cottage of Inesella. Twenty times he stopped, fancying that he caught
glimpses of the fairy form of Inez, tripping across the grounds, on her return to the mansion-house,
and as often he was obliged to resume his course, in disappointment. He reached the gate of
the cottage, knocked, opened the door, entered, and even stood in the presence of the aged
nurse, without meeting the person of her he sought. She had already left the place, on her
return to her father's house! Believing that he must have passed her in the darkness, Middleton
retraced his steps to meet with another disappointment. Inez had not been seen. Without communicating
his intention to any one, the bridegroom proceeded with a palpitating heart to the little sequestered
arbour, where he had overheard his bride offering up those petitions for his happiness and
conversion. Here, too, he was disappointed; and then all was afloat, in the painful incertitude
of doubt and conjecture.

For many hours, a secret distrust of the motives of his wife caused Middleton to proceed in
the search with delicacy and caution. But as day dawned, without restoring her to the arms
of her father or her husband, reserve was thrown aside, and her unaccountable absence was loudly
proclaimed. The enquiries after the lost Inez were now direct and open; but they proved equally
fruitless. No one had seen her, or heard of her, from the moment that she left the cottage
of her nurse.

Day succeeded day, and still no tidings rewarded the search that was immediately instituted,
until she was finally given over, by most of her relations and friends, as irretrievably lost.

An event of so extraordinary a character was not likely to be soon forgotten. It excited speculation,
gave rise to an infinity of rumours, and not a few inventions. The prevalent opinion, among
such of those emigrants who were over-running the country, as had time, in the multitude of
their employments, to think of any foreign concerns, was the simple and direct conclusion that
the absent bride was no more nor less than a felo de se. Father Ignatius had many doubts, and
much secret compunction of conscience; but, like a wise chief, he endeavoured to turn the sad
event to some account, in the impending warfare of faith. Changing his battery, he whispered
in the ears of a few of his oldest parishioners, that he had been deceived in the state of
Middleton's mind, which he was now compelled to believe was completely stranded on the quicksands
of heresy. He began to show his relics again, and was even heard to allude once more to the
delicate and nearly forgotten subject of modern miracles. In consequence of these demonstrations,
on the part of the venerable priest, it came to be whispered among the faithful, and finally
it was adopted, as part of the parish creed, that Inez had been translated to heaven.

Don Augustin had all the feelings of a father, but they were smothered in the lassitude of
a Creole. Like his spiritual governor, he began to think that they had been wrong in consigning
one so pure, so young, so lovely, and above all so pious, to the arms of a heretic: and he
was fain to believe that the calamity, which had befallen his age, was a judgment on his presumption
and want of adherence to established forms. It is true that, as the whispers of the congregation
came to his ears, he found present consolation in their belief; but then nature was too powerful,
and had too strong a hold of the old man's heart, not to give rise to the rebellious thought,
that the succession of his daughter to the heavenly inheritance was a little premature.

But Middleton, the lover, the husband, the bridegroom--Middleton was nearly crushed by the
weight of the unexpected and terrible blow. Educated himself under the dominion of a simple
and rational faith, in which nothing is attempted to be concealed from the believers, he could
have no other apprehensions for the fate of Inez than such as grew out of his knowledge of
the superstitious opinions she entertained of his own church. It is needless to dwell on the
mental tortures that he endured, or all the various surmises, hopes, and disappointments, that
he was fated to experience in the first few weeks of his misery. A jealous distrust of the
motives of Inez, and a secret, lingering, hope that he should yet find her, had tempered his
enquiries, without however causing him to abandon them entirely. But time was beginning to
deprive him, even of the mortifying reflection that he was intentionally, though perhaps temporarily,
deserted, and he was gradually yielding to the more painful conviction that she was dead, when
his hopes were suddenly revived, in a new and singular manner.

The young commander was slowly and sorrowfully returning from an evening parade of his troops,
to his own quarters, which stood at some little distance from the place of the encampment,
and on the same high bluff of land, when his vacant eyes fell on the figure of a man, who by
the regulations of the place, was not entitled to be there, at that forbidden hour. The stranger
was meanly dressed, with every appearance about his person and countenance, of squalid poverty
and of the most dissolute habits. Sorrow had softened the military pride of Middleton, and,
as he passed the crouching form of the intruder, he said, in tones of great mildness, or rather
of kindness--

"You will be given a night in the guard-house, friend, should the patrol find you here;--there
is a dollar,--go, and get a better place to sleep in, and something to eat!"

"I swallow all my food, captain, without chewing," returned the vagabond, with the low exultation
of an accomplished villain, as he eagerly seized the silver. "Make this Mexican twenty, and
I will sell you a secret."

"Go, go," said the other with a little of a soldier's severity, returning to his manner. "Go,
before I order the guard to seize you."

"Well, go I will;--but if I do go, captain, I shall take my knowledge with me; and then you
may live a widower bewitched till the tattoo of life is beat off."

"What mean you, fellow?" exclaimed Middleton, turning quickly towards the wretch, who was already
dragging his diseased limbs from the place.

"I mean to have the value of this dollar in Spanish brandy, and then come back and sell you
my secret for enough to buy a barrel."

"If you have any thing to say, speak now," continued Middleton, restraining with difficulty
the impatience that urged him to betray his feelings.

"I am a-dry, and I can never talk with elegance when my throat is husky, captain. How much
will you give to know what I can tell you; let it be something handsome; such as one gentleman
can offer to another."

"I believe it would be better justice to order the drummer to pay you a visit, fellow. To what
does your boasted secret relate?"

"Matrimony; a wife and no wife; a pretty face and a rich bride: do I speak plain, now, captain?"

"If you know any thing relating to my wife, say it at once; you need not fear for your reward."

"Ay, captain, I have drove many a bargain in my time, and sometimes I have been paid in money,
and sometimes I have been paid in promises; now the last are what I call pinching food."

"Name your price."

"Twenty--no, damn it, it's worth thirty dollars, if it's worth a cent!"

"Here, then, is your money: but remember, if you tell me nothing worth knowing, I have a force
that can easily deprive you of it again, and punish your insolence in the bargain."

The fellow examined the bank-bills he received, with a jealous eye, and then pocketed them,
apparently well satisfied of their being genuine.

"I like a northern note," he said very coolly; "they have a character to lose like myself.
No fear of me, captain; I am a man of honour, and I shall not tell you a word more, nor a word
less than I know of my own knowledge to be true."

"Proceed then without further delay, or I may repent, and order you to be deprived of all your
gains; the silver as well as the notes."

"Honour, if you die for it!" returned the miscreant, holding up a hand in affected horror at
so treacherous a threat. "Well, captain, you must know that gentlemen don't all live by the
same calling; some keep what they've got, and some get what they can."

"You have been a thief."

"I scorn the word. I have been a humanity hunter. Do you know what that means? Ay, it has many
interpretations. Some people think the woolly-heads are miserable, working on hot plantations
under a broiling sun--and all such sorts of inconveniences. Well, captain, I have been, in
my time, a man who has been willing to give them the pleasures of variety, at least, by changing
the scene for them. You understand me?"

"You are, in plain language, a kidnapper."

"Have been, my worthy captain--have been; but just now a little reduced, like a merchant who
leaves off selling tobacco by the hogshead, to deal in it by the yard. I have been a soldier,
too, in my day. What is said to be the great secret of our trade, can you tell me that?"

"I know not," said Middleton, beginning to tire of the fellow's trifling: "courage?"

"No, legs--legs to fight with, and legs to run away with--and therein you see my two callings
agreed. My legs are none of the best just now, and without legs a kidnapper would carry on
a losing trade; but then there are men enough left, better provided than I am."

"Stolen!" groaned the horror-struck husband.

"On her travels, as sure as you are standing still!"

"Villain, what reason have you for believing a thing so shocking?"

"Hands off--hands off--do you think my tongue can do its work the better, for a little squeezing
of the throat! Have patience, and you shall know it all; but if you treat me so ungenteelly
again, I shall be obliged to call in the assistance of the lawyers."

"Say on; but if you utter a single word more or less than the truth, expect instant vengeance!"

"Are you fool enough to believe what such a scoundrel as I am tells you, captain, unless it
has probability to back it? I know you are not: therefore I will give my facts and my opinions,
and then leave you to chew on them, while I go and drink of your generosity. I know a man who
is called Abiram White.--I believe the knave took that name to show his enmity to the race
of blacks! But this gentleman is now, and has been for years, to my certain knowledge, a regular
translator of the human body from one State to another. I have dealt with him in my time, and
a cheating dog he is! No more honour in him than meat in my stomach. I saw him here in this
very town, the day of your wedding. He was in company with his wife's brother, and pretended
to be a settler on the hunt for new land. A noble set they were, to carry on business--seven
sons, each of them as tall as your sergeant with his cap on. Well, the moment I heard that
your wife was lost, I saw at once that Abiram had laid his hands on her."

"Do you know this--can this be true? What reason have you to fancy a thing so wild?"

"Reason enough; I know Abiram White. Now, will you add a trifle just to keep my throat from
parching?"

"Go, go; you are stupified with drink already, miserable man, and know not what you say. Go;
go, and beware the drummer."

"Experience is a good guide"--the fellow called after the retiring Middleton; and then turning
with a chuckling laugh, like one well satisfied with himself, he made the best of his way towards
the shop of the suttler.

A hundred times in the course of that night did Middleton fancy that the communication of the
miscreant was entitled to some attention, and as often did he reject the idea as too wild and
visionary for another thought. He was awakened early on the following morning, after passing
a restless and nearly sleepless night, by his orderly, who came to report that a man was found
dead on the parade, at no great distance from his quarters. Throwing on his clothes he proceeded
to the spot, and beheld the individual, with whom he had held the preceding conference, in
the precise situation in which he had first been found.

The miserable wretch had fallen a victim to his intemperance. This revolting fact was sufficiently
proclaimed by his obtruding eye-balls, his bloated countenance, and the nearly insufferable
odours that were even then exhaling from his carcass. Disgusted with the odious spectacle,
the youth was turning from the sight, after ordering the corpse to be removed, when the position
of one of the dead man's hands struck him. On examination, he found the fore-finger extended,
as if in the act of writing in the sand, with the following incomplete sentence, nearly illegible,
but yet in a state to be deciphered: "Captain, it is true, as I am a gentle--" He had either
died, or fallen into a sleep, the forerunner of his death, before the latter word was finished.

Concealing this fact from the others, Middleton repeated his orders and departed. The pertinacity
of the deceased, and all the circumstances united, induced him to set on foot some secret enquiries.
He found that a family answering the description which had been given him, had in fact passed
the place the day of his nuptials. They were traced along the margin of the Mississippi, for
some distance, until they took boat and ascended the river to its confluence with the Missouri.
Here they had disappeared like hundreds of others, in pursuit of the hidden wealth of the interior.

Furnished with these facts, Middleton detailed a small guard of his most trusty men, took leave
of Don Augustin, without declaring his hopes or his fears, and having arrived at the indicated
point, he pushed into the wilderness in pursuit. It was not difficult to trace a train like
that of Ishmael, until he was well assured its object lay far beyond the usual limits of the
settlements. This circumstance, in itself, quickened his suspicions, and gave additional force
to his hopes of final success.

After getting beyond the assistance of verbal directions, the anxious husband had recourse
to the usual signs of a trail, in order to follow the fugitives. This he also found a task
of no difficulty, until he reached the hard and unyielding soil of the rolling prairies. Here,
indeed, he was completely at fault. He found himself, at length, compelled to divide his followers,
appointing a place of rendezvous at a distant day, and to endeavour to find the lost trail
by multiplying, as much as possible, the number of his eyes. He had been alone a week, when
accident brought him in contact with the trapper and the bee-hunter. Part of their interview
has been related, and the reader can readily imagine the explanations that succeeded the tale
he recounted, and which led, as has already been seen, to the recovery of his bride.

An hour had slid by, in hasty and nearly incoherent questions and answers, before Middleton,
hanging over his recovered treasure with that sort of jealous watchfulness with which a miser
would regard his hoards, closed the disjointed narrative of his own proceedings by demanding--

"And you, my Inez; in what manner were you treated?"

"In every thing, but the great injustice they did in separating me so forcibly from my friends,
as well perhaps as the circumstances of my captors would allow. I think the man, who is certainly
the master here, is but a new beginner in wickedness. He quarrelled frightfully in my presence,
with the wretch who seized me, and then they made an impious bargain, to which I was compelled
to acquiesce, and to which they bound me as well as themselves by oaths. Ah! Middleton, I fear
the heretics are not so heedful of their vows as we who are nurtured in the bosom of the true
church!"

"Believe it not; these villains are of no religion: did they forswear themselves?"

"No, not perjured: but was it not awful to call upon the good God to witness so sinful a compact?"

"And so we think, Inez, as truly as the most virtuous cardinal of Rome. But how did they observe
their oath, and what was its purport?"

"They conditioned to leave me unmolested, and free from their odious presence, provided I would
give a pledge to make no effort to escape; and that I would not even show myself, until a time
that my masters saw fit to name."

"And that time?" demanded the impatient Middleton, who so well knew the religious scruples
of his wife--"that time?"

"It is already passed. I was sworn by my patron saint, and faithfully did I keep the vow, until
the man they call Ishmael forgot the terms by offering violence. I then made my appearance
on the rock, for the time too was passed; though I even think father Ignatius would have absolved
me from the vow, on account of the treachery of my keepers."

"If he had not," muttered the youth between his compressed teeth, "I would have absolved him
for ever from his spiritual care of your conscience!"

"You, Middleton!" returned his wife looking up into his flushed face, while a bright blush
suffused her own sweet countenance; "you may receive my vows, but surely you can have no power
to absolve me from their observance!"

"No, no, no. Inez, you are right. I know but little of these conscientious subtilties, and
I am any thing but a priest: yet tell me, what has induced these monsters to play this desperate
game--to trifle thus with my happiness?"

"You know my ignorance of the world, and how ill I am qualified to furnish reasons for the
conduct of beings so different from any I have ever seen before. But does not love of money
drive men to acts even worse than this? I believe they thought that an aged and wealthy father
could be tempted to pay them a rich ransom for his child; and, perhaps," she added, stealing
an enquiring glance through her tears, at the attentive Middleton, "they counted something
on the fresh affections of a bridegroom."

"They might have extracted the blood from my heart, drop by drop!"

"Yes," resumed his young and timid wife, instantly withdrawing the stolen look she had hazarded,
and hurriedly pursuing the train of the discourse, as if glad to make him forget the liberty
she had just taken, "I have been told, there are men so base as to perjure themselves at the
altar, in order to command the gold of ignorant and confiding girls; and if love of money will
lead to such baseness, we may surely expect it will hurry those, who devote themselves to gain,
into acts of lesser fraud."

"It must be so; and now, Inez, though I am here to guard you with my life, and we are in possession
of this rock, our difficulties, perhaps our dangers, are not ended. You will summon all your
courage to meet the trial and prove yourself a soldier's wife, my Inez?"

"I am ready to depart this instant. The letter you sent by the physician, had prepared me to
hope for the best, and I have every thing arranged for flight, at the shortest warning."

"Let us then leave this place and join our friends."

"Friends!" interrupted Inez, glancing her eyes around the little tent in quest of the form
of Ellen. "I, too, have a friend who must not be forgotten, but who is pledged to pass the
remainder of her life with us. She is gone!"

Middleton gently led her from the spot, as he smilingly answered--

"She may have had, like myself, her own private communications for some favoured ear."

The young man had not however done justice to the motives of Ellen Wade. The sensitive and
intelligent girl had readily perceived how little her presence was necessary in the interview
that has just been related, and had retired with that intuitive delicacy of feeling which seems
to belong more properly to her sex. She was now to be seen seated on a point of the rock, with
her person so entirely enveloped in her dress as to conceal her features. Here she had remained
for near an hour, no one approaching to address her, and as it appeared to her own quick and
jealous eyes, totally unobserved. In the latter particular, however, even the vigilance of
the quick-sighted Ellen was deceived.

The first act of Paul Hover, on finding himself the master of Ishmael's citadel, had been to
sound the note of victory, after the quaint and ludicrous manner that is so often practised
among the borderers of the West. Flapping his sides with his hands, as the conquering game-cock
is wont to do with his wings, he raised a loud and laughable imitation of the exultation of
this bird; a cry which might have proved a dangerous challenge had any one of the athletic
sons of the squatter been within hearing.

"This has been a regular knock-down and drag-out," he cried, "and no bones broke! How now,
old trapper, you have been one of your training, platoon, rank and file soldiers in your day,
and have seen forts taken and batteries stormed before this--am I right?"

"Ay, ay, that have I," answered the old man, who still maintained his post at the foot of the
rock, so little disturbed by what he had just witnessed, as to return the grin of Paul, with
a hearty indulgence in his own silent and peculiar laughter; "you have gone through the exploit
like men!"

"Now tell me, is it not in rule, to call over the names of the living, and to bury the dead,
after every bloody battle?"

"Some did and other some didn't. When Sir William push'd the German, Dieskau, thro' the defiles
at the foot of the Hori--"

"Your Sir William was a drone to Sir Paul, and knew nothing of regularity. Suddenly a gleam of
hope flitted across the blank.

"Perhaps the back is better," he muttered, opening the door that led
to the rear of the premises.

In order to get out he had to pass through the kitchen, where he found his men busy with fried
pork and flour cakes, and his lieutenant, Teddy, preparing coffee.

"What is that?" inquired Jack, pointing to a small heap of brown substance which Teddy was roasting
in a frying-pan.

"Sure it's coffee," said the man.

"Eh?" inquired Jack.

"Coffee, sur," repeated Teddy with emphasis.

"What is it made of?" inquired Jack.

"Bread-crumbs, sur.

I'm used to make it of pais, but it takes longer, d'ye see, for I've got to pound 'em in a cloth
after they're roasted. The crumbs is a'most as good as the pais, an' quicker made whin yer in
a hurry."

Jack's first impulse was to countermand the crumbs and order tea, but he refrained, and went out
to survey the back regions of his new home.

He found that the point selected for the establishment of the fort was a plain of sand, on which
little herbage of any kind grew. In rear of the house there was a belt of stunted bushes, which,
as he went onward into the interior, became a wood of stunted firs. This seemed to grow a little
more dense farther inland, and finally terminated at the base of the distant and rugged mountains
of the interior. In fact, he found that he was established on a sandbank which had either been
thrown up by the sea, or at no very remote period had formed part of its bed. Returning home so
as to enter by the front door, he observed an enclosed space a few hundred yards distant from
the fort. Curious to know what it was, he walked up to it, and, looking over the stockade,
beheld numerous little mounds of sand with wooden crosses at the head of them. It was the burial-ground
of the establishment. Trade had been carried on here by a few adventurous white men before the fort
was built. Some of their number having died, a space had been enclosed
as a burying-ground.

The Roman Catholic Indians afterwards used it, and it was eventually consecrated with much ceremony
by a priest.

With a face from which every vestige of intelligence was removed, Jack Robinson returned to
the fort and sat down in solitary state in the hall. In the act of sitting down he discovered that
the only arm-chair in the room was unsteady on its legs, these being of unequal length. There were
two other chairs without arms, and equally unsteady on their legs. These, as well as everything
in the room, were made of fir-wood-- as yet unpainted. In the empty fire-place Jack observed
a piece of charcoal, which he took up and began, in an absent way, to sketch on the white wall.
He portrayed a raving maniac as large as life, and then, sitting down, began insensibly to hum--

"I
dreamt that I dwelt in marble halls."

In the midst of which he was interrupted by the entrance of his lieutenant with a tray of viands.

"Ah,
yer a purty creatur," exclaimed Teddy, pausing with a look of admiration
before the maniac.

"Come, Teddy, sit down and let's have the news. What have we here?" said Jack, looking at three
covered plates which were placed before him.

"Salt pork fried," said Teddy removing the cover.

"And here?"

"Salt pork biled," said the man, removing the second cover; "an' salt pork cold," he added, removing
the third.

"You see, sur, I wasn't sure which way ye'd like it, an' ye was out whin I come to ax; so I
just did it up in three fashions. Here's loaf bread, an' it's not bad, though I say it that
made it."

As Jack cut down into the loaf, he naturally remembered those lines of a well-known writer:

"Who has not tasted home-made bread, A heavy compound of putty and lead!"

"Are these cakes?" he said, as Teddy presented another plate with something hot in it.

"Ay, pancakes they is, made of flour an' wather fried in grease, an' the best of aitin', as
ye'll find;--but, musha! they've all stuck together from some raison I han't yet diskivered:
but they'll be none the worse for that, and there's plenty of good
thick molasses to wash 'em down wid."

"And this," said Jack, pointing to a battered tin kettle, "is the--
the--"

"That's the coffee, sur."

"Ah! well, sit down, Teddy, I have seen worse fare than this.

Let's be thankful for it. Now, then, let me hear about the fishery."

Nothing pleased Teddy O'Donel so much as being allowed to talk. He sat down accordingly and
entertained his master for the next hour with a full, true, and particular account of every
thing connected with Fort Desolation. We will not, however, inflict this on the reader. Reduced
to its narrowest limits, his information was to the following effect:--

That the Indians, generally, were well disposed towards the traders, though difficult to please.
That a good many furs had been already obtained, and there was a report of more coming in. That
the salmon fishery was situated on a river twenty miles below the
fort, and was progressing favourably; but that the five men engaged
there were a quarrelsome set and difficult to keep in order.

Teddy thought, however, that it was all owing to one of the men, named Ladoc, a bully, who kept
the other four in bad humour.

But the point on which poor Teddy dilated most was his solitude.

For some time he had been living with no other companions than an old Indian woman and her half-caste
daughter, and they having left him, during the last three days he
had been living entirely alone "among the ghosts," many of which he
described minutely.

This intelligence was brought to an abrupt close by a row among the men in the kitchen. Rollo had
been boasting of his walking powers to such an extent, that Pierre had become disgusted and
spoke contemptuously of Rollo; whereupon the bully, as usual, began
to storm, and his wrath culminated when Pierre asserted that, "Mr
Robinson would bring him to his marrow-bones ere long."

"Jack Robinson!" exclaimed Rollo with contempt; "I'd walk him blind
in two hours."

Just at that moment the door opened, and Jack stood before them.

"You are too noisy, men," said he, in a quiet voice, (Jack almost always spoke in a soft voice);
"remember that this kitchen is within hearing of the hall. Rollo, go down to the beach and haul
up the sloop's boat, I see the tide is making on her."

Rollo hesitated.

"You hear?" said Jack, still in a quiet tone, but with a look--not
a fierce look, or a threatening look, but--a peculiar look, which
instantly took effect.

One has often observed a cat when about to spring.

It makes many pauses in its prowling towards its prey, and occasional
motions that lead one to expect a spring.

But the motion which precedes the actual spring is always emphatic.

It may not be violent; it may be as slight as all the previous motions, but there is that in
it which tells irresistibly, somehow, of a fixed purpose. So is it, doubtless, with tigers; so
was it with Jack Robinson.

His first remark to the men was a prowl; his order to Rollo was a
pause, with an intention; his "you hear?" softly said, had a something
in it which induced Rollo to accord instant obedience!

             
             
             On returning to the hall, Jack paced
                                                   up and down indignantly.

"So there are two bullies in the camp," he soliloquised; "I must cure them both;--but softly,
Jack. It won't do to fight if you can secure peace by other means. Let blows be the last resource.
That's my motto. He'll walk me blind! Well, we shall see, to-morrow!"

CHAPTER FOUR.

TAMING A BULLY.

The morrow came, and Jack Robinson rose with the sun. Long before his men were astir he had inspected
the few books and papers of the establishment, had examined the condition of the fur and goods
store, and had otherwise made himself acquainted with the details of the fort; having gone
over its general features with Teddy the day before.

When the "lieutenant" arose, he found indications of his new master having been everywhere
before him, and noted the fact!

As Teddy was by no means a man of order--although a good and trustworthy man--there was enough
to be done before breakfast. Jack purposely put Rollo into the kitchen to prepare the morning
meal, this being comparatively light work.

He himself worked with the other men in the stores. There was necessarily a great deal of
lifting and shifting and clearing, in all of which operations he took the heaviest part of
the work, and did his work better and more thoroughly than any of the others. Teddy observed this
also, and noted the fact!

At breakfast there was naturally a good deal of talk among the men, and special mention was
of course made of the energy of their master.

Breakfast over, Jack assembled the men and apportioned to each his
day's work.

"I myself," said he, "mean to walk down to the fishery to-day, and I leave O'Donel in charge; I shall
be back to-morrow. Rollo, you will prepare to accompany me."

"Yes, sir," answered the man, not knowing very well how to take this. The others glanced at each
other intelligently as they departed to their work.

A few minutes sufficed for preparation, and soon Jack stood with his rifle on his shoulder in
front of the house. Rollo quickly made his appearance with an old trading gun.

"You can leave that, we won't require it," said Jack; "besides I want to walk fast, so it is
well that you should be as light as possible."

"No fear but I'll keep up with you, sir," said the man, somewhat piqued.

"I do not doubt it," replied Jack, "but one gun is enough for us, so put yours by, and come along."

Rollo
obeyed, and resolved in his heart that he would give his new master
a taste of his powers.

Jack started off at a good rattling pace, somewhat over four miles an hour. For the first mile Rollo
allowed him to lead, keeping about a foot behind. Then he thought to himself, "Now, my friend,
I'll try you," and ranged up beside him, keeping a few yards to one side, however, in order to
avoid the appearance of racing. After a few minutes he pushed the pace considerably, and even
went ahead of his companion; but, ere long, Jack was alongside and the pace increased to nearly
five miles an hour.

Only those who have tried it know, or can fully appreciate, what is meant by adding a mile an
hour to one's pace. Most active men go at four miles an hour when walking at a good smart pace.
Men never walk at five miles an hour except when in the utmost haste, and then only for a short
distance. Anything beyond that requires a run in order to be sustained.

It was curious to watch the progress of these two men. The aim of each was to walk at his greatest
possible speed, without allowing the slightest evidence of unwonted exertion to appear on his countenance
or in his manner.

They walked on the sands of the shore--there being no roads there--and
at first the walking was good, as the tide was out and the sand hard.

But before they had got half way to the fishery the sea came in and drove them to the soft sand,
which, as nearly every one knows, is terribly fatiguing and difficult to walk in.

Up to this point the two men had kept abreast, going at a tremendous pace, yet conversing quietly
and keeping down every appearance of distress; affecting, in fact,
to be going at their usual and natural pace!

Many a sidelong glance did Rollo cast, however, at his companion, to see if he were likely to
give in soon.

But Jack was as cool as a cucumber, and wore a remarkably amiable expression of countenance. He
even hummed snatches of one or two songs, as though he were only sauntering on the beach. At last
he took out his pipe, filled it, and began to smoke, without slackening speed. This filled Rollo
with surprise, and for the first time he began to entertain doubts
as to the result of the struggle.

As for Jack, he never doubted it for a moment. When they were compelled to take to the heavy sand
and sank above the ankles at every step, he changed his tactics. Putting out his pipe, he fell
behind a few paces.

"Ha!" thought Rollo, "done up at last; now I'll give it you."

The thought that he was sure of victory infused such spirit into the
man that he braced himself to renewed exertion.

This was just what Jack wanted. He kept exactly a foot behind Rollo, yet when the other ventured
to slacken his pace, (which was now too great to be kept up), he pushed forward just enough to keep
him at it, without disheartening him as to result. In the midst of this they both came to
a full stop on discovering a box made of birch bark, which seemed to have been dropped by
some passing Indians.

"Hallo! what have we here?" cried Jack, stooping down to examine it.

"My blessin' on't whatever it is," thought Rollo, to whom the momentary relief from walking
was of the greatest consequence. Jack knew this, and hastened his inspection. It was a box of
bear's fat.

"Come, not a bad thing in times like these," observed Jack; "will you carry this or the rifle,
my man? See, the rifle is lighter, take that."

Again they stepped out, and the sand seemed to grow softer and deeper as they advanced. They were
now five miles from the end of their journey, so Jack began to exert himself. He pushed on at
a pace that caused Rollo to pant and blow audibly. For some time Jack pretended not to notice
this, but at last he turned round and said--

"You seem to be fatigued, my man, let me carry the rifle."

Rollo did not object, and Jack went forward with the box and rifle more rapidly than before.
He was perspiring, indeed, at every pore profusely, but wind and limb were as sound as when
he started.

He finally left Rollo out of sight, and arrived at the fishery without him!

Half an hour afterwards Rollo arrived. He was a stout fellow, and by taking a short rest, had
recovered sufficiently to come in with some degree of spirit; nevertheless, it was evident
to all that he was "used up," for, "it is not the distance but the pace that kills!" He found
the fishermen at dinner, buttering their cakes with the bear's grease that had been discovered on
the way down. Jack Robinson was sitting in the midst of them, chatting
quietly and smoking his pipe beside the fire-place of the hut.

Jack introduced him as one of the new men, but made no reference
to the walk from Fort Desolation. He felt, however, that he had conquered
the man, at least for that time, and hoped that further and more violent
methods would not be necessary. In this he was disappointed, as the
sequel will show.

That night Jack slept on a bed made of old salmon-nets,
with a new salmon-net above him for a blanket. It was a peculiar and
not a particularly comfortable bed; but in his circumstances he could
have slept on a bed of thorns. He gazed up at the stars through the
hole in the roof that served for a chimney, and listened to the chirping
of the frogs in a neighbouring swamp, to which the snoring of the
men around him formed a rough-and-ready bass. Thus he lay gazing and
listening, till stars and strains alike melted away, and left him
in the sweet regions of oblivion.

CHAPTER FIVE.

THE SALMON FISHERY.

Next
morning, Jack Robinson went out at daybreak to inspect the salmon
fishery.

The river, up which the fish went in thousands, was broad,
deep, and rapid. Its banks were clothed with spruce-fir and dense
underwood. There was little of the picturesque or the beautiful in
the scenery. It was a bleak spot and unattractive.

Two of the four
men who conducted the fishery were stationed at the mouth of the river.
The other two attended to the nets about six miles farther up, at
a place where there was a considerable fall terminating in a long,
turbulent rapid.

With his wonted promptitude and energy, Jack began
to make himself master of his position long before the men were stirring.
Before Ladoc, who was superintendent, had lighted his first pipe and
strolled down to the boat to commence the operations of the day, Jack
had examined the nets, the salt boxes, the curing-vats, the fish in
pickle, the casks, and all the other materiel of the fishery, with
a critical eye. From what he saw, he was convinced that Ladoc was
not the best manager that could be desired, and, remembering that
Ladoc was a bully, he was strengthened in an opinion which he had
long entertained, namely, that a bully is never a trustworthy man.

He
was in the act of forming this opinion, when Ladoc approached.

"Good
morning, Ladoc," said he; "you rise early."

"Oui, sair; mais, you
gits up more earlier."

"Yes, I am fond of morning air. The fishery
prospers, I see."

"It doos, monsieur," said Ladoc, accepting the
remark as a compliment to himself; "ve have catch fifteen casks already,
and they is in most splendid condition."

"Hum!" ejaculated Jack,
with a doubtful look at a cask which was evidently leaking, "hum!
yes, you are getting on pretty well, but--"

Here Jack "hummed" again,
and looked pointedly at one of the large vats, which was also leaking,
and around which there was a great deal of salt that had been scattered
carelessly on the ground. Raising big eyes to the roof of the low
shed in which the salt-boxes stood, he touched with his stick a torn
piece of its tarpaulin covering, through which rain had found its
way in bad weather. He "hummed" again, but said nothing, for he saw
that Ladoc was a little disconcerted.

After some minutes Jack turned
to his companion with a bland smile, and said--

"The next station
is--how many miles did you say?"

"Six, monsieur."

"Ah, six! well,
let us go up and see it. You can show me the way."

"Breakfast be
ready ver' soon," said Ladoc, "monsieur vill eat first, p'r'aps?"

"No,
we will breakfast at the upper station. Ho, Rollo! here, I want you."

Rollo,
who issued from the hut at the moment, with a view to examine the
weather and light his pipe, came forward.

"I am going with Ladoc
to the upper station," said Jack; "you will take his place here until
we return."

"Very well, sir," replied Rollo, fixing his eyes upon
Ladoc. At the same moment Ladoc fixed his eyes on Rollo. The two men
seemed to read each other's character in a single glance, and then
and there hurled silent defiance in each other's teeth through their
eyes! Ladoc was annoyed at having been silently found fault with and
superseded; Rollo was aggrieved at being left behind; both men were
therefore enraged--for it is wonderful how small a matter is sufficient
to enrage a bully--but Jack ordered Ladoc to lead the way, so the
rivals, or enemies, parted company with another glance of defiance.

That
day, Jack Robinson had a somewhat rough and remarkable experience
of life.

He began by overhauling the nets at the mouth of the river,
and these were so prolific that the small flat-bottomed boat used
by the fishermen was soon half filled with glittering salmon, varying
from ten to fifteen pounds in weight. In order to avoid having his
mocassins and nether garments soiled, Jack, who pulled the sculls,
sat with bare feet and tucked-up trousers. In less than an hour he
rowed back to the landing-place, literally up to the knees in salmon!
Among these were a few young seals that had got entangled in the nets,
while in pursuit of the fish, and been drowned. These last were filled
with water to such an extent, that they resembled inflated bladders!

"Breakfast
is ready, sir," said one of the men, as the boat-party leaped ashore.

"Very
good," replied Jack; turning to Ladoc, "now, my man, are you ready
to start for the upper fishery?"

"Eh? ah--oui, monsieur."

There
was a titter amongst the men at the expression of their big comrade's
face, for Ladoc was ravenously hungry, and felt inclined to rebel
at the idea of being obliged to start on a six-miles' walk without
food; but as his young master was about to do the same he felt that
it was beneath his dignity to complain. Besides, there was a something
peculiar about Jack's manner that puzzled and overawed the man.

The
fact was, that Jack Robinson wanted to know what his bullies were
made of, and took rather eccentric methods of finding it out. He accordingly
set off at his best pace, and pushed Ladoc so hard, that he arrived
at the upper fishery in a state of profuse perspiration, with a very
red face, and with a disagreeably vacuous feeling about the pit of
his stomach.

They found the men at the station just landing with
a boat-load of fish. They were all clean-run, and shone in the bright
sunshine like bars of burnished silver.

"Now, Ladoc," said Jack,
"get breakfast ready, while I look over matters here."

It need not
be said that the man obeyed most willingly. His master went to examine
into details. Half-an-hour sufficed to make him pretty well acquainted
with the state of matters at the station, and, during breakfast, he
soon obtained from the men all the knowledge they possessed about
the fishery, the natives, and the region.

One of the men was a half-caste,
a fine-looking, grave, earnest fellow, who spoke English pretty well.
His name was Marteau. Am I man enough! I claim to be of
the class, mammalia; order, primates; genus, homo! Such are my physical attributes; of my moral
properties, let posterity speak; it becomes me to be mute."

"Physic may do for such as relish it; to my taste and judgment it is neither palatable nor
healthy; but morals never did harm to any living mortal, be it that he was a sojourner in the
forest, or a dweller in the midst of glazed windows and smoking chimneys. It is only a few
hard words that divide us, friend; for I am of an opinion that, with use and freedom, we should
come to understand one another, and mainly settle down into the same judgments of mankind,
and of the ways of world. Quiet, Hector, quiet; what ruffles your temper, pup; is it not used
to the scent of human blood?"

The Doctor bestowed a gracious but commiserating smile on the philosopher of nature, as he
retrograded a step or two from the place whither he had been impelled by his excess of spirit,
in order to reply with less expenditure of breath, and with a greater freedom of air and attitude.

"A homo is certainly a homo," he said, stretching forth an arm in an argumentative manner;
"so far as the animal functions extend, there are the connecting links of harmony, order, conformity,
and design, between the whole genus; but there the resemblance ends. Man may be degraded to
the very margin of the line which separates him from the brute, by ignorance; or he may be
elevated to a communion with the great Master-spirit of all, by knowledge; nay, I know not,
if time and opportunity were given him, but he might become the master of all learning, and
consequently equal to the great moving principle."

The old man, who stood leaning on his rifle in a thoughtful attitude, shook his head, as he
answered with a native steadiness, that entirely eclipsed the imposing air which his antagonist
had seen fit to assume--

"This is neither more nor less than mortal wickedness! Here have I been a dweller on the earth
for four-score and six changes of the seasons, and all that time have I look'd at the growing
and the dying trees, and yet do I not know the reasons why the bud starts under the summer
sun, or the leaf falls when it is pinch'd by the frosts. Your l'arning, though it is man's
boast, is folly in the eyes of Him, who sits in the clouds, and looks down, in sorrow, at the
pride and vanity of his creatur's. Many is the hour that I've passed, lying in the shades of
the woods, or stretch'd upon the hills of these open fields, looking up into the blue skies,
where I could fancy the Great One had taken his stand, and was solemnising on the waywardness
of man and brute, below, as I myself had often look'd at the ants tumbling over each other
in their eagerness, though in a way and a fashion more suited to His mightiness and power.
Knowledge! It is his plaything. Say, you who think it so easy to climb into the judgment-seat
above, can you tell me any thing of the beginning and the end? Nay, you're a dealer in ailings
and cures: what is life, and what is death? Why does the eagle live so long, and why is the
time of the butterfly so short? Tell me a simpler thing: why is this hound so uneasy, while
you, who have passed your days in looking into books, can see no reason to be disturbed?"

The Doctor, who had been a little astounded by the dignity and energy of the old man, drew
a long breath, like a sullen wrestler who is just released from the throttling grasp of his
antagonist, and seized on the opportunity of the pause to reply--

"It is his instinct."

"And what is the gift of instinct?"

"An inferior gradation of reason. A sort of mysterious combination of thought and matter."

"And what is that which you call thought?"

"Venerable venator, this is a method of reasoning which sets at nought the uses of definitions,
and such as I do assure you is not at all tolerated in the schools."

"Then is there more cunning in your schools than I had thought, for it is a certain method
of showing them their vanity," returned the trapper, suddenly abandoning a discussion, from
which the naturalist was just beginning to anticipate great delight, by turning to his dog,
whose restlessness he attempted to appease by playing with his ears. "This is foolish, Hector;
more like an untrained pup than a sensible hound; one who has got his education by hard experience,
and not by nosing over the trails of other dogs, as a boy in the settlements follows on the
track of his masters, be it right or be it wrong. Well, friend; you who can do so much, are
you equal to looking into the thicket? or must I go in myself?"

The Doctor again assumed his air of resolution, and, without further parlance, proceeded to
do as desired. The dogs were so far restrained, by the remonstrances of the old man, as to
confine their noise to low but often-repeated whinings. When they saw the naturalist advance,
the pup, however, broke through all restraint, and made a swift circuit around his person,
scenting the earth as he proceeded, and then, returning to his companion, he howled aloud.

"The squatter and his brood have left a strong scent on the earth," said the old man, watching
as he spoke for some signal from his learned pioneer to follow; "I hope yonder school-bred
man knows enough to remember the errand on which I have sent him."

Doctor Battius had already disappeared in the bushes and the trapper was beginning to betray
additional evidences of impatience, when the person of the former was seen retiring from the
thicket backwards, with his face fastened on the place he had just left, as if his look was
bound in the thraldom of some charm.

"Here is something skeery, by the wildness of the creatur's countenance!" exclaimed the old
man relinquishing his hold of Hector, and moving stoutly to the side of the totally unconscious
naturalist. "How is it, friend; have you found a new leaf in your book of wisdom?"

"It is a basilisk!" muttered the Doctor, whose altered visage betrayed the utter confusion
which beset his faculties. "An animal of the order, serpens. I had thought its attributes were
fabulous, but mighty nature is equal to all that man can imagine!"

"What is't? what is't? The snakes of the prairies are harmless, unless it be now and then an
angered rattler and he always gives you notice with his tail, afore he works his mischief with
his fangs. Lord, Lord, what a humbling thing is fear! Here is one who in common delivers words
too big for a humble mouth to hold, so much beside himself, that his voice is as shrill as
the whistle of the whip-poor-will! Courage!--what is it, man?--what is it?"

"A prodigy! a lusus naturae! a monster, that nature has delighted to form, in order to exhibit
her power! Never before have I witnessed such an utter confusion in her laws, or a specimen
that so completely bids defiance to the distinctions of class and genera. Let me record its
appearance," fumbling for his tablets with hands that trembled too much to perform their office,
"while time and opportunity are allowed--eyes, enthralling; colour, various, complex, and profound--"

"One would think the man was craz'd, with his enthralling looks and pieball'd colours!" interrupted
the discontented trapper, who began to grow a little uneasy that his party was all this time
neglecting to seek the protection of some cover. "If there is a reptile in the brush, show
me the creatur', and should it refuse to depart peaceably, why there must be a quarrel for
the possession of the place."

"There!" said the Doctor, pointing into a dense mass of the thicket, to a spot within fifty
feet of that where they both stood. The trapper turned his look, with perfect composure, in
the required direction, but the instant his practised glance met the object which had so utterly
upset the philosophy of the naturalist, he gave a start himself, threw his rifle rapidly forward,
and as instantly recovered it, as if a second flash of thought convinced him he was wrong.
Neither the instinctive movement, nor the sudden recollection, was without a sufficient object.
At the very margin of the thicket, and in absolute contact with the earth, lay an animate ball,
that might easily, by the singularity and fierceness of its aspect, have justified the disturbed
condition of the naturalist's mind. It were difficult to describe the shape or colours of this
extraordinary substance, except to say, in general terms, that it was nearly spherical, and
exhibited all the hues of the rainbow, intermingled without reference to harmony, and without
any very ostensible design. The predominant hues were a black and a bright vermilion. With
these, however, the several tints of white, yellow, and crimson, were strangely and wildly
blended. Had this been all, it would have been difficult to have pronounced that the object
was possessed of life, for it lay motionless as any stone; but a pair of dark, glaring, and
moving eyeballs which watched with jealousy the smallest movement of the trapper and his companion,
sufficiently established the important fact of its possessing vitality.

"Your reptile is a scouter, or I'm no judge of Indian paints and Indian deviltries!" muttered
the old man, dropping the butt of his weapon to the ground, and gazing with a steady eye at
the frightful object, as he leaned on its barrel, in an attitude of great composure. "He wants
to face us out of sight and reason, and make us think the head of a red-skin is a stone covered
with the autumn leaf; or he has some other devilish artifice in his mind!"

"Is the animal human?" demanded the Doctor, "of the genus homo? I had fancied it a non-descript."

"It's as human, and as mortal too, as a warrior of these prairies is ever known to be. I have
seen the time when a red-skin would have shown a foolish daring to peep out of his ambushment
in that fashion on a hunter I could name, but who is too old now, and too near his time, to
be any thing better than a miserable trapper. It will be well to speak to the imp, and to let
him know he deals with men whose beards are grown. Come forth from your cover, friend," he
continued, in the language of the extensive tribes of the Dahcotahs; "there is room on the
prairie for another warrior."

The eyes appeared to glare more fiercely than ever, but the mass which, according to the trapper's
opinion, was neither more nor less than a human head, shorn, as usual among the warriors of
the west, of its hair, still continued without motion, or any other sign of life.

"It is a mistake!" exclaimed the doctor. "The animal is not even of the class, mammalia, much
less a man."

"So much for your knowledge!" returned the trapper, laughing with great exultation. "So much
for the l'arning of one who has look'd into so many books, that his eyes are not able to tell
a moose from a wild-cat! Now my Hector, here, is a dog of education after his fashion, and,
though the meanest primmer in the settlements would puzzle his information, you could not cheat
the hound in a matter like this. As you think the object no man, you shall see his whole formation,
and then let an ignorant old trapper, who never willingly pass'd a day within reach of a spelling-book
in his life, know by what name to call it. Mind, I mean no violence; but just to start the
devil from his ambushment."

The trapper very deliberately examined the priming of his rifle, taking care to make as great
a parade as possible of his hostile intentions, in going through the necessary evolutions with
the weapon. When he thought the stranger began to apprehend some danger, he very deliberately
presented the piece, and called aloud--

"Now, friend, I am all for peace, or all for war, as you may say. No! well it is no man, as
the wiser one, here, says, and there can be no harm in just firing into a bunch of leaves."

The muzzle of the rifle fell as he concluded, and the weapon was gradually settling into a
steady, and what would easily have proved a fatal aim, when a tall Indian sprang from beneath
that bed of leaves and brush, which he had collected about his person at the approach of the
party, and stood upright, uttering the exclamation--

"Wagh!"

CHAPTER XVIII

        My visor is Philemon's roof; within the house is Jove.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The trapper, who had meditated no violence, dropped his rifle again, and laughing at the success
of his experiment, with great seeming self-complacency, he drew the astounded gaze of the naturalist
from the person of the savage to himself, by saying--

"The imps will lie for hours, like sleeping alligators, brooding their deviltries in dreams
and other craftiness, until such time as they see some real danger is at hand, and then they
look to themselves the same as other mortals. But this is a scouter in his war-paint! There
should be more of his tribe at no great distance. Let us draw the truth out of him; for an
unlucky war-party may prove more dangerous to us than a visit from the whole family of the
squatter."

"It is truly a desperate and a dangerous species!" said the Doctor, relieving his amazement
by a breath that seemed to exhaust his lungs of air; "a violent race, and one that it is difficult
to define or class, within the usual boundaries of definitions. Speak to him, therefore; but
let thy words be strong in amity."

The old man cast a keen eye on every side of him, to ascertain the important particular whether
the stranger was supported by any associates, and then making the usual signs of peace, by
exhibiting the palm of his naked hand, he boldly advanced. In the mean time, the Indian betrayed
no evidence of uneasiness. He suffered the trapper to draw nigh, maintaining by his own mien
and attitude a striking air of dignity and fearlessness. Perhaps the wary warrior also knew
that, owing to the difference in their weapons, he should be placed more on an equality, by
being brought nearer to the strangers.

As a description of this individual may furnish some idea of the personal appearance of a whole
race, it may be well to detain the narrative, in order to present it to the reader, in our
hasty and imperfect manner. Would the truant eyes of Alston or Greenough turn, but for a time,
from their gaze at the models of antiquity, to contemplate this wronged and humbled people,
little would be left for such inferior artists as ourselves to delineate.

The Indian in question was in every particular a warrior of fine stature and admirable proportions.
As he cast aside his mask, composed of such party-coloured leaves, as he had hurriedly collected,
his countenance appeared in all the gravity, the dignity, and, it may be added, in the terror
of his profession. The outlines of his lineaments were strikingly noble, and nearly approaching
to Roman, though the secondary features of his face were slightly marked with the well-known
traces of his Asiatic origin. The peculiar tint of the skin, which in itself is so well designed
to aid the effect of a martial expression, had received an additional aspect of wild ferocity
from the colours of the war-paint. But, as if he disdained the usual artifices of his people,
he bore none of those strange and horrid devices, with which the children of the forest are
accustomed, like the more civilised heroes of the moustache, to back their reputation for courage,
contenting himself with a broad and deep shadowing of black, that served as a sufficient and
an admirable foil to the brighter gleamings of his native swarthiness. His head was as usual
shaved to the crown, where a large and gallant scalp-lock seemed to challenge the grasp of
his enemies. The ornaments that were ordinarily pendant from the cartilages of his ears had
been removed, on account of his present pursuit. His body, notwithstanding the lateness of
the season, was nearly naked, and the portion which was clad bore a vestment no warmer than
a light robe of the finest dressed deer-skin, beautifully stained with the rude design of some
daring exploit, and which was carelessly worn, as if more in pride than from any unmanly regard
to comfort. His leggings were of bright scarlet cloth, the only evidence about his person that
he had held communion with the traders of the Pale-faces. But as if to furnish some offset
to this solitary submission to a womanish vanity, they were fearfully fringed, from the gartered
knee to the bottom of the moccasin, with the hair of human scalps. He leaned lightly with one
hand on a short hickory bow, while the other rather touched than sought support, from the long,
delicate handle of an ashen lance. A quiver made of the cougar skin, from which the tail of
the animal depended, as a characteristic ornament, was slung at his back, and a shield of hides,
quaintly emblazoned with another of his warlike deeds, was suspended from his neck by a thong
of sinews.

As the trapper approached, this warrior maintained his calm upright attitude, discovering neither
an eagerness to ascertain the character of those who advanced upon him, nor the smallest wish
to avoid a scrutiny in his own person. An eye, that was darker and more shining than that of
the stag, was incessantly glancing, however, from one to another of the stranger party, seemingly
never knowing rest for an instant.

"Is my brother far from his village?" demanded the old man, in the Pawnee language, after examining
the paint, and those other little signs by which a practised eye knows the tribe of the warrior
he encounters in the American deserts, with the same readiness, and by the same sort of mysterious
observation, as that by which the seaman knows the distant sail.

"It is farther to the towns of the Big-knives," was the laconic reply.

"Why is a Pawnee-Loup so far from the fork of his own river, without a horse to journey on,
and in a spot empty as this?"

"Can the women and children of a Pale-face live without the meat of the bison? There was hunger
in my lodge."

"My brother is very young to be already the master of a lodge," returned the trapper, looking
steadily into the unmoved countenance of the youthful warrior; "but I dare say he is brave,
and that many a chief has offered him his daughters for wives. But he has been mistaken," pointing
to the arrow, which was dangling from the hand that held the bow, "in bringing a loose and
barbed arrow-head to kill the buffaloe. Do the Pawnees wish the wounds they give their game
to rankle?"

"It is good to be ready for the Sioux. Though not in sight, a bush may hide him."

"The man is a living proof of the truth of his words," muttered the trapper in English, "and
a close-jointed and gallant looking lad he is; but far too young for a chief of any importance.
It is wise, however, to speak him fair, for a single arm thrown into either party, if we come
to blows with the squatter and his brood, may turn the day. You see my children are weary,"
he continued in the dialect of the prairies, pointing, as he spoke, to the rest of the party,
who, by this time, were also approaching. "We wish to camp and eat. Does my brother claim this
spot?"

"The runners from the people on the Big-river, tell us that your nation have traded with the
Tawney-faces who live beyond the salt-lake, and that the prairies are now the hunting grounds
of the Big-knives!"

"It is true, as I hear, also, from the hunters and trappers on La Platte. Though it is with
the Frenchers, and not with the men who claim to own the Mexicos, that my people have bargained."

"And warriors are going up the Long-river, to see that they have not been cheated, in what
they have bought?"

"Ay, that is partly true, too, I fear; and it will not be long before an accursed band of choppers
and loggers will be following on their heels, to humble the wilderness which lies so broad
and rich on the western banks of the Mississippi, and then the land will be a peopled desert,
from the shores of the main sea to the foot of the Rocky Mountains; fill'd with all the abominations
and craft of man, and stript of the comforts and loveliness it received from the hands of the
Lord!"

"And where were the chiefs of the Pawnee-Loups, when this bargain was made?" suddenly demanded
the youthful warrior, a look of startling fierceness gleaming, at the same instant, athwart
his dark visage. "Is a nation to be sold like the skin of a beaver?"

"Right enough--right enough, and where were truth and honesty, also? But might is right, according
to the fashions of the 'arth; and what the strong choose to do, the weak must call justice.
If the law of the Wahcondah was as much hearkened to, Pawnee, as the laws of the Long-knives,
your right to the prairies would be as good as that of the greatest chief in the settlements
to the house which covers his head."

"The skin of the traveller is white," said the young native, laying a finger impressively on
the hard and wrinkled hand of the trapper. "Does his heart say one thing and his tongue another?"

"The Wahcondah of a white man has ears, and he shuts them to a lie. Look at my head; it is
like a frosted pine, and must soon be laid in the ground. Why then should I wish to meet the
Great Spirit, face to face, while his countenance is dark upon me."

The Pawnee gracefully threw his shield over one shoulder, and placing a hand on his chest,
he bent his head, in deference to the grey locks exhibited by the trapper; after which his
eye became more steady, and his countenance less fierce. Still he maintained every appearance
of a distrust and watchfulness that were rather tempered and subdued, than forgotten. When
this equivocal species of amity was established between the warrior of the prairies and the
experienced old trapper, the latter proceeded to give his directions to Paul, concerning the
arrangements of the contemplated halt. While Inez and Ellen were dismounting, and Middleton
and the bee-hunter were attending to their comforts, the discourse was continued, sometimes
in the language of the natives, but often, as Paul and the Doctor mingled their opinions with
the two principal speakers, in the English tongue. There was a keen and subtle trial of skill
between the Pawnee and the trapper, in which each endeavoured to discover the objects of the
other, without betraying his own interest in the investigation. As might be expected, when
the struggle was between adversaries so equal, the result of the encounter answered the expectations
of neither. The latter had put all the interrogatories his ingenuity and practice could suggest,
concerning the state of the tribe of the Loups, their crops, their store of provisions for
the ensuing winter, and their relations with their different warlike neighbours without extorting
any answer, which, in the slightest degree, elucidated the cause of his finding a solitary
warrior so far from his people. On the other hand, while the questions of the Indian were far
more dignified and delicate, they were equally ingenious. He commented on the state of the
trade in peltries, spoke of the good or ill success of many white hunters, whom he had either
encountered, or heard named, and even alluded to the steady march, which the nation of his
great father, as he cautiously termed the government of the States, was making towards the
hunting-grounds of his tribe. It was apparent, however, by the singular mixture of interest,
contempt, and indignation, that were occasionally gleaming through the reserved manner of this
warrior, that he knew the strange people, who were thus trespassing on his native rights, much
more by report than by any actual intercourse. This personal ignorance of the whites was as
much betrayed by the manner in which he regarded the females, as by the brief, but energetic,
expressions which occasionally escaped him.

While speaking to the trapper he suffered his wandering glances to stray towards the intellectual
and nearly infantile beauty of Inez, as one might be supposed to gaze upon the loveliness of
an ethereal being. It was very evident that he now saw, for the first time, one of those females,
of whom the fathers of his tribe so often spoke, and who were considered of such rare excellence
as to equal all that savage ingenuity could imagine in the way of loveliness. His observation
of Ellen was less marked, but notwithstanding the warlike and chastened expression of his eye,
there was much of the homage, which man is made to pay to woman, even in the more cursory look
he sometimes turned on her maturer and perhaps more animated beauty. This admiration, however,
was so tempered by his habits, and so smothered in the pride of a warrior, as completely to
elude every eye but that of the trapper, who was too well skilled in Indian customs, and was
too well instructed in the importance of rightly conceiving, the character of the stranger,
to let the smallest trait, or the most trifling of his movements, escape him. In the mean time,
the unconscious Ellen herself moved about the feeble and less resolute Inez, with her accustomed
assiduity and tenderness, exhibiting in her frank features those changing emotions of joy and
regret which occasionally beset her, as her active mind dwelt on the decided step she had just
taken, with the contending doubts and hopes, and possibly with some of the mental vacillation,
that was natural to her situation and sex.

Not so Paul; conceiving himself to have obtained the two things dearest to his heart, the possession
of Ellen and a triumph over the sons of Ishmael, he now enacted his part, in the business of
the moment, with as much coolness as though he was already leading his willing bride, from
solemnising their nuptials before a border magistrate, to the security of his own dwelling.
He had hovered around the moving family, during the tedious period of their weary march, concealing
himself by day, and seeking interviews with his betrothed as opportunities offered, in the
manner already described, until fortune and his own intrepidity had united to render him successful,
at the very moment when he was beginning to despair, and he now cared neither for distance,
nor violence, nor hardships. To his sanguine fancy and determined resolution all the rest was
easily to be achieved. Such were his feelings, and such in truth they seemed to be. With his
cap cast on one side, and whistling a low air, he thrashed among the bushes, in order to make
a place suitable for the females to repose on, while, from time to time, he cast an approving
glance at the agile form of Ellen, as she tripped past him, engaged in her own share of the duty.

"And so the Wolf-tribe of the Pawnees have buried the hatchet with their neighbours, the Konzas?"
said the trapper, pursuing a discourse which he had scarcely permitted to flag, though it had
been occasionally interrupted by the different directions with which he occasionally saw fit
to interrupt it. (The reader will remember that, while he spoke to the native warrior in his
own tongue, he necessarily addressed his white companions in English.) "The Loups and the light-fac'd
Red-skins are again friends. Doctor, that is a tribe of which I'll engage you've often read,
and of which many a round lie has been whispered in the ears of the ignorant people, who live
in the settlements. There was a story of a nation of Welshers, that liv'd hereaway in the prairies,
and how they came into the land afore the uneasy minded man, who first let in the Christians
to rob the heathens of their inheritance, had ever dreamt that the sun set on a country as
big as that it rose from. And how they knew the white ways, and spoke with white tongues, and
a thousand other follies and idle conceits."

"Have I not heard of them?" exclaimed the naturalist, dropping a piece of jerked bison's meat,
which he was rather roughly discussing, at the moment. "I should be greatly ignorant not to
have often dwelt with delight on so beautiful a theory, and one which so triumphantly establishes
two positions, which I have often maintained are unanswerable, even without such living testimony
in their favour--viz. that this continent can claim a more remote affinity with civilisation
than the time of Columbus, and that colour is the fruit of climate and condition, and not a
regulation of nature. Propound the latter question to this Indian gentleman, venerable hunter;
he is of a reddish tint himself, and his opinion may be said to make us masters of the two
sides of the disputed point."

"Do you think a Pawnee is a reader of books, and a believer of printed lies, like the idlers
in the towns?" retorted the old man, laughing. "But it may be as well to humour the likings
of the man, which, after all, it is quite possible are neither more nor less than his natural
gift, and therefore to be followed, although they may be pitied. What does my brother think?
all whom he sees here have pale skins, but the Pawnee warriors are red; does he believe that
man changes with the season, and that the son is not like his father?"

The young warrior regarded his interrogator for a moment with a steady and deliberating eye;
then raising his finger upward, he answered with dignity--

"The Wahcondah pours the rain from his clouds; when he speaks, he shakes the lulls; and the
fire, which scorches the trees, is the anger of his eye; but he fashioned his children with
care and thought. What he has thus made, never alters!"

"Ay, 'tis in the reason of natur' that it should be so, Doctor," continued the trapper, when
he had interpreted this answer to the disappointed naturalist. "The Pawnees are a wise and
a great people, and I'll engage they abound in many a wholesome and honest tradition. The hunters
and trappers, that I sometimes see, speak of a great warrior of your race."

"My tribe are not women. A brave is no stranger in my village."

"Ay; but he, they speak of most, is a chief far beyond the renown of common warriors, and one
that might have done credit to that once mighty but now fallen people, the Delawares of the hills."

"Such a warrior should have a name?"

"They call him Hard-Heart, from the stoutness of his resolution; and well is he named, if all
I have heard of his deeds be true."

The stranger cast a glance, which seemed to read the guileless soul of the old man, as he demanded--

"Has the Pale-face seen the partisan of my people?"

"Never. It is not with me now, as it used to be some forty years ago, when warfare and bloodshed
were my calling and my gifts!"

A loud shout from the reckless Paul interrupted his speech, and at the next moment the bee-hunter
appeared, leading an Indian war-horse from the side of the thicket opposite to the one occupied
by the party.

"Here is a beast for a Red-skin to straddle!" he cried, as he made the animal go through some
of its wild paces. "There's not a brigadier in all Kentucky that can call himself master of
so sleek and well-jointed a nag! A Spanish saddle too, like a grandee of the Mexicos! and look
at the mane and tail, braided and platted down with little silver balls, as if it were Ellen
herself getting her shining hair ready for a dance, or a husking frolic! Isn't this a real
trotter, old trapper, to eat out of the manger of a savage?"

"Softly, lad, softly. The Loups are famous for their horses, and it is often that you see a
warrior on the prairies far better mounted, than a congress-man in the settlements. But this,
indeed, is a beast that none but a powerful chief should ride! The saddle, as you rightly think,
has been sit upon in its day by a great Spanish captain, who has lost it and his life together,
in some of the battles which this people often fight against the southern provinces. I warrant
me, I warrant me, the youngster is the son of a great chief; may be of the mighty Hard-Heart
himself!"

During this rude interruption to the discourse, the young Pawnee manifested neither impatience
nor displeasure; but when he thought his beast had been the subject of sufficient comment,
he very coolly, and with the air of one accustomed to have his will respected, relieved Paul
of the bridle, and throwing the reins on the neck of the animal, he sprang upon his back, with
the activity of a professor of the equestrian art. Nothing could be finer or firmer than the
seat of the savage. The highly wrought and cumbrous saddle was evidently more for show than
use. Indeed it impeded rather than aided the action of limbs, which disdained to seek assistance,
or admit of restraint from so womanish inventions as stirrups. The horse, which immediately
began to prance, was, like its rider, wild and untutored in all his motions, but while there
was so little of art, there was all the freedom and grace of nature in the movements of both.
The animal was probably indebted to the blood of Araby for its excellence, through a long pedigree,
that embraced the steed of Mexico, the Spanish barb, and the Moorish charger. The rider, in
obtaining his steed from the provinces of Central-America, had also obtained that spirit and
grace in controlling him, which unite to form the most intrepid and perhaps the most skilful
horseman in the world.

Notwithstanding this sudden occupation of his animal, the Pawnee discovered no hasty wish to
depart. More at his ease, and possibly more independent, now he found himself secure of the
means of retreat, he rode back and forth, eyeing the different individuals of the party with
far greater freedom than before. But, at each extremity of his ride, just as the sagacious
trapper expected to see him profit by his advantage and fly, he would turn his horse, and pass
over the same ground, sometimes with the rapidity of the flying deer, and at others more slowly,
and with greater dignity of mien and attitude. Anxious to ascertain such facts as might have
an influence on his future movements, the old man determined to invite him to a renewal of
their conference. He therefore made a gesture expressive at the same time of his wish to resume
the interrupted discourse, and of his own pacific intentions. The quick eye of the stranger
was not slow to note the action, but it was not until a sufficient time had passed to allow
him to debate the prudence of the measure in his own mind, that he seemed willing to trust
himself again, so near a party that was so much superior to himself in physical power, and
consequently one that was able, at any instant, to command his life, or control his personal
liberty. When he did approach nigh enough to converse with facility, it was with a singular
mixture of haughtiness and of distrust.

"It is far to the village of the Loups," he said, stretching his arm in a direction contrary
to that in which, the trapper well knew, the tribe dwelt, "and the road is crooked. What has
the Big-knife to say?"

"Ay, crooked enough!" muttered the old man in English, "if you are to set out on your journey
by that path, but not half so winding as the cunning of an Indian's mind. Say, my brother;
do the chiefs of the Pawnees love to see strange faces in their lodges?"

The young warrior bent his body gracefully, though but slightly, over the saddle-bow, as he
replied--

"When have my people forgotten to give food to the stranger?"

"If I lead my daughters to the doors of the Loups, will the women take them by the hand; and
will the warriors smoke with my young men?"

"The country of the Pale-faces is behind them. Why do they journey so far towards the setting
sun? Have they lost the path, or are these the women of the white warriors, that I hear are
wading up the river of 'the troubled waters?'"

"Neither. They, who wade the Missouri, are the warriors of my great father, who has sent them
on his message; but we are peace-runners. The white men and the red are neighbours, and they
wish to be friends.--Do not the Omahaws visit the Loups, when the tomahawk is buried in the
path between the two nations?"

"The Omahaws are welcome."

"And the Yanktons, and the burnt-wood Tetons, who live in the elbow of the river, 'with muddy
water,' do they not come into the lodges of the Loups and smoke?"

"The Tetons are liars!" exclaimed the other. "They dare not shut their eyes in the night. No;
they sleep in the sun. See," he added, pointing with fierce triumph to the frightful ornaments
of his leggings, "their scalps are so plenty, that the Pawnees tread on them! Go; let a Sioux
live in banks of snow; the plains and buffaloes are for men!"

"Ah! the secret is out," said the trapper to Middleton, who was an attentive, because a deeply
interested, observer of what was passing. "This good-looking young Indian is scouting on the
track of the Siouxes--you may see it by his arrow-heads, and his paint; ay, and by his eye,
too; for a Red-skin lets his natur' follow the business he is on, be it for peace, or be it
for war,--quiet, Hector, quiet. Have you never scented a Pawnee afore, pup?--keep down, dog--keep
down--my brother is right. The Siouxes are thieves. Men of all colours and nations say it of
them, and say it truly. But the people from the rising sun are not Siouxes, and they wish to
visit the lodges of the Loups."

"The head of my brother is white," returned the Pawnee, throwing one of those glances at the
trapper, which were so remarkably expressive of distrust, intelligence, and pride, and then
pointing, as he continued, towards the eastern horizon, "and his eyes have looked on many things--can
he tell me the name of what he sees yonder--is it a buffaloe?"

"It looks more like a cloud, peeping above the skirt of the plain with the sunshine lighting
its edges. It is the smoke of the heavens."

"It is a hill of the earth, and on its top are the lodges of Pale-faces! Let the women of my
brother wash their feet among the people of their own colour."

"The eyes of a Pawnee are good, if he can see a white-skin so far."

The Indian turned slowly towards the speaker, and after a pause of a moment he sternly demanded--

"Can my brother hunt?"

"Alas! I claim to be no better than a miserable trapper!"

"When the plain is covered with the buffaloes, can he see them?"

"No doubt, no doubt--it is far easier to see than to take a scampering bull."

"And when the birds are flying from the cold, and the clouds are black with their feathers,
can he see them too?"

"Ay, ay, it is not hard to find a duck, or a goose, when millions are darkening the heavens."

"When the snow falls, and covers the lodges of the Long-knives, can the stranger see flakes
in the air?"

"My eyes are none of the best now," returned the old man a little resentfully, "but the time
has been when I had a name for my sight!"

"The Red-skins find the Big-knives as easily as the strangers see the buffaloe, or the travelling
birds, or the falling snow. Your warriors think the Master of Life has made the whole earth
white. They are mistaken. They are pale, and it is their own faces that they see. Go! a Pawnee
is not blind, that he need look long for your people!"

The warrior suddenly paused, and bent his face aside, like one who listened with all his faculties
absorbed in the act. Then turning the head of his horse, he rode to the nearest angle of the
thicket, and looked intently across the bleak prairie, in a direction opposite to the side
on which the party stood. Returning slowly from this unaccountable, and to his observers, startling
procedure, he riveted his eyes on Inez, and paced back and forth several times, with the air
of one who maintained a warm struggle on some difficult point, in the recesses of his own thoughts.
He had drawn the reins of his impatient steed, and was seemingly about to speak, when his head
again sunk on his chest, and he resumed his former attitude of attention. Galloping like a
deer, to the place of his former observations, he rode for a moment swiftly, in short and rapid
circles, as if still uncertain of his course, and then darted away, like a bird that had been
fluttering around its nest before it takes a distant flight. After scouring the plain for a
minute, he was lost to the eye behind a swell of the land.

The hounds, who had also manifested great uneasiness for some time, followed him for a little
distance, and then terminated their chase by seating themselves on the ground, and raising
their usual low, whining, and warning howls.

CHAPTER XIX

                      How if he will not stand?
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The several movements, related in the close of the preceding chapter, had passed in so short
a space of time, that the old man, while he neglected not to note the smallest incident, had
no opportunity of expressing his opinion concerning the stranger's motives. After the Pawnee
had disappeared, however, he shook his head and muttered, while he walked slowly to the angle
of the thicket that the Indian had just quitted--

"There are both scents and sounds in the air, though my miserable senses are not good enough
to hear the one, or to catch the taint of the other."

"There is nothing to be seen," cried Middleton, who kept close at his side. "My eyes and my
ears are good, and yet I can assure you that I neither hear nor see any thing."

"Your eyes are good! and you are not deaf!" returned the other with a slight air of contempt;
"no, lad, no; they may be good to see across a church, or to hear a town-bell, but afore you
had passed a year in these prairies you would find yourself taking a turkey for a buffaloe,
or conceiting, fifty times, that the roar of a buffaloe bull was the thunder of the Lord! There
is a deception of natur' in these naked plains, in which the air throws up the images like
water, and then it is hard to tell the prairies from a sea. But yonder is a sign that a hunter
never fails to know!"

The trapper pointed to a flight of vultures, that were sailing over the plain at no great distance,
and apparently in the direction in which the Pawnee had riveted his eye. At first Middleton
could not distinguish the small dark objects, that were dotting the dusky clouds, but as they
came swiftly onward, first their forms, and then their heavy waving wings, became distinctly
visible.

"Listen," said the trapper, when he had succeeded in making Middleton see the moving column
of birds. "Now you hear the buffaloes, or bisons, as your knowing Doctor sees fit to call them,
though buffaloes is their name among all the hunters of these regions. And, I conclude, that
a hunter is a better judge of a beast and of its name," he added, winking to the young soldier,
"than any man who has turned over the leaves of a book, instead of travelling over the face
of the 'arth, in order to find out the natur's of its inhabitants."

"Of their habits, I will grant you," cried the naturalist, who rarely missed an opportunity
to agitate any disputed point in his favourite studies. "That is, provided always, deference
is had to the proper use of definitions, and that they are contemplated with scientific eyes."

"Eyes of a mole! as if man's eyes were not as good for names as the eyes of any other creatur'!
Who named the works of His hand? can you tell me that, with your books and college wisdom?
Was it not the first man in the Garden, and is it not a plain consequence that his children
inherit his gifts?"

"That is certainly the Mosaic account of the event," said the Doctor; "though your reading
is by far too literal!"

"My reading! nay, if you suppose, that I have wasted my time in schools, you do such a wrong
to my knowledge, as one mortal should never lay to the door of another without sufficient reason.
If I have ever craved the art of reading, it has been that I might better know the sayings
of the book you name, for it is a book which speaks, in every line, according to human feelings,
and therein according to reason."

"And do you then believe," said the Doctor a little provoked by the dogmatism of his stubborn
adversary, and perhaps, secretly, too confident in his own more liberal, though scarcely as
profitable, attainments,--"do you then believe that all these beasts were literally collected
in a garden, to be enrolled in the nomenclature of the first man?"

"Why not? I understand your meaning; for it is not needful to live in towns to hear all the
devilish devices, that the conceit of man can invent to upset his own happiness. What does
it prove, except indeed it may be said to prove that the garden He made was not after the miserable
fashions of our times, thereby directly giving the lie to what the world calls its civilising?
No, no, the garden of the Lord was the forest then, and is the forest now, where the fruits
do grow, and the birds do sing, according to his own wise ordering. It is quite usual, however,
when there is a slight deviation from a familiar pattern, resulting from either the introduction
of some variation or by the omission of a portion of the old design, to make a corresponding
change in the name. Good illustrations of this custom are the minor alterations which have been
made in the tree trunk of the "tree" pattern. These may be so slight as to be entirely unobserved
by the casual admirer, yet they are responsible for at least three
new names: "Pine Tree," "Temperance Tree," and "Tree of Paradise."

A minor change in the ordinary "Nine Patch," with a new name as a result, is another striking
example of how very slight an alteration may be in order to inspire a new title. In this case, the
central block is cut somewhat larger than in the old "Nine Patch,"
and the four corner blocks are, by comparison with the centre block,
quite small.

This slight change is in reality a magical transformation, for the staid "Nine Patch" has now become
a lively "Puss-in-the-Corner." The changes in some patterns have come about through efforts
to make a limited amount of highly prized colour brighten a whole quilt. This circumstance, as
much as any other, has been the cause of new names.

Important events occurring during the construction periods of old
quilts are quite frequently recalled to us by their names.

The stirring frontier activities and the great men of history made impressions on the mind
of the housewife which found expression in the names of her quilts. "Washington's Plumes," "Mexican
Rose," and "Rose of Dixie" are old quilt names reflecting domestic interest in important events.
The hardships and vicissitudes endured by the sturdy pioneers were constantly in the minds of
the early American quilters and inspired many names. "Pilgrim's Pride," "Bear's Paws," "Rocky
Road to Kansas," "Texas Tears," and "Rocky Road to California" have great interest as they reveal
to us the thoughts of our great-grandmothers over their quilting frames.

The names having political significance, which were attached to quilts, show that the women
as well as the men had a keen interest in the affairs of our country
in its earlier days.

"Old Tippecanoe," "Lincoln's Platform," "Harrison Rose," "Democrat Rose," "Whig Rose," and
"Radical Rose" are all suggestive of the great discussion over slavery. Of the last name, an
old lady, famous for her quilt making, said: "Here's my 'Radical Rose.' I reckon you've heard
I was the first human that ever put black in a Radical Rose

.
 Can the proudest governor in all the States go into his fields,
and slaughter a nobler bullock than is here offered to the meanest hand; and when he has gotten
his sirloin, or his steak, can he eat it with as good a relish as he who has sweetened his
food with wholesome toil, and earned it according to the law of natur', by honestly mastering
that which the Lord hath put before him?"

"If the prairie platter is smoking with a buffaloe's hump, I answer, No," interrupted the luxurious
bee-hunter.

"Ay, boy, you have tasted, and you feel the genuine reasoning of the thing! But the herd is
heading a little this-a-way, and it behoves us to make ready for their visit. If we hide ourselves,
altogether, the horned brutes will break through the place and trample us beneath their feet,
like so many creeping worms; so we will just put the weak ones apart, and take post, as becomes
men and hunters, in the van."

As there was but little time to make the necessary arrangements, the whole party set about
them in good earnest. Inez and Ellen were placed in the edge of the thicket on the side farthest
from the approaching herd. Asinus was posted in the centre, in consideration of his nerves,
and then the old man, with his three male companions, divided themselves in such a manner as
they thought would enable them to turn the head of the rushing column, should it chance to
approach too nigh their position. By the vacillating movements of some fifty or a hundred bulls,
that led the advance, it remained questionable, for many moments, what course they intended
to pursue. But a tremendous and painful roar, which came from behind the cloud of dust that
rose in the centre of the herd, and which was horridly answered by the screams of the carrion
birds, that were greedily sailing directly above the flying drove, appeared to give a new impulse
to their flight, and at once to remove every symptom of indecision. As if glad to seek the
smallest signs of the forest, the whole of the affrighted herd became steady in its direction,
rushing in a straight line toward the little cover of bushes, which has already been so often
named.

The appearance of danger was now, in reality, of a character to try the stoutest nerves. The
flanks of the dark, moving mass, were advanced in such a manner as to make a concave line of
the front, and every fierce eye, that was glaring from the shaggy wilderness of hair in which
the entire heads of the males were enveloped, was riveted with mad anxiety on the thicket.
It seemed as if each beast strove to outstrip his neighbour, in gaining this desired cover;
and as thousands in the rear pressed blindly on those in front, there was the appearance of
an imminent risk that the leaders of the herd would be precipitated on the concealed party,
in which case the destruction of every one of them was certain. Each of our adventurers felt
the danger of his situation in a manner peculiar to his individual character and circumstances.

Middleton wavered. At times he felt inclined to rush through the bushes, and, seizing Inez,
attempt to fly. Then recollecting the impossibility of outstripping the furious speed of an
alarmed bison, he felt for his arms, determined to make head against the countless drove. The
faculties of Dr. Battius were quickly wrought up to the very summit of mental delusion. The
dark forms of the herd lost their distinctness, and then the naturalist began to fancy he beheld
a wild collection of all the creatures of the world, rushing upon him in a body, as if to revenge
the various injuries, which in the course of a life of indefatigable labour in behalf of the
natural sciences, he had inflicted on their several genera. The paralysis it occasioned in
his system, was like the effect of the incubus. Equally unable to fly or to advance, he stood
riveted to the spot, until the infatuation became so complete, that the worthy naturalist was
beginning, by a desperate effort of scientific resolution, even to class the different specimens.
On the other hand, Paul shouted, and called on Ellen to come and assist him in shouting, but
his voice was lost in the bellowings and trampling of the herd. Furious, and yet strangely
excited by the obstinacy of the brutes and the wildness of the sight, and nearly maddened by
sympathy and a species of unconscious apprehension, in which the claims of nature were singularly
mingled with concern for his mistress, he nearly split his throat in exhorting his aged friend
to interfere.

"Come forth, old trapper," he shouted, "with your prairie inventions! or we shall be all smothered
under a mountain of buffaloe humps!"

The old man, who had stood all this while leaning on his rifle, and regarding the movements
of the herd with a steady eye, now deemed it time to strike his blow. Levelling his piece at
the foremost bull, with an agility that would have done credit to his youth, he fired. The
animal received the bullet on the matted hair between his horns, and fell to his knees: but
shaking his head he instantly arose, the very shock seeming to increase his exertions. There
was now no longer time to hesitate. Throwing down his rifle, the trapper stretched forth his
arms, and advanced from the cover with naked hands, directly towards the rushing column of
the beasts.

The figure of a man, when sustained by the firmness and steadiness that intellect can only
impart, rarely fails of commanding respect from all the inferior animals of the creation. The
leading bulls recoiled, and for a single instant there was a sudden stop to their speed, a
dense mass of bodies rolling up in front, until hundreds were seen floundering and tumbling
on the plain. Then came another of those hollow bellowings from the rear, and set the herd
again in motion. The head of the column, however, divided. The immovable form of the trapper,
cutting it, as it were, into two gliding streams of life. Middleton and Paul instantly profited
by his example, and extended the feeble barrier by a similar exhibition of their own persons.

For a few moments, the new impulse given to the animals in front, served to protect the thicket.
But, as the body of the herd pressed more and more upon the open line of its defenders, and
the dust thickened, so as to obscure their persons, there was, at each instant, a renewed danger
of the beasts breaking through. It became necessary for the trapper and his companions to become
still more and more alert; and they were gradually yielding before the headlong multitude,
when a furious bull darted by Middleton, so near as to brush his person, and, at the next instant,
swept through the thicket with the velocity of the wind.

"Close, and die for the ground," shouted the old man, "or a thousand of the devils will be
at his heels!"

All their efforts would have proved fruitless, however, against the living torrent, had not
Asinus, whose domains had just been so rudely entered, lifted his voice, in the midst of the
uproar. The most sturdy and furious of the bulls trembled at the alarming and unknown cry,
and then each individual brute was seen madly pressing from that very thicket, which, the moment
before, he had endeavoured to reach, with the eagerness with which the murderer seeks the sanctuary.

As the stream divided, the place became clear; the two dark columns moving obliquely from the
copse, to unite again at the distance of a mile, on its opposite side. The instant the old
man saw the sudden effect which the voice of Asinus had produced, he coolly commenced reloading
his rifle, indulging at the same time in a heartfelt fit of his silent and peculiar merriment.

"There they go, like dogs with so many half-filled shot-pouches dangling at their tails, and
no fear of their breaking their order; for what the brutes in the rear didn't hear with their
own ears, they'll conceit they did: besides, if they change their minds, it may be no hard
matter to get the Jack to sing the rest of his tune!" 

Plates and saucers of various diameters are always available to serve as markers in laying out
such designs. The "pineapple," "broken plaid," and "shell" patterns are very popular, especially
with those who are more experienced in the art. One very effective design used by many quilters
is known as the "Ostrich Feather."

These so-called feathers are arranged in straight bands, waved lines, or circles, and--when the work
is well done--are very beautiful. The "fan" and "twisted rope" patterns are familiar to the
older quilters but are not much used at the present time.

Frequently the quilting design follows the pieced or patched pattern
and is then very effective, especially when a floral pattern is used.

Some quilters show much originality and ingenuity in incorporating into their work the outlines
of the flowers and leaves of the quilt design. Sometimes the pieced top is of such common material
as to seem an unworthy basis for the beautiful work of an experienced quilter, who stitches with
such patient hand, wasting, some may think, her art upon too poor a subject. However, for
the consolation of those who consider quilting a wicked waste of time, it may be added that
nowadays expert quilters are very few indeed, and enthusiasts who have spent weeks piecing a
beautiful quilt have been known to wait a year before being able to get it quilted by an expert
in this art.

On the thin cotton quilts that have the elaborate quilting designs and are the pride of the owner, the
quilting is done with fine cotton thread, about number seventy. The running stitch used in
quilting should be as small and even as it is possible for the quilter to make. This is a very
difficult feat to accomplish, since the quilt composed of two thicknesses of cloth with an interlining
of cotton is stretched so tightly in the frame that it is quite difficult to push the needle through.
Also the quilter, while bending over the frame with one hand above and one hand below, is in
a somewhat unnatural strained position. It requires much patience to acquire the knack of sitting in
the rather uncomfortable quilter's position without quickly tiring.

Skill and speed in quilting can be acquired only through much practice. Perfect quilting cannot
be turned out by a novice in the art, no matter how skilful she may
be at other kinds of needlework.

The patience and skill of the quilter are especially taxed when, in following the vagaries
of some design, she is forced to quilt lines that extend away from her instead of toward her.
As the result of many years spent over the quilting frame, some quilters acquire an unusual dexterity
in handling the needle, and occasionally one is encountered who can quilt as well with one hand
as with the other.

Quilting is usually paid for by the amount of thread used, no consideration being given to the
amount of time expended on the work. A spool of cotton thread, such as is found in every dry-goods
store, averaging two hundred yards to the spool, is the universal
measure.

The price charged is more a matter of locality than excellence of workmanship. A certain price
will prevail in one section among all quilters there, while in another, not far removed, two
or three times that price will be asked for the same work. When many of the old quilts, now
treasured as remembrances of our diligent and ambitious ancestors, were made, one dollar per
spool was the usual price paid for quilting. However, as the number of quilters has decreased,
the price of quilting has increased, until as much as five dollars per spool is now asked in
some parts of the country. Even at the advanced prices, it is exceedingly difficult to find
sufficient quilters to complete the many pieced and appliqué quilts
being made.

After the space of some twelve inches, which is as far
as the quilter can reach conveniently, has been quilted, the completed
portion is rolled up on the side of the frame nearest the quilter.

"How well the Pawnee knew the philosophy of a buffaloe hunt!" said the old man, after he had
stood regarding the animated scene for a few moments, with evident satisfaction. "You saw how
he went off like the wind before the drove. It was in order that he might not taint the air,
and that he might turn the flank, and join--Ha! how is this! yonder Red-skins are no Pawnees!
The feathers in their heads are from the wings and tails of owls.--Ah! as I am but a miserable,
half-sighted, trapper, it is a band of the accursed Siouxes! To cover, lads, to cover. A single
cast of an eye this-a-way, would strip us of every rag of clothes, as surely as the lightning
scorches the bush, and it might be that our very lives would be far from safe."

Middleton had already turned from the spectacle, to seek that which pleased him better; the
sight of his young and beautiful bride. Paul seized the Doctor by the arm; and, as the trapper
followed with the smallest possible delay, the whole party was quickly collected within the
cover of the thicket. After a few short explanations concerning the character of this new danger,
the old man, on whom the whole duty of directing their movements was devolved, in deference
to his great experience, continued his discourse as follows--

"This is a region, as you must all know, where a strong arm is far better than the right, and
where the white law is as little known as needed. Therefore does every thing, now, depend on
judgment and power. If," he continued, laying his finger on his cheek, like one who considered
deeply all sides of the embarrassing situation in which he found himself,--"if an invention
could be framed, which would set these Siouxes and the brood of the squatter by the ears, then
might we come in, like the buzzards after a fight atween the beasts, and pick up the gleanings
of the ground--there are Pawnees nigh us, too! It is a certain matter, for yonder lad is not
so far from his village without an errand. Here are therefore four parties within sound of
a cannon, not one of whom can trust the other. All which makes movement a little difficult,
in a district where covers are far from plenty. But we are three well-armed, and I think I
may see three stout-hearted men--"

"Four," interrupted Paul.

"Anan," said the old man, looking up simply at his companion.

"Four," repeated the bee-hunter, pointing to the naturalist.

"Every army has its hangers-on and idlers," rejoined the blunt border-man. "Friend, it will
be necessary to slaughter this ass."

"To slay Asinus! such a deed would be an act of supererogatory cruelty."

"I know nothing of your words, which hide their meaning in sound; but that is cruel which sacrifices
a Christian to a brute. This is what I call the reason of mercy. It would be just as safe to
blow a trumpet, as to let the animal raise his voice again, inasmuch as it would prove a manifest
challenge to the Siouxes."

"I will answer for the discretion of Asinus, who seldom speaks without a reason."

"They say a man can be known by the company he keeps," retorted the old man, "and why not a
brute? I once made a forced march, and went through a great deal of jeopardy, with a companion
who never opened his mouth but to sing; and trouble enough and great concern of mind did the
fellow give me. It was in that very business with your grand'ther, captain. But then he had
a human throat, and well did he know how to use it, on occasion, though he didn't always stop
to regard the time and seasons fit for such outcries. Ah's me! if I was now, as I was then,
it wouldn't be a band of thieving Siouxes that should easily drive me from such a lodgment
as this! But what signifies boasting, when sight and strength are both failing. The warrior,
that the Delawares once saw fit to call after the Hawk, for the goodness of his eyes, would
now be better termed the Mole! In my judgment, therefore, it will be well to slay the brute."

"There's argument and good logic in it," said Paul; "music is music, and it's always noisy,
whether it comes from a fiddle or a jackass. Therefore I agree with the old man, and say, Kill
the beast."

"Friends," said the naturalist, looking with a sorrowful eye from one to another of his bloodily
disposed companions, "slay not Asinus; he is a specimen of his kind, of whom much good and
little evil can be said. Hardy and docile for his genus; abstemious and patient, even for his
humble species. We have journeyed much together, and his death would grieve me. How would it
trouble thy spirit, venerable venator, to separate, in such an untimely manner, from your faithful
hound?"

"The animal shall not die," said the old man, suddenly clearing his throat, in a manner that
proved he felt the force of the appeal; "but his voice must be smothered. Bind his jaws with
the halter, and then I think we may trust the rest to Providence."

With this double security for the discretion of Asinus, for Paul instantly bound the muzzle
of the ass in the manner required, the trapper seemed content. After which he proceeded to
the margin of the thicket to reconnoitre.

The uproar, which attended the passage of the herd, was now gone, or rather it was heard rolling
along the prairie, at the distance of a mile. The clouds of dust were already blown away by
the wind, and a clear range was left to the eye, in that place where ten minutes before there
existed a scene of so much wildness and confusion.

The Siouxes had completed their conquest, and, apparently satisfied with this addition to the
numerous previous captures they had made, they now seemed content to let the remainder of the
herd escape. A dozen remained around the carcass, over which a few buzzards were balancing
themselves with steady wings and greedy eyes, while the rest were riding about, in quest of
such further booty as might come in their way, on the trail of so vast a drove. The trapper
measured the proportions, and scanned the equipments of such individuals as drew nearer to
the side of the thicket, with careful eyes. At length he pointed out one among them, to Middleton,
as Weucha.

"Now, know we not only who they are, but their errand," the old man continued, deliberately
shaking his head. "They have lost the trail of the squatter, and are on its hunt. These buffaloes
have crossed their path, and in chasing the animals, bad luck has led them in open sight of
the hill on which the brood of Ishmael have harboured. Do you see yon birds watching for the
offals of the beast they have killed? Therein is a moral, which teaches the manner of a prairie
life. A band of Pawnees are outlying for these very Siouxes, as you see the buzzards looking
down for their food, and it behoves us, as Christian men who have so much at stake, to look
down upon them both. Ha! what brings yonder two skirting reptiles to a stand? As you live,
they have found the place where the miserable son of the squatter met his death!"

The old man was not mistaken. Weucha, and a savage who accompanied him, had reached that spot,
which has already been mentioned as furnishing the frightful evidences of violence and bloodshed.
There they sat on their horses, examining the well-known signs, with the intelligence that
distinguishes the habits of Indians. Their scrutiny was long, and apparently not without distrust.
At length they raised a cry, that was scarcely less piteous and startling than that which the
hounds had before made over the same fatal signs, and which did not fail to draw the whole
band immediately around them, as the fell bark of the jackal is said to gather his comrades
to the chase.

CHAPTER XX

                       Welcome, ancient Pistol.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

It was not long before the trapper pointed out the commanding person of Mahtoree, as the leader
of the Siouxes. This chief, who had been among the last to obey the vociferous summons of Weucha,
no sooner reached the spot where his whole party was now gathered, than he threw himself from
his horse, and proceeded to examine the marks of the extraordinary trail, with that degree
of dignity and attention which became his high and responsible station. The warriors, for it
was but too evident that they were to a man of that fearless and ruthless class, awaited the
result of his investigation with patient reserve; none but a few of the principal braves, presuming
even to speak, while their leader was thus gravely occupied. It was several minutes before
Mahtoree seemed satisfied. He then directed his eyes along the ground to those several places
where Ishmael had found the same revolting evidences of the passage of some bloody struggle,
and motioned to his people to follow.

The whole band advanced in a body towards the thicket, until they came to a halt, within a
few yards of the precise spot, where Esther had stimulated her sluggish sons to break into
the cover. The reader will readily imagine that the trapper and his companions were not indifferent
observers of so threatening a movement. The old man summoned all who were capable of bearing
arms to his side, and demanded, in very unequivocal terms, though in a voice that was suitably
lowered, in order to escape the ears of their dangerous neighbours, whether they were disposed
to make battle for their liberty, or whether they should try the milder expedient of conciliation.
As it was a subject in which all had an equal interest, he put the question as to a council
of war, and not without some slight exhibition of the lingering vestiges of a nearly extinct
military pride. Paul and the Doctor were diametrically opposed to each other in opinion; the
former declaring for an immediate appeal to arms, and the latter was warmly espousing the policy
of pacific measures. Middleton, who saw that there was great danger of a hot verbal dispute
between two men, who were governed by feelings so diametrically opposed, saw fit to assume
the office of arbiter; or rather to decide the question, his situation making him a sort of
umpire. He also leaned to the side of peace, for he evidently saw that, in consequence of the
vast superiority of their enemies, violence would irretrievably lead to their destruction.

The trapper listened to the reasons of the young soldier with great attention; and, as they
were given with the steadiness of one who did not suffer apprehension to blind his judgment,
they did not fail to produce a suitable impression.

"It is rational," rejoined the trapper, when the other had delivered his reasons; "it is very
rational, for what man cannot move with his strength he must circumvent with his wits. It is
reason that makes him stronger than the buffaloe, and swifter than the moose. Now stay you
here, and keep yourselves close. My life and my traps are but of little value, when the welfare
of so many human souls are concerned; and, moreover, I may say that I know the windings of
Indian cunning. Therefore will I go alone upon the prairie. It may so happen, that I can yet
draw the eyes of a Sioux from this spot and give you time and room to fly."

As if resolved to listen to no remonstrance, the old man quietly shouldered his rifle, and
moving leisurely through the thicket, he issued on the plain, at a point whence he might first
appear before the eyes of the Siouxes, without exciting their suspicions that he came from
its cover.

The instant that the figure of a man dressed in the garb of a hunter, and bearing the well
known and much dreaded rifle, appeared before the eyes of the Siouxes, there was a sensible,
though a suppressed sensation in the band. The artifice of the trapper had so far succeeded,
as to render it extremely doubtful whether he came from some point on the open prairie, or
from the thicket; though the Indians still continued to cast frequent and suspicious glances
at the cover. They had made their halt at the distance of an arrow-flight from the bushes;
but when the stranger came sufficiently nigh to show that the deep coating of red and brown,
which time and exposure had given to his features, was laid upon the original colour of a Pale-face,
they slowly receded from the spot, until they reached a distance that might defeat the aim
of fire-arms.

In the mean time the old man continued to advance, until he had got nigh enough to make himself
heard without difficulty. Here he stopped, and dropping his rifle to the earth, he raised his
hand with the palm outward, in token of peace. After uttering a few words of reproach to his
hound, who watched the savage group with eyes that seemed to recognise them, he spoke in the
Sioux tongue--

"My brothers are welcome," he said, cunningly constituting himself the master of the region
in which they had met, and assuming the offices of hospitality. "They are far from their villages,
and are hungry. Will they follow to my lodge, to eat and sleep?"

No sooner was his voice heard, than the yell of pleasure, which burst from a dozen mouths,
convinced the sagacious trapper, that he also was recognised. Feeling that it was too late
to retreat, he profited by the confusion which prevailed among them, while Weucha was explaining
his character, to advance, until he was again face to face with the redoubtable Mahtoree. The
second interview between these two men, each of whom was extraordinary in his way, was marked
by the usual caution of the frontiers. They stood, for nearly a minute, examining each other
without speaking.

"Where are your young men?" sternly demanded the Teton chieftain, after he found that the immovable
features of the trapper refused to betray any of their master's secrets, under his intimidating
look.

"The Long-knives do not come in bands to trap the beaver? I am alone."

"Your head is white, but you have a forked tongue. Mahtoree has been in your camp. He knows
that you are not alone. Where is your young wife, and the warrior that I found upon the prairie?"

"I have no wife. I have told my brother that the woman and her friend were strangers. The words
of a grey head should be heard, and not forgotten. The Dahcotahs found travellers asleep, and
they thought they had no need of horses. The women and children of a Pale-face are not used
to go far on foot. Let them be sought where you left them."

The eyes of the Teton flashed fire as he answered--

"They are gone: but Mahtoree is a wise chief, and his eyes can see a great distance!"

"Does the partisan of the Tetons see men on these naked fields?" retorted the trapper, with
great steadiness of mien. "I am very old, and my eyes grow dim. Where do they stand?" The chief
remained silent a moment, as if he disdained to contest any further the truth of a fact, concerning
which he was already satisfied. Then pointing to the traces on the earth, he said, with a sudden
transition to mildness, in his eye and manner--

"My father has learnt wisdom, in many winters; can he tell me whose moccasin has left this trail?"

"There have been wolves and buffaloes on the prairies; and there may have been cougars too."

Mahtoree glanced his eye at the thicket, as if he thought the latter suggestion not impossible.
Pointing to the place, he ordered his young men to reconnoitre it more closely, cautioning
them, at the same time, with a stern look at the trapper, to beware of treachery from the Big-knives.
Three or four half-naked, eager-looking youths lashed their horses at the word, and darted
away to obey the mandate. The old man trembled a little for the discretion of Paul, when he
saw this demonstration. The Tetons encircled the place two or three times, approaching nigher
and nigher at each circuit, and then galloped back to their leader to report that the copse
seemed empty. Notwithstanding the trapper watched the eye of Mahtoree, to detect the inward
movements of his mind, and if possible to anticipate, in order to direct his suspicions, the
utmost sagacity of one so long accustomed to study the cold habits of the Indian race, could
however detect no symptom, or expression, that denoted how far he credited or distrusted this
intelligence. Instead of replying to the information of his scouts, he spoke kindly to his
horse, and motioning to a youth to receive the bridle, or rather halter, by which he governed
the animal, he took the trapper by the arm, and led him a little apart from the rest of the band.

"Has my brother been a warrior?" said the wily Teton, in a tone that he intended should be
conciliating.

"Do the leaves cover the trees in the season of fruits? Go. The Dahcotahs have not seen as
many warriors living as I have looked on in their blood! But what signifies idle remembrancing,"
he added in English, "when limbs grow stiff, and sight is failing!"

The chief regarded him a moment with a severe look, as if he would lay bare the falsehood he
had heard; but meeting in the calm eye and steady mien of the trapper a confirmation of the
truth of what he said, he took the hand of the old man and laid it gently on his head, in token
of the respect that was due to the other's years and experience.

"Why then do the Big-knives tell their red brethren to bury the tomahawk," he said, "when their
own young men never forget that they are braves, and meet each other so often with bloody hands?"

"My nation is more numerous than the buffaloes on the prairies, or the pigeons in the air.
Their quarrels are frequent; yet their warriors are few. None go out on the war-path but they
who are gifted with the qualities of a brave, and therefore such see many battles."

"It is not so--my father is mistaken," returned Mahtoree, indulging in a smile of exulting
penetration, at the very instant he corrected the force of his denial, in deference to the
years and services of one so aged. "The Big-knives are very wise, and they are men; all of
them would be warriors. They would leave the Red-skins to dig roots and hoe the corn. But a
Dahcotah is not born to live like a woman; he must strike the Pawnee and the Omahaw, or he
will lose the name of his fathers."

"The Master of Life looks with an open eye on his children, who die in a battle that is fought
for the right; but he is blind, and his ears are shut to the cries of an Indian, who is killed
when plundering, or doing evil to his neighbour."

"My father is old," said Mahtoree, looking at his aged companion, with an expression of irony,
that sufficiently denoted he was one of those who overstep the trammels of education, and who
are perhaps a little given to abuse the mental liberty they thus obtain. "He is very old: has
he made a journey to the far country; and has he been at the trouble to come back, to tell
the young men what he has seen?"

"Teton," returned the trapper, throwing the breach of his rifle to the earth with startling
vehemence, and regarding his companion with steady serenity, "I have heard that there are men,
among my people, who study their great medicines until they believe themselves to be gods,
and who laugh at all faith except in their own vanities. It may be true. It is true; for I
have seen them. When man is shut up in towns and schools, with his own follies, it may be easy
to believe himself greater than the Master of Life; but a warrior, who lives in a house with
the clouds for its roof, where he can at any moment look both at the heavens and at the earth,
and who daily sees the power of the Great Spirit, should be more humble. A Dahcotah chieftain
ought to be too wise to laugh at justice."

The crafty Mahtoree, who saw that his free-thinking was not likely to produce a favourable
impression on the old man, instantly changed his ground, by alluding to the more immediate
subject of their interview. Laying his hand gently on the shoulder of the trapper, he led him
forward, until they both stood within fifty feet of the margin of the thicket. Here he fastened
his penetrating eyes on the other's honest countenance, and continued the discourse--

"If my father has hid his young men in the bush, let him tell them to come forth. You see that
a Dahcotah is not afraid. Mahtoree is a great chief! A warrior, whose head is white, and who
is about to go to the Land of Spirits, cannot have a tongue with two ends, like a serpent."

"Dahcotah, I have told no lie. Since the Great Spirit made me a man, I have lived in the wilderness,
or on these naked plains, without lodge or family. I am a hunter and go on my path alone."

"My father has a good carabine. Let him point it in the bush and fire."

The old man hesitated a moment, and then slowly prepared himself to give this delicate assurance
of the truth of what he said, without which he plainly perceived the suspicions of his crafty
companion could not be lulled. As he lowered his rifle, his eye, although greatly dimmed and
weakened by age, ran over the confused collection of objects, that lay embedded amid the party-coloured
foliage of the thicket, until it succeeded in catching a glimpse of the brown covering of the
stem of a small tree. With this object in view, he raised the piece to a level and fired. The
bullet had no sooner glided from the barrel than a tremor seized the hands of the trapper,
which, had it occurred a moment sooner, would have utterly disqualified him for so hazardous
an experiment. A frightful silence succeeded the report, during which he expected to hear the
shrieks of the females, and then, as the smoke whirled away in the wind, he caught a view of
the fluttering bark, and felt assured that all his former skill was not entirely departed from
him. Dropping the piece to the earth, he turned again to his companion with an air of the utmost
composure, and demanded--

"Is my brother satisfied?"

"Mahtoree is a chief of the Dahcotahs," returned the cunning Teton, laying his hand on his
chest, in acknowledgment of the other's sincerity. "He knows that a warrior, who has smoked
at so many council-fires, until his head has grown white, would not be found in wicked company.
But did not my father once ride on a horse, like a rich chief of the Pale-faces, instead of
travelling on foot like a hungry Konza?"

"Never! The Wahcondah has given me legs, and he has given me resolution to use them. For sixty
summers and winters did I journey in the woods of America, and ten tiresome years have I dwelt
on these open fields, without finding need to call often upon the gifts of the other creatur's
of the Lord to carry me from place to place."

"If my father has so long lived in the shade, why has he come upon the prairies? The sun will
scorch him."

The old man looked sorrowfully about for a moment, and then turning with a confidential air
to the other, he replied--

"I passed the spring, summer, and autumn of life among the trees. The winter of my days had
come, and found me where I loved to be, in the quiet--ay, and in the honesty of the woods!
Teton, then I slept happily, where my eyes could look up through the branches of the pines
and the beeches, to the very dwelling of the Good Spirit of my people. If I had need to open
my heart to him, while his fires were burning above my head, the door was open and before my
eyes. But the axes of the choppers awoke me. For a long time my ears heard nothing but the
uproar of clearings. I bore it like a warrior and a man; there was a reason that I should bear
it: but when that reason was ended, I bethought me to get beyond the accursed sounds. It was
trying to the courage and to the habits, but I had heard of these vast and naked fields, and
I came hither to escape the wasteful temper of my people. Tell me, Dahcotah, have I not done well?"

The trapper laid his long lean finger on the naked shoulder of the Indian as he ended, and
seemed to demand his felicitations on his ingenuity and success, with a ghastly smile, in which
triumph was singularly blended with regret. His companion listened intently, and replied to
the question by saying, in the sententious manner of his race--

"The head of my father is very grey; he has always lived with men, and he has seen everything.
What he does is good; what he speaks is wise. Now let him say, is he sure that he is a stranger
to the Big-knives, who are looking for their beasts on every side of the prairies and cannot
find them?"

"Dahcotah, what I have said is true. I live alone, and never do I mingle with men whose skins
are white, if--"

His mouth was suddenly closed by an interruption that was as mortifying as it was unexpected.
The words were still on his tongue, when the bushes on the side of the thicket where they stood,
opened, and the whole of the party whom he had just left, and in whose behalf he was endeavouring
to reconcile his love of truth to the necessity of prevaricating, came openly into view. A
pause of mute astonishment succeeded this unlooked-for spectacle. Then Mahtoree, who did not
suffer a muscle or a joint to betray the wonder and surprise he actually experienced, motioned
towards the advancing friends of the trapper with an air of assumed civility, and a smile,
that lighted his fierce, dark, visage, as the glare of the setting sun reveals the volume and
load of the cloud, that is charged to bursting with the electric fluid. He however disdained
to speak, or to give any other evidence of his intentions than by calling to his side the distant
band, who sprang forward at his beck, with the alacrity of willing subordinates.

In the mean time the friends of the old man continued to advance. Middleton himself was foremost,
supporting the light and aerial looking figure of Inez, on whose anxious countenance he cast
such occasional glances of tender interest as, in similar circumstances, a father would have
given to his child. Paul led Ellen, close in their rear. But while the eye of the bee-hunter
did not neglect his blooming companion, it scowled angrily, resembling more the aspect of the
sullen and retreating bear than the soft intelligence of a favoured suitor. Obed and Asinus
came last, the former leading his companion with a degree of fondness that could hardly be
said to be exceeded by any other of the party. The approach of the naturalist was far less
rapid than that of those who preceded him. His feet seemed equally reluctant to advance, or
to remain stationary; his position bearing a great analogy to that of Mahomet's coffin, with
the exception that the quality of repulsion rather than that of attraction held him in a state
of rest. The repulsive power in his rear however appeared to predominate, and by a singular
exception, as he would have said himself, to all philosophical principles, it rather increased
than diminished by distance. As the eyes of the naturalist steadily maintained a position that
was the opposite of his route, they served to give a direction to those of the observers of
all these movements, and at once furnished a sufficient clue by which to unravel the mystery
of so sudden a debouchement from the cover.

Another cluster of stout and armed men was seen at no great distance, just rounding a point
of the thicket, and moving directly though cautiously towards the place where the band of the
Siouxes was posted, as a squadron of cruisers is often seen to steer across the waste of waters,
towards the rich but well-protected convoy. In short, the family of the squatter, or at least
such among them as were capable of bearing arms, appeared in view, on the broad prairie, evidently
bent on revenging their wrongs.

Mahtoree and his party slowly retired from the thicket, the moment they caught a view of the
strangers, until they halted on a swell that commanded a wide and unobstructed view of the
naked fields on which they stood. Here the Dahcotah appeared disposed to make his stand, and
to bring matters to an issue. Notwithstanding this retreat, in which he compelled the trapper
to accompany him, Middleton still advanced, until he too halted on the same elevation, and
within speaking distance of the warlike Siouxes. The borderers in their turn took a favourable
position, though at a much greater distance. The three groups now resembled so many fleets
at sea, lying with their topsails to the masts, with the commendable precaution of reconnoitring,
before each could ascertain who among the strangers might be considered as friends, and who
as foes.

During this moment of suspense, the dark, threatening, eye of Mahtoree rolled from one of the
strange parties to the other, in keen and hasty examination, and then it turned its withering
look on the old man, as the chief said, in a tone of high and bitter scorn--

"The Big-knives are fools! Analyzing himself, he was well aware that he would never possess a truly
Christian spirit of humility and penitence.

He knew without a doubt that he would never experience that moment of grace mentioned by Lacordaire,
"when the last shaft of light penetrates the soul and unites the truths there lying dispersed." He
never felt the need of mortification and of prayer, without which no conversion in possible, if one
is to believe the majority of priests. He had no desire to implore a God whose forgiveness
seemed most improbable. Yet the sympathy he felt for his old teachers lent him an interest
in their works and doctrines.

Those inimitable accents of conviction, those ardent voices of men of indubitably superior intelligence
returned to him and led him to doubt his own mind and strength.

Amid the solitude in which he lived, without new nourishment, without any fresh experiences,
without any renovation of thought, without that exchange of sensations common to society, in
this unnatural confinement in which he persisted, all the questionings
forgotten during his stay in Paris were revived as active irritants.

The reading of his beloved Latin works, almost all of them written
by bishops and monks, had doubtless contributed to this crisis.

Enveloped in a convent-like atmosphere, in a heady perfume of incense,
his nervous brain had grown excitable.

And by an association of ideas, these books had driven back the memories of his life as a
young man, revealing in full light the years spent with the Fathers.

"There is no doubt about it," Des Esseintes mused, as he reasoned the matter and followed the
progress of this introduction of the Jesuitic spirit into Fontenay.

"Since my childhood, although unaware of it, I have had this leaven
which has never fermented.

The weakness I have always borne for religious subjects is perhaps a positive proof of it."
But he sought to persuade himself to the contrary, disturbed at no
longer being his own master.

He searched for motives; it had required a struggle for him to abandon things sacerdotal, since
the Church alone had treasured objects of art--the lost forms of past ages. Even in its wretched
modern reproductions, she had preserved the contours of the gold and silver ornaments, the charm
of chalices curving like petunias, and the charm of pyxes with their chaste sides; even in
aluminum and imitation enamels and colored glasses, she had preserved the grace of vanished
modes. In short, most of the precious objects now to be found in the Cluny museum, which have miraculously
escaped the crude barbarism of the philistines, come from the ancient
French abbeys.

And just as the Church had preserved philosophy and history and letters from barbarism in the
Middle Ages, so had she saved the plastic arts, bringing to our own days those marvelous fabrics
and jewelries which the makers of sacred objects spoil to the best of their ability, without
being able to destroy the originally exquisite form.

It followed, then, that there was nothing surprising in his having bought these old trinkets,
in his having, together with a number of other collectors, purchased such relics from the antique
shops of Paris and the second-hand dealers of the provinces.

But these reasons he evoked in vain. He did not wholly succeed in convincing himself. He persisted
in considering religion as a superb legend, a magnificent imposture. Yet, despite his convictions,
his scepticism began to be shattered.

This was the singular fact he was obliged to face: he was less confident now than in childhood,
when he had been directly under the influence of the Jesuits, when their instruction could not be shunned,
when he was in their hands and belonged to them body and soul, without family ties, with no outside
influence powerful enough to counteract their precepts. Moreover, they had inculcated in him
a certain tendency towards the marvelous which, interned and exercised in the close quarters of
his fixed ideas, had slowly and obscurely developed in his soul, until today it was blossoming in
his solitude, affecting his spirit, regardless of arguments.

By examining the process of his reasoning, by seeking to unite its threads and to discover its
sources and causes, he concluded that his previous mode of living was derived from the education
he had received. Thus, his tendencies towards artificiality and his craving for eccentricity,
were no more than the results of specious studies, spiritual refinements and quasi-theological
speculations. They were, in the last analysis, ecstacies, aspirations towards an ideal, towards
an unknown universe as desirable as that promised us by the Holy
Scriptures.

He curbed his thoughts sharply and broke the thread of his reflections.

"Well!" he thought, vexed, "I am even more affected than I had imagined. Here am I arguing with
myself like a very casuist!"

He was left pensive, agitated by a vague fear. Certainly, if Lacordaire's theory were sound,
he had nothing to be afraid of, since the magic touch of conversion
is not to be consummated in a moment.

To bring about the explosion, the ground must be constantly and assiduously
mined.

But just as the romancers speak of the thunderclap of love, so do theologians also speak of the
thunderclap of conversion. No one was safe, should one admit the
truth of this doctrine.

There was no longer any need of self-analysis, of paying heed to presentiments, of taking
preventive measures.

The psychology of mysticism was void.

Things were so because they were so, and that was all.

"I am really becoming stupid," thought Des Esseintes.

"The very fear of this malady will end by bringing it on, if this
continues."

He partially succeeded in shaking off this influence. The memories of his life with the Jesuits
waned, only to be replaced by other thoughts.

He was entirely dominated by morbid abstractions. Despite himself, he thought of the contradictory
interpretations of the dogmas, of the lost apostasies of Father Labbe, recorded in the works
on the Decrees. Fragments of these schisms, scraps of these heresies which for centuries had
divided the Churches of the Orient and the Occident, returned to him.

Here, Nestorius denied the title of "Mother of God" to the Virgin because, in the mystery of
the Incarnation, it was not God but rather a human being she had
nourished in her womb; there, Eutyches declared that Christ's image
could not resemble that of other men, since divinity had chosen to
dwell in his body and had consequently entirely altered the form of
everything.

Other quibblers maintained that the Redeemer had had no body at all
and that this expression of the holy books must be taken figuratively,
while Tertullian put forth his famous, semi-materialistic axiom: "Only
that which is not, has no body; everything which is, has a body fitting
it."

Finally, this ancient question, debated for years, demanded an answer: was Christ hanged on
the cross, or was it the Trinity which had suffered as one in its
triple hypostasis, on the cross at Calvary?

And mechanically, like a lesson long ago learned, he proposed the questions to himself and answered
them.

For several days his brain was a swarm of paradoxes, subtleties and hair-splittings, a skein of
rules as complicated as the articles of the codes that involved the sense of everything, indulged
in puns and ended in a most tenuous and singular celestial jurisprudence. The abstract side vanished,
in its turn, and under the influence of the Gustave Moreau paintings
of the wall, yielded to a concrete succession of pictures.

Before him he saw marching a procession of prelates. The archimandrites and patriarchs, their
white beards waving during the reading of the prayers, lifted golden arms to bless kneeling
throngs. He saw silent files of penitents marching into dim crypts. Before him rose vast cathedrals
where white monks intoned from pulpits. Just as De Quincey, having taken a dose of opium and uttered
the word "Consul Romanus," evoked entire pages of Livius, and beheld the solemn advance of
the consuls and the magnificent, pompous march of the Roman armies, so he, at a theological expression,
paused breathless as he viewed the onrush of penitents and the churchly
apparitions which detached themselves from the glowing depths of the
basilica.

These scenes held him enchanted.

             They moved from age to age, culminating in
                                                   the modern religious ceremonies, bathing his soul in a tender, mournful
infinity of music.

On this plane, no reasonings were necessary; there were no further contests to be endured. He
had an indescribable impression of respect and fear. His artistic sense was conquered by the
skillfully calculated Catholic rituals. His nerves quivered at these memories. Then, in sudden
rebellion, in a sudden reversion, monstrous ideas were born in him, fancies concerning those
sacrileges warned against by the manual of the Father confessors, of the scandalous, impure desecration
of holy water and sacred oil. The Demon, a powerful rival, now stood against an omnipotent God.
A frightful grandeur seemed to Des Esseintes to emanate from a crime
committed in church by a believer bent, with blasphemously horrible
glee and sadistic joy, over such revered objects, covering them with
outrages and saturating them in opprobrium.

Before him were conjured up the madnesses of magic, of the black mass, of the witches' revels,
of terrors of possessions and of exorcisms. He reached the point where he wondered if he were
not committing a sacrilege in possessing objects which had once been consecrated: the Church
canons, chasubles and pyx covers. And this idea of a state of sin
imparted to him a mixed sensation of pride and relief.

The pleasures of sacrilege were unravelled from the skein of this idea, but these were debatable
sacrileges, in any case, and hardly serious, since he really loved these objects and did not pollute
them by misuse. In this wise he lulled himself with prudent and cowardly thoughts, the caution
of his soul forbidding obvious crimes and depriving him of the courage necessary to the consummation
of frightful and deliberate sins.

Little by little this tendency to ineffectual quibbling disappeared. In his mind's eye he saw the panorama
of the Church with its hereditary influence on humanity through the centuries. He imagined it as
imposing and suffering, emphasizing to man the horror of life, the
infelicity of man's destiny; preaching patience, penitence and the
spirit of sacrifice; seeking to heal wounds, while it displayed the
bleeding wounds of Christ; bespeaking divine privileges; promising
the richest part of paradise to the afflicted; exhorting humanity
to suffer and to render to God, like a holocaust, its trials and offenses,
its vicissitudes and pains.

Thus the Church grew truly eloquent, the beneficent mother of the oppressed, the eternal menace
of oppressors and despots.

Here, Des Esseintes was on firm ground. He was thoroughly satisfied with this admission of
social ordure, but he revolted against the vague hope of remedy in the beyond. Schopenhauer was
more true. His doctrine and that of the Church started from common premises. He, too, based
his system on the vileness of the world; he, too, like the author of the Imitation of Christ, uttered
that grievous outcry: "Truly life on earth is wretched." He, also, preached the nothingness
of life, the advantages of solitude, and warned humanity that no
matter what it does, in whatever direction it may turn, it must remain
wretched, the poor by reason of the sufferings entailed by want, the
rich by reason of the unconquerable weariness engendered by abundance;
but this philosophy promised no universal remedies, did not entice
one with false hopes, so as to minimize the inevitable evils of life.

He did not affirm the revolting conception of original sin, nor did
he feel inclined to argue that it is a beneficent God who protects
the worthless and wicked, rains misfortunes on children, stultifies
the aged and afflicts the innocent.

He did not exalt the virtues of a Providence which has invented that useless, incomprehensible,
unjust and senseless abomination, physical suffering. Far from seeking to justify, as does
the Church, the necessity of torments and afflictions, he cried, in his outraged pity: "If a God
has made this world, I should not wish to be that God. The world's wretchedness would rend
my heart."

Ah! Schopenhauer alone was right. Compared with these treatises of spiritual hygiene, of what
avail were the evangelical pharmacopoeias? He did not claim to cure anything, and he offered
no alleviation to the sick. But his theory of pessimism was, in the end, the great consoler
of choice intellects and lofty souls. He revealed society as it is, asserted woman's inherent
stupidity, indicated the safest course, preserved you from disillusionment
by warning you to restrain hopes as much as possible, to refuse to
yield to their allurement, to deem yourself fortunate, finally, if
they did not come toppling about your ears at some unexpected moment.

Traversing the same path as the Imitation, this theory, too, ended
in similar highways of resignation and indifference, but without going
astray in mysterious labyrinths and remote roads.

But if this resignation, which was obviously the only outcome of the deplorable condition of things
and their irremediability, was open to the spiritually rich, it was all the more difficult of
approach to the poor whose passions and cravings were more easily satisfied by the benefits
of religion.

These reflections relieved Des Esseintes of a heavy burden. The aphorisms of the great German
calmed his excited thoughts, and the points of contact in these two doctrines helped him to
correlate them; and he could never forget that poignant and poetic Catholicism in which he had bathed,
and whose essence he had long ago absorbed.

These reversions to religion, these intimations of faith tormented him particularly since the changes
that had lately taken place in his health. Their progress coincided with that of his recent nervous
disorders.

He had been tortured since his youth by inexplicable aversions, by shudderings which chilled
his spine and made him grit his teeth, as, for example, when he saw
a girl wringing wet linen.

These reactions had long persisted. Even now he suffered poignantly when he heard the tearing
of cloth, the rubbing of a finger against a piece of chalk, or a hand touching a bit of moire.

The
excesses of his youthful life, the exaggerated tension of his mind had strangely aggravated
his earliest nervous disorder, and had thinned the already impoverished
blood of his race.

In Paris, he had been compelled to submit to hydrotherapic treatments for his trembling fingers,
frightful pains, neuralgic strokes which cut his face in two, drummed maddeningly against his
temples, pricked his eyelids agonizingly and induced a nausea which
could be dispelled only by lying flat on his back in the dark.

These afflictions had gradually disappeared, thanks to a more regulated
and sane mode of living.

They now returned in another form, attacking his whole body. The pains left his head, but affected
his inflated stomach. His entrails seemed pierced by hot bars of iron. A nervous cough racked
him at regular intervals, awakening and almost strangling him in his bed. Then his appetite forsook
him; gaseous, hot acids and dry heats coursed through his stomach. He grew swollen, was choked
for breath, and could not endure his clothes after each attempt at
eating.

He shunned alcoholic beverages, coffee and tea, and drank only milk. And he took recourse to
baths of cold water and dosed himself with assafoetida, valerian and quinine. He even felt
a desire to go out, and strolled about the country when the rainy days came to make it desolate
and still. He obliged himself to take exercise.

As a last resort, he temporarily abandoned his books and, corroded with ennui, determined to
make his listless life tolerable by realizing a project he had long deferred through laziness
and a dislike of change, since his installment at Fontenay.

Being no longer able to intoxicate himself with the felicities of style, with the delicious witchery
of the rare epithet which, while remaining precise, yet opens to the imagination of the initiate
infinite and distant vistas, he determined to give the finishing touches to the decorations of his
home.

He would procure precious hot-house flowers and thus permit himself a material occupation
which might distract him, calm his nerves and rest his brain. He also hoped that the sight of
their strange and splendid nuances would in some degree atone for
the fanciful and genuine colors of style which he was for the time
to lose from his literary diet.

Chapter 8

He had always been passionately fond of flowers, but during his residence at Jutigny, that love had
been lavished upon flowers of all sorts; he had never cultivated
distinctions and discriminations in regard to them.

Now his taste in this direction had grown refined and self-conscious.

For a long time he had scorned the popular plants which grow in flat baskets, in watered pots,
under green awnings or under the red parasols of Parisian markets.

Simultaneous with the refinement of his literary taste and his preoccupations
with art, which permitted him to be content only in the presence of
choice creations, distilled by subtly troubled brains, and simultaneous
with the weariness he began to feel in the presence of popular ideas,
his love for flowers had grown purged of all impurities and lees,
and had become clarified.

He compared a florist's shop to a microcosm wherein all the categories
of society are represented.

Here are poor common flowers, the kind found in hovels, which are truly at home only when resting
on ledges of garret windows, their roots thrust into milk bottles
and old pans, like the gilly-flower for example.

And one also finds stupid and pretentious flowers like the rose which
belongs in the porcelain flowerpots painted by young girls.

Then, there are flowers of noble lineage like the orchid, so delicate
and charming, at once cold and palpitating, exotic flowers exiled
in the heated glass palaces of Paris, princesses of the vegetable
kingdom living in solitude, having absolutely nothing in common with
the street plants and other bourgeois flora.

He permitted himself
to feel a certain interest and pity only for the popular flowers enfeebled
by their nearness to the odors of sinks and drains in the poor quarters.
In revenge he detested the bouquets harmonizing with the cream and
gold rooms of pretentious houses. For the joy of his eyes he reserved
those distinguished, rare blooms which had been brought from distant
lands and whose lives were sustained by artful devices under artificial
equators.

But this very choice, this predilection for the conservatory
plants had itself changed under the influence of his mode of thought.
Formerly, during his Parisian days, his love for artificiality had
led him to abandon real flowers and to use in their place replicas
faithfully executed by means of the miracles performed with India
rubber and wire, calico and taffeta, paper and silk.

"The Dahcotah knows that my tongue is not forked. Let him open his eyes wider. Does he not
see a very great medicine?"

The light was not necessary to recall to the savage each feature in the really remarkable costume
and equipage of Dr. Battius. In common with the rest of the band, and in conformity with the
universal practice of the Indians, this warrior, while he had suffered no gaze of idle curiosity
to disgrace his manhood, had not permitted a single distinctive mark, which might characterise
any one of the strangers, to escape his vigilance. He knew the air, the stature, the dress,
and the features, even to the colour of the eyes and of the hair, of every one of the Big-knives,
whom he had thus strangely encountered, and deeply had he ruminated on the causes, which could
have led a party, so singularly constituted, into the haunts of the rude inhabitants of his
native wastes. He had already considered the several physical powers of the whole party, and
had duly compared their abilities with what he supposed might have been their intentions. Warriors
they were not, for the Big-knives, like the Siouxes, left their women in their villages when
they went out on the bloody path. The same objections applied to them as hunters, and even
as traders, the two characters under which the white men commonly appeared in their villages.
He had heard of a great council, at which the Menahashah, or Long-knives, and the Washsheomantiqua,
or Spaniards, had smoked together, when the latter had sold to the former their incomprehensible
rights over those vast regions, through which his nation had roamed, in freedom, for so many
ages. His simple mind had not been able to embrace the reasons why one people should thus assume
a superiority over the possessions of another, and it will readily be perceived, that at the
hint just received from the trapper, he was not indisposed to fancy that some of the hidden
subtilty of that magical influence, of which he was so firm a believer, was about to be practised
by the unsuspecting subject of their conversation, in furtherance of these mysterious claims.
Abandoning, therefore, all the reserve and dignity of his manner, under the conscious helplessness
of ignorance, he turned to the old man, and stretching forth his arms, as if to denote how
much he lay at his mercy, he said--

"Let my father look at me. I am a wild man of the prairies; my body is naked; my hands empty;
my skin red. I have struck the Pawnees, the Konzas, the Omahaws, the Osages, and even the Long-knives.
I am a man amid warriors, but a woman among the conjurors. Let my father speak: the ears of
the Teton are open. He listens like a deer to the step of the cougar."

"Such are the wise and uns'archable ways of One who alone knows good from evil!" exclaimed
the trapper, in English. "To some He grants cunning, and on others He bestows the gift of manhood!
It is humbling, and it is afflicting to see so noble a creatur' as this, who has fou't in many
a bloody fray, truckling before his superstition like a beggar asking for the bones you would
throw to the dogs. The Lord will forgive me for playing with the ignorance of the savage, for
He knows I do it in no mockery of his state, or in idle vaunting of my own; but in order to
save mortal life, and to give justice to the wronged, while I defeat the deviltries of the
wicked! Teton," speaking again in the language of the listener, "I ask you, is not that a wonderful
medicine? If the Dahcotahs are wise, they will not breathe the air he breathes, nor touch his
robes. They know, that the Wahconshecheh (bad spirit) loves his own children, and will not
turn his back on him that does them harm."

The old man delivered this opinion in an ominous and sententious manner, and then rode apart
as if he had said enough. The result justified his expectations. The warrior, to whom he had
addressed himself, was not slow to communicate his important knowledge to the rest of the rear-guard,
and, in a very few moments, the naturalist was the object of general observation and reverence.
The trapper, who understood that the natives often worshipped, with a view to propitiate, the
evil spirit, awaited the workings of his artifice, with the coolness of one who had not the
smallest interest in its effects. It was not long before he saw one dark figure after another,
lashing his horse and galloping ahead into the centre of the band, until Weucha alone remained
nigh the persons of himself and Obed. The very dulness of this grovelling-minded savage, who
continued gazing at the supposed conjuror with a sort of stupid admiration, opposed now the
only obstacle to the complete success of his artifice.

Thoroughly understanding the character of this Indian, the old man lost no time in getting
rid of him also. Riding to his side he said, in an affected whisper--

"Has Weucha drunk of the milk of the Big-knives, to-day?"

"Hugh!" exclaimed the savage, every dull thought instantly recalled from heaven to earth by
the question.

"Because the great captain of my people, who rides in front, has a cow that is never empty.
I know it will not be long before he will say, Are any of my red brethren dry?"

The words were scarcely uttered, before Weucha, in his turn, quickened the gait of his beast,
and was soon blended with the rest of the dark group, who were riding, at a more moderate pace,
a few rods in advance. The trapper, who knew how fickle and sudden were the changes of a savage
mind, did not lose a moment in profiting by this advantage. He loosened the reins of his own
impatient steed, and in an instant he was again at the side of Obed.

"Do you see the twinkling star, that is, may be, the length of four rifles above the prairie;
hereaway, to the North I mean?"

"Ay, it is of the constellation---"

"A tut for your constellations, man; do you see the star I mean? Tell me, in the English of
the land, yes or no."

"Yes."

"The moment my back is turned, pull upon the rein of your ass, until you lose sight of the
savages. Then take the Lord for your dependence, and yonder star for your guide. Turn neither
to the right hand, nor to the left, but make diligent use of your time, for your beast is not
quick of foot, and every inch of prairie you gain, is a day added to your liberty, or to your
life."

Without waiting to listen to the queries, which the naturalist was about to put, the old man
again loosened the reins of his horse, and presently he too was blended with the group in front.

Obed was now alone. Asinus willingly obeyed the hint which his master soon gave, rather in
desperation than with any very collected understanding of the orders he had received, and checked
his pace accordingly. As the Tetons however rode at a hand-gallop, but a moment of time was
necessary, after the ass began to walk, to remove them effectually from before the vision of
his rider. Without plan, expectation, or hope of any sort, except that of escaping from his
dangerous neighbours, the Doctor first feeling, to assure himself that the package, which contained
the miserable remnants of his specimens and notes was safe at his crupper, turned the head
of the beast in the required direction, and kicking him with a species of fury, he soon succeeded
in exciting the speed of the patient animal into a smart run. He had barely time to descend
into a hollow and ascend the adjoining swell of the prairie, before he heard, or fancied he
heard, his name shouted, in good English, from the throats of twenty Tetons. The delusion gave
a new impulse to his ardour; and no professor of the saltant art ever applied himself with
greater industry, than the naturalist now used his heels on the ribs of Asinus. The conflict
endured for several minutes without interruption, and to all appearances it might have continued
to the present moment, had not the meek temper of the beast become unduly excited. Borrowing
an idea from the manner in which his master exhibited his agitation, Asinus so far changed
the application of his own heels, as to raise them simultaneously with a certain indignant
flourish into the air, a measure that instantly decided the controversy in his favour. Obed
took leave of his seat, as of a position no longer tenable, continuing, however, the direction
of his flight, while the ass, like a conqueror, took possession of the field of battle, beginning
to crop the dry herbage, as the fruits of victory.

When Doctor Battius had recovered his feet, and rallied his faculties, which were in a good
deal of disorder from the hurried manner in which he had abandoned his former situation, he
returned in quest of his specimens and of his ass. Asinus displayed enough of magnanimity to
render the interview amicable, and thenceforth the naturalist continued the required route
with very commendable industry, but with a much more tempered discretion.

In the mean time, the old trapper had not lost sight of the important movements that he had
undertaken to control. Obed had not been mistaken in supposing that he was already missed and
sought, though his imagination had corrupted certain savage cries into the well-known sounds
that composed his own latinized name. The truth was simply this. The warriors of the rearguard
had not failed to apprise those in front of the mysterious character, with which it had pleased
the trapper to invest the unsuspecting naturalist. The same untutored admiration, which on
the receipt of this intelligence had driven those in the rear to the front, now drove many
of the front to the rear. The Doctor was of course absent, and the outcry was no more than
the wild yells, which were raised in the first burst of savage disappointment.

But the authority of Mahtoree was prompt to aid the ingenuity of the trapper, in suppressing
these dangerous sounds. When order was restored, and the former was made acquainted with the
reason why his young men had betrayed so strong a mark of indiscretion, the old man, who had
taken a post at his elbow, saw, with alarm, the gleam of keen distrust that flashed in his
swarthy visage.

"Where is your conjuror?" demanded the chief, turning suddenly to the trapper, as if he meant
to make him responsible for the re-appearance of Obed.

"Can I tell my brother the number of the stars? The ways of a great medicine are not like the
ways of other men."

"Listen to me, grey-head, and count my words," continued the other, bending on his rude saddle-bow,
like some chevalier of a more civilised race, and speaking in the haughty tones of absolute
power; "the Dahcotahs have not chosen a woman for their chief; when Mahtoree feels the power
of a great medicine, he will tremble; until then he will look with his own eyes, without borrowing
sight from a Pale-face. If your conjuror is not with his friends in the morning, my young men
shall look for him. Your ears are open. Enough."

The trapper was not sorry to find that so long a respite was granted. He had before found reason
to believe, that the Teton partisan was one of those bold spirits, who overstep the limits
which use and education fix to the opinions of man, in every state of society, and he now saw
plainly that he must adopt some artifice to deceive him, different from that which had succeeded
so well with his followers. The sudden appearance of the rock, however, which hove up, a bleak
and ragged mass, out of the darkness ahead, put an end for the present to the discourse, Mahtoree
giving all his thoughts to the execution of his designs on the rest of the squatter's movables.
A murmur ran through the band, as each dark warrior caught a glimpse of the desired haven,
after which the nicest ear might have listened in vain, to catch a sound louder than the rustling
of feet among the tall grass of the prairie.

But the vigilance of Esther was not easily deceived. She had long listened anxiously to the
suspicious sounds, which approached the rock across the naked waste, nor had the sudden outcry
been unheard by the unwearied sentinels of the rock. The savages, who had dismounted at some
little distance, had not time to draw around the base of the hill in their customary silent
and insidious manner, before the voice of the Amazon was raised, demanding--

"Who is beneath? Answer, for your lives! Siouxes or devils, I fear ye not!"

No answer was given to this challenge, every warrior halting where he stood, confident that
his dusky form was blended with the shadows of the plain. It was at this moment that the trapper
determined to escape. He had been left with the rest of his friends, under the surveillance
of those who were assigned to the duty of watching the horses, and as they all continued mounted,
the moment appeared favourable to his project. The attention of the guards was drawn to the
rock, and a heavy cloud driving above them at that instant, obscured even the feeble light
which fell from the stars. Leaning on the neck of his horse, the old man muttered--

"Where is my pup? Where is it--Hector--where is it, dog?"

The hound caught the well-known sounds, and answered by a whine of friendship, which threatened
to break out into one of his piercing howls. The trapper was in the act of raising himself
from this successful exploit, when he felt the hand of Weucha grasping his throat, as if determined
to suppress his voice by the very unequivocal process of strangulation. Profiting by the circumstance,
he raised another low sound, as in the natural effort of breathing, which drew a second responsive
cry from the faithful hound. Weucha instantly abandoned his hold of the master in order to
wreak his vengeance on the dog. But the voice of Esther was again heard, and every other design
was abandoned in order to listen.

"Ay, whine and deform your throats as you may, ye imps of darkness," she said, with a cracked
but scornful laugh; "I know ye; tarry, and ye shall have light for your misdeeds. Put in the
coal, Phoebe; put in the coal; your father and the boys shall see that they are wanted at home,
to welcome their guests."

As she spoke, a strong light, like that of a brilliant star, was seen on the very pinnacle
of the rock; then followed a forked flame, which curled for a moment amid the windings of an
enormous pile of brush, and flashing upward in an united sheet, it wavered to and fro, in the
passing air, shedding a bright glare on every object within its influence. A taunting laugh
was heard from the height, in which the voices of all ages mingled, as though they triumphed
at having so successfully exposed the treacherous intentions of the Tetons.

The trapper looked about him to ascertain in what situations he might find his friends. True
to the signals, Middleton and Paul had drawn a little apart, and now stood ready, by every
appearance, to commence their flight at the third repetition of the cry. Hector had escaped
his savage pursuer, and was again crouching at the heels of his master's horse. But the broad
circle of light was gradually increasing in extent and power, and the old man, whose eye and
judgment so rarely failed him, patiently awaited a more propitious moment for his enterprise.

"Now, Ishmael, my man, if sight and hand ar' true as ever, now is the time to work upon these
Redskins, who claim to own all your property, even to wife and children! Now, my good man,
prove both breed and character!"

A distant shout was heard in the direction of the approaching party of the squatter, assuring
the female garrison that succour was not far distant. Esther answered to the grateful sounds
by a cracked cry of her own, lifting her form, in the first burst of exultation, above the
rock in a manner to be visible to all below. Not content with this dangerous exposure of her
person, she was in the act of tossing her arms in triumph, when the dark figure of Mahtoree
shot into the light and pinioned them to her side. The forms of three other warriors glided
across the top of the rock, looking like naked demons flitting among the clouds. The air was
filled with the brands of the beacon, and a heavy darkness succeeded, not unlike that of the
appalling instant, when the last rays of the sun are excluded by the intervening mass of the
moon. A yell of triumph burst from the savages in their turn, and was rather accompanied than
followed by a long, loud whine from Hector.

In an instant the old man was between the horses of Middleton and Paul, extending a hand to
the bridle of each, in order to check the impatience of their riders.

"Softly, softly," he whispered, "their eyes are as marvellously shut for the minute, as if
the Lord had stricken them blind; but their ears are open. Softly, softly; for fifty rods,
at least, we must move no faster than a walk."

The five minutes of doubt that succeeded appeared like an age to all but the trapper. As their
sight was gradually restored, it seemed to each that the momentary gloom, which followed the
extinction of the beacon, was to be replaced by as broad a light as that of noon-day. Gradually
the old man, however, suffered the animals to quicken their steps, until they had gained the
centre of one of the prairie bottoms. Then laughing in his quiet manner he released the reins
and said--

"Now, let them give play to their legs; but keep on the old fog to deaden the sounds."

It is needless to say how cheerfully he was obeyed. In a few more minutes they ascended and
crossed a swell of the land, after which the flight was continued at the top of their horses'
speed, keeping the indicated star in view, as the labouring bark steers for the light which
points the way to a haven and security.

CHAPTER XXII

              The clouds and sunbeams o'er his eye,
              That once their shades and glories threw,
              Have left, in yonder silent sky,
              No vestige where they flew.
                                                   --Montgomery.

A stillness, as deep as that which marked the gloomy wastes in their front, was observed by
the fugitives to distinguish the spot they had just abandoned. Even the trapper lent his practised
faculties, in vain, to detect any of the well-known signs, which might establish the important
fact that hostilities had actually commenced between the parties of Mahtoree and Ishmael; but
their horses carried them out of the reach of sounds, without the occurrence of the smallest
evidence of the sort. The old man, from time to time, muttered his discontent, but manifested
the uneasiness he actually entertained in no other manner, unless it might be in exhibiting
a growing anxiety to urge the animals to increase their speed. He pointed out in passing, the
deserted swale, where the family of the squatter had encamped, the night they were introduced
to the reader, and afterwards he maintained an ominous silence; ominous, because his companions
had already seen enough of his character, to be convinced that the circumstances must be critical
indeed, which possessed the power to disturb the well regulated tranquillity of the old man's mind.

"Have we not done enough," Middleton demanded, in tenderness to the inability of Inez and Ellen
to endure so much fatigue, at the end of some hours; "we have ridden hard, and have crossed
a wide tract of plain. It is time to seek a place of rest."

"You must seek it then in Heaven, if you find yourselves unequal to a longer march," murmured
the old trapper. "Had the Tetons and the squatter come to blows, as any one might see in the
natur' of things they were bound to do, there would be time to look about us, and to calculate
not only the chances but the comforts of the journey; but as the case actually is, I should
consider it certain death, or endless captivity, to trust our eyes with sleep, until our heads
are fairly hid in some uncommon cover."

"I know not," returned the youth, who reflected more on the sufferings of the fragile being
he supported, than on the experience of his companion; "I know not; we have ridden leagues,
and I can see no extraordinary signs of danger:--if you fear for yourself, my good friend,
believe me you are wrong, for--"

"Your grand'ther, were he living and here," interrupted the old man, stretching forth a hand,
and laying a finger impressively on the arm of Middleton, "would have spared those words. He
had some reason to think that, in the prime of my days, when my eye was quicker than the hawk's,
and my limbs were as active as the legs of the fallow-deer, I never clung too eagerly and fondly
to life: then why should I now feel such a childish affection for a thing that I know to be
vain, and the companion of pain and sorrow. Let the Tetons do their worst; they will not find
a miserable and worn out trapper the loudest in his complaints, or his prayers."

"Pardon me, my worthy, my inestimable friend," exclaimed the repentant young man, warmly grasping
the hand, which the other was in the act of withdrawing; "I knew not what I said--or rather
I thought only of those whose tenderness we are most bound to consider."

"Enough. It is natur', and it is right. Therein your grand'ther would have done the very same.
Ah's me! what a number of seasons, hot and cold, wet and dry, have rolled over my poor head,
since the time we worried it out together, among the Red Hurons of the Lakes, back in those
rugged mountains of Old York! and many a noble buck has since that day fallen by my hand; ay,
and many a thieving Mingo, too! Tell me, lad, did the general, for general I know he got to
be, did he ever tell you of the deer we took, that night the outlyers of the accursed tribe
drove us to the caves, on the island, and how we feasted and drunk in security?"

"I have often heard him mention the smallest circumstance of the night you mean; but--"

"And the singer; and his open throat; and his shoutings in the fights!" continued the old man,
laughing joyously at the strength of his own recollections.

"All--all--he forgot nothing, even to the most trifling incident. Do you not--"

"What! did he tell you of the imp behind the log and of the miserable devil who went over the
fall--or of the wretch in the tree?"

"Of each and all, with every thing that concerned them.[*] I should think--"

    [*] They who have read the preceding books, in which, the trapper
    appears as a hunter and a scout, will readily understand the
    allusions.

"Ay," continued the old man, in a voice, which betrayed how powerfully his own faculties retained
the impression of the spectacle, "I have been a dweller in forests, and in the wilderness for
three-score and ten years, and if any can pretend to know the world, or to have seen scary
sights, it is myself! But never, before nor since, have I seen human man in such a state of
mortal despair as that very savage; and yet he scorned to speak, or to cry out, or to own his
forlorn condition! It is their gift, and nobly did he maintain it!"

"Harkee, old trapper," interrupted Paul, who, content with the knowledge that his waist was
grasped by one of the arms of Ellen, had hitherto ridden in unusual silence; "my eyes are as
true and as delicate as a humming-bird's in the day; but they are nothing worth boasting of
by starlight. Is that a sick buffaloe, crawling along in the bottom, there, or is it one of
the stray cattle of the savages?"

The whole party drew up, in order to examine the object, which Paul had pointed out. During
most of the time, they had ridden in the little vales in order to seek the protection of the
shadows, but just at that moment, they had ascended a roll of the prairie in order to cross
into the very bottom where this unknown animal was now seen.

"Let us descend," said Middleton; "be it beast or man, we are too strong to have any cause
of fear."

"Now, if the thing was not morally impossible," cried the trapper, who the reader must have
already discovered was not always exact in the use of qualifying words, "if the thing was not
morally impossible, I should say, that was the man, who journeys in search of reptiles and
insects: our fellow-traveller the Doctor."

"Why impossible? did you not direct him to pursue this course, in order to rejoin us?"

"Ay, but I did not tell him to make an ass outdo the speed of a horse:--you are right--you
are right," said the trapper, interrupting himself, as by gradually lessening the distance
between them, his eyes assured him it was Obed and Asinus, whom he saw; "you are right, as
certainly as the thing is a miracle. Lord, what a thing is fear! How now, friend; you have
been industrious to have got so far ahead in so short a time. I marvel at the speed of the ass!"

"Asinus is overcome," returned the naturalist, mournfully. "The animal has certainly not been
idle since we separated, but he declines all my admonitions and invitations to proceed. I hope
there is no instant fear from the savages?"

"I cannot say that; I cannot say that; matters are not as they should be, atween the squatter
and the Tetons, nor will I answer as yet for the safety of any scalp among us. The beast is
broken down! you have urged him beyond his natural gifts, and he is like a worried hound. There
is pity and discretion in all things, even though a man be riding for his life."

"You indicated the star," returned the Doctor, "and I deemed it expedient to use great diligence
in pursuing the direction."

"Did you expect to reach it, by such haste? Go, go; you talk boldly of the creatur's of the
Lord, though I plainly see you are but a child in matters that concern their gifts and instincts.
What a plight would you now be in, if there was need for a long and a quick push with our heels?"

"The fault exists in the formation of the quadruped," said Obed, whose placid temper began
to revolt under so many scandalous imputations. "Had there been rotary levers for two of the
members, a moiety of the fatigue would have been saved, for one item--"

"That, for your moiety's and rotaries, and items, man; a jaded ass is a jaded ass, and he who
denies it is but a brother of the beast itself. Now, captain, are we driven to choose one of
two evils. We must either abandon this man, who has been too much with us through good and
bad to be easily cast away, or we must seek a cover to let the animal rest."

"Venerable venator!" exclaimed the alarmed Obed; "I conjure you by all the secret sympathies
of our common nature, by all the hidden--"

"Ah, fear has brought him to talk a little rational sense! It is not natur', truly, to abandon
a brother in distress; and the Lord He knows that I have never yet done the shameful deed.
You are right, friend, you are right; we must all be hidden, and that speedily. But what to
do with the ass! Friend Doctor, do you truly value the life of the creatur'?"

"He is an ancient and faithful servant," returned the disconsolate Obed, "and with pain should
I see him come to any harm. Fetter his lower limbs, and leave him to repose in this bed of
herbage. I will engage he shall be found where he is left, in the morning."

"And the Siouxes? What would become of the beast should any of the red imps catch a peep at
his ears, growing up out of the grass like to mullein-tops?" cried the bee-hunter. "They would
stick him as full of arrows, as a woman's cushion is full of pins, and then believe they had
done the job for the father of all rabbits! My word for it out they would find out their blunder
at the first mouthful!"

Middleton, who began to grow impatient under the protracted discussion, interposed, and, as
a good deal of deference was paid to his rank, he quickly prevailed in his efforts to effect
a sort of compromise. The humble Asinus, too meek and too weary to make any resistance, was
soon tethered and deposited in his bed of dying grass, where he was left with a perfect confidence
on the part of his master of finding him, again, at the expiration of a few hours. The old
man strongly remonstrated against this arrangement, and more than once hinted that the knife
was much more certain than the tether, but the petitions of Obed, aided perhaps by the secret
reluctance of the trapper to destroy the beast, were the means of saving its life. When Asinus
was thus secured, and as his master believed secreted, the whole party proceeded to find some
place where they might rest themselves, during the time required for the repose of the animal.

According to the calculations of the trapper, they had ridden twenty miles since the commencement
of their flight. The delicate frame of Inez began to droop under the excessive fatigue, nor
was the more robust, but still feminine person of Ellen, insensible to the extraordinary effort
she had made. Middleton himself was not sorry to repose, nor did the vigorous and high-spirited
Paul hesitate to confess that he should be all the better for a little rest. The old man alone
seemed indifferent to the usual claims of nature. Although but little accustomed to the unusual
description of exercise he had just been taking, he appeared to bid defiance to all the usual
attacks of human infirmities. Though evidently so near its dissolution, his attenuated frame
still stood like the shaft of seasoned oak, dry, naked, and tempest-driven, but unbending and
apparently indurated to the consistency of stone. On the present occasion he conducted the
search for a resting-place, which was immediately commenced, with all the energy of youth,
tempered by the discretion and experience of his great age.

The bed of grass, in which the Doctor had been met, and in which his ass had just been left,
was followed a little distance until it was found that the rolling swells of the prairie were
melting away into one vast level plain, that was covered, for miles on miles, with the same
species of herbage.

"Ah, this may do, this may do," said the old man, when they arrived on the borders of this
sea of withered grass. "I know the spot, and often have I lain in its secret holes, for days
at a time, while the savages have been hunting the buffaloes on the open ground. We must enter
it with great care, for a broad trail might be seen, and Indian curiosity is a dangerous neighbour."

Leading the way himself, he selected a spot where the tall coarse herbage stood most erect,
growing not unlike a bed of reeds, both in height and density. Here he entered, singly, directing
the others to follow as nearly as possible in his own footsteps. When they had paused for some
hundred or two feet into the wilderness of weeds, he gave his directions to Paul and Middleton,
who continued a direct route deeper into the place, while he dismounted and returned on his
tracks to the margin of the meadow. Here he passed many minutes in replacing the trodden grass,
and in effacing, as far as possible, every evidence of their passage.

In the mean time the rest of the party continued their progress, not without toil, and consequently
at a very moderate gait, until they had penetrated a mile into the place. Here they found a
spot suited to their circumstances, and, dismounting, they began to make their dispositions
to pass the remainder of the night. By this time the trapper had rejoined the party, and again
resumed the direction of their proceedings.

The weeds and grass were soon plucked and cut from an area of sufficient extent, and a bed
for Inez and Ellen was speedily made, a little apart, which for sweetness and ease might have
rivalled one of down. The exhausted females, after receiving some light refreshments from the
provident stores of Paul and the old man, now sought their repose, leaving their more stout
companions at liberty to provide for their own necessities. Middleton and Paul were not long
in following the example of their betrothed, leaving the trapper and the naturalist still seated
around a savoury dish of bison's meat, which had been cooked at a previous halt, and which
was, as usual, eaten cold.

A certain lingering sensation, which had so long been uppermost in the mind of Obed, temporarily
banished sleep; and as for the old man, his wants were rendered, by habit and necessity, as
seemingly subject to his will as if they altogether depended on the pleasure of the moment.
Like his companion he chose therefore to watch, instead of sleeping.

"If the children of ease and security knew the hardships and dangers the students of nature
encounter in their behalf," said Obed, after a moment of silence, when Middleton took his leave
for the night, "pillars of silver, and statues of brass would be reared as the everlasting
monuments of their glory!"

"I know not, I know not," returned his companion; "silver is far from plenty, at least in the
wilderness, and your brazen idols are forbidden in the commandments of the Lord."

"Such indeed was the opinion of the great lawgiver of the Jews, but the Egyptians, and the
Chaldeans, the Greeks, and the Romans, were wont to manifest their gratitude, in these types
of the human form. Indeed many of the illustrious masters of antiquity, have by the aid of
science and skill, even outdone the works of nature, and exhibited a beauty and perfection
in the human form that are difficult to be found in the rarest living specimens of any of the
species; genus, homo."

"Can your idols walk or speak, or have they the glorious gift of reason?" demanded the trapper,
with some indignation in his voice; "though but little given to run into the noise and chatter
of the settlements, yet have I been into the towns in my day, to barter the peltry for lead
and powder, and often have I seen your waxen dolls, with their tawdry clothes and glass eyes--"

"Waxen dolls!" interrupted Obed; "it is profanation, in the view of the arts, to liken the
miserable handy-work of the dealers in wax to the pure models of antiquity!"

"It is profanation in the eyes of the Lord," retorted the old man, "to liken the works of his
creatur's, to the power of his own hand."

"Venerable venator," resumed the naturalist, clearing his throat, like one who was much in
earnest, "let us discuss understandingly and in amity. You speak of the dross of ignorance,
whereas my memory dwells on those precious jewels, which it was my happy fortune, formerly,
to witness, among the treasured glories of the Old World."

"Old World!" retorted the trapper, "that is the miserable cry of all the half-starved miscreants
that have come into this blessed land, since the days of my boyhood! They tell you of the Old
World; as if the Lord had not the power and the will to create the universe in a day, or as
if he had not bestowed his gifts with an equal hand, though not with an equal mind, or equal
wisdom, have they been received and used. Were they to say a worn out, and an abused, and a
sacrilegious world, they might not be so far from the truth!"

Doctor Battius, who found it quite as arduous a task to maintain any of his favourite positions
with so irregular an antagonist, as he would have found it difficult to keep his feet within
the hug of a western wrestler, hemmed aloud, and profited by the new opening the trapper had
made, to shift the grounds of the discussion--

"By Old and New World, my excellent associate," he said, "it is not to be understood that the
hills, and the valleys, the rocks and the rivers of our own moiety of the earth do not, physically
speaking, bear a date as ancient as the spot on which the bricks of Babylon are found; it merely
signifies that its moral existence is not co-equal with its physical, or geological formation."

"Anan!" said the old man, looking up enquiringly into the face of the philosopher.

"Merely that it has not been so long known in morals, as the other countries of Christendom."

"So much the better, so much the better. I am no great admirator of your old morals, as you
call them, for I have ever found, and I have liv'd long as it were in the very heart of natur',
that your old morals are none of the best. Mankind twist and turn the rules of the Lord, to
suit their own wickedness, when their devilish cunning has had too much time to trifle with
His commands."

"Nay, venerable hunter, still am I not comprehended. By morals I do not mean the limited and
literal signification of the term, such as is conveyed in its synonyme, morality, but the practices
of men, as connected with their daily intercourse, their institutions, and their laws."

"And such I call barefaced and downright wantonness and waste," interrupted his sturdy disputant.

"Well, be it so," returned the Doctor, abandoning the explanation in despair. "Perhaps I have
conceded too much," he then instantly added, fancying that he still saw the glimmerings of
an argument through another chink in the discourse. "Perhaps I have conceded too much, in saying
that this hemisphere is literally as old in its formation, as that which embraces the venerable
quarters of Europe, Asia, and Africa."

"It is easy to say a pine is not so tall as an alder, but it would be hard to prove. Can you
give a reason for such a belief?"

"The reasons are numerous and powerful," returned the Doctor, delighted by this encouraging
opening. "Look into the plains of Egypt and Arabia; their sandy deserts teem with the monuments
of their antiquity; and then we have also recorded documents of their glory; doubling the proofs
of their former greatness, now that they lie stripped of their fertility; while we look in
vain for similar evidences that man has ever reached the summit of civilisation on this continent,
or search, without our reward, for the path by which he has made the downward journey to his
present condition of second childhood."

"And what see you in all this?" demanded the trapper, who, though a little confused by the
terms of his companion, seized the thread of his ideas.

"A demonstration of my problem, that nature did not make so vast a region to lie an uninhabited
waste so many ages. This is merely the moral view of the subject; as to the more exact and
geological--"

"Your morals are exact enough for me," returned the old man, "for I think I see in them the
very pride of folly. I am but little gifted in the fables of what you call the Old World, seeing
that my time has been mainly passed looking natur' steadily in the face, and in reasoning on
what I've seen, rather than on what I've heard in traditions. But I have never shut my ears
to the words of the good book, and many is the long winter evening that I have passed in the
wigwams of the Delawares, listening to the good Moravians, as they dealt forth the history
and doctrines of the elder times, to the people of the Lenape! It was pleasant to hearken to
such wisdom after a weary hunt! Right pleasant did I find it, and often have I talked the matter
over with the Great Serpent of the Delawares, in the more peaceful hours of our out-lyings,
whether it might be on the trail of a war-party of the Mingoes, or on the watch for a York
deer. I remember to have heard it, then and there, said, that the Blessed Land was once fertile
as the bottoms of the Mississippi, and groaning with its stores of grain and fruits; but that
the judgment has since fallen upon it, and that it is now more remarkable for its barrenness
than any qualities to boast of."

"It is true; but Egypt--nay much of Africa furnishes still more striking proofs of this exhaustion
of nature."

"Tell me," interrupted the old man, "is it a certain truth that buildings are still standing
in that land of Pharaoh, which may be likened, in their stature, to the hills of the 'arth?"

"It is as true as that nature never refuses to bestow her incisores on the animals, mammalia;
genus, homo--"

"It is very marvellous! and it proves how great He must be, when His miserable creatur's can
accomplish such wonders! Many men must have been needed to finish such an edifice; ay, and
men gifted with strength and skill too! Does the land abound with such a race to this hour?"

"Far from it. Most of the country is a desert, and but for a mighty river all would be so."

"Yes; rivers are rare gifts to such as till the ground, as any one may see who journeys far
atween the Rocky Mountains and the Mississippi. But how do you account for these changes on
the face of the 'arth itself, and for this downfall of nations, you men of the schools?"

"It is to be ascribed to moral cau--"

"You're right--it is their morals; their wickedness and their pride, and chiefly their waste
that has done it all! Now listen to what the experience of an old man teaches him. I have lived
long, as these grey hairs and wrinkled hands will show, even though my tongue should fail in
the wisdom of my years. And I have seen much of the folly of man; for his natur' is the same,
be he born in the wilderness, or be he born in the towns. To my weak judgment it hath ever
seemed that his gifts are not equal to his wishes. That he would mount into the heavens, with
all his deformities about him, if he only knew the road, no one will gainsay, that witnesses
his bitter strivings upon 'arth. If his power is not equal to his will, it is because the wisdom
of the Lord hath set bounds to his evil workings."

"It is much too certain that certain facts will warrant a theory, which teaches the natural
depravity of the genus; but if science could be fairly brought to bear on a whole species at
once, for instance, education might eradicate the evil principle."

"That, for your education! The time has been when I have thought it possible to make a companion
of a beast. Many are the cubs, and many are the speckled fawns that I have reared with these
old hands, until I have even fancied them rational and altered beings--but what did it amount
to? the bear would bite, and the deer would run, notwithstanding my wicked conceit in fancying
I could change a temper that the Lord himself had seen fit to bestow. Now if man is so blinded
in his folly as to go on, ages on ages, doing harm chiefly to himself, there is the same reason
to think that he has wrought his evil here as in the countries you call so old. Look about
you, man; where are the multitudes that once peopled these prairies; the kings and the palaces;
the riches and the mightinesses of this desert?"

"Where are the monuments that would prove the truth of so vague a theory?"

"I know not what you call a monument."

"The works of man! The glories of Thebes and Balbec--columns, catacombs, and pyramids! standing
amid the sands of the East, like wrecks on a rocky shore, to testify to the storms of ages!"

"They are gone. Time has lasted too long for them. For why? Time was made by the Lord, and
they were made by man. This very spot of reeds and grass, on which you now sit, may once have
been the garden of some mighty king. It is the fate of all things to ripen, and then to decay.
The tree blossoms, and bears its fruit, which falls, rots, withers, and even the seed is lost!
Go, count the rings of the oak and of the sycamore; they lie in circles, one about another,
until the eye is blinded in striving to make out their numbers; and yet a full change of the
seasons comes round while the stem is winding one of these little lines about itself, like
the buffaloe changing his coat, or the buck his horns; and what does it all amount to? There
does the noble tree fill its place in the forest, loftier, and grander, and richer, and more
difficult to imitate, than any of your pitiful pillars, for a thousand years, until the time
which the Lord hath given it is full. Then come the winds, that you cannot see, to rive its
bark; and the waters from the heavens, to soften its pores; and the rot, which all can feel
and none can understand, to humble its pride and bring it to the ground. From that moment its
beauty begins to perish. It lies another hundred years, a mouldering log, and then a mound
of moss and 'arth; a sad effigy of a human grave. This is one of your genuine monuments, though
made by a very different power than such as belongs to your chiseling masonry! and after all,
the cunningest scout of the whole Dahcotah nation might pass his life in searching for the
spot where it fell, and be no wiser when his eyes grew dim, than when they were first opened.
As if that was not enough to convince man of his ignorance; and as though it were put there
in mockery of his conceit, a pine shoots up from the roots of the oak, just as barrenness comes
after fertility, or as these wastes have been spread, where a garden may have been created.
Tell me not of your worlds that are old! it is blasphemous to set bounds and seasons, in this
manner, to the works of the Almighty, like a woman counting the ages of her young."

"Friend hunter, or trapper," returned the naturalist, clearing his throat in some intellectual
confusion at the vigorous attack of his companion, "your deductions, if admitted by the world,
would sadly circumscribe the efforts of reason, and much abridge the boundaries of knowledge."

"So much the better--so much the better; for I have always found that a conceited man never
knows content. All things prove it. Why have we not the wings of the pigeon, the eyes of the
eagle, and the legs of the moose, if it had been intended that man should be equal to all his
wishes?"

"There are certain physical defects, venerable trapper, in which I am always ready to admit
great and happy alterations might be suggested. For example, in my own order of Phalangacru--"

"Cruel enough would be the order, that should come from miserable hands like thine! A touch
from such a finger would destroy the mocking deformity of a monkey! Go, go; human folly is
not needed to fill up the great design of God. There is no stature, no beauty, no proportions,
nor any colours in which man himself can well be fashioned, that is not already done to his hands."

"That is touching another great and much disputed question," exclaimed the Doctor, who seized
upon every distinct idea that the ardent and somewhat dogmatic old man left exposed to his
mental grasp, with the vain hope of inducing a logical discussion, in which he might bring
his battery of syllogisms to annihilate the unscientific defences of his antagonist.

It is, however, unnecessary to our narrative to relate the erratic discourse that ensued. The
old man eluded the annihilating blows of his adversary, as the light armed soldier is wont
to escape the efforts of the more regular warrior, even while he annoys him most, and an hour
passed away without bringing any of the numerous subjects, on which they touched, to a satisfactory
conclusion. The arguments acted, however, on the nervous system of the Doctor, like so many
soothing soporifics, and by the time his aged companion was disposed to lay his head on his
pack, Obed, refreshed by his recent mental joust, was in a condition to seek his natural rest,
without enduring the torments of the incubus, in the shapes of Teton warriors and bloody tomahawks.

CHAPTER XXIII

                           --Save you, sir.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The sleep of the fugitives lasted for several hours. The trapper was the first to shake off
its influence, as he had been the last to court its refreshment. Rising, just as the grey light
of day began to brighten that portion of the studded vault which rested on the eastern margin
of the plain, he summoned his companions from their warm lairs, and pointed out the necessity
of their being once more on the alert. While Middleton attended to the arrangements necessary
to the comforts of Inez and Ellen, in the long and painful journey which lay before them, the
old man and Paul prepared the meal, which the former had advised them to take before they proceeded
to horse. These several dispositions were not long in making, and the little group was soon
seated about a repast which, though it might want the elegancies to which the bride of Middleton
had been accustomed, was not deficient in the more important requisites of savour and nutriment.

"When we get lower into the hunting-grounds of the Pawnees," said the trapper, laying a morsel
of delicate venison before Inez, on a little trencher neatly made of horn, and expressly for
his own use, "we shall find the buffaloes fatter and sweeter, the deer in more abundance, and
all the gifts of the Lord abounding to satisfy our wants. Perhaps we may even strike a beaver,
and get a morsel from his tail[*] by way of a rare mouthful."

    [*] The American hunters consider the tail of the beaver the most
    nourishing of all food.

"What course do you mean to pursue, when you have once thrown these bloodhounds from the chase?"
demanded Middleton.

"If I might advise," said Paul, "it would be to strike a water-course, and get upon its downward
current, as soon as may be. Give me a cotton-wood, and I will turn you out a canoe that shall
carry us all, the jackass excepted, in perhaps the work of a day and a night. Ellen, here,
is a lively girl enough, but then she is no great race-rider; and it would be far more comfortable
to boat six or eight hundred miles, than to go loping along like so many elks measuring the
prairies; besides, water leaves no trail."

"I will not swear to that," returned the trapper; "I have often thought the eyes of a Red-skin
would find a trail in air."

"See, Middleton," exclaimed Inez, in a sudden burst of youthful pleasure, that caused her for
a moment to forget her situation, "how lovely is that sky; surely it contains a promise of
happier times!"

"It is glorious!" returned her husband. "Glorious and heavenly is that streak of vivid red,
and here is a still brighter crimson; rarely have I seen a richer rising of the sun.

"Rising of the sun!" slowly repeated the old man, lifting his tall person from its seat with
a deliberate and abstracted air, while he kept his eye riveted on the changing, and certainly
beautiful tints, that were garnishing the vault of Heaven. "Rising of the sun! I like not such
risings of the sun. Ah's me! the imps have circumvented us with a vengeance. The prairie is
on fire!"

"God in Heaven protect us!" cried Middleton, catching Inez to his bosom, under the instant
impression of the imminence of their danger. "There is no time to lose, old man; each instant
is a day; let us fly."

"Whither?" demanded the trapper, motioning him, with calmness and dignity, to arrest his steps.
"In this wilderness of grass and reeds, you are like a vessel in the broad lakes without a
compass. A single step on the wrong course might prove the destruction of us all. It is seldom
danger is so pressing, that there is not time enough for reason to do its work, young officer;
therefore let us await its biddings."

"For my own part," said Paul Hover, looking about him with no equivocal expression of concern,
"I acknowledge, that should this dry bed of weeds get fairly in a flame, a bee would have to
make a flight higher than common to prevent his wings from scorching. Therefore, old trapper,
I agree with the captain, and say mount and run."

"Ye are wrong--ye are wrong; man is not a beast to follow the gift of instinct, and to snuff
up his knowledge by a taint in the air, or a rumbling in the sound; but he must see and reason,
and then conclude. So follow me a little to the left, where there is a rise in the ground,
whence we may make our reconnoitrings."

The old man waved his hand with authority, and led the way without further parlance to the
spot he had indicated, followed by the whole of his alarmed companions. An eye less practised
than that of the trapper might have failed in discovering the gentle elevation to which he
alluded, and which looked on the surface of the meadow like a growth a little taller than common.
When they reached the place, however, the stinted grass itself announced the absence of that
moisture, which had fed the rank weeds of most of the plain, and furnished a clue to the evidence
by which he had judged of the formation of the ground hidden beneath. Here a few minutes were
lost in breaking down the tops of the surrounding herbage, which, notwithstanding the advantage
of their position, rose even above the heads of Middleton and Paul, and in obtaining a look-out
that might command a view of the surrounding sea of fire.

The frightful prospect added nothing to the hopes of those who had so fearful a stake in the
result. Although the day was beginning to dawn, the vivid colours of the sky continued to deepen,
as if the fierce element were bent on an impious rivalry of the light of the sun. Bright flashes
of flame shot up here and there, along the margin of the waste, like the nimble coruscations
of the North, but far more angry and threatening in their colour and changes. The anxiety on
the rigid features of the trapper sensibly deepened, as he leisurely traced these evidences
of a conflagration, which spread in a broad belt about their place of refuge, until he had
encircled the whole horizon.

Shaking his head, as he again turned his face to the point where the danger seemed nighest
and most rapidly approaching, the old man said--

"Now have we been cheating ourselves with the belief, that we had thrown these Tetons from
our trail, while here is proof enough that they not only know where we lie, but that they intend
to smoke us out, like so many skulking beasts of prey. See; they have lighted the fire around
the whole bottom at the same moment, and we are as completely hemmed in by the devils as an
island by its waters."

"Let us mount and ride," cried Middleton; "is life not worth a struggle?"

"Whither would ye go? Is a Teton horse a salamander that he can walk amid fiery flames unhurt,
or do you think the Lord will show his might in your behalf, as in the days of old, and carry
you harmless through such a furnace as you may see glowing beneath yonder red sky? There are
Siouxes, too, hemming the fire with their arrows and knives on every side of us, or I am no
judge of their murderous deviltries."

"We will ride into the centre of the whole tribe," returned the youth fiercely, "and put their
manhood to the test."

"Ay, it's well in words, but what would it prove in deeds? Here is a dealer in bees, who can
teach you wisdom in a matter like this."

"Now for that matter, old trapper," said Paul, stretching his athletic form like a mastiff
conscious of his strength, "I am on the side of the captain, and am clearly for a race against
the fire, though it line me into a Teton wigwam. Here is Ellen, who will--"

"Of what use, of what use are your stout hearts, when the element of the Lord is to be conquered
as well as human men. Look about you, friends; the wreath of smoke, that is rising from the
bottoms, plainly says that there is no outlet from this spot, without crossing a belt of fire.
Look for yourselves, my men; look for yourselves; if you can find a single opening, I will
engage to follow."

The examination, which his companions so instantly and so intently made, rather served to assure
them of their desperate situation, than to appease their fears. Huge columns of smoke were
rolling up from the plain, and thickening in gloomy masses around the horizon. The red glow,
which gleamed upon their enormous folds, now lighting their volumes with the glare of the conflagration,
and now flashing to another point, as the flame beneath glided ahead, leaving all behind enveloped
in awful darkness, and proclaiming louder than words the character of the imminent and approaching
danger.

"This is terrible!" exclaimed Middleton, folding the trembling Inez to his heart. "At such
a time as this, and in such a manner!"

"The gates of Heaven are open to all who truly believe," murmured the pious devotee in his bosom.

"This resignation is maddening! But we are men, and will make a struggle for our lives! how
now, my brave and spirited friend, shall we yet mount and push across the flames, or shall
we stand here, and see those we most love perish in this frightful manner, without an effort?"

"I am for a swarming time, and a flight before the hive is too hot to hold us," said the bee-hunter,
to whom it will be at once seen that Middleton addressed himself. "Come, old trapper, you must
acknowledge this is but a slow way of getting out of danger. If we tarry here much longer,
it will be in the fashion that the bees lie around the straw after the hive has been smoked
for its honey. You may hear the fire begin to roar already, and I know by experience, that
when the flame once gets fairly into the prairie grass, it is no sloth that can outrun it."

"Think you," returned the old man, pointing scornfully at the mazes of the dry and matted grass
which environed them, "that mortal feet can outstrip the speed of fire, on such a path! If
I only knew now on which side these miscreants lay!"

"What say you, friend Doctor," cried the bewildered Paul, turning to the naturalist with that
sort of helplessness with which the strong are often apt to seek aid of the weak, when human
power is baffled by the hand of a mightier being, "what say you; have you no advice to give
away, in a case of life and death?"

The naturalist stood, tablets in hand, looking at the awful spectacle with as much composure
as if the conflagration had been lighted in order to solve the difficulties of some scientific
problem. Aroused by the question of his companion, he turned to his equally calm though differently
occupied associate, the trapper, demanding, with the most provoking insensibility to the urgent
nature of their situation--

"Venerable hunter, you have often witnessed similar prismatic experiments--"

He was rudely interrupted by Paul, who struck the tablets from his hands, with a violence that
betrayed the utter intellectual confusion which had overset the equanimity of his mind. Before
time was allowed for remonstrance, the old man, who had continued during the whole scene like
one much at a loss how to proceed, though also like one who was rather perplexed than alarmed,
suddenly assumed a decided air, as if he no longer doubted on the course it was most advisable
to pursue.

"It is time to be doing," he said, interrupting the controversy that was about to ensue between
the naturalist and the bee-hunter; "it is time to leave off books and moanings, and to be doing."

"You have come to your recollections too late, miserable old man," cried Middleton; "the flames
are within a quarter of a mile of us, and the wind is bringing them down in this quarter with
dreadful rapidity."

"Anan! the flames! I care but little for the flames. If I only knew how to circumvent the cunning
of the Tetons, as I know how to cheat the fire of its prey, there would be nothing needed but
thanks to the Lord for our deliverance. Do you call this a fire? If you had seen what I have
witnessed in the Eastern hills, when mighty mountains were like the furnace of smith, you would
have known what it was to fear the flames, and to be thankful that you were spared! Come, lads,
come; 'tis time to be doing now, and to cease talking; for yonder curling flame is truly coming
on like a trotting moose. Put hands upon this short and withered grass where we stand, and
lay bare the 'arth."

"Would you think to deprive the fire of its victims in this childish manner?" exclaimed Middleton.

A faint but solemn smile passed over the features of the old man, as he answered--

"Your grand'ther would have said, that when the enemy was nigh, a soldier could do no better
than to obey."

The captain felt the reproof, and instantly began to imitate the industry of Paul, who was
tearing the decayed herbage from the ground in a sort of desperate compliance with the trapper's
direction. Even Ellen lent her hands to the labour, nor was it long before Inez was seen similarly
employed, though none amongst them knew why or wherefore. When life is thought to be the reward
of labour, men are wont to be industrious. A very few moments sufficed to lay bare a spot of
some twenty feet in diameter. Into one edge of this little area the trapper brought the females,
directing Middleton and Paul to cover their light and inflammable dresses with the blankets
of the party. So soon as this precaution was observed, the old man approached the opposite
margin of the grass, which still environed them in a tall and dangerous circle, and selecting
a handful of the driest of the herbage he placed it over the pan of his rifle. The light combustible
kindled at the flash. Then he placed the little flame in a bed of the standing fog, and withdrawing
from the spot to the centre of the ring, he patiently awaited the result.

The subtle element seized with avidity upon its new fuel, and in a moment forked flames were
gliding among the grass, as the tongues of ruminating animals are seen rolling among their
food, apparently in quest of its sweetest portions.

"Now," said the old man, holding up a finger, and laughing in his peculiarly silent manner,
"you shall see fire fight fire! Ah's me! many is the time I have burnt a smooty path, from
wanton laziness to pick my way across a tangled bottom."

"But is this not fatal?" cried the amazed Middleton; "are you not bringing the enemy nigher
to us instead of avoiding it?"

"Do you scorch so easily? your grand'ther had a tougher skin. But we shall live to see; we
shall all live to see."

The experience of the trapper was in the right. As the fire gained strength and heat, it began
to spread on three sides, dying of itself on the fourth, for want of aliment. As it increased,
and the sullen roaring announced its power, it cleared every thing before it, leaving the black
and smoking soil far more naked than if the scythe had swept the place. The situation of the
fugitives would have still been hazardous had not the area enlarged as the flame encircled
them. But by advancing to the spot where the trapper had kindled the grass, they avoided the
heat, and in a very few moments the flames began to recede in every quarter, leaving them enveloped
in a cloud of smoke, but perfectly safe from the torrent of fire that was still furiously rolling
onward.

The spectators regarded the simple expedient of the trapper with that species of wonder, with
which the courtiers of Ferdinand are said to have viewed the manner in which Columbus made
his egg stand on its end, though with feelings that were filled with gratitude instead of envy.

"Most wonderful!" said Middleton, when he saw the complete success of the means by which they
had been rescued from a danger that he had conceived to be unavoidable. "The thought was a
gift from Heaven, and the hand that executed it should be immortal!"

"Old trapper," cried Paul, thrusting his fingers through his shaggy locks, "I have lined many
a loaded bee into his hole, and know something of the nature of the woods, but this is robbing
a hornet of his sting without touching the insect!"

"It will do--it will do," returned the old man, who after the first moment of his success seemed
to think no more of the exploit; "now get the horses in readiness. Let the flames do their
work for a short half hour, and then we will mount. That time is needed to cool the meadow,
for these unshod Teton beasts are as tender on the hoof as a barefooted girl."

Middleton and Paul, who considered this unlooked-for escape as a species of resurrection, patiently
awaited the time the trapper mentioned with renewed confidence in the infallibility of his
judgment. The Doctor regained his tablets, a little the worse from having fallen among the
grass which had been subject to the action of the flames, and was consoling himself for this
slight misfortune by recording uninterruptedly such different vacillations in light and shadow
as he chose to consider phenomena.

In the mean time the veteran, on whose experience they all so implicitly relied for protection,
employed himself in reconnoitring objects in the distance, through the openings which the air
occasionally made in the immense bodies of smoke, that by this time lay in enormous piles on
every part of the plain.

"Look you here, lads," the trapper said, after a long and anxious examination, "your eyes are
young and may prove better than my worthless sight--though the time has been, when a wise and
brave people saw reason to think me quick on a look-out; but those times are gone, and many
a true and tried friend has passed away with them. Ah's me! if I could choose a change in the
orderings of Providence--which I cannot, and which it would be blasphemy to attempt, seeing
that all things are governed by a wiser mind than belongs to mortal weakness--but if I were
to choose a change, it would be to say, that such as they who have lived long together in friendship
and kindness, and who have proved their fitness to go in company, by many acts of suffering
and daring in each other's behalf, should be permitted to give up life at such times, as when
the death of one leaves the other but little reason to wish to live."

"Is it an Indian, that you see?" demanded the impatient Middleton.

"Red-skin or White-skin it is much the same. Friendship and use can tie men as strongly together
in the woods as in the towns--ay, and for that matter, stronger. Here are the young warriors
of the prairies.--Often do they sort themselves in pairs, and set apart their lives for deeds
of friendship; and well and truly do they act up to their promises. The death-blow to one is
commonly mortal to the other! I have been a solitary man much of my time, if he can be called
solitary, who has lived for seventy years in the very bosom of natur', and where he could at
any instant open his heart to God, without having to strip it of the cares and wickednesses
of the settlements--but making that allowance, have I been a solitary man; and yet have I always
found that intercourse with my kind was pleasant, and painful to break off, provided that the
companion was brave and honest. Brave, because a skeary comrade in the woods," suffering his
eyes inadvertently to rest a moment on the person of the abstracted naturalist, "is apt to
make a short path long; and honest, inasmuch as craftiness is rather an instinct of the brutes,
than a gift becoming the reason of a human man."

"But the object, that you saw--was it a Sioux?"

"What the world of America is coming to, and where the machinations and inventions of its people
are to have an end, the Lord, he only knows. I have seen, in my day, the chief who, in his
time, had beheld the first Christian that placed his wicked foot in the regions of York! How
much has the beauty of the wilderness been deformed in two short lives! My own eyes were first
opened on the shores of the Eastern sea, and well do I remember, that I tried the virtues of
the first rifle I ever bore, after such a march, from the door of my father to the forest,
as a stripling could make between sun and sun; and that without offence to the rights, or prejudices,
of any man who set himself up to be the owner of the beasts of the fields. Natur' then lay
in its glory along the whole coast, giving a narrow stripe, between the woods and the ocean,
to the greediness of the settlers. And where am I now? Had I the wings of an eagle, they would
tire before a tenth of the distance, which separates me from that sea, could be passed; and
towns, and villages, farms, and highways, churches, and schools, in short, all the inventions
and deviltries of man, are spread across the region. I have known the time when a few Red-skins,
shouting along the borders, could set the provinces in a fever; and men were to be armed; and
troops were to be called to aid from a distant land; and prayers were said, and the women frighted,
and few slept in quiet, because the Iroquois were on the war-path, or the accursed Mingo had
the tomahawk in hand. How is it now? The country sends out her ships to foreign lands, to wage
their battles; cannon are plentier than the rifle used to be, and trained soldiers are never
wanting, in tens of thousands, when need calls for their services. Such is the difference atween
a province and a state, my men; and I, miserable and worn out as I seem, have lived to see it all!"

"That you must have seen many a chopper skimming the cream from the face of the earth, and
many a settler getting the very honey of nature, old trapper," said Paul, "no reasonable man
can, or, for that matter, shall doubt. But here is Ellen getting uneasy about the Siouxes,
and now you have opened your mind, so freely, concerning these matters, if you will just put
us on the line of our flight, the swarm will make another move."

"Anan!"

"I say that Ellen is getting uneasy, and as the smoke is lifting from the plain, it may be
prudent to take another flight."

"The boy is reasonable. I had forgotten we were in the midst of a raging fire, and that Siouxes
were round about us, like hungry wolves watching a drove of buffaloes. But when memory is at
work in my old brain, on times long past, it is apt to overlook the matters of the day. You
say right, my children; it is time to be moving, and now comes the real nicety of our case.
It is easy to outwit a furnace, for it is nothing but a raging element; and it is not always
difficult to throw a grizzly bear from his scent, for the creatur' is both enlightened and
blinded by his instinct; but to shut the eyes of a waking Teton is a matter of greater judgment,
inasmuch as his deviltry is backed by reason."

Notwithstanding the old man appeared so conscious of the difficulty of the undertaking, he
set about its achievement with great steadiness and alacrity. After completing the examination,
which had been interrupted by the melancholy wanderings of his mind, he gave the signal to
his companions to mount. The horses, which had continued passive and trembling amid the raging
of the fire, received their burdens with a satisfaction so very evident, as to furnish a favourable
augury of their future industry. The trapper invited the Doctor to take his own steed, declaring
his intention to proceed on foot.

"I am but little used to journeying with the feet of others," he added, as a reason for the
measure, "and my legs are a weary of doing nothing. Besides, should we light suddenly on an
ambushment, which is a thing far from impossible, the horse will be in a better condition for
a hard run with one man on his back than with two. As for me, what matters it whether my time
is to be a day shorter or a day longer! Let the Tetons take my scalp, if it be God's pleasure:
they will find it covered with grey hairs; and it is beyond the craft of man to cheat me of
the knowledge and experience by which they have been whitened."

As no one among the impatient listeners seemed disposed to dispute the arrangement, it was
acceded to in silence. The Doctor, though he muttered a few mourning exclamations on behalf
of the lost Asinus, was by far too well pleased in finding that his speed was likely to be
sustained by four legs instead of two, to be long in complying: and, consequently, in a very
few moments the bee-hunter, who was never last to speak on such occasions, vociferously announced
that they were ready to proceed.

"Now look off yonder to the East," said the old man, as he began to lead the way across the
murky and still smoking plain; "little fear of cold feet in journeying such a path as this:
but look you off to the East, and if you see a sheet of shining white, glistening like a plate
of beaten silver through the openings of the smoke, why that is water. A noble stream is running
thereaway, and I thought I got a glimpse of it a while since; but other thoughts came, and
I lost it. It is a broad and swift river, such as the Lord has made many of its fellows in
this desert. For here may natur' be seen in all its richness, trees alone excepted. Trees,
which are to the 'arth, as fruits are to a garden; without them nothing can be pleasant, or
thoroughly useful. Now watch all of you, with open eyes, for that stripe of glittering water:
we shall not be safe until it is flowing between our trail and these sharp sighted Tetons."

The latter declaration was enough to ensure a vigilant look out for the desired stream, on
the part of all the trapper's followers. With this object in view, the party proceeded in profound
silence, the old man having admonished them of the necessity of caution, as they entered the
clouds of smoke, which were rolling like masses of fog along the plain, more particularly over
those spots where the fire had encountered occasional pools of stagnant water.

They travelled near a league in this manner, without obtaining the desired glimpse of the river.
The fire was still raging in the distance, and as the air swept away the first vapour of the
conflagration, fresh volumes rolled along the place, limiting the view. At length the old man,
who had begun to betray some little uneasiness, which caused his followers to apprehend that
even his acute faculties were beginning to be confused, in the mazes of the smoke, made a sudden
pause, and dropping his rifle to the ground, he stood, apparently musing over some object at
his feet. Middleton and the rest rode up to his side, and demanded the reason of the halt.

"Look ye, here," returned the trapper, pointing to the mutilated carcass of a horse, that lay
more than half consumed in a little hollow of the ground; "here may you see the power of a
prairie conflagration. The 'arth is moist, hereaway, and the grass has been taller than usual.
This miserable beast has been caught in his bed. You see the bones; the crackling and scorched
hide, and the grinning teeth. A thousand winters could not wither an animal so thoroughly,
as the element has done it in a minute."

"And this might have been our fate," said Middleton, "had the flames come upon us, in our sleep!"

"Nay, I do not say that, I do not say that. Not but that man will burn as well as tinder; but,
that being more reasoning than a horse, he would better know how to avoid the danger."

"Perhaps this then has been but the carcass of an animal, or he too would have fled?"

"See you these marks in the damp soil? Here have been his hoofs,--and there is a moccasin print,
as I'm a sinner! The owner of the beast has tried hard to move him from the place, but it is
in the instinct of the creatur' to be faint-hearted and obstinate in a fire."

"It is a well-known fact. But if the animal has had a rider, where is he?"

"Ay, therein lies the mystery," returned the trapper, stooping to examine the signs in the
ground with a closer eye. "Yes, yes, it is plain there has been a long struggle atween the
two. The master has tried hard to save his beast, and the flames must have been very greedy,
or he would have had better success."

"Harkee, old trapper," interrupted Paul, pointing to a little distance, where the ground was
drier, and the herbage had, in consequence, been less luxuriant; "just call them two horses.
Yonder lies another."

"The boy is right! can it be, that the Tetons have been caught in their own snares? Such things
do happen; and here is an example to all evil-doers. Ay, look you here, this is iron; there
have been some white inventions about the trappings of the beast--it must be so--it must be
so--a party of the knaves have been skirting in the grass after us, while their friends have
fired the prairie, and look you at the consequences; they have lost their beasts, and happy
have they been if their own souls are not now skirting along the path, which leads to the Indian
heaven."

"They had the same expedient at command as yourself," rejoined Middleton, as the party slowly
proceeded, approaching the other carcass, which lay directly on their route.

"I know not that. It is not every savage that carries his steel and flint, or as good a rifle-pan
as this old friend of mine. It is slow making a fire with two sticks, and little time was given
to consider, or invent, just at this spot, as you may see by yon streak of flame, which is
flashing along afore the wind, as if it were on a trail of powder. It is not many minutes since
the fire has passed here away, and it may be well to look at our primings, not that I would
willingly combat the Tetons, God forbid! but if a fight needs be, it is always wise to get
the first shot."

"This has been a strange beast, old man," said Paul, who had pulled the bridle, or rather halter
of his steed, over the second carcass, while the rest of the party were already passing, in
their eagerness to proceed; "a strange horse do I call it; it had neither head nor hoofs!"

"The fire has not been idle," returned the trapper, keeping his eye vigilantly employed in
profiting by those glimpses of the horizon, which the whirling smoke offered to his examination.
"It would soon bake you a buffaloe whole, or for that matter powder his hoofs and horns into
white ashes. Shame, shame, old Hector: as for the captain's pup, it is to be expected that
he would show his want of years, and I may say, I hope without offence, his want of education
too; but for a hound, like you, who have lived so long in the forest afore you came into these
plains, it is very disgraceful, Hector, to be showing your teeth, and growling at the carcass
of a roasted horse, the same as if you were telling your master that you had found the trail
of a grizzly bear."

"I tell you, old trapper, this is no horse; neither in hoofs, head, nor hide."

"Anan! Not a horse? Your eyes are good for the bees and for the hollow trees, my lad, but--bless
me, the boy is right! That I should mistake the hide of a buffaloe, scorched and crimpled as
it is, for the carcass of a horse! Ah's me! The time has been, my men, when I would tell you
the name of a beast, as far as eye could reach, and that too with most of the particulars of
colour, age, and sex."

"An inestimable advantage have you then enjoyed, venerable venator!" observed the attentive
naturalist. "The man who can make these distinctions in a desert, is saved the pain of many
a weary walk, and often of an enquiry that in its result proves useless. Pray tell me, did
your exceeding excellence of vision extend so far as to enable you to decide on their order,
or genus?"

"I know not what you mean by your orders of genius."

"No!" interrupted the bee-hunter, a little disdainfully for him, when speaking to his aged
friend; "now, old trapper, that is admitting your ignorance of the English language, in a way
I should not expect from a man of your experience and understanding. By order, our comrade
means whether they go in promiscuous droves, like a swarm that is following its queen-bee,
or in single file, as you often see the buffaloes trailing each other through a prairie. And
as for genius, I'm sure that is a word well understood, and in every body's mouth. There is
the congress-man in our district, and that tonguey little fellow, who puts out the paper in
our county, they are both so called, for their smartness; which is what the Doctor means, as
I take it, seeing that he seldom speaks without some considerable meaning."

When Paul finished this very clever explanation he looked behind him with an expression, which,
rightly interpreted, would have said--"You see, though I don't often trouble myself in these
matters, I am no fool."

Ellen admired Paul for anything but his learning. There was enough in his frank, fearless,
and manly character, backed as it was by great personal attraction, to awaken her sympathies,
without the necessity of prying into his mental attainments. The poor girl reddened like a
rose, her pretty fingers played with the belt, by which she sustained herself on the horse,
and she hurriedly observed, as if anxious to direct the attentions of the other listeners from
a weakness, on which her own thoughts could not bear to dwell--

"And this is not a horse, after all?"

"It is nothing more, nor less, than the hide of a buffaloe," continued the trapper, who had
been no less puzzled by the explanation of Paul, than by the language of the Doctor; "the hair
is beneath; the fire has run over it as you see; for being fresh, the flames could take no
hold. The beast has not been long killed, and it may be that some of the beef is still hereaway."

"Lift the corner of the skin, old trapper," said Paul, with the tone of one, who felt, as if
he had now proved his right to mingle his voice in any council; "if there is a morsel of the
hump left, it must be well cooked, and it shall be welcome."

The old man laughed, heartily, at the conceit of his companion. Thrusting his foot beneath
the skin, it moved. Then it was suddenly cast aside, and an Indian warrior sprang from its
cover, to his feet, with an agility, that bespoke how urgent he deemed the occasion.

CHAPTER XXIV

             I would it were bed-time, Hal, and all well.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

A second glance sufficed to convince the whole of the startled party, that the young Pawnee,
whom they had already encountered, again stood before them. Surprise kept both sides mute,
and more than a minute was passed in surveying each other, with eyes of astonishment, if not
of distrust. The wonder of the young warrior was, however, much more tempered and dignified
than that of his Christian acquaintances. While Middleton and Paul felt the tremor, which shook
the persons of their dependant companions, thrilling through their own quickened blood, the
glowing eye of the Indian rolled from one to another, as if it could never quail before the
rudest assaults. His gaze, after making the circuit of every wondering countenance, finally
settled in a steady look on the equally immovable features of the trapper. The silence was
first broken by Dr. Battius, in the ejaculation of--"Order, primates; genus, homo; species,
prairie!"

"Ay--ay--the secret is out," said the old trapper, shaking his head, like one who congratulated
himself on having mastered the mystery of some knotty difficulty. "The lad has been in the
grass for a cover; the fire has come upon him in his sleep, and having lost his horse, he has
been driven to save himself under that fresh hide of a buffaloe. No bad invention, when powder
and flint were wanting to kindle a ring. I warrant me, now, this is a clever youth, and one
that it would be safe to journey with! I will speak to him kindly, for anger can at least serve
no turn of ours. My brother is welcome again," using the language, which the other understood;
"the Tetons have been smoking him, as they would a racoon."

The young Pawnee rolled his eye over the place, as if he were examining the terrific danger
from which he had just escaped, but he disdained to betray the smallest emotion, at its imminency.
His brow contracted, as he answered to the remark of the trapper by saying--

"A Teton is a dog. When the Pawnee war-whoop is in their ears, the whole nation howls."

"It is true. The imps are on our trail, and I am glad to meet a warrior, with the tomahawk
in his hand, who does not love them. Will my brother lead my children to his village? If the
Siouxes follow on our path, my young men shall help him to strike them."

The young Pawnee turned his eyes from one to another of the strangers, in a keen scrutiny,
before he saw fit to answer so important an interrogatory. His examination of the males was
short, and apparently satisfactory. But his gaze was fastened long and admiringly, as in their
former interview, on the surpassing and unwonted beauty of a being so fair and so unknown as
Inez. Though his glance wandered, for moments, from her countenance to the more intelligible
and yet extraordinary charms of Ellen, it did not fail to return promptly to the study of a
creature who, in the view of his unpractised eye and untutored imagination, was formed with
all that perfection, with which the youthful poet is apt to endow the glowing images of his
brain. Nothing so fair, so ideal, so every way worthy to reward the courage and self-devotion
of a warrior, had ever before been encountered on the prairies, and the young brave appeared
to be deeply and intuitively sensible to the influence of so rare a model of the loveliness
of the sex. Perceiving, however, that his gaze gave uneasiness to the subject of his admiration,
he withdrew his eyes, and laying his hand impressively on his chest, he, modestly, answered--

"My father shall be welcome. The young men of my nation shall hunt with his sons; the chiefs
shall smoke with the grey-head. The Pawnee girls will sing in the ears of his daughters."

"And if we meet the Tetons?" demanded the trapper, who wished to understand, thoroughly, the
more important conditions of this new alliance.

"The enemy of the Big-knives shall feel the blow of the Pawnee."

"It is well. Now let my brother and I meet in council, that we may not go on a crooked path,
but that our road to his village may be like the flight of the pigeons."

The young Pawnee made a significant gesture of assent and followed the other a little apart,
in order to be removed from all danger of interruption from the reckless Paul, or the abstracted
naturalist. Their conference was short, but, as it was conducted in the sententious manner
of the natives, it served to make each of the parties acquainted with all the necessary information
of the other. When they rejoined their associates, the old man saw fit to explain a portion
of what had passed between them, as follows--

"Ay, I was not mistaken," he said; "this good-looking young warrior--for good-looking and noble-looking
he is, though a little horrified perhaps with paint--this good-looking youth, then, tells me
he is out on the scout for these very Tetons. His party was not strong enough to strike the
devils, who are down from their towns in great numbers to hunt the buffaloe, and runners have
gone to the Pawnee villages for aid. It would seem that this lad is a fearless boy, for he
has been hanging on their skirts alone, until, like ourselves, he was driven to the grass for
a cover. But he tells me more, my men, and what I am mainly sorry to hear, which is, that the
cunning Mahtoree instead of going to blows with the squatter, has become his friend, and that
both broods, red and white, are on our heels, and outlying around this very burning plain to
circumvent us to our destruction."

"How knows he all this to be true?" demanded Middleton.

"Anan?"

"In what manner does he know, that these things are so?"

"In what manner! Do you think newspapers and town criers are needed to tell a scout what is
doing on the prairies, as they are in the bosom of the States? No gossiping woman, who hurries
from house to house to spread evil of her neighbour, can carry tidings with her tongue, so
fast as these people will spread their meaning, by signs and warnings, that they alone understand.
'Tis their l'arning, and what is better, it is got in the open air, and not within the walls
of a school. I tell you, captain, that what he says is true."

"For that matter," said Paul, "I'm ready to swear to it. It is reasonable, and therefore it
must be true."

"And well you might, lad; well you might. He furthermore declares, that my old eyes for once
were true to me, and that the river lies, hereaway, at about the distance of half a league.
You see the fire has done most of its work in that quarter, and our path is clouded in smoke.
He also agrees that it is needful to wash our trail in water. Yes, we must put that river atween
us and the Sioux eyes, and then, by the favour of the Lord, not forgetting our own industry,
we may gain the village of the Loups."

"Words will not forward us a foot," said Middleton; "let us move."

The old man assented, and the party once more prepared to renew its route. The Pawnee threw
the skin of the buffaloe over his shoulder and led the advance, casting many a stolen glance
behind him as he proceeded, in order to fix his gaze on the extraordinary and, to him, unaccountable
loveliness of the unconscious Inez.

An hour sufficed to bring the fugitives to the bank of the stream, which was one of the hundred
rivers that serve to conduct, through the mighty arteries of the Missouri and Mississippi,
the waters of that vast and still uninhabited region to the Ocean. The river was not deep,
but its current was troubled and rapid. The flames had scorched the earth to its very margin,
and as the warm streams of the fluid mingled, in the cooler air of the morning, with the smoke
of the raging conflagration, most of its surface was wrapped in a mantle of moving vapour.
The trapper pointed out the circumstance with pleasure, saying, as he assisted Inez to dismount
on the margin of the watercourse--

"The knaves have outwitted themselves! I am far from certain that I should not have fired the
prairie, to have got the benefit of this very smoke to hide our movements, had not the heartless
imps saved us the trouble. I've known such things done in my day, and done with success. Come,
lady, put your tender foot upon the ground--for a fearful time has it been to one of your breeding
and skeary qualities. Ah's me! what have I not known the young, and the delicate, and the virtuous,
and the modest, to undergo, in my time, among the horrifications and circumventions of Indian
warfare! Come, it is a short quarter of a mile to the other bank, and then our trail, at least,
will be broken."

Paul had by this time assisted Ellen to dismount, and he now stood looking, with rueful eyes,
at the naked banks of the river. The subject is none the less important, that circumstances require
that it should be touched on in a slight, almost flippant, manner.

Had Jack Robinson known what lay before him that evening, he would--he would have been a wiser
man! Nothing more appropriate than that occurs to us at this moment. But, to be more particular:--

When
the party reached the nets, Jack left them to attend to their work, and went off alone to the vats,
some of which, measuring about six feet in diameter, were nearly
full of fish in pickle.

As he walked along the slight track which guided him towards them, he pondered the circumstances
in which he then found himself, and, indulging in a habit which he
had acquired in his frequent and prolonged periods of solitude, began
to mutter his thoughts aloud.

"So, so, Jack, you left your farm because you were tired of solitude, and now you find yourself
in the midst of society. Pleasant society, truly!--bullies and geese, without a sympathetic mind
to rub against. Humph! a pleasant fix you've got into, old fellow."

Jack was wrong in this to some extent, as he afterwards came to confess to himself, for among
his men there were two or three minds worth cultivating, noble and shrewd, and deep, too, though
not educated or refined. But at the time of which we write, Jack did not know this. He went
on to soliloquise:

"Yes, you've got a pretty set to deal with; elements that will cause you enough of trouble before
you have done with them. Well, well, don't give in, old chap. Never say die. If solitude is
to be your lot, meet it like a man. Why, they say that solitude of the worst kind is to be
found where most people dwell.

Has it not been said, that in the great city of London itself a man may be more solitary than
in the heart of the wilderness? I've read it, but I can't very well believe it. Yet, there may
be something in it. Humph! Well, well, Jack, you're not a philosopher, so don't try to go too deep;
take it easy, and do the best you can."

At this point Jack came suddenly in sight of the vats. They stood in the centre of a cleared
space in the forest. On the edge of the largest vat was perched an object which induced our
hero to throw forward his fowling-piece hastily. It was a black bear, or rather the hind-quarters
of a black bear, for the head and one paw and shoulder of the animal
were far down in the vat.

He was holding firmly to its edge by the hind legs and one fore-leg, while with the other he was
straining his utmost to reach the fish.

Jack's first impulse was to fire, but reflecting that the portion of the bear then in view was
not a very vulnerable part, he hesitated, and finally crept behind a tree to consider, feeling
confident that whatever should occur he would be pretty sure of getting a favourable opportunity
to fire with effect.

Quite unconscious of his danger, bruin continued to reach down into the vat with unwearied determination.
His efforts were rewarded with success, for he presently appeared on the edge of the vat with a fine
salmon in his embrace. Now was Jack's opportunity. He raised his piece, but remembering Marteau's
remark about the bear's difficulty in eating salt salmon, he postponed the fatal shot until
he should have studied this point in natural history.

His forbearance met with a reward, for the bear kept him during the
next five minutes in such a state of suppressed laughter, that he
could not have taken a steady aim to have saved his life.

Its sense of smell was evidently gratified, for on leaping to the ground it took a powerful snuff,
and then began to devour the salmon with immense gusto. But the first mouthful produced an expression
of countenance that could not be misunderstood. It coughed, spluttered, and sneezed, or at least
gave vent to something resembling these sounds, and drew back from the fish with a snarl; then
it snuffed again. There was no mistaking the smell. It was delicious! Bruin, disbelieving
his sense of taste, and displaying unwise faith in his sense of smell, made another attempt. He
had tried the head first; with some show of reason he now tried the tail. Faugh! it was worse
than the other; "as salt as fire," as we have heard it sometimes expressed. The spluttering at
this point became excessive, and it was clear that the bear was getting angry. Once again,
with an amount of perseverance that deserved better fortune, the
bear snuffed heartily at the fish, tore it to shreds with his claws,
and then tried another mouthful, which it spat out instantly.

Displaying all its teeth and gums, it shut its eyes, and, raising its head in the air, fairly
howled with disappointment.

Jack now deemed it prudent to bring the scene to a close, so, calming himself as well as he
could, he took a steady aim, and, watching his opportunity, fired.

The bear did not fall.

It faced round in a moment, and, uttering a fierce growl, very unlike to its previous tones,
rushed upon its enemy, who fired his second barrel at the creature's
breast.

Whether it was that Jack's fit of laughter had shaken his nerves so as to render him incapable
of taking a good aim, is a matter of uncertainty, but although both shots took effect, the
bear was not checked in his career. On it came. Jack had no time to load. He turned to run,
when his quick eye observed a branch of a tree over his head within reach. Dropping his gun he
bounded upwards and caught it, and, being unusually powerful in the arms, drew himself up and
got astride of it just as the bear reached the spot. But bruin was not to be baulked so easily.
He was a black bear and a good climber. Finding that he could not at his utmost stretch obtain
a nibble at Jack's toes, he rushed at the trunk of the tree and began to ascend rapidly. Jack at
once moved towards the end of the branch, intending to drop to the ground, recover his gun and
run for it; but the movement broke the branch off suddenly, and he came down with such a crash,
that the bear stopped, looked round, and, seeing his enemy on the ground, began to descend.

Although somewhat stunned by the fall, our hero was able to spring up and run in the direction
of the hut. The bear was so close on his heels, however, that he had no chance of his reaching
it. He felt this, and, as a last resource, doubled on his track like a hare and made for the
banks of the river, which were twenty feet high at the place, intending
to leap into the rapid and take his chance.

In this, too, he was foiled. His fall from the tree had partially disabled him, and he could not
run with his wonted agility.

About ten yards from the edge of the bank the bear overtook him, and it seemed as if poor Jack
Robinson's troubles were at last about to be brought to an abrupt
close.

But Jack was self-possessed and brave as steel. On feeling the bear's claws in his back, he
drew his knife, wheeled round, fell into its embrace, and plunged
the knife three or four times in its side.

The thing was done in a moment, and the two, falling together, rolled over the edge of the
steep bank, and went crashing down through the bushes amid a cloud
of dust and stones into the raging flood below.

At the foot of the rapid, Marteau and one of the men happened to
be rowing ashore with a load of fish.

"Hallo! what's that?" cried Marteau.

"Eh!" exclaimed his comrade.

"A bear!" shouted Marteau, backing his oar.

"And a man! What! I say!"

"Pull! pull!"

Next moment the boat was dancing on the foam, and Marteau had hold of the bear's neck with one
hand, and Jack's hair with the other.

They were soon hauled to land, the bear in its dying agonies and Jack in a state of insensibility;
but it took the united strength of the two men to tear him from the tremendous grasp that
he had fastened on the brute, and his knife was found buried to the
handle close alongside of bruin's heart!

CHAPTER SEVEN.

SOLITUDE.

On the day of his encounter with the bear, Jack Robinson sent Rollo up to the fort to fetch down
all the men except O'Donel, in order that the fishery might be carried on with vigour.

Of course it is unnecessary to inform the reader that Jack speedily recovered from the effects of
his adventure. It would be absurd to suppose that anything of an ordinary nature could kill or even
do much damage to our hero. Beyond five deep punctures on his back and five on his breast, besides
a bite in the shoulder, Jack had received no damage, and was able to return on foot to Fort Desolation
a few days after the event.

On arriving, he found his man, Teddy O'Donel, sitting over the kitchen fire in the last stage
of an attack of deep depression and home sickness. Jack's sudden appearance wrought an instantaneous
cure.

"Ah!" said he, grasping his master's hand and wringing it warmly; "it's a blessed sight for sore
eyes! Sure I've bin all but dead, sur, since ye wint away."

"You've not been ill, have you?" said Jack, looking somewhat earnestly in the man's face.

"Ill? No, not i' the body, if that's what ye mane, but I've been awful bad i' the mind. It's
the intellect as kills men more nor the body. The sowl is what does it all." (Here Teddy passed
his hand across his forehead and looked haggard.) "Ah!

Mr Robinson, it's myself as'll niver do to live alone. I do belave that all the ghosts as iver
lived have come and took up there abode in this kitchen."

"Nonsense!" said Jack, sitting down on a stool beside the fire and filling his pipe; "you're too superstitious."

"Supperstitious,
is it?" exclaimed the man, with a look of intense gravity.

"Faix, if ye seed them ye'd change yer tune. It's the noses of 'em as is wust. Of all the noses
for length and redness and for blowin' like trumpets I ever did see--well, well, it's no use
conjicturin', but I do wonder sometimes what guv the ghosts sitch noses."

"I suppose they knows that best themselves," observed Jack.

"P'r'aps they does," replied Teddy with a meditative gaze at the fire.

"But I rather suspect," continued Jack, "that as your own nose is somewhat long and red, and as
you've got a habit of squinting, not to mention snoring, Teddy, we
may be justified in accounting for the--"

"Ah! it's no use jokin'," interrupted O'Donel; "ye'll niver joke me
out o' my belaif in ghosts.

It's no longer agone than last night, after tay, I laid me down on
the floor beside the fire in sitch a state o' moloncholly weakness,
that I really tried to die.

It's true for ye; and I belave I'd have done it, too, av I hadn't wint off to slape by mistake,
an' whin I awoke, I was so cowld and hungry that I thought I'd pusspone dyin' till after supper.
I got better after supper, but, och! it's a hard thing to live all
be yer lone like this."

"Have no Indians been here since I left?"

"Not wan, sur."

"Well, Teddy, I will keep you company now.

We shall be alone here together for a few weeks, as I mean to leave all our lads at the fishery.
Meanwhile, bestir yourself and let me have supper."

During the next few weeks Jack Robinson was very busy. Being an extremely active man, he soon
did every conceivable thing that had to be done about the fort, and conceived, as well as did,
a good many things that did not require to be done. While rummaging in the stores, he discovered
a hand-net, with which he waded into the sea and caught large quantities of small fish, about
four inches in length, resembling herrings. These he salted and dried in the sun, and thus
improved his fare,--for, having only salt pork and fresh salmon, he felt the need of a little variety.
Indeed, he had already begun to get tired of salmon, insomuch that
he greatly preferred salt pork.

After that, he scraped together a sufficient number of old planks, and built therewith a flat-bottomed
boat--a vessel much wanted at the place. But, do what he would, time hung very heavy on his hands,
even although he made as much of a companion of Teddy O'Donel, as was consistent with his dignity.
The season for wild fowl had not arrived, and he soon got tired of
going out with his gun, with the certainty of returning empty-handed.

At last there was a brief break in the monotony of the daily life at Fort Desolation. A band
of Indians came with a good supply of furs. They were not a very high type of human beings,
had little to say, and did not seem disposed to say it. But they wanted goods from Jack, and
Jack wanted furs from them; so their presence during the two days
and nights they stayed shed a glow of moral sunshine over the fort
that made its inhabitants as light-hearted and joyful as though some
unwonted piece of good fortune had befallen them.

When the Indians went away, however, the gloom was proportionally deeper, Jack and his man sounded
lower depths of despair than they had ever before fathomed, and the latter began to make frequent
allusions to the possibility of making away with himself.

Indeed, he did one evening, while he and Jack stood silently on the shore together, propose that
they should go into the bush behind the fort, cover themselves over with leaves, and perish
"at wance, like the babes in the wood."

Things were in this gloomy condition, when an event occurred, which, although not of great importance
in itself, made such a deep impression on the dwellers at Fort Desolation, that it is worthy
of a chapter to itself.

CHAPTER EIGHT.

HORRORS.

One morning the sun rose with unwonted splendour on the broad bosom
of the Saint Lawrence. The gulf was like a mirror, in which the images
of the seagulls were as perfect as the birds themselves, and the warm
hazy atmosphere was lighted up so brightly by the sun, that it seemed
as though the world were enveloped in delicate golden gauze.

Jack
Robinson stood on the shore, with the exile of Erin beside him. Strange
to say, the effect of this lovely scene on both was the reverse of
gladdening.

"It's very sad," said Jack, slowly.

"True for ye," observed
the sympathising Teddy, supposing that his master had finished his
remark.

"It's very sad," repeated Jack, "to look abroad upon this
lovely world, and know that thousands of our fellow-men are enjoying
it in each other's society, while we are self-exiled here."

"An'
so it is," said Teddy, "not to mintion our fellow-women an' our fellow-childers
to boot."

"To be sure we have got each other's society, O'Donel,"
continued Jack, "and the society of the gulls--"

"An' the fush,"
interposed Teddy.

"And the fish," assented Jack; "for all of which
blessings we have cause to be thankful; but it's my opinion that you
and I are a couple of egregious asses for having forsaken our kind
and come to vegetate here in the wilderness."

"That's just how it
is, sur. We're both on us big asses, an' it's a pint for investigation
which on us is the biggest--you, who ought to have know'd better,
or me, as niver kno'w'd anything, a'most, to spake of."

Jack smiled.
He was much too deeply depressed to laugh. For some minutes they stood
gazing in silent despondency at the sea.

"What's that?" exclaimed
Jack, with sudden animation, pointing to an object which appeared
at the moment near the extremity of a point of rocks not far from
the spot where they stood--"a canoe?"

"Two of 'em!" cried O'Donel,
as another object came into view.

The change which came over the
countenances of the two men, as they stood watching the approach of
the two canoes, would have been incomprehensible to any one not acquainted
with the effect of solitude on the human mind. They did not exactly
caper on the beach, but they felt inclined to do so, and their heaving
bosoms and sparkling eyes told of the depth of emotion within.

In
about a quarter of an hour the canoes were within a short distance
of the landing-place, but no shout or sign of recognition came from
the Indians who paddled them. There was an Indian in the bow and stern
of each canoe, and a woman in the middle of one of them.

"Well, boys,
what cheer?" said Jack, using a well-known backwood's salutation,
as the men landed.

The Indians silently took the proffered hand of
the trader and shook it, replying in a low voice, "Wachee," as the
nearest point they could attain to the pronunciation of "What cheer?"

There
was something so unusually solemn in the air and manner of the savages,
that Jack glanced at the canoe in which the woman sat. There he saw
what explained the mystery. In the bottom lay an object wrapped up
in pieces of old cloth and birchbark, which, from its form, was evidently
a human body. A few words with the Indians soon drew from them the
information that this was one of their wives who had been ailing for
a long time, and at length had died. They were Roman Catholic converts,
and had come to bury the body in the graveyard of the fort which had
been "consecrated" by a priest.

To whatever pitch of excitement Jack
and his man had risen at the unexpected appearance of the Indians,
their spirits fell to an immeasurably profounder depth than before
when their errand was made known.

Everything connected with this
burial was sad and repulsive, yet Jack and his man felt constrained,
out of mere sympathy, to witness it all.

The Indians were shabby
and squalid in the extreme, and, being destitute of the means of making
a coffin, had rolled the corpse up in such wretched materials as they
happened to possess. One consequence of this was, that it was quite
supple. On being lifted out of the canoe, the joints bent, and a sort
of noise was emitted from the mouth, which was exceedingly horrible.
Had the dead face been visible, the effect would not have been so
powerful, but its being covered tended to set the imagination free
to conceive things still more dreadful.

The grave was soon dug in
the sand inside the graveyard, which was not more than a hundred yards
on one side of the fort. Here, without ceremony of any kind, the poor
form was laid and covered over. While being lowered into the grave,
the same doubling-up of the frame and the same noise were observed.

"Now let us depart!" exclaimed Obed, endeavouring to catch a furtive glimpse of the lead, which
he fancied was whizzing at his very ear; "we have maintained the bank in a gallant manner,
for a sufficient length of time; quite as much military skill is to be displayed in a retreat,
as in an advance."

The old man cast a look behind him, and seeing that the equestrians had reached the cover of
the hill, he made no objections to the proposal. The remaining horse was given to the Doctor,
with instructions to pursue the course just taken by Middleton and Paul. When the naturalist
was mounted and in full retreat, the trapper and the young Pawnee stole from the spot in such
a manner as to leave their enemies some time in doubt as to their movements. Instead, however,
of proceeding across the plain towards the hill, a route on which they must have been in open
view, they took a shorter path, covered by the formation of the ground, and intersected the
little water-course at the point where Middleton had been directed to leave it, and just in
season to join his party. The Doctor had used so much diligence in the retreat, as to have
already overtaken his friends, and of course all the fugitives were again assembled.

The trapper now looked about him for some convenient spot, where the whole party might halt,
as he expressed it, for some five or six hours.

"Halt!" exclaimed the Doctor, when the alarming proposal reached his ears; "venerable hunter,
it would seem, that on the contrary, many days should be passed in industrious flight."

Middleton and Paul were both of this opinion, and each in his particular manner expressed as much.

The old man heard them with patience, but shook his head like one who was unconvinced, and
then answered all their arguments, in one general and positive reply.

"Why should we fly?" he asked. "Can the legs of mortal men outstrip the speed of horses? Do
you think the Tetons will lie down and sleep; or will they cross the water and nose for our
trail? Thanks be to the Lord, we have washed it well in this stream, and if we leave the place
with discretion and wisdom, we may yet throw them off its track. But a prairie is not a wood.
There a man may journey long, caring for nothing but the prints his moccasin leaves, whereas
in these open plains a runner, placed on yonder hill, for instance, could see far on every
side of him, like a hovering hawk looking down on his prey. No, no; night must come, and darkness
be upon us, afore we leave this spot. But listen to the words of the Pawnee; he is a lad of
spirit, and I warrant me many is the hard race that he has run with the Sioux bands. Does my
brother think our trail is long enough?" he demanded in the Indian tongue.

"Is a Teton a fish, that he can see it in the river?"

"But my young men think we should stretch it, until it reaches across the prairie."

"Mahtoree has eyes; he will see it."

"What does my brother counsel?"

The young warrior studied the heavens a moment, and appeared to hesitate. He mused some time
with himself, and then he replied, like one whose opinion was fixed--

"The Dahcotahs are not asleep," he said; "we must lie in the grass."

"Ah! the lad is of my mind," said the old man, briefly explaining the opinion of his companion
to his white friends. Middleton was obliged to acquiesce, and, as it was confessedly dangerous
to remain upon their feet, each one set about assisting in the means to be adopted for their
security. Inez and Ellen were quickly bestowed beneath the warm and not uncomfortable shelter
of the buffaloe skins, which formed a thick covering, and tall grass was drawn over the place,
in such a manner as to evade any examination from a common eye. Paul and the Pawnee fettered
the beasts and cast them to the earth, where, after supplying them with food, they were also
left concealed in the fog of the prairie. No time was lost when these several arrangements
were completed, before each of the others sought a place of rest and concealment, and then
the plain appeared again deserted to its solitude.

The old man had advised his companions of the absolute necessity of their continuing for hours
in this concealment. All their hopes of escape depended on the success of the artifice. If
they might elude the cunning of their pursuers, by this simple and therefore less suspected
expedient, they could renew their flight as the evening approached, and, by changing their
course, the chance of final success would be greatly increased. Influenced by these momentous
considerations the whole party lay, musing on their situation, until thoughts grew weary, and
sleep finally settled on them all, one after another.

The deepest silence had prevailed for hours, when the quick ears of the trapper and the Pawnee
were startled by a faint cry of surprise from Inez. Springing to their feet, like men, who
were about to struggle for their lives, they found the vast plain, the rolling swells, the
little hillock, and the scattered thickets, covered alike in one, white, dazzling sheet of snow.

"The Lord have mercy on ye all!" exclaimed the old man, regarding the prospect with a rueful
eye; "now, Pawnee, do I know the reason why you studied the clouds so closely; but it is too
late; it is too late! A squirrel would leave his trail on this light coating of the 'arth.
Ha! there come the imps to a certainty. Down with ye all, down with ye; your chance is but
small, and yet it must not be wilfully cast away."

The whole party was instantly concealed again, though many an anxious and stolen glance was
directed through the tops of the grass, on the movements of their enemies. At the distance
of half a mile, the Teton band was seen riding in a circuit, which was gradually contracting
itself, and evidently closing upon the very spot where the fugitives lay. There was but little
difficulty in solving the mystery of this movement. The snow had fallen in time to assure them
that those they sought were in their rear, and they were now employed, with the unwearied perseverance
and patience of Indian warriors, in circling the certain boundaries of their place of concealment.

Each minute added to the jeopardy of the fugitives. Paul and Middleton deliberately prepared
their rifles, and as the occupied Mahtoree came, at length, within fifty feet of them, keeping
his eyes riveted on the grass through which he rode, they levelled them together and pulled
the triggers. The effort was answered by the mere snapping of the locks.

"Enough," said the old man, rising with dignity; "I have cast away the priming; for certain
death would follow your rashness. Now let us meet our fates like men. Cringing and complaining
find no favour in Indian eyes."

His appearance was greeted by a yell, that spread far and wide over the plain, and in a moment
a hundred savages were seen riding madly to the spot. Mahtoree received his prisoners with
great self-restraint, though a single gleam of fierce joy broke through his clouded brow, and
the heart of Middleton grew cold as he caught the expression of that eye, which the chief turned
on the nearly insensible but still lovely Inez.

The exultation of receiving the white captives was so great, as for a time to throw the dark
and immovable form of their young Indian companion entirely out of view. He stood apart, disdaining
to turn an eye on his enemies, as motionless as if he were frozen in that attitude of dignity
and composure. But when a little time had passed, even this secondary object attracted the
attention of the Tetons. Then it was that the trapper first learned, by the shout of triumph
and the long drawn yell of delight, which burst at once from a hundred throats, as well as
by the terrible name, which filled the air, that his youthful friend was no other than that
redoubtable and hitherto invincible warrior, Hard-Heart.

CHAPTER XXV

            What, are ancient Pistol and you friends, yet?
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The curtain of our imperfect drama must fall, to rise upon another scene. The time is advanced
several days, during which very material changes had occurred in the situation of the actors.
The hour is noon, and the place an elevated plain, that rose, at no great distance from the
water, somewhat abruptly from a fertile bottom, which stretched along the margin of one of
the numberless water-courses of that region. The river took its rise near the base of the Rocky
Mountains, and, after washing a vast extent of plain, it mingled its waters with a still larger
stream, to become finally lost in the turbid current of the Missouri.

The landscape was changed materially for the better; though the hand, which had impressed so
much of the desert on the surrounding region, had laid a portion of its power on this spot.
The appearance of vegetation was, however, less discouraging than in the more sterile wastes
of the rolling prairies. Clusters of trees were scattered in greater profusion, and a long
outline of ragged forest marked the northern boundary of the view. Here and there, on the bottom,
were to be seen the evidences of a hasty and imperfect culture of such indigenous vegetables
as were of a quick growth, and which were known to flourish, without the aid of art, in deep
and alluvial soils. On the very edge of what might be called the table-land, were pitched the
hundred lodges of a horde of wandering Siouxes. Their light tenements were arranged without
the least attention to order. Proximity to the water seemed to be the only consideration which
had been consulted in their disposition, nor had even this important convenience been always
regarded. While most of the lodges stood along the brow of the plain, many were to be seen
at greater distances, occupying such places as had first pleased the capricious eyes of their
untutored owners. The encampment was not military, nor in the slightest degree protected from
surprise by its position or defences. It was open on every side, and on every side as accessible
as any other point in those wastes, if the imperfect and natural obstruction offered by the
river be excepted. In short, the place bore the appearance of having been tenanted longer than
its occupants had originally intended, while it was not wanting in the signs of readiness for
a hasty, or even a compelled departure.

This was the temporary encampment of that portion of his people, who had long been hunting
under the direction of Mahtoree, on those grounds which separated the stationary abodes of
his nation, from those of the warlike tribes of the Pawnees. The lodges were tents of skin,
high, conical, and of the most simple and primitive construction. The shield, the quiver, the
lance and the bow of its master, were to be seen suspended from a light post before the opening,
or door, of each habitation. The different domestic implements of his one, two, or three wives,
as the brave was of greater or lesser renown, were carelessly thrown at its side, and here
and there the round, full, patient countenance of an infant might be found peeping from its
comfortless wrappers of bark, as, suspended by a deer-skin thong from the same post, it rocked
in the passing air. Children of a larger growth were tumbling over each other in piles, the
males, even at that early age, making themselves distinguished for that species of domination
which, in after life, was to mark the vast distinction between the sexes. Youths were in the
bottom, essaying their juvenile powers in curbing the wild steeds of their fathers, while here
and there a truant girl was to be seen, stealing from her labours to admire their fierce and
impatient daring.

Thus far the picture was the daily exhibition of an encampment confident in its security. But
immediately in front of the lodges was a gathering, that seemed to forbode some movements of
more than usual interest. A few of the withered and remorseless crones of the band were clustering
together, in readiness to lend their fell voices, if needed, to aid in exciting their descendants
to an exhibition, which their depraved tastes coveted, as the luxurious Roman dame witnessed
the struggles and the agony of the gladiator. The men were subdivided into groups, assorted
according to the deeds and reputations of the several individuals of whom they were composed.

They, who were of that equivocal age which admitted them to the hunts, while their discretion
was still too doubtful to permit them to be trusted on the war-path, hung around the skirts
of the whole, catching, from the fierce models before them, that gravity of demeanour and restraint
of manner, which in time was to become so deeply ingrafted in their own characters. A few of
the still older class, and who had heard the whoop in anger, were a little more presuming,
pressing nigher to the chiefs, though far from presuming to mingle in their councils, sufficiently
distinguished by being permitted to catch the wisdom which fell from lips so venerated. The
ordinary warriors of the band were still less diffident, not hesitating to mingle among the
chiefs of lesser note, though far from assuming the right to dispute the sentiments of any
established brave, or to call in question the prudence of measures, that were recommended by
the more gifted counsellors of the nation.

Among the chiefs themselves there was a singular compound of exterior. They were divided into
two classes; those who were mainly indebted for their influence to physical causes, and to
deeds in arms, and those who had become distinguished rather for their wisdom than for their
services in the field. The former was by far the most numerous and the most important class.
They were men of stature and mien, whose stern countenances were often rendered doubly imposing
by those evidences of their valour, which had been roughly traced on their lineaments by the
hands of their enemies. That class, which had gained its influence by a moral ascendency was
extremely limited. They were uniformly to be distinguished by the quick and lively expression
of their eyes, by the air of distrust that marked their movements, and occasionally by the
vehemence of their utterance in those sudden outbreakings of the mind, by which their present
consultations were, from time to time, distinguished.

In the very centre of a ring, formed by these chosen counsellors, was to be seen the person
of the disquieted, but seemingly calm, Mahtoree. There was a conjunction of all the several
qualities of the others in his person and character. Mind as well as matter had contributed
to establish his authority. His scars were as numerous and deep as those of the whitest head
in his nation; his limbs were in their greatest vigour; his courage at its fullest height.
Endowed with this rare combination of moral and physical influence, the keenest eye in all
that assembly was wont to lower before his threatening glance. Courage and cunning had established
his ascendency, and it had been rendered, in some degree, sacred by time. He knew so well how
to unite the powers of reason and force, that in a state of society, which admitted of a greater
display of his energies, the Teton would in all probability have been both a conqueror and
a despot.

A little apart from the gathering of the band, was to be seen a set of beings of an entirely
different origin. Taller and far more muscular in their persons, the lingering vestiges of
their Saxon and Norman ancestry were yet to be found beneath the swarthy complexions, which
had been bestowed by an American sun. It would have been a curious investigation, for one skilled
in such an enquiry, to have traced those points of difference, by which the offspring of the
most western European was still to be distinguished from the descendant of the most remote
Asiatic, now that the two, in the revolutions of the world, were approximating in their habits,
their residence, and not a little in their characters. The group, of whom we write, was composed
of the family of the squatter. They stood indolent, lounging, and inert, as usual when no immediate
demand was made on their dormant energies, clustered in front of some four or five habitations
of skin, for which they were indebted to the hospitality of their Teton allies. The terms of
their unexpected confederation were sufficiently explained, by the presence of the horses and
domestic cattle that were quietly grazing on the bottom beneath, under the jealous eyes of
the spirited Hetty. Their wagons were drawn about the lodges, in a sort of irregular barrier,
which at once manifested that their confidence was not entirely restored, while, on the other
hand, their policy or indolence prevented any very positive exhibition of distrust. There was
a singular union of passive enjoyment and of dull curiosity slumbering in every dull countenance,
as each of the party stood leaning on his rifle, regarding the movements of the Sioux conference.
Still no sign of expectation or interest escaped from the youngest among them, the whole appearing
to emulate the most phlegmatic of their savage allies, in an exhibition of patience. They rarely
spoke; and when they did it was in some short and contemptuous remark, which served to put
the physical superiority of a white man, and that of an Indian, in a sufficiently striking
point of view. In short, the family of Ishmael appeared now to be in the plenitude of an enjoyment,
which depended on inactivity, but which was not entirely free from certain confused glimmerings
of a perspective, in which their security stood in some little danger of a rude interruption
from Teton treachery. Abiram, alone, formed a solitary exception to this state of equivocal repose.

After a life passed in the commission of a thousand mean and insignificant villanies, the mind
of the kidnapper had become hardy enough to attempt the desperate adventure, which has been
laid before the reader, in the course of the narrative. His influence over the bolder, but
less active, spirit of Ishmael was far from great, and had not the latter been suddenly expelled
from a fertile bottom, of which he had taken possession, with intent to keep it, without much
deference to the forms of law, he would never have succeeded in enlisting the husband of his
sister in an enterprise that required so much decision and forethought. Their original success
and subsequent disappointment have been seen; and Abiram now sat apart, plotting the means,
by which he might secure to himself the advantages of his undertaking, which he perceived were
each moment becoming more uncertain, through the open admiration of Mahtoree for the innocent
subject of his villany. We shall leave him to his vacillating and confused expedients, in order
to pass to the description of certain other personages in the drama.

There was still another corner of the picture that was occupied. On a little bank, at the extreme
right of the encampment, lay the forms of Middleton and Paul. Their limbs were painfully bound
with thongs, cut from the skin of a bison, while, by a sort of refinement in cruelty, they
were so placed, that each could see a reflection of his own misery in the case of his neighbour.
Within a dozen yards of them a post was set firmly in the ground, and against it was bound
the light and Apollo-like person of Hard-Heart. Between the two stood the trapper, deprived
of his rifle, his pouch and his horn, but otherwise left in a sort of contemptuous liberty.
Some five or six young warriors, however, with quivers at their backs, and long tough bows
dangling from their shoulders, who stood with grave watchfulness at no great distance from
the spot, sufficiently proclaimed how fruitless any attempt to escape, on the part of one so
aged and so feeble, might prove. Unlike the other spectators of the important conference, these
individuals were engaged in a discourse that for them contained an interest of its own.

"Captain," said the bee-hunter with an expression of comical concern, that no misfortune could
depress in one of his buoyant feelings, "do you really find that accursed strap of untanned
leather cutting into your shoulder, or is it only the tickling in my own arm that I feel?"

"When the spirit suffers so deeply, the body is insensible to pain," returned the more refined,
though scarcely so spirited Middleton; "would to Heaven that some of my trusty artillerists
might fall upon this accursed encampment!"

"You might as well wish that these Teton lodges were so many hives of hornets, and that the
insects would come forth and battle with yonder tribe of half naked savages." Then, chuckling
with his own conceit, the bee-hunter turned away from his companion, and sought a momentary
relief from his misery, by imagining that so wild an idea might be realised, and fancying the
manner, in which the attack would upset even the well established patience of an Indian.

Middleton was glad to be silent; but the old man, who had listened to their words, drew a little
nigher, and continued the discourse.

"Here is likely to be a merciless and a hellish business!" he said, shaking his head in a manner
to prove that even his experience was at a loss for a remedy in so trying a dilemma. "Our Pawnee
friend is already staked for the torture, and I well know, by the eye and the countenance of
the great Sioux, that he is leading on the temper of his people to further enormities."

"Harkee, old trapper," said Paul, writhing in his bonds to catch a glimpse of the other's melancholy
face; "you ar' skilled in Indian tongues, and know somewhat of Indian deviltries. Go you to
the council, and tell their chiefs in my name, that is to say, in the name of Paul Hover, of
the state of Kentucky, that provided they will guarantee the safe return of one Ellen Wade
into the States, they are welcome to take his scalp when and in such manner as best suits their
amusements; or, if-so-be they will not trade on these conditions, you may throw in an hour
or two of torture before hand, in order to sweeten the bargain to their damnable appetites."

"Ah! lad, it is little they would hearken to such an offer, knowing, as they do, that you are
already like a bear in a trap, as little able to fight as to fly. But be not down-hearted,
for the colour of a white man is sometimes his death-warrant among these far tribes of savages,
and sometimes his shield. Though they love us not, cunning often ties their hands. Could the
red nations work their will, trees would shortly be growing again on the ploughed fields of
America, and woods would be whitened with Christian bones. No one can doubt that, who knows
the quality of the love which a Red-skin bears a Pale-face; but they have counted our numbers
until their memories fail them, and they are not without their policy. Therefore is our fate
unsettled; but I fear me there is small hope left for the Pawnee!"

As the old man concluded, he walked slowly towards the subject of his latter observation, taking
his post at no great distance from his side. Here he stood, observing such a silence and mien
as became him to manifest, to a chief so renowned and so situated as his captive associate.
But the eye of Hard-Heart was fastened on the distance, and his whole air was that of one whose
thoughts were entirely removed from the present scene.

"The Siouxes are in council on my brother," the trapper at length observed, when he found he
could only attract the other's attention by speaking.

The young partisan turned his head with a calm smile as he answered "They are counting the
scalps over the lodge of Hard-Heart!"

"No doubt, no doubt; their tempers begin to mount, as they remember the number of Tetons you
have struck, and better would it be for you now, had more of your days been spent in chasing
the deer, and fewer on the war-path. Then some childless mother of this tribe might take you
in the place of her lost son, and your time would be filled in peace."

"Does my father think that a warrior can ever die? The Master of Life does not open his hand
to take away his gifts again. When He wants His young men He calls them, and they go. But the
Red-skin He has once breathed on lives for ever."

"Ay, this is a more comfortable and a more humble faith than that which yonder heartless Teton
harbours. There is something in these Loups which opens my inmost heart to them; they seem
to have the courage, ay, and the honesty, too, of the Delawares of the hills. And this lad--it
is wonderful, it is very wonderful; but the age, and the eye, and the limbs are as if they
might have been brothers! Tell me, Pawnee, have you ever in your traditions heard of a mighty
people who once lived on the shores of the Salt-lake, hard by the rising sun?"

"The earth is white, by people of the colour of my father."

"Nay, nay, I speak not now of any strollers, who have crept into the land to rob the lawful
owners of their birth-right, but of a people who are, or rather were, what with nature and
what with paint, red as the berry on the bush."

"I have heard the old men say, that there were bands, who hid themselves in the woods under
the rising sun, because they dared not come upon the open prairies to fight with men."

"Do not your traditions tell you of the greatest, the bravest, and the wisest nation of Red-skins
that the Wahcondah has ever breathed upon?"

Hard-Heart raised his head, with a loftiness and dignity that even his bonds could not repress,
as he answered--

"Has age blinded my father; or does he see so many Siouxes, that he believes there are no longer
any Pawnees?"

"Ah! such is mortal vanity and pride!" exclaimed the disappointed old man, in English. "Natur'
is as strong in a Red-skin, as in the bosom of a man of white gifts. Now would a Delaware conceit
himself far mightier than a Pawnee, just as a Pawnee boasts himself to be of the princes of
the 'arth. And so it was atween the Frenchers of the Canadas and the red-coated English, that
the king did use to send into the States, when States they were not, but outcrying and petitioning
provinces, they fou't and they fou't, and what marvellous boastings did they give forth to
the world of their own valour and victories, while both parties forgot to name the humble soldier
of the land, who did the real service, but who, as he was not privileged then to smoke at the
great council fire of his nation, seldom heard of his deeds, after they were once bravely done."

When the old man had thus given vent to the nearly dormant, but far from extinct, military
pride, that had so unconsciously led him into the very error he deprecated, his eye, which
had begun to quicken and glimmer with some of the ardour of his youth, softened and turned
its anxious look on the devoted captive, whose countenance was also restored to its former
cold look of abstraction and thought.

"Young warrior," he continued in a voice that was growing tremulous, "I have never been father,
or brother. The Wahcondah made me to live alone. He never tied my heart to house or field,
by the cords with which the men of my race are bound to their lodges; if he had, I should not
have journeyed so far, and seen so much. But I have tarried long among a people, who lived
in those woods you mention, and much reason did I find to imitate their courage and love their
honesty. The Master of Life has made us all, Pawnee, with a feeling for our kind. I never was
a father, but well do I know what is the love of one. You are like a lad I valued, and I had
even begun to fancy that some of his blood might be in your veins. But what matters that? You
are a true man, as I know by the way in which you keep your faith; and honesty is a gift too
rare to be forgotten. My heart yearns to you, boy, and gladly would I do you good."

The youthful warrior listened to the words, which came from the lips of the other with a force
and simplicity that established their truth, and he bowed his head on his naked bosom, in testimony
of the respect with which he met the proffer. Then lifting his dark eye to the level of the
view, he seemed to be again considering of things removed from every personal consideration.
The trapper, who well knew how high the pride of a warrior would sustain him, in those moments
he believed to be his last, awaited the pleasure of his young friend, with a meekness and patience
that he had acquired by his association with that remarkable race. At length the gaze of the
Pawnee began to waver; and then quick, flashing glances were turned from the countenance of
the old man to the air, and from the air to his deeply marked lineaments again, as if the spirit,
which governed their movements, was beginning to be troubled.

"Father," the young brave finally answered in a voice of confidence and kindness, "I have heard
your words. They have gone in at my ears, and are now within me. The white-headed Long-knife
has no son; the Hard-Heart of the Pawnees is young, but he is already the oldest of his family.
He found the bones of his father on the hunting ground of the Osages, and he has sent them
to the prairies of the Good Spirits. No doubt the great chief, his father, has seen them, and
knows what is part of himself. But the Wahcondah will soon call to us both; you, because you
have seen all that is to be seen in this country; and Hard-Heart, because he has need of a
warrior, who is young. There is no time for the Pawnee to show the Pale-face the duty, that
a son owes to his father."

"Old as I am, and miserable and helpless as I now stand, to what I once was, I may live to
see the sun go down in the prairie. Does my son expect to do as much?"

"The Tetons are counting the scalps on my lodge!" returned the young chief, with a smile whose
melancholy was singularly illuminated by a gleam of triumph.

"And they find them many. Too many for the safety of its owner, while he is in their revengeful
hands. My son is not a woman, and he looks on the path he is about to travel with a steady
eye. Has he nothing to whisper in the ears of his people, before he starts? These legs are
old, but they may yet carry me to the forks of the Loup river."

"Tell them that Hard-Heart has tied a knot in his wampum for every Teton," burst from the lips
of the captive, with that vehemence with which sudden passion is known to break through the
barriers of artificial restraint "if he meets one of them all, in the prairies of the Master
of Life, his heart will become Sioux!"

"Ah that feeling would be a dangerous companion for a man with white gifts to start with on
so solemn a journey," muttered the old man in English. "This is not what the good Moravians
said to the councils of the Delawares, nor what is so often preached, to the White-skins in
the settlements, though, to the shame of the colour be it said, it is so little heeded. Pawnee,
I love you; but being a Christian man, I cannot be the runner to bear such a message."

"If my father is afraid the Tetons will hear him, let him whisper it softly to our old men."

"As for fear, young warrior, it is no more the shame of a Pale-face than of a Red-skin. The
Wahcondah teaches us to love the life he gives; but it is as men love their hunts, and their
dogs, and their carabines, and not with the doting that a mother looks upon her infant. The
Master of Life will not have to speak aloud twice when he calls my name. I am as ready to answer
to it now, as I shall be to-morrow, or at any time it may please his mighty will. But what
is a warrior without his traditions? Mine forbid me to carry your words."

The chief made a dignified motion of assent, and here there was great danger that those feelings
of confidence, which had been so singularly awakened, would as suddenly subside. But the heart
of the old man had been too sensibly touched, through long dormant but still living recollections,
to break off the communication so rudely. He pondered for a minute, and then bending his look
wistfully on his young associate, again continued--

"Each warrior must be judged by his gifts. I have told my son what I cannot, but let him open
his ears to what I can do. An elk shall not measure the prairie much swifter than these old
legs, if the Pawnee will give me a message that a white man may bear."

"Let the Pale-face listen," returned the other, after hesitating a single instant longer, under
a lingering sensation of his former disappointment. "He will stay here till the Siouxes have
done counting the scalps of their dead warriors. He will wait until they have tried to cover
the heads of eighteen Tetons with the skin of one Pawnee; he will open his eyes wide, that
he may see the place where they bury the bones of a warrior."

"All this will I, and may I, do, noble boy."

"He will mark the spot, that he may know it."

"No fear, no fear that I shall forget the place," interrupted the other, whose fortitude began
to give way under so trying an exhibition of calmness and resignation.

"Then I know that my father will go to my people. His head is grey, and his words will not
be blown away with the smoke. Let him get on my lodge, and call the name of Hard-Heart aloud.
No Pawnee will be deaf. Then let my father ask for the colt, that has never been ridden, but
which is sleeker than the buck, and swifter than the elk."

"I understand you, boy, I understand you," interrupted the attentive old man; "and what you
say shall be done, ay, and well done too, or I'm but little skilled in the wishes of a dying
Indian."

"And when my young men have given my father the halter of that colt, he will lead him by a
crooked path to the grave of Hard-Heart?"

"Will I! ay, that I will, brave youth, though the winter covers these plains in banks of snow,
and the sun is hidden as much by day as by night. To the head of the holy spot will I lead
the beast, and place him with his eyes looking towards the setting sun."

"And my father will speak to him, and tell him, that the master, who has fed him since he was
foaled, has now need of him."

"That, too, will I do; though the Lord he knows that I shall hold discourse with a horse, not
with any vain conceit that my words will be understood, but only to satisfy the cravings of
Indian superstition. Hector, my pup, what think you, dog, of talking to a horse?"

"Let the grey-beard speak to him with the tongue of a Pawnee," interrupted the young victim,
perceiving that his companion had used an unknown language for the preceding speech.

"My son's will shall be done. And with these old hands, which I had hoped had nearly done with
bloodshed, whether it be of man or beast, will I slay the animal on your grave!"

"It is good," returned the other, a gleam of satisfaction flitting across his features. "Hard-Heart
will ride his horse to the blessed prairies, and he will come before the Master of Life like
a chief!"

The sudden and striking change, which instantly occurred in the countenance of the Indian,
caused the trapper to look aside, when he perceived that the conference of the Siouxes had
ended, and that Mahtoree, attended by one or two of the principal warriors, was deliberately
approaching his intended victim.

CHAPTER XXVI

              I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
              Commonly are.
                      --But I have that honourable
              Grief lodged here, which burns worse than
              Tears drown
                                                   --Shakspeare.

When within twenty feet of the prisoners, the Tetons stopped, and their leader made a sign
to the old man to draw nigh. The trapper obeyed, quitting the young Pawnee with a significant
look, which was received, as it was meant, for an additional pledge that he would never forget
his promise. So soon as Mahtoree found that the other had stopped within reach of him, he stretched
forth his arm, and laying a hand upon the shoulder of the attentive old man, he stood regarding
him, a minute, with eyes that seemed willing to penetrate the recesses of his most secret thoughts.

"Is a Pale-face always made with two tongues?" he demanded, when he found that, as usual, with
the subject of this examination, he was as little intimidated by his present frown, as moved
by any apprehensions of the future.

"Honesty lies deeper than the skin."

"It is so. Now let my father hear me. Mahtoree has but one tongue, the grey-head has many.
They may be all straight, and none of them forked. A Sioux is no more than a Sioux, but a Pale-face
is every thing! He can talk to the Pawnee, and the Konza, and the Omawhaw, and he can talk
to his own people."

"Ay, there are linguists in the settlements that can do still more. But what profits it all?
The Master of Life has an ear for every language!"

"The grey-head has done wrong. He has said one thing when he meant another. He has looked before
him with his eyes, and behind him with his mind. He has ridden the horse of a Sioux too hard;
he has been the friend of a Pawnee, and the enemy of my people."

"Teton, I am your prisoner. Though my words are white, they will not complain. Act your will."

"No. Mahtoree will not make a white hair red. My father is free. The prairie is open on every
side of him. But before the grey-head turns his back on the Siouxes, let him look well at them,
that he may tell his own chief, how great is a Dahcotah!"

"I am not in a hurry to go on my path. You see a man with a white head, and no woman, Teton;
therefore shall I not run myself out of breath, to tell the nations of the prairies what the
Siouxes are doing."

"It is good. My father has smoked with the chiefs at many councils," returned Mahtoree, who
now thought himself sufficiently sure of the other's favour to go more directly to his object.
"Mahtoree will speak with the tongue of his very dear friend and father. A young Pale-face
will listen when an old man of that nation opens his mouth. Go; my father will make what a
poor Indian says fit for a white ear."

"Speak aloud!" said the trapper, who readily understood the metaphorical manner, in which the
Teton expressed a desire that he should become an interpreter of his words into the English
language; "speak, my young men listen. Now, captain, and you too, friend bee-hunter, prepare
yourselves to meet the deviltries of this savage, with the stout hearts of white warriors.
If you find yourselves giving way under his threats, just turn your eyes on that noble-looking
Pawnee, whose time is measured with a hand as niggardly, as that with which a trader in the
towns gives forth the fruits of the Lord, inch by inch, in order to satisfy his covetousness.
A single look at the boy will set you both up in resolution."

"My brother has turned his eyes on the wrong path," interrupted Mahtoree, with a complacency
that betrayed how unwilling he was to offend his intended interpreter.

"The Dahcotah will speak to my young men?"

"After he has sung in the ear of the flower of the Pale-faces."

"The Lord forgive the desperate villain!" exclaimed the old man in English. "There are none
so tender, or so young, or so innocent, as to escape his ravenous wishes. But hard words and
cold looks will profit nothing; therefore it will be wise to speak him fair. Let Mahtoree open
his mouth."

"Would my father cry out, that the women and children should hear the wisdom of chiefs! We
will go into the lodge and whisper."

As the Teton ended, he pointed significantly towards a tent, vividly emblazoned with the history
of one of his own boldest and most commended exploits, and which stood a little apart from
the rest, as if to denote it was the residence of some privileged individual of the band. The
shield and quiver at its entrance were richer than common, and the high distinction of a fusee,
attested the importance of its proprietor. In every other particular it was rather distinguished
by signs of poverty than of wealth. The domestic utensils were fewer in number and simpler
in their forms, than those to be seen about the openings of the meanest lodges, nor was there
a single one of those high-prized articles of civilised life, which were occasionally bought
of the traders, in bargains that bore so hard on the ignorant natives. All these had been bestowed,
as they had been acquired, by the generous chief, on his subordinates, to purchase an influence
that might render him the master of their lives and persons; a species of wealth that was certainly
more noble in itself, and far dearer to his ambition.

The old man well knew this to be the lodge of Mahtoree, and, in obedience to the sign of the
chief, he held his way towards it with slow and reluctant steps. But there were others present,
who were equally interested in the approaching conference, whose apprehensions were not to
be so easily suppressed. The watchful eye and jealous ears of Middleton had taught him enough
to fill his soul with horrible forebodings. With an incredible effort he succeeded in gaining
his feet, and called aloud to the retiring trapper--

"I conjure you, old man, if the love you bore my parents was more than words, or if the love
you bear your God is that of a Christian man, utter not a syllable that may wound the ear of
that innocent--"

Exhausted in spirit and fettered in limbs, he then fell, like an inanimate log, to the earth,
where he lay like one dead.

Paul had however caught the clue and completed the exhortation, in his peculiar manner.

"Harkee, old trapper," he shouted, vainly endeavouring at the same time to make a gesture of
defiance with his hand; "if you ar' about to play the interpreter, speak such words to the
ears of that damnable savage, as becomes a white man to use, and a heathen to hear. Tell him,
from me, that if he does or says the thing that is uncivil to the girl, called Nelly Wade,
that I'll curse him with my dying breath; that I'll pray for all good Christians in Kentucky
to curse him; sitting and standing; eating and drinking, fighting, praying, or at horse-races;
in-doors and outdoors; in summer or winter, or in the month of March in short I'll--ay, it
ar' a fact, morally true--I'll haunt him, if the ghost of a Pale-face can contrive to lift
itself from a grave made by the hands of a Red-skin!"

Having thus ventured the most terrible denunciation he could devise, and the one which, in
the eyes of the honest bee-hunter, there seemed the greatest likelihood of his being able to
put in execution, he was obliged to await the fruits of his threat, with that resignation which
would be apt to govern a western border-man who, in addition to the prospects just named, had
the advantage of contemplating them in fetters and bondage. We shall not detain the narrative,
to relate the quaint morals with which he next endeavoured to cheer the drooping spirits of
his more sensitive companion, or the occasional pithy and peculiar benedictions that he pronounced,
on all the bands of the Dahcotahs, commencing with those whom he accused of stealing or murdering,
on the banks of the distant Mississippi, and concluding, in terms of suitable energy, with
the Teton tribe. The latter more than once received from his lips curses as sententious and
as complicated as that celebrated anathema of the church, for a knowledge of which most unlettered
Protestants are indebted to the pious researches of the worthy Tristram Shandy. But as Middleton
recovered from his exhaustion he was fain to appease the boisterous temper of his associate,
by admonishing him of the uselessness of such denunciations, and of the possibility of their
hastening the very evil he deprecated, by irritating the resentments of a race, who were sufficiently
fierce and lawless, even in their most pacific moods.

In the mean time the trapper and the Sioux chief pursued their way to the lodge. The former
had watched with painful interest the expression of Mahtoree's eye, while the words of Middleton
and Paul were pursuing their footsteps, but the mien of the Indian was far too much restrained
and self-guarded, to permit the smallest of his emotions to escape through any of those ordinary
outlets, by which the condition of the human volcano is commonly betrayed. His look was fastened
on the little habitation they approached; and, for the moment, his thoughts appeared to brood
alone on the purposes of this extraordinary visit.

The appearance of the interior of the lodge corresponded with its exterior. It was larger than
most of the others, more finished in its form, and finer in its materials; but there its superiority
ceased. Nothing could be more simple and republican than the form of living that the ambitious
and powerful Teton chose to exhibit to the eyes of his people. A choice collection of weapons
for the chase, some three or four medals, bestowed by the traders and political agents of the
Canadas as a homage to, or rather as an acknowledgment of, his rank, with a few of the most
indispensable articles of personal accommodation, composed its furniture. It abounded in neither
venison, nor the wild-beef of the prairies; its crafty owner having well understood that the
liberality of a single individual would be abundantly rewarded by the daily contributions of
a band. Although as pre-eminent in the chase as in war, a deer or a buffaloe was never seen
to enter whole into his lodge. In return, an animal was rarely brought into the encampment,
that did not contribute to support the family of Mahtoree. But the policy of the chief seldom
permitted more to remain than sufficed for the wants of the day, perfectly assured that all
must suffer before hunger, the bane of savage life, could lay its fell fangs on so important
a victim.

Immediately beneath the favourite bow of the chief, and encircled in a sort of magical ring
of spears, shields, lances and arrows, all of which had in their time done good service, was
suspended the mysterious and sacred medicine-bag. It was highly-wrought in wampum, and profusely
ornamented with beads and porcupine's quills, after the most cunning devices of Indian ingenuity.
The peculiar freedom of Mahtoree's religious creed has been more than once intimated, and by
a singular species of contradiction, he appeared to have lavished his attentions on this emblem
of a supernatural agency, in a degree that was precisely inverse to his faith. It was merely
the manner in which the Sioux imitated the well-known expedient of the Pharisees, "in order
that they might be seen of men."

The tent had not, however, been entered by its owner since his return from the recent expedition.
As the reader has already anticipated, it had been made the prison of Inez and Ellen. The bride
of Middleton was seated on a simple couch of sweet-scented herbs covered with skins. She had
already suffered so much, and witnessed so many wild and unlooked-for events, within the short
space of her captivity, that every additional misfortune fell with a diminished force on her
seemingly devoted head. Her cheeks were bloodless, her dark and usually animated eye was contracted
in an expression of settled concern, and her form appeared shrinking and sensitive, nearly
to extinction. But in the midst of these evidences of natural weakness, there were at times
such an air of pious resignation, such gleams of meek but holy hope lighting her countenance,
as might well have rendered it a question whether the hapless captive was most a subject of
pity, or of admiration. All the precepts of father Ignatius were riveted in her faithful memory,
and not a few of his pious visions were floating before her imagination. Sustained by so sacred
resolutions, the mild, the patient and the confiding girl was bowing her head to this new stroke
of Providence, with the same sort of meekness as she would have submitted to any other prescribed
penitence for her sins, though nature, at moments, warred powerfully, with so compelled a humility.

On the other hand, Ellen had exhibited far more of the woman, and consequently of the passions
of the world. She had wept until her eyes were swollen and red. Her cheeks were flushed and
angry, and her whole mien was distinguished by an air of spirit and resentment, that was not
a little, however, qualified by apprehensions for the future. In short, there was that about
the eye and step of the betrothed of Paul, which gave a warranty that should happier times
arrive, and the constancy of the bee-hunter finally meet with its reward, he would possess
a partner every way worthy to cope with his own thoughtless and buoyant temperament.

There was still another and a third figure in that little knot of females. It was the youngest,
the most highly gifted, and, until now, the most favoured of the wives of the Teton. Her charms
had not been without the most powerful attraction in the eyes of her husband, until they had
so unexpectedly opened on the surpassing loveliness of a woman of the Pale-faces. From that
hapless moment the graces, the attachment, the fidelity of the young Indian, had lost their
power to please. Still the complexion of Tachechana, though less dazzling than that of her
rival, was, for her race, clear and healthy. Her hazel eye had the sweetness and playfulness
of the antelope's; her voice was soft and joyous as the song of the wren, and her happy laugh
was the very melody of the forest. Of all the Sioux girls, Tachechana (or the Fawn) was the
lightest-hearted and the most envied. Her father had been a distinguished brave, and her brothers
had already left their bones on a distant and dreary war-path. Numberless were the warriors,
who had sent presents to the lodge of her parents, but none of them were listened to until
a messenger from the great Mahtoree had come. She was his third wife, it is true, but she was
confessedly the most favoured of them all. Their union had existed but two short seasons, and
its fruits now lay sleeping at her feet, wrapped in the customary ligatures of skin and bark,
which form the swaddlings of an Indian infant.

At the moment, when Mahtoree and the trapper arrived at the opening of the lodge, the young
Sioux wife was seated on a simple stool, turning her soft eyes, with looks that varied, like
her emotions, with love and wonder, from the unconscious child to those rare beings, who had
filled her youthful and uninstructed mind with so much admiration and astonishment. Though
Inez and Ellen had passed an entire day in her sight, it seemed as if the longings of her curiosity
were increasing with each new gaze. She regarded them as beings of an entirely different nature
and condition from the females of the prairie. Even the mystery of their complicated attire
had its secret influence on her simple mind, though it was the grace and charms of sex, to
which nature has made every people so sensible, that most attracted her admiration. But while
her ingenuous disposition freely admitted the superiority of the strangers over the less brilliant
attractions of the Dahcotah maidens, she had seen no reason to deprecate their advantages.
The visit that she was now about to receive, was the first which her husband had made to the
tent since his return from the recent inroad, and he was ever present to her thoughts, as a
successful warrior, who was not ashamed, in the moments of inaction, to admit the softer feelings
of a father and a husband.

We have every where endeavoured to show that while Mahtoree was in all essentials a warrior
of the prairies, he was much in advance of his people in those acquirements which announce
the dawnings of civilisation. He had held frequent communion with the traders and troops of
the Canadas, and the intercourse had unsettled many of those wild opinions which were his birthright,
without perhaps substituting any others of a nature sufficiently definite to be profitable.
His reasoning was rather subtle than true, and his philosophy far more audacious than profound.
Like thousands of more enlightened beings, who fancy they are able to go through the trials
of human existence without any other support than their own resolutions, his morals were accommodating
and his motive selfish. These several characteristics will be understood always with reference
to the situation of the Indian, though little apology is needed for finding resemblances between
men, who essentially possess the same nature, however it may be modified by circumstances.

Notwithstanding the presence of Inez and Ellen, the entrance of the Teton warrior into the
lodge of his favourite wife, was made with the tread and mien of a master. The step of his
moccasin was noiseless, but the rattling of his bracelets, and of the silver ornaments of his
leggings, sufficed to announce his approach, as he pushed aside the skin covering of the opening
of the tent, and stood in the presence of its inmates. A faint cry of pleasure burst from the
lips of Tachechana in the suddenness of her surprise, but the emotion was instantly suppressed
in that subdued demeanour which should characterise a matron of her tribe. Instead of returning
the stolen glance of his youthful and secretly rejoicing wife, Mahtoree moved to the couch,
occupied by his prisoners, and placed himself in the haughty, upright attitude of an Indian
chief, before their eyes. The old man had glided past him, and already taken a position suited
to the office he had been commanded to fill.

Surprise kept the females silent and nearly breathless. Though accustomed to the sight of savage
warriors, in the horrid panoply of their terrible profession, there was something so startling
in the entrance, and so audacious in the inexplicable look of their conqueror, that the eyes
of both sunk to the earth, under a feeling of terror and embarrassment. Then Inez recovered
herself, and addressing the trapper, she demanded, with the dignity of an offended gentlewoman,
though with her accustomed grace, to what circumstance they owed this extraordinary and unexpected
visit. The old man hesitated; but clearing his throat, like one who was about to make an effort
to which he was little used, he ventured on the following reply--

"Lady," he said, "a savage is a savage, and you are not to look for the uses and formalities
of the settlements on a bleak and windy prairie. As these Indians would say, fashions and courtesies
are things so light, that they would blow away. As for myself, though a man of the forest,
I have seen the ways of the great, in my time, and I am not to learn that they differ from
the ways of the lowly. I was long a serving-man in my youth, not one of your beck-and-nod runners
about a household, but a man that went through the servitude of the forest with his officer,
and well do I know in what manner to approach the wife of a captain. Now, had I the ordering
of this visit, I would first have hemmed aloud at the door, in order that you might hear that
strangers were coming, and then I--"

"The manner is indifferent," interrupted Inez, too anxious to await the prolix explanations
of the old man; "why is the visit made?"

"Therein shall the savage speak for himself. The daughters of the Pale-faces wish to know why
the Great Teton has come into his lodge?"

Mahtoree regarded his interrogator with a surprise, which showed how extraordinary he deemed
the question. Then placing himself in a posture of condescension, after a moment's delay, he
answered--

"Sing in the ears of the dark-eye. Tell her the lodge of Mahtoree is very large, and that it
is not full. She shall find room in it, and none shall be greater than she. Tell the light-hair,
that she too may stay in the lodge of a brave, and eat of his venison. Mahtoree is a great
chief. His hand is never shut."

"Teton," returned the trapper, shaking his head in evidence of the strong disapprobation with
which he heard this language, "the tongue of a Red-skin must be coloured white, before it can
make music in the ears of a Pale-face. Should your words be spoken, my daughters would shut
their ears, and Mahtoree would seem a trader to their eyes. Now listen to what comes from a
grey-head, and then speak accordingly. My people is a mighty people. The sun rises on their
eastern and sets on their western border. The land is filled with bright-eyed and laughing
girls, like these you see--ay, Teton, I tell no lie," observing his auditor to start with an
air of distrust--"bright-eyed and pleasant to behold, as these before you."

"Has my father a hundred wives!" interrupted the savage, laying his finger on the shoulder
of the trapper, with a look of curious interest in the reply.

"No, Dahcotah. The Master of Life has said to me, Live alone; your lodge shall be the forest;
the roof of your wigwam, the clouds. But, though never bound in the secret faith which, in
my nation, ties one man to one woman, often have I seen the workings of that kindness which
brings the two together. Go into the regions of my people; you will see the daughters of the
land, fluttering through the towns like many-coloured and joyful birds in the season of blossoms.
You will meet them, singing and rejoicing, along the great paths of the country, and you will
hear the woods ringing with their laughter. They are very excellent to behold, and the young
men find pleasure in looking at them."

"Hugh," ejaculated the attentive Mahtoree.

"Ay, well may you put faith in what you hear, for it is no lie. But when a youth has found
a maiden to please him, he speaks to her in a voice so soft, that none else can hear. He does
not say, My lodge is empty and there is room for another; but shall I build, and will the virgin
show me near what spring she would dwell? His voice is sweeter than honey from the locust,
and goes into the ear thrilling like the song of a wren. Therefore, if my brother wishes his
words to be heard, he must speak with a white tongue."

Mahtoree pondered deeply, and in a wonder that he did not attempt to conceal. It was reversing
all the order of society, and, according to his established opinions, endangering the dignity
of a chief, for a warrior thus to humble himself before a woman. But as Inez sat before him,
reserved and imposing in air, utterly unconscious of his object, and least of all suspecting
the true purport of so extraordinary a visit, the savage felt the influence of a manner to
which he was unaccustomed. Bowing his head, in acknowledgment of his error, he stepped a little
back, and placing himself in an attitude of easy dignity, he began to speak with the confidence
of one who had been no less distinguished for eloquence, than for deeds in arms. Keeping his
eyes riveted on the unconscious bride of Middleton, he proceeded in the following words--

"I am a man with a red skin, but my eyes are dark. They have been open since many snows. They
have seen many things--they know a brave from a coward. When a boy, I saw nothing but the bison
and the deer. I went to the hunts, and I saw the cougar and the bear. This made Mahtoree a
man. He talked with his mother no more. His ears were open to the wisdom of the old men. They
told him every thing--they told him of the Big-knives. He went on the war-path. He was then
the last; now, he is the first. What Dahcotah dare say he will go before Mahtoree into the
hunting grounds of the Pawnees? The chiefs met him at their doors, and they said, My son is
without a home. They gave him their lodges, they gave him their riches, and they gave him their
daughters. Then Mahtoree became a chief, as his fathers had been. He struck the warriors of
all the nations, and he could have chosen wives from the Pawnees, the Omawhaws, and the Konzas;
but he looked at the hunting grounds, and not at his village. He thought a horse was pleasanter
than a Dahcotah girl. But he found a flower on the prairies, and he plucked it, and brought
it into his lodge. He forgets that he is the master of a single horse. He gives them all to
the stranger, for Mahtoree is not a thief; he will only keep the flower he found on the prairie.
Her feet are very tender. She cannot walk to the door of her father; she will stay, in the
lodge of a valiant warrior for ever."

When he had finished this extraordinary address, the Teton awaited to have it translated, with
the air of a suitor who entertained no very disheartening doubts of his success. The trapper
had not lost a syllable of the speech, and he now prepared himself to render it into English
in such a manner as should leave its principal idea even more obscure than in the original.
But as his reluctant lips were in the act of parting, Ellen lifted a finger, and with a keen
glance from her quick eye, at the still attentive Inez, she interrupted him.

"Spare your breath," she said, "all that a savage says is not to be repeated before a Christian
lady."

Inez started, blushed, and bowed with an air of reserve, as she coldly thanked the old man
for his intentions, and observed that she could now wish to be alone.

"My daughters have no need of ears to understand what a great Dahcotah says," returned the
trapper, addressing himself to the expecting Mahtoree. "The look he has given, and the signs
he has made, are enough. They understand him; they wish to think of his words; for the children
of great braves, such as their fathers are, do nothing with out much thought."

With this explanation, so flattering to the energy of his eloquence, and so promising to his
future hopes, the Teton was every way content. He made the customary ejaculation of assent,
and prepared to retire. Saluting the females, in the cold but dignified manner of his people,
he drew his robe about him, and moved from the spot where he had stood, with an air of ill-concealed
triumph.

But there had been a stricken, though a motionless and unobserved auditor of the foregoing
scene. Not a syllable had fallen from the lips of the long and anxiously expected husband,
that had not gone directly to the heart of his unoffending wife. In this manner had he wooed
her from the lodge of her father, and it was to listen to similar pictures of the renown and
deeds of the greatest brave in her tribe, that she had shut her ears to the tender tales of
so many of the Sioux youths.

As the Teton turned to leave his lodge, in the manner just mentioned, he found this unexpected
and half-forgotten object before him. She stood, in the humble guise and with the shrinking
air of an Indian girl, holding the pledge of their former love in her arms, directly in his
path. Starting, the chief regained the marble-like indifference of countenance, which distinguished
in so remarkable a degree the restrained or more artificial expression of his features, and
signed to her, with an air of authority to give place.

"Is not Tachechana the daughter of a chief?" demanded a subdued voice, in which pride struggled
with anguish: "were not her brothers braves?"

"Go; the men are calling their partisan. He has no ears for a woman."

"No," replied the supplicant; "it is not the voice of Tachechana that you hear, but this boy,
speaking with the tongue of his mother. He is the son of a chief, and his words will go up
to his father's ears. Listen to what he says. When was Mahtoree hungry and Tachechana had not
food for him? When did he go on the path of the Pawnees and find it empty, that my mother did
not weep? When did he come back with the marks of their blows, that she did not sing? What
Sioux girl has given a brave a son like me? Look at me well, that you may know me. My eyes
are the eagle's. I look at the sun and laugh. In a little time the Dahcotahs will follow me
to the hunts and on the war-path. Why does my father turn his eyes from the woman that gives
me milk? Why has he so soon forgotten the daughter of a mighty Sioux?"

There was a single instant, as the exulting father suffered his cold eye to wander to the face
of the laughing boy, that the stern nature of the Teton seemed touched. But shaking off the
grateful sentiment, like one who would gladly be rid of any painful, because reproachful, emotion,
he laid his hand calmly on the arm of his wife, and led her directly in front of Inez. Pointing
to the sweet countenance that was beaming on her own, with a look of tenderness and commiseration,
he paused, to allow his wife to contemplate a loveliness, which was quite as excellent to her
ingenuous mind as it had proved dangerous to the character of her faithless husband. When he
thought abundant time had passed to make the contrast sufficiently striking, he suddenly raised
a small mirror, that dangled at her breast, an ornament he had himself bestowed, in an hour
of fondness, as a compliment to her beauty, and placed her own dark image in its place. Wrapping
his robe again about him, the Teton motioned to the trapper to follow, and stalked haughtily
from the lodge, muttering, as he went--

"Mahtoree is very wise! What nation has so great a chief as the Dahcotahs?"

Tachechana stood frozen into a statue of humility. Her mild and usually joyous countenance
worked, as if the struggle within was about to dissolve the connection between her soul and
that more material part, whose deformity was becoming so loathsome. Inez and Ellen were utterly
ignorant of the nature of her interview with her husband, though the quick and sharpened wits
of the latter led her to suspect a truth, to which the entire innocence of the former furnished
no clue. They were both, however, about to tender those sympathies, which are so natural to,
and so graceful in the sex, when their necessity seemed suddenly to cease. The convulsions
in the features of the young Sioux disappeared, and her countenance became cold and rigid,
like chiselled stone. A single expression of subdued anguish, which had made its impression
on a brow that had rarely before contracted with sorrow, alone remained. It was never removed,
in all the changes of seasons, fortunes, and years, which, in the vicissitudes of a suffering,
female, savage life, she was subsequently doomed to endure. As in the case of a premature blight,
let the plant quicken and revive as it may, the effects of that withering touch were always
present.

Tachechana first stripped her person of every vestige of those rude but highly prized ornaments,
which the liberality of her husband had been wont to lavish on her, and she tendered them meekly,
and without a murmur, as an offering to the superiority of Inez. The bracelets were forced
from her wrists, the complicated mazes of beads from her leggings, and the broad silver band
from her brow. Then she paused, long and painfully. But it would seem, that the resolution,
she had once adopted, was not to be conquered by the lingering emotions of any affection, however
natural. The boy himself was next laid at the feet of her supposed rival, and well might the
self-abased wife of the Teton believe that the burden of her sacrifice was now full.

While Inez and Ellen stood regarding these several strange movements with eyes of wonder, a
low soft musical voice was heard saying in a language, that to them was unintelligible--

"A strange tongue will tell my boy the manner to become a man. He will hear sounds that are
new, but he will learn them, and forget the voice of his mother. It is the will of the Wahcondah,
and a Sioux girl should not complain. Speak to him softly, for his ears are very little; when
he is big, your words may be louder. The mass of books which he had once studied he had thrown into
dim corners of his library shelves when he left the Fathers' school. "I should have left them
in Paris," he told himself, as he turned out some books which were particularly insufferable:
those of the Abbe Lamennais and that impervious sectarian so magisterially, so pompously dull
and empty, the Comte Joseph de Maistre.

A single volume remained on a shelf, within reach of his hand. It was the Homme of Ernest Hello.
This writer was the absolute opposite of his religious confederates. Almost isolated among
the pious group terrified by his conduct, Ernest Hello had ended by abandoning the open road
that led from earth to heaven. Probably disgusted by the dullness of the journey and the noisy
mob of those pilgrims of letters who for centuries followed one after the other upon the same
highway, marching in each other's steps, stopping at the same places to exchange the same commonplace
remarks on religion, on the Church Fathers, on their similar beliefs, on their common masters,
he had departed through the byways to wander in the gloomy glade
of Pascal, where he tarried long to recover his breath before continuing
on his way and going even farther in the regions of human thought
than the Jansenist, whom he derided.

  
  Tortuous and precious, doctoral and complex, Hello, by the piercing
  cunning of his analysis, recalled to Des Esseintes the sharp, probing
                                                   investigations of some of the infidel psychologists of the preceding
and present century.

In him was a sort of Catholic Duranty, but more dogmatic and penetrating, an experienced manipulation
of the magnifying glass, a sophisticated engineer of the soul, a skillful watchmaker of the brain,
delighting to examine the mechanism of a passion and elucidate it by details of the wheel work.

In
this oddly formed mind existed unsurmised relationships of thoughts,
harmonies and oppositions; furthermore, he affected a wholly novel
manner of action which used the etymology of words as a spring-board
for ideas whose associations sometimes became tenuous, but which almost
constantly remained ingenious and sparkling.

Thus, despite the awkwardness of his structure, he dissected with a singular perspicacity, the Avare,
"the ordinary man," and "the passion of unhappiness," revealing meanwhile
interesting comparisons which could be constructed between the operations
of photography and of memory.

But such skill in handling this perfected instrument of analysis, stolen from the enemies of the
Church, represented only one of the temperamental phases of this man.

Still another existed. This mind divided itself in two parts and revealed, besides the writer,
the religious fanatic and Biblical prophet.

Like Hugo, whom he now and again recalled in distortions of phrases and words, Ernest Hello had
delighted in imitating Saint John of Patmos.

He pontificated and vaticinated from his retreat in the rue Saint-Sulpice, haranguing the reader
with an apocalyptic language partaking in spots of the bitterness of an Isaiah.

He affected inordinate pretentions of profundity.

There were some fawning and complacent people who pretended to consider
him a great man, the reservoir of learning, the encyclopedic giant
of the age.

Perhaps he was a well, but one at whose bottom one often could not find a drop of water.

In his volume Paroles de Dieu, he paraphrased the Holy Scriptures, endeavoring to complicate
their ordinarily obvious sense. In his other book Homme, and in his brochure le Jour du Seigneur,
written in a biblical style, rugged and obscure, he sought to appear
like a vengeful apostle, prideful and tormented with spleen, but showed
himself a deacon touched with a mystic epilepsy, or like a talented
Maistre, a surly and bitter sectarian.

But, thought Des Esseintes, this sickly shamelessness often obstructed the inventive sallies
of the casuist.

With more intolerance than even Ozanam, he resolutely denied all
that pertained to his clan, proclaimed the most disconcerting axioms,
maintained with a disconcerting authority that "geology is returning
toward Moses," and that natural history, like chemistry and every
contemporary science, verifies the scientific truth of the Bible.

The proposition on each page was of the unique truth and the superhuman
knowledge of the Church, and everywhere were interspersed more than
perilous aphorisms and raging curses cast at the art of the last century.

To

this strange mixture was added the love of sanctimonious delights, such as a translation of the
Visions by Angele de Foligno, a book of an unparalleled fluid stupidity,
with selected works of Jean Rusbrock l'Admirable, a mystic of the
thirteenth century whose prose offered an incomprehensible but alluring
combination of dusky exaltations, caressing effusions, and poignant
transports.

The whole attitude of this presumptuous pontiff, Hello, had leaped
from a preface written for this book.

He himself remarked that "extraordinary things can only be stammered," and he stammered in
good truth, declaring that "the holy gloom where Rusbrock extends his eagle wings is his ocean,
his prey, his glory, and for such as him the far horizons would be a too narrow garment."

However this might be, Des Esseintes felt himself intrigued toward this ill-balanced but subtile
mind.

No fusion had been effected between the skilful psychologist and the pious pedant, and the very
jolts and incoherencies constituted the personality of the man.

With him was recruited the little group of writers who fought on the
front battle line of the clerical camp.

They did not belong to the regular army, but were more properly the scouts of a religion which distrusted
men of such talent as Veuillot and Hello, because they did not seem
sufficiently submissive and shallow.

What the Church really desires is soldiers who do not reason, files of such blind combatants
and such mediocrities as Hello describes with the rage of one who has submitted to their yoke.
Thus it was that Catholicism had lost no time in driving away one of its partisans, an enraged
pamphleteer who wrote in a style at once rare and exasperated, the savage Leon Bloy; and caused
to be cast from the doors of its bookshops, as it would a plague or a filthy vagrant, another
writer who had made himself hoarse with celebrating its praises,
Barbey d'Aurevilly.

It is true that the latter was too prone to compromise and not sufficiently docile. Others bent
their heads under rebukes and returned to the ranks; but he was the enfant terrible, and was unrecognized
by the party.

In a literary way, he pursued women whom he dragged into the sanctuary. Nay, even that vast
disdain was invoked, with which Catholicism enshrouds talent to prevent excommunication from
putting beyond the pale of the law a perplexing servant who, under pretext of honoring his
masters, broke the window panes of the chapel, juggled with the holy pyxes and executed eccentric
dances around the tabernacle.

Two works of Barbey d'Aurevilly specially attracted Des Esseintes, the Pretre marie and the Diaboliques.
Others, such as the Ensorcele, the Chevalier des touches and Une Vieille Maitresse, were certainly
more comprehensive and more finely balanced, but they left Des Esseintes untouched, for he
was really interested only in unhealthy works which were consumed and irritated by fever.

In these all but healthy volumes, Barbey d'Aurevilly constantly hesitated between those two
pits which the Catholic religion succeeds in reconciling: mysticism and sadism.

In these two books which Des Esseintes was thumbing, Barbey had lost all prudence, given full rein to his
steed, and galloped at full speed over roads to their farthest limits.

All the mysterious horror of the Middle Ages hovered over that improbable book, the Pretre marie;
magic blended with religion, black magic with prayer and, more pitiless and savage than the Devil
himself, the God of Original Sin incessantly tortured the innocent Calixte, His reprobate, as
once He had caused one of his angels to mark the houses of unbelievers
whom he wished to slay.

Conceived by a fasting monk in the grip of delirium, these scenes were unfolded in the uneven
style of a tortured soul. Unfortunately, among those disordered creatures that were like galvanized
Coppelias of Hoffmann, some, like Neel de Nehou, seemed to have been imagined in moments of
exhaustion following convulsions, and were discordant notes in this harmony of sombre madness,
where they were as comical and ridiculous as a tiny zinc figure playing on a horn on a timepiece.

After
these mystic divagations, the writer had experienced a period of calm. Then a terrible relapse
followed.

This belief that man is a Buridanesque donkey, a being balanced between
two forces of equal attraction which successively remain victorious
and vanquished, this conviction that human life is only an uncertain
combat waged between hell and heaven, this faith in two opposite beings,
Satan and Christ, was fatally certain to engender such inner discords
of the soul, exalted by incessant struggle, excited at once by promises
and menaces, and ending by abandoning itself to whichever of the two
forces persisted in the pursuit the more relentlessly.

In the Pretre marie, Barbey d'Aurevilly sang the praises of Christ, who had prevailed against
temptations; in the Diaboliques, the author succumbed to the Devil, whom he celebrated; then
appeared sadism, that bastard of Catholicism, which through the centuries religion has relentlessly
pursued with its exorcisms and stakes.

This condition, at once fascinating and ambiguous, can not arise in
the soul of an unbeliever.

It does not merely consist in sinking oneself in the excesses of the flesh, excited by outrageous
blasphemies, for in such a case it would be no more than a case of satyriasis that had reached
its climax. Before all, it consists in sacrilegious practice, in moral rebellion, in spiritual
debauchery, in a wholly ideal aberration, and in this it is exemplarily Christian. It also is
founded upon a joy tempered by fear, a joy analogous to the satisfaction of children who disobey
their parents and play with forbidden things, for no reason other than that they had been forbidden
to do so.

In fact, if it did not admit of sacrilege, sadism would have no reason for existence. Besides, the
sacrilege proceeding from the very existence of a religion, can only be intentionally and pertinently
performed by a believer, for no one would take pleasure in profaning a faith that was indifferent
or unknown to him.

The power of sadism and the attraction it presents, lies entirely then in the prohibited enjoyment
of transferring to Satan the praises and prayers due to God; it lies in the non-observance
of Catholic precepts which one really follows unwillingly, by committing
in deeper scorn of Christ, those sins which the Church has especially
cursed, such as pollution of worship and carnal orgy.

In its elements, this phenomenon to which the Marquis de Sade has bequeathed his name is as old as
the Church. It had reared its head in the eighteenth century, recalling, to go back no farther,
by a simple phenomenon of atavism the impious practices of the Sabbath, the witches' revels of the
Middle Ages.

By having consulted the Malleus maleficorum, that terrible code of Jacob Sprenger which permits
the Church wholesale burnings of necromancers and sorcerers, Des Esseintes recognized in the witches'
Sabbath, all the obscene practices and all the blasphemies of sadism. In addition to the unclean
scenes beloved by Malin, the nights successively and lawfully consecrated to excessive sensual
orgies and devoted to the bestialities of passion, he once more discovered the parody of the processions,
the insults and eternal threats levelled at God and the devotion bestowed upon His rival, while
amid cursing of the wine and the bread, the black mass was being celebrated on the back of a woman
on all fours, whose stained bare thighs served as the altar from which the congregation received
the communion from a black goblet stamped with an image of a goat.

This profusion of impure mockeries and foul shames were marked in the career of the Marquis de Sade,
who garnished his terrible pleasures with outrageous sacrileges.

He cried out to the sky, invoked Lucifer, shouted his contempt of God, calling Him rogue and
imbecile, spat upon the communion, endeavored to contaminate with vile ordures a Divinity who
he prayed might damn him, the while he declared, to defy Him the more, that He did not exist.

Barbey
d'Aurevilly approached this psychic state.

If he did not presume as far as De Sade in uttering atrocious curses against the Saviour; if,
more prudent or more timid, he claimed ever to honor the Church, he none the less addressed
his suit to the Devil as was done in medieval times and he, too, in order to brave God, fell
into demoniac nymphomania, inventing sensual monstrosities, even borrowing from bedroom philosophy
a certain episode which he seasoned with new condiments when he wrote the story le Diner d'un
athee.

This extravagant book pleased Des Esseintes. He had caused to be printed, in violet ink and in
a frame of cardinal purple, on a genuine parchment which the judges
of the Rota had blessed, a copy of the Diaboliques, with characters
whose quaint quavers and flourishes in turned up tails and claws affected
a satanic form.

After certain pieces of Baudelaire that, in imitation of the clamorous songs of nocturnal revels,
celebrated infernal litanies, this volume alone of all the works of contemporary apostolic literature
testified to this state of mind, at once impious and devout, toward which Catholicism often thrust
Des Esseintes.

With Barbey d'Aurevilly ended the line of religious writers; and in truth, that pariah belonged
more, from every point of view, to secular literature than to the
other with which he demanded a place that was denied him.

His language was the language of disheveled romanticism, full of involved expressions, unfamiliar
turns of speech, delighted with extravagant comparisons and with whip strokes and phrases
which exploded, like the clangor of noisy bells, along the text. In short, d'Aurevilly was
like a stallion among the geldings of the ultramontaine stables.

Des Esseintes reflected in this wise while re-reading, here and there, several passages of the
book and, comparing its nervous and changing style with the fixed
manner of other Church writers, he thought of the evolution of language
which Darwin has so truly revealed.

Compelled to live in a secular
atmosphere, raised in the heart of the romantic school, constantly
being in the current of modern literature and accustomed to reading
contemporary publications, Barbey d'Aurevilly had acquired a dialect
which although it had sustained numerous and profound changes since
the Great Age, had nevertheless renewed itself in his works.

The
ecclesiastical writers, on the contrary, confined within specific
limitations, restricted to ancient Church literature, knowing nothing
of the literary progress of the centuries and determined if need be
to blind their eyes the more surely not to see, necessarily were constrained
to the use of an inflexible language, like that of the eighteenth
century which descendants of the French who settled in Canada still
speak and write today, without change of phrasing or words, having
succeeded in preserving their original idiom by isolation in certain
metropolitan centres, despite the fact that they are enveloped upon
every side by English-speaking peoples.

Meanwhile the silvery sound
of a clock that tolled the angelus announced breakfast time to Des
Esseintes. He abandoned his books, pressed his brow and went to the
dining room, saying to himself that, among all the volumes he had
just arranged, the works of Barbey d'Aurevilly were the only ones
whose ideas and style offered the gaminess he so loved to savor in
the Latin and decadent, monastic writers of past ages. A place was reserved
for three or four of the principal chiefs, and a few of the oldest of the women, as withered,
as age, exposure, hardships, and lives of savage passions could make them, thrust themselves
into the foremost circle, with a temerity, to which they were impelled by their insatiable
desire for cruelty, and which nothing, but their years and their long tried fidelity to the
nation, would have excused.

All, but the chiefs already named, were now in their places. These had delayed their appearance,
in the vain hope that their own unanimity might smooth the way to that of their respective
factions; for, notwithstanding the superior influence of Mahtoree, his power was to be maintained
only by constant appeals to the opinions of his inferiors. As these important personages at
length entered the circle in a body, their sullen looks and clouded brows, notwithstanding
the time given to consultation, sufficiently proclaimed the discontent which reigned among
them. The eye of Mahtoree was varying in its expression, from sudden gleams, that seemed to
kindle with the burning impulses of his soul, to that cold and guarded steadiness, which was
thought more peculiarly to become a chief in council. He took his seat, with the studied simplicity
of a demagogue; though the keen and flashing glance, that he immediately threw around the silent
assembly, betrayed the more predominant temper of a tyrant.

When all were present, an aged warrior lighted the great pipe of his people, and blew the smoke
towards the four quarters of the heavens. So soon as this propitiatory offering was made, he
tendered it to Mahtoree, who, in affected humility, passed it to a grey-headed chief by his
side. After the influence of the soothing weed had been courted by all, a grave silence succeeded,
as if each was not only qualified to, but actually did, think more deeply on the matters before
them. Then an old Indian arose, and spoke as follows:--

"The eagle, at the falls of the endless river, was in its egg, many snows after my hand had
struck a Pawnee. What my tongue says, my eyes have seen. Bohrecheena is very old. The hills
have stood longer in their places, than he has been in his tribe, and the rivers were full
and empty, before he was born; but where is the Sioux that knows it besides himself? What he
says, they will hear. If any of his words fall to the ground, they will pick them up and hold
them to their ears. If any blow away in the wind, my young men, who are very nimble, will catch
them. Now listen. Since water ran and trees grew, the Sioux has found the Pawnee on his war-path.
As the cougar loves the antelope, the Dahcotah loves his enemy. When the wolf finds the fawn,
does he lie down and sleep? When the panther sees the doe at the spring, does he shut his eyes?
You know that he does not. He drinks too; but it is of blood! A Sioux is a leaping panther,
a Pawnee a trembling deer. Let my children hear me. They will find my words good. I have spoken."

A deep guttural exclamation of assent broke from the lips of all the partisans of Mahtoree,
as they listened to this sanguinary advice from one, who was certainly among the most aged
men of the nation. That deeply seated love of vengeance, which formed so prominent a feature
in their characters, was gratified by his metaphorical allusions, and the chief himself augured
favourably of the success of his own schemes, by the number of supporters, who manifested themselves
to be in favour of the counsels of his friend. But still unanimity was far from prevailing.
A long and decorous pause was suffered to succeed the words of the first speaker, in order
that all might duly deliberate on their wisdom, before another chief took on himself the office
of refutation. The second orator, though past the prime of his days, was far less aged than
the one who had preceded him. He felt the disadvantage of this circumstance, and endeavoured
to counteract it, as far as possible, by the excess of his humility.

"I am but an infant," he commenced, looking furtively around him, in order to detect how far
his well-established character for prudence and courage contradicted his assertion. "I have
lived with the women, since my father has been a man. If my head is getting grey, it is not
because I am old. Some of the snow, which fell on it while I have been sleeping on the war-paths,
has frozen there, and the hot sun, near the Osage villages, has not been strong enough to melt
it." A low murmur was heard, expressive of admiration of the services to which he thus artfully
alluded. The orator modestly awaited for the feeling to subside a little, and then he continued,
with increasing energy, encouraged by their commendations. "But the eyes of a young brave are
good. He can see very far. He is a lynx. Look at me well. I will turn my back, that you may
see both sides of me. Now do you know I am your friend, for you look on a part that a Pawnee
never yet saw. Now look at my face; not in this seam, for there your eyes can never see into
my spirit. It is a hole cut by a Konza. But here is an opening made by the Wahcondah, through
which you may look into the soul. What am I? A Dahcotah, within and without. You know it. Therefore
hear me. The blood of every creature on the prairie is red. Who can tell the spot where a Pawnee
was struck, from the place where my young men took a bison? It is of the same colour. The Master
of Life made them for each other. He made them alike. But will the grass grow green where a
Pale-face is killed? My young men must not think that nation so numerous, that it will not
miss a warrior. They call them over often, and say, Where are my sons? If they miss one, they
will send into the prairies to look for him. If they cannot find him, they will tell their
runners to ask for him, among the Siouxes. My brethren, the Big-knives are not fools. There
is a mighty medicine of their nation now among us; who can tell how loud is his voice, or how
long is his arm?--"

The speech of the orator, who was beginning to enter into his subject with warmth, was cut
short by the impatient Mahtoree, who suddenly arose and exclaimed, in a voice in which authority
was mingled with contempt, and at the close with a keen tone of irony, also--

"Let my young men lead the evil spirit of the Palefaces to the council. My brother shall see
his medicine, face to face!"

A death-like and solemn stillness succeeded this extraordinary interruption. It not only involved
a deep offence against the sacred courtesy of debate, but the mandate was likely to brave the
unknown power of one of those incomprehensible beings, whom few Indians were enlightened enough,
at that day, to regard without reverence, or few hardy enough to oppose. The subordinates,
however, obeyed, and Obed was led forth from the lodge, mounted on Asinus, with a ceremony
and state which was certainly intended for derision, but which nevertheless was greatly enhanced
by fear. As they entered the ring, Mahtoree, who had foreseen and had endeavoured to anticipate
the influence of the Doctor, by bringing him into contempt, cast an eye around the assembly,
in order to gather his success in the various dark visages by which he was encircled.

Truly, nature and art had combined to produce such an effect from the air and appointments
of the naturalist, as might have made him the subject of wonder in any place. His head had
been industriously shaved, after the most approved fashion of Sioux taste. A gallant scalp-lock,
which would probably not have been spared had the Doctor himself been consulted in the matter,
was all that remained of an exuberant, and at that particular season of the year, far from
uncomfortable head of hair. Thick coats of paint had been laid on the naked poll, and certain
fanciful designs, in the same material, had even been extended into the neighbourhood of the
eyes and mouth, lending to the keen expression of the former a look of twinkling cunning, and
to the dogmatism of the latter, not a little of the grimness of necromancy. He had been despoiled
of his upper garments, and, in their stead, his body was sufficiently protected from the cold,
by a fantastically painted robe of dressed deer-skin. As if in mockery of his pursuit, sundry
toads, frogs, lizards, butterflies, &c., all duly prepared to take their places at some future
day, in his own private cabinet, were attached to the solitary lock on his head, to his ears,
and to various other conspicuous parts of his person. If, in addition to the effect produced
by these quaint auxiliaries to his costume, we add the portentous and troubled gleamings of
doubt, which rendered his visage doubly austere, and proclaimed the misgivings of the worthy
Obed's mind, as he beheld his personal dignity thus prostrated, and what was of far greater
moment in his eyes, himself led forth, as he firmly believed, to be the victim of some heathenish
sacrifice, the reader will find no difficulty in giving credit to the sensation of awe, that
was excited by his appearance in a band already more than half-prepared to worship him, as
a powerful agent of the evil spirit.

Weucha led Asinus directly into the centre of the circle, and leaving them together, (for the
legs of the naturalist were attached to the beast in such a manner, that the two animals might
be said to be incorporated, and to form a new order,) he withdrew to his proper place, gazing
at the conjuror, as he retired, with a wonder and admiration, that were natural to the groveling
dulness of his mind.

The astonishment seemed mutual, between the spectators and the subject of this strange exhibition.
If the Tetons contemplated the mysterious attributes of the medicine, with awe and fear, the
Doctor gazed on every side of him, with a mixture of quite as many extraordinary emotions,
in which the latter sensation, however, formed no inconsiderable ingredient. Every where his
eyes, which just at that moment possessed a secret magnifying quality, seemed to rest on several
dark, savage, and obdurate countenances at once, from none of which could he extract a solitary
gleam of sympathy or commiseration. At length his wandering gaze fell on the grave and decent
features of the trapper, who, with Hector at his feet, stood in the edge of the circle, leaning
on that rifle which he had been permitted, as an acknowledged friend, to resume, and apparently
musing on the events that were likely to succeed a council, marked by so many and such striking
ceremonies.

"Venerable venator, or hunter, or trapper," said the disconsolate Obed, "I rejoice greatly
in meeting thee again. I fear that the precious time, which had been allotted me, in order
to complete a mighty labour, is drawing to a premature close, and I would gladly unburden my
mind to one who, if not a pupil of science, has at least some of the knowledge which civilisation
imparts to its meanest subjects. Doubtless many and earnest enquiries will be made after my
fate, by the learned societies of the world, and perhaps expeditions will be sent into these
regions to remove any doubts, which may arise on so important a subject. I esteem myself happy
that a man, who speaks the vernacular, is present, to preserve the record of my end. You will
say that after a well-spent and glorious life, I died a martyr to science, and a victim to
mental darkness. As I expect to be particularly calm and abstracted in my last moments, if
you add a few details, concerning the fortitude and scholastic dignity with which I met my
death, it may serve to encourage future aspirants for similar honours, and assuredly give offence
to no one. And now, friend trapper, as a duty I owe to human nature, I will conclude by demanding
if all hope has deserted me, or if any means still exist by which so much valuable information
may be rescued from the grasp of ignorance, and preserved to the pages of natural history."

The old man lent an attentive ear to this melancholy appeal, and apparently he reflected on
every side of the important question, before he would presume to answer.

"I take it, friend physicianer," he at length gravely replied, "that the chances of life and
death, in your particular case, depend altogether on the will of Providence, as it may be pleased
to manifest it, through the accursed windings of Indian cunning. For my own part, I see no
great difference in the main end to be gained, inasmuch as it can matter no one greatly, yourself
excepted, whether you live or die."

"Would you account the fall of a corner-stone, from the foundations of the edifice of learning,
a matter of indifference to contemporaries or to posterity?" interrupted Obed. "Besides, my
aged associate," he reproachfully added, "the interest, that a man has in his own existence,
is by no means trifling, however it may be eclipsed by his devotion to more general and philanthropic
feelings."

"What I would say is this," resumed the trapper, who was far from understanding all the subtle
distinctions with which his more learned companion so often saw fit to embellish his discourse;
"there is but one birth and one death to all things, be it hound, or be it deer; be it red
skin, or be it white. Both are in the hands of the Lord, it being as unlawful for man to strive
to hasten the one, as impossible to prevent the other. But I will not say that something may
not be done to put the last moment aside, for a while at least, and therefore it is a question,
that any one has a right to put to his own wisdom, how far he will go, and how much pain he
will suffer, to lengthen out a time that may have been too long already. Many a dreary winter
and scorching summer has gone by since I have turned, to the right hand or to the left, to
add an hour to a life that has already stretched beyond fourscore years. I keep myself as ready
to answer to my name as a soldier at evening roll-call. In my judgment, if your cases are left
to Indian tempers, the policy of the Great Sioux will lead his people to sacrifice you all;
nor do I put much dependence on his seeming love for me; therefore it becomes a question whether
you are ready for such a journey; and if, being ready, whether this is not as good a time to
start as another. Should my opinion be asked, thus far will I give it in your favour; that
is to say, it is my belief your life has been innocent enough, touching any great offences
that you may have committed, though honesty compels me to add, that I think all you can lay
claim to, on the score of activity in deeds, will not amount to any thing worth naming in the
great account."

Obed turned a rueful eye on the calm, philosophic countenance of the other, as he answered
with so discouraging a statement of his case, clearing his throat, as he did so, in order to
conceal the desperate concern which began to beset his faculties, with a vestige of that pride,
which rarely deserts poor human nature, even in the greatest emergencies.

"I believe, venerable hunter," he replied, "considering the question in all its bearings, and
assuming that your theory is just, it will be the safest to conclude that I am not prepared
to make so hasty a departure, and that measures of precaution should be, forthwith, resorted to."

"Being in that mind," returned the deliberate trapper, "I will act for you as I would for myself;
though as time has begun to roll down the hill with you, I will just advise that you look to
your case speedily, for it may so happen that your name will be heard, when quite as little
prepared to answer to it as now."

With this amicable understanding, the old man drew back again into the ring, where he stood
musing on the course he should now adopt, with the singular mixture of decision and resignation
that proceeded from his habits and his humility, and which united to form a character, in which
excessive energy, and the most meek submission to the will of Providence, were oddly enough
combined.

CHAPTER XXVIII

  The witch, in Smithfield, shall be burned to ashes, And you three
  shall be strangled on the gallows.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The Siouxes had awaited the issue of the foregoing dialogue with commendable patience. Most
of the band were restrained, by the secret awe with which they regarded the mysterious character
of Obed; while a few of the more intelligent chiefs gladly profited by the opportunity, to
arrange their thoughts for the struggle that was plainly foreseen. Mahtoree, influenced by
neither of these feelings, was content to show the trapper how much he conceded to his pleasure;
and when the old man discontinued the discourse, he received from the chief a glance, that
was intended to remind him of the patience, with which he had awaited his movements. A profound
and motionless silence succeeded the short interruption. Then Mahtoree arose, evidently prepared
to speak. First placing himself in an attitude of dignity, he turned a steady and severe look
on the whole assembly. The expression of his eye, however, changed as it glanced across the
different countenances of his supporters and of his opponents. To the former the look, though
stern, was not threatening, while it seemed to tell the latter all the hazards they incurred,
in daring to brave the resentment of one so powerful.

Still, in the midst of so much hauteur and confidence, the sagacity and cunning of the Teton
did not desert him. When he had thrown the gauntlet, as it were, to the whole tribe, and sufficiently
asserted his claim to superiority, his mien became more affable and his eye less angry. Then
it was that he raised his voice, in the midst of a death-like stillness, varying its tones
to suit the changing character of his images, and of his eloquence.

"What is a Sioux?" the chief sagaciously began; "he is ruler of the prairies, and master of
its beasts. The fishes in the 'river of troubled waters' know him, and come at his call. He
is a fox in counsel; an eagle in sight; a grizzly bear in combat. A Dahcotah is a man!" After
waiting for the low murmur of approbation, which followed this flattering portrait of his people,
to subside, the Teton continued--"What is a Pawnee? A thief, who only steals from women; a
Red-skin, who is not brave; a hunter, that begs for his venison. In counsel he is a squirrel,
hopping from place to place; he is an owl, that goes on the prairies at night; in battle he
is an elk, whose legs are long. A Pawnee is a woman." Another pause succeeded, during which
a yell of delight broke from several mouths, and a demand was made, that the taunting words
should be translated to the unconscious subject of their biting contempt. The old man took
his cue from the eyes of Mahtoree, and complied. Hard-Heart listened gravely, and then, as
if apprized that his time to speak had not arrived, he once more bent his look on the vacant
air. The orator watched his countenance, with an expression that manifested how inextinguishable
was the hatred he felt for the only chief, far and near, whose fame might advantageously be
compared with his own. Though disappointed in not having touched the pride of one whom he regarded
as a boy, he proceeded, what he considered as far more important, to quicken the tempers of
the men of his own tribe, in order that they might be prepared to work his savage purposes.
"If the earth was covered with rats, which are good for nothing," he said, "there would be
no room for buffaloes, which give food and clothes to an Indian. If the prairies were covered
with Pawnees, there would be no room for the foot of a Dahcotah. A Loup is a rat, a Sioux a
heavy buffaloe; let the buffaloes tread upon the rats and make room for themselves.

"My brothers, a little child has spoken to you. He tells you, his hair is not grey, but frozen--that
the grass will not grow where a Pale-face has died. Does he know the colour of the blood of
a Big-knife? No! I know he does not; he has never seen it. What Dahcotah, besides Mahtoree,
has ever struck a Pale-face? Not one. But Mahtoree must be silent. Every Teton will shut his
ears when he speaks. The scalps over his lodge were taken by the women. They were taken by
Mahtoree, and he is a woman. His mouth is shut; he waits for the feasts to sing among the girls!"

Notwithstanding the exclamations of regret and resentment, which followed so abasing a declaration,
the chief took his seat, as if determined to speak no more. But the murmurs grew louder and
more general, and there were threatening symptoms that the council would dissolve itself in
confusion; and he arose and resumed his speech, by changing his manner to the fierce and hurried
enunciation of a warrior bent on revenge.

"Let my young men go look for Tetao!" he cried; "they will find his scalp drying in Pawnee
smoke. Where is the son of Bohrecheena? His bones are whiter than the faces of his murderers.
Is Mahhah asleep in his lodge? You know it is many moons since he started for the blessed prairies;
would he were here, that he might say of what colour was the hand that took his scalp!"

In this strain the artful chief continued for many minutes, calling those warriors by name,
who were known to have met their deaths in battle with the Pawnees, or in some of those lawless
frays which so often occurred between the Sioux bands and a class of white men, who were but
little removed from them in the qualities of civilisation. Time was not given to reflect on
the merits, or rather the demerits, of most of the different individuals to whom he alluded,
in consequence of the rapid manner in which he ran over their names; but so cunningly did he
time his events, and so thrillingly did he make his appeals, aided as they were by the power
of his deep-toned and stirring voice, that each of them struck an answering chord in the breast
of some one of his auditors.

It was in the midst of one of his highest flights of eloquence, that a man, so aged as to walk
with the greatest difficulty, entered the very centre of the circle, and took his stand directly
in front of the speaker. An ear of great acuteness might possibly have detected that the tones
of the orator faltered a little, as his flashing look first fell on this unexpected object,
though the change was so trifling, that none, but such as thoroughly knew the parties, would
have suspected it. The stranger had once been as distinguished for his beauty and proportions,
as had been his eagle eye for its irresistible and terrible glance. But his skin was now wrinkled,
and his features furrowed with so many scars, as to have obtained for him, half a century before,
from the French of the Canadas, a title which has been borne by so many of the heroes of France,
and which had now been adopted into the language of the wild horde of whom we are writing,
as the one most expressive of the deeds of their own brave. The murmur of Le Balafre, that
ran through the assembly when he appeared, announced not only his name and the high estimation
of his character, but how extraordinary his visit was considered. As he neither spoke nor moved,
however, the sensation created by his appearance soon subsided, and then every eye was again
turned upon the speaker, and every ear once more drunk in the intoxication of his maddening
appeals.

It would have been easy to have traced the triumph of Mahtoree, in the reflecting countenances
of his auditors. It was not long before a look of ferocity and of revenge was to be seen seated
on the grim visages of most of the warriors, and each new and crafty allusion to the policy
of extinguishing their enemies, was followed by fresh and less restrained bursts of approbation.
In the height of this success the Teton closed his speech, by a rapid appeal to the pride and
hardihood of his native band, and suddenly took his seat.

In the midst of the murmurs of applause, which succeeded so remarkable an effort of eloquence,
a low, feeble and hollow voice was heard rising on the ear, as if it rolled from the inmost
cavities of the human chest, and gathered strength and energy as it issued into the air. A
solemn stillness followed the sounds, and then the lips of the aged man were first seen to move.

"The day of Le Balafre is near its end," were the first words that were distinctly audible.
"He is like a buffaloe, on whom the hair will grow no longer. He will soon be ready to leave
his lodge, to go in search of another, that is far from the villages of the Siouxes; therefore,
what he has to say concerns not him, but those he leaves behind him. His words are like the
fruit on the tree, ripe and fit to be given to chiefs.

"Many snows have fallen since Le Balafre has been found on the war-path. His blood has been
very hot, but it has had time to cool. The Wahcondah gives him dreams of war no longer; he
sees that it is better to live in peace.

"My brothers, one foot is turned to the happy hunting-grounds, the other will soon follow,
and then an old chief will be seen looking for the prints of his father's moccasins, that he
may make no mistake, but be sure to come before the Master of Life, by the same path, as so
many good Indians have already travelled. But who will follow? Le Balafre has no son. His oldest
has ridden too many Pawnee horses; the bones of the youngest have been gnawed by Konza dogs!
Le Balafre has come to look for a young arm, on which he may lean, and to find a son, that
when he is gone his lodge may not be empty. Tachechana, the skipping fawn of the Tetons, is
too weak, to prop a warrior, who is old. She looks before her and not backwards. Her mind is
in the lodge of her husband."

The enunciation of the veteran warrior had been calm, but distinct, and decided. His declaration
was received in silence; and though several of the chiefs, who were in the counsels of Mahtoree,
turned their eyes on their leader, none presumed to oppose so aged and so venerated a brave,
in a resolution that was strictly in conformity to the usages of the nation. The Teton himself
was content to await the result with seeming composure, though the gleams of ferocity, that
played about his eye, occasionally betrayed the nature of those feelings, with which he witnessed
a procedure, that was likely to rob him of that one of all his intended victims whom he most hated.

In the mean time Le Balafre moved with a slow and painful step towards the captives. He stopped
before the person of Hard-Heart, whose faultless form, unchanging eye, and lofty mien, he contemplated
long, with high and evident satisfaction. Then making a gesture of authority, he awaited, until
his order had been obeyed, and the youth was released from the post and his bonds, by the same
blow of the knife. When the young warrior was led nearer to his dimmed and failing sight, the
examination was renewed, with strictness of scrutiny, and that admiration, which physical excellence
is so apt to excite in the breast of a savage.

"It is good," the wary veteran murmured, when he found that all his skill in the requisites
of a brave could detect no blemish; "this is a leaping panther! Does my son speak with the
tongue of a Teton?"

The intelligence, which lighted the eyes of the captive, betrayed how well he understood the
question, but still he was far too haughty to communicate his ideas through the medium of a
language that belonged to a hostile people. Some of the surrounding warriors explained to the
old chief, that the captive was a Pawnee-Loup.

"My son opened his eyes on the 'waters of the wolves,'" said Le Balafre, in the language of
that nation, "but he will shut them in the bend of the 'river with a troubled stream.' He was
born a Pawnee, but he will die a Dahcotah. Look at me. I am a sycamore, that once covered many
with my shadow. The leaves are fallen, and the branches begin to drop. But a single sucker
is springing from my roots; it is a little vine, and it winds itself about a tree that is green.
I have long looked for one fit to grow by my side. Now have I found him. Le Balafre is no longer
without a son; his name will not be forgotten when he is gone! Men of the Tetons, I take this
youth into my lodge."

No one was bold enough to dispute a right, that had so often been exercised by warriors far
inferior to the present speaker, and the adoption was listened to, in grave and respectful
silence. Le Balafre took his intended son by the arm, and leading him into the very centre
of the circle, he stepped aside with an air of triumph, in order that the spectators might
approve of his choice. Mahtoree betrayed no evidence of his intentions, but rather seemed to
await a moment better suited to the crafty policy of his character. The more experienced and
sagacious chiefs distinctly foresaw the utter impossibility of two partisans so renowned, so
hostile, and who had so long been rivals in fame, as their prisoner and their native leader,
existing amicably in the same tribe. Still the character of Le Balafre was so imposing, and
the custom to which he had resorted so sacred, that none dared to lift a voice in opposition
to the measure. They watched the result with increasing interest, but with a coldness of demeanour
that concealed the nature of their inquietude. From this state of embarrassment, and as it
might readily have proved of disorganisation, the tribe was unexpectedly relieved by the decision
of the one most interested in the success of the aged chief's designs.

During the whole of the foregoing scene, it would have been difficult to have traced a single
distinct emotion in the lineaments of the captive. He had heard his release proclaimed, with
the same indifference as the order to bind him to the stake. But now, that the moment had arrived
when it became necessary to make his election, he spoke in a way to prove that the fortitude,
which had bought him so distinguished a name, had in no degree deserted him.

"My father is very old, but he has not yet looked upon every thing," said Hard-Heart, in a
voice so clear as to be heard by all in presence. "He has never seen a buffaloe change to a
bat. He will never see a Pawnee become a Sioux!"

There was a suddenness, and yet a calmness in the manner of delivering this decision, which
assured most of the auditors that it was unalterable. The heart of Le Balafre, however, was
yearning towards the youth, and the fondness of age was not so readily repulsed. Reproving
the burst of admiration and triumph, to which the boldness of the declaration, and the freshened
hopes of revenge had given rise, by turning his gleaming eye around the band, the veteran again
addressed his adopted child, as if his purpose was not to be denied.

"It is well," he said; "such are the words a brave should use, that the warriors may see his
heart. The day has been when the voice of Le Balafre was loudest among the lodges of the Konzas.
But the root of a white hair is wisdom. My child will show the Tetons that he is brave, by
striking their enemies. Men of the Dahcotahs, this is my son!"

The Pawnee hesitated a moment, and then stepping in front of the chief, he took his hard and
wrinkled hand, and laid it with reverence on his head, as if to acknowledge the extent of his
obligation. Then recoiling a step, he raised his person to its greatest elevation, and looked
upon the hostile band, by whom he was environed, with an air of loftiness and disdain, as he
spoke aloud, in the language of the Siouxes--

"Hard-Heart has looked at himself, within and without. He has thought of all he has done in
the hunts and in the wars. Every where he is the same. There is no change. He is in all things
a Pawnee. He has struck so many Tetons that he could never eat in their lodges. His arrows
would fly backwards; the point of his lance would be on the wrong end; their friends would
weep at every whoop he gave; their enemies would laugh. Do the Tetons know a Loup? Let them
look at him again. His head is painted; his arm is flesh; his heart is rock. When the Tetons
see the sun come from the Rocky Mountains, and move towards the land of the Pale-faces, the
mind of Hard-Heart will soften, and his spirit will become Sioux. Until that day, he will live
and die a Pawnee."

A yell of delight, in which admiration and ferocity were strangely mingled, interrupted the
speaker, and but too clearly announced the character of his fate. The captive awaited a moment,
for the commotion to subside, and then turning again to Le Balafre, he continued, in tones
conciliating and kind, as if he felt the propriety of softening his refusal, in a manner not
to wound the pride of one who would so gladly be his benefactor--

"Let my father lean heavier on the fawn of the Dahcotahs," he said: "she is weak now, but as
her lodge fills with young, she will be stronger. See," he added, directing the eyes of the
other to the earnest countenance of the attentive trapper; "Hard-Heart is not without a grey-head
to show him the path to the blessed prairies. If he ever has another father, it shall be that
just warrior."

Le Balafre turned away in disappointment from the youth, and approached the stranger, who had
thus anticipated his design. The examination between these two aged men was long, mutual, and
curious. It was not easy to detect the real character of the trapper, through the mask which
the hardships of so many years had laid upon his features, especially when aided by his wild
and peculiar attire. Some moments elapsed before the Teton spoke, and then it was in doubt
whether he addressed one like himself, or some wanderer of that race who, he had heard, were
spreading themselves, like hungry locusts, throughout the land.

"The head of my brother is very white," he said; "but the eye of Le Balafre is no longer like
the eagle's. Of what colour is his skin?"

"The Wahcondah made me like these you see waiting for a Dahcotah judgment; but fair and foul
has coloured me darker than the skin of a fox. What of that! Though the bark is ragged and
riven, the heart of the tree is sound."

"My brother is a Big-knife! Let him turn his face towards the setting sun, and open his eyes.
Does he see the salt lake beyond the mountains?"

"The time has been, Teton, when few could see the white on the eagle's head farther than I;
but the glare of fourscore and seven winters has dimmed my eyes, and but little can I boast
of sight in my latter days. Does the Sioux think a Pale-face is a god, that he can look through
hills?"

"Then let my brother look at me. I am nigh him, and he can see that I am a foolish Red-man.
Why cannot his people see every thing, since they crave all?"

"I understand you, chief; nor will I gainsay the justice of your words, seeing that they are
too much founded in truth. But though born of the race you love so little, my worst enemy,
not even a lying Mingo, would dare to say that I ever laid hands on the goods of another, except
such as were taken in manful warfare; or that I ever coveted more ground than the Lord has
intended each man to fill."

"And yet my brother has come among the Red-skins to find a son?"

The trapper laid a finger on the naked shoulder of Le Balafre, and looked into his scarred
countenance with a wistful and confidential expression, as he answered--

"Ay; but it was only that I might do good to the boy. If you think, Dahcotah, that I adopted
the youth in order to prop my age, you do as much injustice to my goodwill, as you seem to
know little of the merciless intentions of your own people. I have made him my son, that he
may know that one is left behind him. Peace, Hector, peace! Is this decent, pup, when greyheads
are counselling together, to break in upon their discourse with the whinings of a hound! The
dog is old, Teton; and though well taught in respect of behaviour, he is getting, like ourselves,
I fancy, something forgetful of the fashions of his youth."

Further discourse, between these veterans, was interrupted by a discordant yell, which burst
at that moment from the lips of the dozen withered crones, who have already been mentioned
as having forced themselves into a conspicuous part of the circle. The outcry was excited by
a sudden change in the air of Hard-Heart. When the old men turned towards the youth, they saw
him standing in the very centre of the ring, with his head erect, his eye fixed on vacancy,
one leg advanced and an arm a little raised, as if all his faculties were absorbed in the act
of listening. A smile lighted his countenance, for a single moment, and then the whole man
sunk again into his former look of dignity and coldness, suddenly recalled to self-possession.
The movement had been construed into contempt, and even the tempers of the chiefs began to
be excited. Unable to restrain their fury, the women broke into the circle in a body, and commenced
their attack by loading the captive with the most bitter revilings. They boasted of the various
exploits, which their sons had achieved at the expense of the different tribes of the Pawnees.
They undervalued his own reputation, and told him to look at Mahtoree, if he had never yet
seen a warrior. They accused him of having been suckled by a doe, and of having drunk in cowardice
with his mother's milk. In short, they lavished upon their unmoved captive a torrent of that
vindictive abuse, in which the women of the savages are so well known to excel, but which has
been too often described to need a repetition here.

The effect of this outbreaking was inevitable. Le Balafre turned away disappointed, and hid
himself in the crowd, while the trapper, whose honest features were working with inward emotion,
pressed nigher to his young friend, as those who are linked to the criminal, by ties so strong
as to brave the opinions of men, are often seen to stand about the place of execution to support
his dying moments. The excitement soon spread among the inferior warriors, though the chiefs
still forbore to make the signal, which committed the victim to their mercy. Mahtoree, who
had awaited such a movement among his fellows, with the wary design of concealing his own jealous
hatred, soon grew weary of delay, and, by a glance of his eye, encouraged the tormentors to
proceed.

Weucha, who, eager for this sanction, had long stood watching the countenance of the chief,
bounded forward at the signal like a blood-hound loosened from the leash. Forcing his way into
the centre of the hags, who were already proceeding from abuse to violence, he reproved their
impatience, and bade them wait, until a warrior had begun to torment, and then they should
see their victim shed tears like a woman.

The heartless savage commenced his efforts, by flourishing his tomahawk about the head of the
captive, in such a manner as to give reason to suppose, that each blow would bury the weapon
in the flesh, while it was so governed as not to touch the skin. To this customary expedient
Hard-Heart was perfectly insensible. His eye kept the same steady, riveted look on the air,
though the glittering axe described, in its evolutions, a bright circle of light before his
countenance. Frustrated in this attempt, the callous Sioux laid the cold edge on the naked
head of his victim, and began to describe the different manners, in which a prisoner might
be flayed. The women kept time to his cruelties with their taunts, and endeavoured to force
some expression of the lingerings of nature from the insensible features of the Pawnee. But
he evidently reserved himself for the chiefs, and for those moments of extreme anguish, when
the loftiness of his spirit might evince itself in a manner better becoming his high and untarnished
reputation.

The eyes of the trapper, followed every movement of the tomahawk, with the interest of a real
father, until at length, unable to command his indignation, he exclaimed--

"My son has forgotten his cunning. This is a low-minded Indian, and one easily hurried into
folly. I cannot do the thing myself, for my traditions forbid a dying warrior to revile his
persecutors, but the gifts of a Red-skin are different. Let the Pawnee say the bitter words
and purchase an easy death. I will answer for his success, provided he speaks before the grave
men set their wisdom to back the folly of this fool."

The savage Sioux, who heard his words without comprehending their meaning, turned to the speaker
and menaced him with death, for his temerity.

"Ay, work your will," said the unflinching old man; "I am as ready now as I shall be to-morrow.
Though it would be a death that an honest man might not wish to die. Look at that noble Pawnee,
Teton, and see what a Red-skin may become, who fears the Master of Life, and follows his laws.
How many of your people has he sent to the distant prairies?" he continued in a sort of pious
fraud, thinking, that while the danger menaced himself, there could surely be no sin in extolling
the merits of another; "how many howling Siouxes has he struck, like a warrior in open combat,
while arrows were sailing in the air plentier than flakes of falling snow! Go! will Weucha
speak the name of one enemy he has ever struck?"

"Hard-Heart!" shouted the Sioux, turning in his fury, and aiming a deadly blow at the head
of his victim. His arm fell into the hollow of the captive's hand. For a single moment the
two stood, as if entranced in that attitude, the one paralysed by so unexpected a resistance,
and the other bending his head, not to meet his death, but in the act of the most intense attention.
The women screamed with triumph, for they thought the nerves of the captive had at length failed
him. The trapper trembled for the honour of his friend; and Hector, as if conscious of what
was passing, raised his nose into the air, and uttered a piteous howl.

But the Pawnee hesitated, only for that moment. Raising the other hand, like lightning, the
tomahawk flashed in the air, and Weucha sunk to his feet, brained to the eye. Then cutting
a way with the bloody weapon, he darted through the opening, left by the frightened women,
and seemed to descend the declivity at a single bound.

Had a bolt from Heaven fallen in the midst of the Teton band it would not have occasioned greater
consternation, than this act of desperate hardihood. A shrill plaintive cry burst from the
lips of all the women, and there was a moment, that even the oldest warriors appeared to have
lost their faculties. This stupor endured only for the instant. It was succeeded by a yell
of revenge, that burst from a hundred throats, while as many warriors started forward at the
cry, bent on the most bloody retribution. But a powerful and authoritative call from Mahtoree
arrested every foot. The chief, in whose countenance disappointment and rage were struggling
with the affected composure of his station, extended an arm towards the river, and the whole
mystery was explained.

Hard-Heart had already crossed half the bottom, which lay between the acclivity and the water.
At this precise moment a band of armed and mounted Pawnees turned a swell, and galloped to
the margin of the stream, into which the plunge of the fugitive was distinctly heard. A few
minutes sufficed for his vigorous arm to conquer the passage, and then the shout from the opposite
shore told the humbled Tetons the whole extent of the triumph of their adversaries.

CHAPTER XXIX

  If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly; the curses he
  shall have, the tortures he shall feel, will break the back of
  man, the heart of monster.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

It will readily be seen that the event just related was attended by an extraordinary sensation
among the Siouxes. In leading the hunters of the band back to the encampment, their chief had
neglected none of the customary precautions of Indian prudence, in order that his trail might
escape the eyes of his enemies. It would seem, however, that the Pawnees had not only made
the dangerous discovery, but had managed with great art to draw nigh the place, by the only
side on which it was thought unnecessary to guard the approaches with the usual line of sentinels.
The latter, who were scattered along the different little eminences, which lay in the rear
of the lodges, were among the last to be apprized of the danger.

In such a crisis there was little time for deliberation. It was by exhibiting the force of
his character in scenes of similar difficulty, that Mahtoree had obtained and strengthened
his ascendency among his people, nor did he seem likely to lose it by the manifestation of
any indecision on the present occasion. In the midst of the screams of the young, the shrieks
of the women, and the wild howlings of the crones, which were sufficient of themselves to have
created a chaos in the thoughts of one less accustomed to act in emergencies, he promptly asserted
his authority, issuing his orders with the coolness of a veteran.

While the warriors were arming, the boys were despatched to the bottom for the horses. The
tents were hastily struck by the women, and disposed of on such of the beasts are were not
deemed fit to be trusted in combat. The infants were cast upon the backs of their mothers,
and those children, who were of a size to march, were driven to the rear, like a herd of less
reasoning animals. Though these several movements were made amid outcries, and a clamour, that
likened the place to another Babel, they were executed with incredible alacrity and intelligence.

In the mean time, Mahtoree neglected no duty that belonged to his responsible station. From
the elevation, on which he stood, he could command a perfect view of the force and evolutions
of the hostile party. A grim smile lighted his visage, when he found that, in point of numbers,
his own band was greatly the superior. Notwithstanding this advantage, however, there were
other points of inequality, which would probably have a tendency to render his success, in
the approaching conflict, exceedingly doubtful. His people were the inhabitants of a more northern
and less hospitable region than their enemies, and were far from being rich in that species
of property, horses and arms, which constitutes the most highly prized wealth of a western
Indian. The band in view was mounted to a man; and as it had come so far to rescue, or to revenge,
their greatest partisan, he had no reason to doubt its being composed entirely of braves. On
the other hand, many of his followers were far better in a hunt than in a combat; men who might
serve to divert the attention of his foes, but from whom he could expect little desperate service.
Still, his flashing eye glanced over a body of warriors on whom he had often relied, and who
had never deceived him; and though, in the precise position in which he found himself, he felt
no disposition to precipitate the conflict, he certainly would have had no intention to avoid
it, had not the presence of his women and children placed the option altogether in the power
of his adversaries.

On the other hand, the Pawnees, so unexpectedly successful in their first and greatest object,
manifested no intention to drive matters to an issue. The river was a dangerous barrier to
pass, in the face of a determined foe, and it would now have been in perfect accordance with
their cautious policy, to have retired for a season, in order that their onset might be made
in the hours of darkness, and of seeming security. But there was a spirit in their chief that
elevated him, for the moment, above the ordinary expedients of savage warfare. His bosom burned
with the desire to wipe out that disgrace of which he had been the subject; and it is possible,
that he believed the retiring camp of the Siouxes contained a prize, that began to have a value
in his eyes, far exceeding any that could be found in fifty Teton scalps. Let that be as it
might, Hard-Heart had no sooner received the brief congratulations of his band, and communicated
to the chiefs such facts as were important to be known, than he prepared himself to act such
a part in the coming conflict, as would at once maintain his well-earned reputation, and gratify
his secret wishes. A led horse, one that had been long trained in the hunts, had been brought
to receive his master, with but little hope that his services would ever be needed again in
this life. With a delicacy and consideration, that proved how much the generous qualities of
the youth had touched the feelings of his people, a bow, a lance, and a quiver, were thrown
across the animal, which it had been intended to immolate on the grave of the young brave;
a species of care that would have superseded the necessity for the pious duty that the trapper
had pledged himself to perform.

Though Hard-Heart was sensible of the kindness of his warriors, and believed that a chief,
furnished with such appointments, might depart with credit for the distant hunting-grounds
of the Master of Life, he seemed equally disposed to think that they might be rendered quite
as useful, in the actual state of things. His countenance lighted with stern pleasure, as he
tried the elasticity of the bow, and poised the well-balanced spear. The glance he bestowed
on the shield was more cursory and indifferent; but the exultation with which he threw himself
on the back of his favoured war-horse was so great, as to break through the forms of Indian
reserve. He rode to and fro among his scarcely less delighted warriors, managing the animal
with a grace and address that no artificial rules can ever supply; at times flourishing his
lance, as if to assure himself of his seat, and at others examining critically into the condition
of the fusee, with which he had also been furnished, with the fondness of one, who was miraculously
restored to the possession of treasures, that constituted his pride and his happiness.

At this particular moment Mahtoree, having completed the necessary arrangements, prepared to
make a more decisive movement. The Teton had found no little embarrassment in disposing of
his captives. The tents of the squatter were still in sight, and his wary cunning did not fail
to apprise him, that it was quite as necessary to guard against an attack from that quarter
as to watch the motions of his more open and more active foes. His first impulse had been to
make the tomahawk suffice for the men, and to trust the females under the same protection as
the women of his band; but the manner, in which many of his braves continued to regard the
imaginary medicine of the Long-knives, forewarned him of the danger of so hazardous an experiment
on the eve of a battle. It might be deemed the omen of defeat. In this dilemma he motioned
to a superannuated warrior, to whom he had confided the charge of the non-combatants, and leading
him apart, he placed a finger significantly on his shoulder, as he said, in a tone, in which
authority was tempered by confidence--

"When my young men are striking the Pawnees, give the women knives. Enough; my father is very
old; he does not want to hear wisdom from a boy."

The grim old savage returned a look of ferocious assent, and then the mind of the chief appeared
to be at rest on this important subject. From that moment he bestowed all his care on the achievement
of his revenge, and the maintenance of his martial character. Throwing himself on his horse,
he made a sign, with the air of a prince to his followers, to imitate his example, interrupting,
without ceremony, the war songs and solemn rites by which many among them were stimulating
their spirits to deeds of daring. When all were in order, the whole moved with great steadiness
and silence towards the margin of the river.

The hostile bands were now separated by the water. The width of the stream was too great to
admit of the use of the ordinary Indian missiles, but a few useless shots were exchanged from
the fusees of the chiefs, more in bravado than with any expectation of doing execution. As
some time was suffered to elapse, in demonstrations and abortive efforts, we shall leave them,
for that period, to return to such of our characters as remained in the hands of the savages.

We have shed much ink in vain, and wasted quires, that might possibly have been better employed,
if it be necessary now to tell the reader that few of the foregoing movements escaped the observation
of the experienced trapper. He had been, in common with the rest, astonished at the sudden
act of Hard-Heart; and there was a single moment when a feeling of regret and mortification
got the better of his longings to save the life of the youth. The simple and well-intentioned
old man would have felt, at witnessing any failure of firmness on the part of a warrior, who
had so strongly excited his sympathies, the same species of sorrow that a Christian parent
would suffer in hanging over the dying moments of an impious child. But when, instead of an
impotent and unmanly struggle for existence, he found that his friend had forborne, with the
customary and dignified submission of an Indian warrior, until an opportunity had offered to
escape, and that he had then manifested the spirit and decision of the most gifted brave, his
gratification became nearly too powerful to be concealed. In the midst of the wailing and commotion,
which succeeded the death of Weucha and the escape of the captive, he placed himself nigh the
persons of his white associates, with a determination of interfering, at every hazard, should
the fury of the savages take that direction. The appearance of the hostile band spared him,
however, so desperate and probably so fruitless an effort, and left him to pursue his observations,
and to mature his plans more at leisure.

He particularly remarked that, while by far the greater part of the women, and all the children,
together with the effects of the party, were hurried to the rear, probably with an order to
secrete themselves in some of the adjacent woods, the tent of Mahtoree himself was left standing,
and its contents undisturbed. Two chosen horses, however, stood near by, held by a couple of
youths, who were too young to go into the conflict, and yet of an age to understand the management
of the beasts. The trapper perceived in this arrangement the reluctance of Mahtoree to trust
his newly-found flowers beyond the reach of his eye; and, at the same time, his forethought
in providing against a reverse of fortune. Neither had the manner of the Teton, in giving his
commission to the old savage, nor the fierce pleasure with which the latter had received the
bloody charge, escaped his observation. From all these mysterious movements, the old man was
aware that a crisis was at hand, and he summoned the utmost knowledge he had acquired, in so
long a life, to aid him in the desperate conjuncture. While musing on the means to be employed,
the Doctor again attracted his attention to himself, by a piteous appeal for assistance.

"Venerable trapper, or, as I may now say, liberator," commenced the dolorous Obed, "it would
seem, that a fitting time has at length arrived to dissever the unnatural and altogether irregular
connection, which exists between my inferior members and the body of Asinus. Perhaps if such
a portion of my limbs were released as might leave me master of the remainder, and this favourable
opportunity were suitably improved, by making a forced march towards the settlements, all hopes
of preserving the treasures of knowledge, of which I am the unworthy receptacle, would not
be lost. The importance of the results is surely worth the hazard of the experiment."

"I know not, I know not," returned the deliberate old man; "the vermin and reptiles, which
you bear about you, were intended by the Lord for the prairies, and I see no good in sending
them into regions that may not suit their natur's. And, moreover, you may be of great and particular
use as you now sit on the ass, though it creates no wonder in my mind to perceive that you
are ignorant of it, seeing that usefulness is altogether a new calling to so bookish a man."

"Of what service can I be in this painful thraldom, in which the animal functions are in a
manner suspended, and the spiritual, or intellectual, blinded by the secret sympathy that unites
mind to matter? There is likely to be blood spilt between yonder adverse hosts of heathens;
and, though but little desiring the office, it would be better that I should employ myself
in surgical experiments, than in thus wasting the precious moments, mortifying both soul and body."

"It is little that a Red-skin would care to have a physician at his hurts, while the whoop
is ringing in his ears. Patience is a virtue in an Indian, and can be no shame to a Christian
white man. Look at these hags of squaws, friend Doctor; I have no judgment in savage tempers,
if they are not bloody minded, and ready to work their accursed pleasures on us all. Now, so
long as you keep upon the ass, and maintain the fierce look which is far from being your natural
gift, fear of so great a medicine may serve to keep down their courage. I am placed here, like
a general at the opening of the battle, and it has become my duty to make such use of all my
force as, in my judgment, each is best fitted to perform. If I know these niceties, you will
be more serviceable for your countenance just now than in any more stirring exploits."

"Harkee, old trapper," shouted Paul, whose patience could no longer maintain itself under the
calculating and prolix explanations of the other, "suppose you cut two things I can name, short
off. That is to say, your conversation, which is agreeable enough over a well baked buffaloe's
hump, and these damnable thongs of hide, which, according to my experience, can be pleasant
nowhere. A single stroke of your knife would be of more service, just now, than the longest
speech that was ever made in a Kentucky court-house."

"Ay, court-houses are the 'happy hunting-grounds,' as a Red-skin would say, for them that are
born with gifts no better than such as lie in the tongue. I was carried into one of the lawless
holes myself once, and it was all about a thing of no more value than the skin of a deer. The
Lord forgive them!--the Lord forgive them!--they knew no better, and they did according to
their weak judgments, and therefore the more are they to be pitied; and yet it was a solemn
sight to see an aged man, who had always lived in the air, laid neck and heels by the law,
and held up as a spectacle for the women and boys of a wasteful settlement to point their fingers
at!"

"If such be your opinions of confinement, honest friend, you had better manifest the same,
by putting us at liberty with as little delay as possible," said Middleton, who, like his companion,
began to find the tardiness of his often-tried companion quite as extraordinary as it was disagreeable.

"I should greatly like to do the same; especially in your behalf, Captain, who, being a soldier,
might find not only pleasure but profit in examining, more at your ease, into the circumventions
and cunning of an Indian fight. As to our friend, here, it is of but little matter, how much
of this affair he examines, or how little, seeing that a bee is not to be overcome in the same
manner as an Indian."

"Old man, this trifling with our misery is inconsiderate, to give it a name no harsher--"

"Ay, your grand'ther was of a hot and hurrying mind, and one must not expect, that the young
of a panther will crawl the 'arth like the litter of a porcupine. Now keep you both silent,
and what I say shall have the appearance of being spoken concerning the movements that are
going on in the bottom; all of which will serve to put jealousy to sleep, and to shut the eyes
of such as rarely close them on wickedness and cruelty. In the first place, then, you must
know that I have reason to think yonder treacherous Teton has left an order to put us all to
death, so soon as he thinks the deed may be done secretly, and without tumult."

"Great Heaven! will you suffer us to be butchered like unresisting sheep?"

"Hist, Captain, hist; a hot temper is none of the best, when cunning is more needed than blows.
Ah, the Pawnee is a noble boy! it would do your heart good to see how he draws off from the
river, in order to invite his enemies to cross; and yet, according to my failing sight, they
count two warriors to his one! But as I was saying, little good comes of haste and thoughtlessness.
The facts are so plain that any child may see into their wisdom. The savages are of many minds
as to the manner of our treatment. Some fear us for colour, and would gladly let us go, and
other some would show us the mercy that the doe receives from the hungry wolf. When opposition
gets fairly into the councils of a tribe, it is rarely that humanity is the gainer. Now see
you these wrinkled and cruel-minded squaws--No, you cannot see them as you lie, but nevertheless
they are here, ready and willing, like so many raging she-bears, to work their will upon us
so soon as the proper time shall come."

"Harkee, old gentleman trapper," interrupted Paul, with a little bitterness in his manner;
"do you tell us these matters for our amusement, or for your own? If for ours, you may keep
your breath for the next race you run, as I am tickled nearly to suffocation, already, with
my part of the fun."

"Hist"--said the trapper, cutting with great dexterity and rapidity the thong, which bound
one of the arms of Paul to his body, and dropping his knife at the same time within reach of
the liberated hand. "Hist, boy, hist; that was a lucky moment! The yell from the bottom drew
the eyes of these blood-suckers in another quarter, and so far we are safe. Now make a proper
use of your advantages; but be careful, that what you do, is done without being seen."

"Thank you for this small favour, old deliberation," muttered the bee-hunter, "though it comes
like a snow in May, somewhat out of season."

"Foolish boy!" reproachfully exclaimed the other, who had moved to a little distance from his
friends, and appeared to be attentively regarding the movements of the hostile parties, "will
you never learn to know the wisdom of patience? And you, too, Captain; though a man myself,
that seldom ruffles his temper by vain feelings, I see that you are silent, because you scorn
to ask favours any longer from one you think too slow to grant them. No doubt, ye are both
young, and filled with the pride of your strength and manhood, and I dare say you thought it
only needful to cut the thongs, to leave you masters of the ground. But he, that has seen much,
is apt to think much. Had I run like a bustling woman to have given you freedom, these hags
of the Siouxes would have seen the same, and then where would you both have found yourselves?
Under the tomahawk and the knife, like helpless and outcrying children, though gifted with
the size and beards of men. Ask our friend, the bee-hunter, in what condition he finds himself
to struggle with a Teton boy, after so many hours of bondage; much less with a dozen merciless
and bloodthirsty squaws!"

"Truly, old trapper," returned Paul, stretching his limbs, which were by this time entirely
released, and endeavouring to restore the suspended circulation, "you have some judgmatical
notions in these matters. Now here am I, Paul Hover, a man who will give in to few at wrestle
or race, nearly as helpless as the day I paid my first visit to the house of old Paul, who
is dead and gone,--the Lord forgive him any little blunders he may have made while he tarried
in Kentucky! Now there is my foot on the ground, so far as eye-sight has any virtue, and yet
it would take no great temptation to make me swear it didn't touch the earth by six inches.
I say, honest friend, since you have done so much, have the goodness to keep these damnable
squaws, of whom you say so many interesting things, at a little distance, till I have got the
blood of this arm in motion, and am ready to receive them."

The trapper made a sign that he perfectly understood the case; and he walked towards the superannuated
savage, who began to manifest an intention of commencing his assigned task, leaving the bee-hunter
to recover the use of his limbs as well as he could, and to put Middleton in a similar situation
to defend himself.

Mahtoree had not mistaken his man, in selecting the one he did to execute his bloody purpose.
He had chosen one of those ruthless savages, more or less of whom are to be found in every
tribe, who had purchased a certain share of military reputation, by the exhibition of a hardihood
that found its impulses in an innate love of cruelty. Contrary to the high and chivalrous sentiment,
which among the Indians of the prairies renders it a deed of even greater merit to bear off
the trophy of victory from a fallen foe, than to slay him, he had been remarkable for preferring
the pleasure of destroying life, to the glory of striking the dead. While the more self-devoted
and ambitious braves were intent on personal honour, he had always been seen, established behind
some favourable cover, depriving the wounded of hope, by finishing that which a more gallant
warrior had begun. In all the cruelties of the tribe he had ever been foremost; and no Sioux
was so uniformly found on the side of merciless councils.

He had awaited, with an impatience which his long practised restraint could with difficulty
subdue, for the moment to arrive when he might proceed to execute the wishes of the great chief,
without whose approbation and powerful protection he would not have dared to undertake a step,
that had so many opposers in the nation. But events had been hastening to an issue, between
the hostile parties; and the time had now arrived, greatly to his secret and malignant joy,
when he was free to act his will.

The trapper found him distributing knives to the ferocious hags, who received the presents
chanting a low monotonous song, that recalled the losses of their people, in various conflicts
with the whites, and which extolled the pleasures and glory of revenge. The appearance of such
a group was enough of itself to have deterred one, less accustomed to such sights than the
old man, from trusting himself within the circle of their wild and repulsive rites.

Each of the crones, as she received the weapon, commenced a slow and measured, but ungainly,
step, around the savage, until the whole were circling him in a sort of magic dance. The movements
were timed, in some degree, by the words of their songs, as were their gestures by the ideas.
When they spoke of their own losses, they tossed their long straight locks of grey into the
air, or suffered them to fall in confusion upon their withered necks; but as the sweetness
of returning blow for blow was touched upon, by any among them, it was answered by a common
howl, as well as by gestures, that were sufficiently expressive of the manner in which they
were exciting themselves to the necessary state of fury.

Into the very centre of this ring of seeming demons, the trapper now stalked, with the same
calmness and observation as he would have walked into a village church. No other change was
made by his appearance, than a renewal of the threatening gestures, with, if possible, a still
less equivocal display of their remorseless intentions. Making a sign for them to cease, the
old man demanded--

"Why do the mothers of the Tetons sing with bitter tongues? The Pawnee prisoners are not yet
in their village; their young men have not come back loaded with scalps!"

He was answered by a general howl, and a few of the boldest of the furies even ventured to
approach him, flourishing their knives within a dangerous proximity of his own steady eye-balls.

"It is a warrior you see, and no runner of the Long-knives, whose face grows paler at the sight
of a tomahawk," returned the trapper, without moving a muscle. "Let the Sioux women think;
if one White-skin dies, a hundred spring up where he falls."

Still the hags made no other answer, than by increasing their speed in the circle, and occasionally
raising the threatening expressions of their chant, into louder and more intelligible strains.
Suddenly, one of the oldest, and the most ferocious of them all, broke out of the ring, and
skirred away in the direction of her victims, like a rapacious bird, that having wheeled on
poised wings, for the time necessary to ensure its object, makes the final dart upon its prey.
The others followed, a disorderly and screaming flock, fearful of being too late to reap their
portion of the sanguinary pleasure.

"Mighty medicine of my people!" shouted the old man, in the Teton tongue; "lift your voice
and speak, that the Sioux nation may hear."

Whether Asinus had acquired so much knowledge, by his recent experience, as to know the value
of his sonorous properties, or the strange spectacle of a dozen hags flitting past him, filling
the air with such sounds as were even grating to the ears of an ass, most moved his temper,
it is certain that the animal did that which Obed was requested to do, and probably with far
greater effect than if the naturalist had strove with his mightiest effort to be heard. It
was the first time the strange beast had spoken, since his arrival in the encampment. Admonished
by so terrible a warning, the hags scattered themselves, like vultures frightened from their
prey, still screaming, and but half diverted from their purpose.

In the mean time the sudden appearance, and the imminency of the danger, quickened the blood
in the veins of Paul and Middleton, more than all their laborious frictions, and physical expedients.
The former had actually risen to his feet, and assumed an attitude which perhaps threatened
more than the worthy bee-hunter was able to perform, and even the latter had mounted to his
knees, and shown a disposition to do good service for his life. The unaccountable release of
the captives from their bonds was attributed, by the hags, to the incantations of the medicine;
and the mistake was probably of as much service, as the miraculous and timely interposition
of Asinus in their favour.

"Now is the time to come out of our ambushment," exclaimed the old man, hastening to join his
friends, "and to make open and manful war. It would have been policy to have kept back the
struggle, until the Captain was in better condition to join, but as we have unmasked our battery,
why, we must maintain the ground--"

He was interrupted by feeling a gigantic hand on his shoulder. Turning, under a sort of confused
impression that necromancy was actually abroad in the place, he found that he was in the hands
of a sorcerer no less dangerous and powerful than Ishmael Bush. The file of the squatter's
well-armed sons, that was seen issuing from behind the still standing tent of Mahtoree, explained
at once, not only the manner in which their rear had been turned, while their attention had
been so earnestly bestowed on matters in front, but the utter impossibility of resistance.

Neither Ishmael, nor his sons deemed it necessary to enter into prolix explanations. Middleton
and Paul were bound again, with extraordinary silence and despatch, and this time not even
the aged trapper was exempt from a similar fortune. The tent was struck, the females placed
upon the horses, and the whole were on the way towards the squatter's encampment, with a celerity
that might well have served to keep alive the idea of magic.

During this summary and brief disposition of things, the disappointed agent of Mahtoree and
his callous associates were seen flying across the plain, in the direction of the retiring
families; and when Ishmael left the spot with his prisoners and his booty, the ground, which
had so lately been alive with the bustle and life of an extensive Indian encampment, was as
still and empty as any other spot in those extensive wastes.

CHAPTER XXX

               Is this proceeding just and honourable?
                                                   --Shakspeare.

During the occurrence of these events on the upland plain, the warriors on the bottom had not
been idle. We left the adverse bands watching one another on the opposite banks of the stream,
each endeavouring to excite its enemy to some act of indiscretion, by the most reproachful
taunts and revilings. But the Pawnee chief was not slow to discover that his crafty antagonist
had no objection to waste the time so idly, and, as they mutually proved, in expedients that
were so entirely useless. He changed his plans, accordingly, and withdrew from the bank, as
has been already explained through the mouth of the trapper, in order to invite the more numerous
host of the Siouxes to cross. The challenge was not accepted, and the Loups were compelled
to frame some other method to attain their end.

Instead of any longer throwing away the precious moments, in fruitless endeavours to induce
his foe to cross the stream, the young partisan of the Pawnees led his troops, at a swift gallop,
along its margin, in quest of some favourable spot, where by a sudden push he might throw his
own band without loss to the opposite shore. The instant his object was discovered, each mounted
Teton received a footman behind him, and Mahtoree was still enabled to concentrate his whole
force against the effort. Perceiving that his design was anticipated, and unwilling to blow
his horses by a race that would disqualify them for service, even after they had succeeded
in outstripping the more heavily-burdened cattle of the Siouxes, Hard-Heart drew up, and came
to a dead halt on the very margin of the water-course.

As the country was too open for any of the usual devices of savage warfare, and time was so
pressing, the chivalrous Pawnee resolved to bring on the result by one of those acts of personal
daring, for which the Indian braves are so remarkable, and by which they often purchase their
highest and dearest renown. The spot he had selected was favourable to such a project. The
river, which throughout most of its course was deep and rapid, had expanded there to more than
twice its customary width, and the rippling of its waters proved that it flowed over a shallow
bottom. In the centre of the current there was an extensive and naked bed of sand, but a little
raised above the level of the stream and of a colour and consistency which warranted, to a
practised eye, that it afforded a firm and safe foundation for the foot. To this spot the partisan
now turned his wistful gaze, nor was he long in making his decision. First speaking to his
warriors, and apprising them of his intentions, he dashed into the current, and partly by swimming,
and more by the use of his horse's feet, he reached the island in safety.

The experience of Hard-Heart had not deceived him. When his snorting steed issued from the
water, he found himself on a tremendous but damp and compact bed of sand, that was admirably
adapted to the exhibition of the finest powers of the animal. The horse seemed conscious of
the advantage, and bore his warlike rider, with an elasticity of step and a loftiness of air,
that would have done no discredit to the highest trained and most generous charger. The blood
of the chief himself quickened with the excitement of his situation. He sat the beast as if
conscious that the eyes of two tribes were on his movements; and as nothing could be more acceptable
and grateful to his own band, than this display of native grace and courage, so nothing could
be more taunting and humiliating to their enemies.

The sudden appearance of the Pawnee on the sands was announced among the Tetons, by a general
yell of savage anger. A rush was made to the shore, followed by a discharge of fifty arrows
and a few fusees, and, on the part of several braves, there was a plain manifestation of a
desire to plunge into the water, in order to punish the temerity of their insolent foe. But
a call and a mandate, from Mahtoree, checked the rising, and nearly ungovernable, temper of
his band. So far from allowing a single foot to be wet, or a repetition of the fruitless efforts
of his people to drive away their foe with missiles, the whole of the party was commanded to
retire from the shore, while he himself communicated his intentions to one or two of his most
favoured followers.

When the Pawnees observed the rush of their enemies, twenty warriors rode into the stream;
but so soon as they perceived that the Tetons had withdrawn, they fell back to a man, leaving
the young chief to the support of his own often-tried skill and well-established courage. The
instructions of Hard-Heart, on quitting his band, had been worthy of the self-devotion and
daring of his character. So long as single warriors came against him, he was to be left to
the keeping of the Wahcondah and his own arm; but should the Siouxes attack him in numbers,
he was to be sustained, man for man, even to the extent of his whole force. These generous
orders were strictly obeyed; and though so many hearts in the troop panted to share in the
glory and danger of their partisan, not a warrior was found, among them all, who did not know
how to conceal his impatience under the usual mask of Indian self-restraint. They watched the
issue with quick and jealous eyes, nor did a single exclamation of surprise escape them, when
they saw, as will soon be apparent, that the experiment of their chief was as likely to conduce
to peace as to war.

Mahtoree was not long in communicating his plans to his confidants, whom he as quickly dismissed
to join their fellows in the rear. The Teton entered a short distance into the stream and halted.
Here he raised his hand several times, with the palm outwards, and made several of those other
signs, which are construed into a pledge of amicable intentions among the inhabitants of those
regions. Then, as if to confirm the sincerity of his faith, he cast his fusee to the shore,
and entered deeper into the water, where he again came to a stand, in order to see in what
manner the Pawnee would receive his pledges of peace.

The crafty Sioux had not made his calculations on the noble and honest nature of his more youthful
rival in vain. Hard-Heart had continued galloping across the sands, during the discharge of
missiles and the appearance of a general onset, with the same proud and confident mien, as
that with which he had first braved the danger. When he saw the well-known person of the Teton
partisan enter the river, he waved his hand in triumph, and flourishing his lance, he raised
the thrilling war-cry of his people, as a challenge for him to come on. But when he saw the
signs of a truce, though deeply practised in the treachery of savage combats, he disdained
to show a less manly reliance on himself, than that which his enemy had seen fit to exhibit.
Riding to the farthest extremity of the sands, he cast his own fusee from him, and returned
to the point whence he had started.

The two chiefs were now armed alike. Each had his spear, his bow, his quiver, his little battle-axe,
and his knife; and each had, also, a shield of hides, which might serve as a means of defence
against a surprise from any of these weapons. The Sioux no longer hesitated, but advanced deeper
into the stream, and soon landed on a point of the island which his courteous adversary had
left free for that purpose. Had one been there to watch the countenance of Mahtoree, as he
crossed the water that separated him from the most formidable and the most hated of all his
rivals, he might have fancied that he could trace the gleamings of a secret joy, breaking through
the cloud which deep cunning and heartless treachery had drawn before his swarthy visage; and
yet there would have been moments, when he might have believed that the flashings of the Teton's
eye and the expansion of his nostrils, had their origin in a nobler sentiment, and one more
worthy of an Indian chief.

The Pawnee awaited the time of his enemy with calmness and dignity. The Teton made a short
run or two, to curb the impatience of his steed, and to recover his seat after the effort of
crossing, and then he rode into the centre of the place, and invited the other, by a courteous
gesture, to approach. Hard-Heart drew nigh, until he found himself at a distance equally suited
to advance or to retreat, and, in his turn, he came to a stand, keeping his glowing eye riveted
on that of his enemy. A long and grave pause succeeded this movement, during which these two
distinguished braves, who were now, for the first time, confronted, with arms in their hands,
sat regarding each other, like warriors who knew how to value the merits of a gallant foe,
however hated. But the mien of Mahtoree was far less stern and warlike than that of the partisan
of the Loups. Throwing his shield over his shoulder, as if to invite the confidence of the
other, he made a gesture of salutation and was the first to speak.

"Let the Pawnees go upon the hills," he said, "and look from the morning to the evening sun,
from the country of snows to the land of many flowers, and they will see that the earth is
very large. Why cannot the Red-men find room on it for all their villages?"

"Has the Teton ever known a warrior of the Loups come to his towns to beg a place for his lodge?"
returned the young brave, with a look in which pride and contempt were not attempted to be
concealed, "when the Pawnees hunt, do they send runners to ask Mahtoree if there are no Siouxes
on the prairies?"

"When there is hunger in the lodge of a warrior, he looks for the buffaloe, which is given
him for food," the Teton continued, struggling to keep down the ire excited by the other's
scorn. "The Wahcondah has made more of them than he has made Indians. He has not said, This
buffaloe shall be for a Pawnee, and that for a Dahcotah; this beaver for Konza, and that for
an Omawhaw. No; he said, There are enough. I love my red children, and I have given them great
riches. The swiftest horse shall not go from the village of the Tetons to the village of the
Loups in many suns. It is far from the towns of the Pawnees to the river of the Osages. There
is room for all that I love. Why then should a Red-man strike his brother?"

Hard-Heart dropped one end of his lance to the earth, and having also cast his shield across
his shoulder, he sat leaning lightly on the weapon, as he answered with a smile of no doubtful
expression--

"Are the Tetons weary of the hunts, and of the warpath? Do they wish to cook the venison, and
not to kill it. Do they intend to let the hair cover their heads, that their enemies shall
not know where to find their scalps? Go; a Pawnee warrior will never come among such Sioux
squaws for a wife!"

A frightful gleam of ferocity broke out of the restraint of the Dahcotah's countenance, as
he listened to this biting insult; but he was quick in subduing the tell-tale feeling, in an
expression much better suited to his present purpose.

"This is the way a young chief should talk of war," he answered with singular composure; "but
Mahtoree has seen the misery of more winters than his brother. When the nights have been long,
and darkness has been in his lodge, while the young men slept, he has thought of the hardships
of his people. He has said to himself, Teton, count the scalps in your smoke. They are all
red but two! Does the wolf destroy the wolf, or the rattler strike his brother? You know they
do not; therefore, Teton, are you wrong to go on a path that leads to the village of a Red-skin,
with a tomahawk in your hand."

"The Sioux would rob the warrior of his fame? He would say to his young men, Go, dig roots
in the prairies, and find holes to bury your tomahawks in; you are no longer braves!"

"If the tongue of Mahtoree ever says thus," returned the crafty chief, with an appearance of
strong indignation, "let his women cut it out, and burn it with the offals of the buffaloe.
No," he added, advancing a few feet nigher to the immovable Hard-Heart, as if in the sincerity
of confidence; "the Red-man can never want an enemy: they are plentier than the leaves on the
trees, the birds in the heavens, or the buffaloes on the prairies. Let my brother open his
eyes wide: does he no where see an enemy he would strike?"

"How long is it since the Teton counted the scalps of his warriors, that were drying in the
smoke of a Pawnee lodge? The hand that took them is here, and ready to make eighteen, twenty."

"Now, let not the mind of my brother go on a crooked path. If a Red-skin strikes a Red-skin
for ever, who will be masters of the prairies, when no warriors are left to say, 'They are
mine?' Hear the voices of the old men. They tell us that in their days many Indians have come
out of the woods under the rising sun, and that they have filled the prairies with their complaints
of the robberies of the Long-knives. Where a Pale-face comes, a Red-man cannot stay. The land
is too small. They are always hungry. See, they are here already!"

As the Teton spoke, he pointed towards the tents of Ishmael, which were in plain sight, and
then he paused, to await the effect of his words on the mind of his ingenuous foe. Hard-Heart
listened like one in whom a train of novel ideas had been excited by the reasoning of the other.
He mused for a minute before he demanded--

"What do the wise chiefs of the Sioux say must be done?"

"They think that the moccasin of every Pale-face should be followed, like the track of the
bear. That the Long-knife, who comes upon the prairie, should never go back. That the path
shall be open to those who come, and shut to those who go. Yonder are many. They have horses
and guns. They are rich, but we are poor. Will the Pawnees meet the Tetons in council? and
when the sun is gone behind the Rocky Mountains, they will say, This is for a Loup and this
for a Sioux."

"Teton--no! Hard-Heart has never struck the stranger. They come into his lodge and eat, and
they go out in safety. A mighty chief is their friend! When my people call the young men to
go on the war-path, the moccasin of Hard-Heart is the last. But his village is no sooner hid
by the trees, than it is the first. No, Teton; his arm will never be lifted against the stranger."

"Fool; die, with empty hands!" Mahtoree exclaimed, setting an arrow to his bow, and sending
it, with a sudden and deadly aim, full at the naked bosom of his generous and confiding enemy.

The action of the treacherous Teton was too quick, and too well matured, to admit of any of
the ordinary means of defence on the part of the Pawnee. His shield was hanging at his shoulder,
and even the arrow had been suffered to fall from its place, and lay in the hollow of the hand
which grasped his bow. But the quick eye of the brave had time to see the movement, and his
ready thoughts did not desert him. Pulling hard and with a jerk upon the rein, his steed reared
his forward legs into the air, and, as the rider bent his body low, the horse served for a
shield against the danger. So true, however, was the aim, and so powerful the force by which
it was sent, that the arrow entered the neck of the animal, and broke the skin on the opposite
side.

Quicker than thought Hard-Heart sent back an answering arrow. The shield of the Teton was transfixed,
but his person was untouched. For a few moments the twang of the bow and the glancing of arrows
were incessant, notwithstanding the combatants were compelled to give so large a portion of
their care to the means of defence. The quivers were soon exhausted; and though blood had been
drawn, it was not in sufficient quantities to impair the energy of the combat.

A series of masterly and rapid evolutions with the horses now commenced. The wheelings, the
charges, the advances, and the circuitous retreats, were like the flights of circling swallows.
Blows were struck with the lance, the sand was scattered in the air, and the shocks often seemed
to be unavoidably fatal; but still each party kept his seat, and still each rein was managed
with a steady hand. At length the Teton was driven to the necessity of throwing himself from
his horse, to escape a thrust that would otherwise have proved fatal. The Pawnee passed his
lance through the beast, uttering a shout of triumph as he galloped by. Turning in his tracks,
he was about to push the advantage, when his own mettled steed staggered and fell, under a
burden that he could no longer sustain. Mahtoree answered his premature cry of victory, and
rushed upon the entangled youth, with knife and tomahawk. The utmost agility of Hard-Heart
had not sufficed to extricate himself in season from the fallen beast. He saw that his case
was desperate. Feeling for his knife, he took the blade between a finger and thumb, and cast
it with admirable coolness at his advancing foe. The keen weapon whirled a few times in the
air, and its point meeting the naked breast of the impetuous Sioux, the blade was buried to
the buck-horn haft.

Mahtoree laid his hand on the weapon, and seemed to hesitate whether to withdraw it or not.
For a moment his countenance darkened with the most inextinguishable hatred and ferocity, and
then, as if inwardly admonished how little time he had to lose, he staggered to the edge of
the sands, and halted with his feet in the water. The cunning and duplicity, which had so long
obscured the brighter and nobler traits of his character, were lost in the never dying sentiment
of pride, which he had imbibed in youth.

"Boy of the Loups!" he said with a smile of grim satisfaction, "the scalp of a mighty Dahcotah
shall never dry in Pawnee smoke!"

Drawing the knife from the wound, he hurled it towards the enemy in disdain. Then shaking his
arm at his successful foe, his swarthy countenance appearing to struggle with volumes of scorn
and hatred, that he could not utter with the tongue, he cast himself headlong into one of the
most rapid veins of the current, his hand still waving in triumph above the fluid, even after
his body had sunk into the tide for ever. Hard-Heart was by this time free. The silence, which
had hitherto reigned in the bands, was suddenly broken by general and tumultuous shouts. Fifty
of the adverse warriors were already in the river, hastening to destroy or to defend the conqueror,
and the combat was rather on the eve of its commencement than near its termination. But to
all these signs of danger and need, the young victor was insensible. He sprang for the knife,
and bounded with the foot of an antelope along the sands, looking for the receding fluid which
concealed his prize. A dark, bloody spot indicated the place, and, armed with the knife, he
plunged into the stream, resolute to die in the flood, or to return with his trophy.

In the mean time, the sands became a scene of bloodshed and violence. Better mounted and perhaps
more ardent, the Pawnees had, however, reached the spot in sufficient numbers to force their
enemies to retire. The victors pushed their success to the opposite shore, and gained the solid
ground in the melee of the fight. Here they were met by all the unmounted Tetons, and, in their
turn, they were forced to give way.

The combat now became more characteristic and circumspect. As the hot impulses, which had driven
both parties to mingle in so deadly a struggle, began to cool, the chiefs were enabled to exercise
their influence, and to temper the assaults with prudence. In consequence of the admonitions
of their leaders, the Siouxes sought such covers as the grass afforded, or here and there some
bush or slight inequality of the ground, and the charges of the Pawnee warriors necessarily
became more wary, and of course less fatal.

In this manner the contest continued with a varied success, and without much loss. The Siouxes
had succeeded in forcing themselves into a thick growth of rank grass, where the horses of
their enemies could not enter, or where, when entered, they were worse than useless. It became
necessary to dislodge the Tetons from this cover, or the object of the combat must be abandoned.
Several desperate efforts had been repulsed, and the disheartened Pawnees were beginning to
think of a retreat, when the well-known war-cry of Hard-Heart was heard at hand, and at the
next instant the chief appeared in their centre, flourishing the scalp of the Great Sioux,
as a banner that would lead to victory.

He was greeted by a shout of delight, and followed into the cover, with an impetuosity that,
for the moment, drove all before it. But the bloody trophy in the hand of the partisan served
as an incentive to the attacked, as well as to the assailants. Mahtoree had left many a daring
brave behind him in his band, and the orator, who in the debates of that day had manifested
such pacific thoughts, now exhibited the most generous self-devotion, in order to wrest the
memorial of a man he had never loved, from the hands of the avowed enemies of his people.

The result was in favour of numbers. After a severe struggle, in which the finest displays
of personal intrepidity were exhibited by all the chiefs, the Pawnees were compelled to retire
upon the open bottom, closely pressed by the Siouxes, who failed not to seize each foot of
ground ceded by their enemies. Had the Tetons stayed their efforts on the margin of the grass,
it is probable that the honour of the day would have been theirs, notwithstanding the irretrievable
loss they had sustained in the death of Mahtoree. But the more reckless braves of the band
were guilty of an indiscretion, that entirely changed the fortunes of the fight, and suddenly
stripped them of their hard-earned advantages.

A Pawnee chief had sunk under the numerous wounds he had received, and he fell, a target for
a dozen arrows, in the very last group of his retiring party. Regardless alike of inflicting
further injury on their foes, and of the temerity of the act, the Sioux braves bounded forward
with a whoop, each man burning with the wish to reap the high renown of striking the body of
the dead. They were met by Hard-Heart and a chosen knot of warriors, all of whom were just
as stoutly bent on saving the honour of their nation, from so foul a stain. The struggle was
hand to hand, and blood began to flow more freely. As the Pawnees retired with the body, the
Siouxes pressed upon their footsteps, and at length the whole of the latter broke out of the
cover with a common yell, and threatened to bear down all opposition by sheer physical superiority.

The fate of Hard-Heart and his companions, all of whom would have died rather than relinquish
their object, would have been quickly sealed, but for a powerful and unlooked-for interposition
in their favour. A shout was heard from a little brake on the left, and a volley from the fatal
western rifle immediately succeeded. Some five or six Siouxes leaped forward in the death agony,
and every arm among them was as suddenly suspended, as if the lightning had flashed from the
clouds to aid the cause of the Loups. Then came Ishmael and his stout sons in open view, bearing
down upon their late treacherous allies, with looks and voices that proclaimed the character
of the succour.

The shock was too much for the fortitude of the Tetons. Several of their bravest chiefs had
already fallen, and those that remained were instantly abandoned by the whole of the inferior
herd. A few of the most desperate braves still lingered nigh the fatal symbol of their honour,
and there nobly met their deaths, under the blows of the re-encouraged Pawnees. A second discharge
from the rifles of the squatter and his party completed the victory.

The Siouxes were now to be seen flying to more distant covers, with the same eagerness and
desperation as, a few moments before, they had been plunging into the fight. The triumphant
Pawnees bounded forward in chase, like so many high-blooded and well-trained hounds. On every
side were heard the cries of victory, or the yell of revenge. A few of the fugitives endeavoured
to bear away the bodies of their fallen warriors, but the hot pursuit quickly compelled them
to abandon the slain, in order to preserve the living. Among all the struggles, which were
made on that occasion, to guard the honour of the Siouxes from the stain which their peculiar
opinions attached to the possession of the scalp of a fallen brave, but one solitary instance
of success occurred.

The opposition of a particular chief to the hostile proceedings in the councils of that morning
has been already seen. But, after having raised his voice in vain, in support of peace, his
arm was not backward in doing its duty in the war. His prowess has been mentioned; and it was
chiefly by his courage and example, that the Tetons sustained themselves in the heroic manner
they did, when the death of Mahtoree was known. This warrior, who, in the figurative language
of his people, was called "the Swooping Eagle," had been the last to abandon the hopes of victory.
When he found that the support of the dreaded rifle had robbed his band of the hard-earned
advantages, he sullenly retired amid a shower of missiles, to the secret spot where he had
hid his horse, in the mazes of the highest grass. Here he found a new and an entirely unexpected
competitor, ready to dispute with him for the possession of the beast. It was Bohrecheena,
the aged friend of Mahtoree; he whose voice had been given in opposition to his own wiser opinions,
transfixed with an arrow, and evidently suffering under the pangs of approaching death.

"I have been on my last war-path," said the grim old warrior, when he found that the real owner
of the animal had come to claim his property; "shall a Pawnee carry the white hairs of a Sioux
into his village, to be a scorn to his women and children?"

The other grasped his hand, answering to the appeal with the stern look of inflexible resolution.
With this silent pledge, he assisted the wounded man to mount. So soon as he had led the horse
to the margin of the cover, he threw himself also on its back, and securing his companion to
his belt, he issued on the open plain, trusting entirely to the well-known speed of the beast
for their mutual safety. The Pawnees were not long in catching a view of these new objects,
and several turned their steeds to pursue. The race continued for a mile without a murmur from
the sufferer, though in addition to the agony of his body, he had the pain of seeing his enemies
approach at every leap of their horses.

"Stop," he said, raising a feeble arm to check the speed of his companion; "the Eagle of my
tribe must spread his wings wider. Let him carry the white hairs of an old warrior into the
burnt-wood village!"

Few words were necessary, between men who were governed by the same feelings of glory, and
who were so well trained in the principles of their romantic honour. The Swooping Eagle threw
himself from the back of the horse, and assisted the other to alight. The old man raised his
tottering frame to its knees, and first casting a glance upward at the countenance of his countryman,
as if to bid him adieu, he stretched out his neck to the blow he himself invited. A few strokes
of the tomahawk, with a circling gash of the knife, sufficed to sever the head from the less
valued trunk. So weak was he that he leaned against the table. He rose, feeling the need of air,
but the bread had slowly risen in his gullet and remained there. Never had he felt so distressed,
so shattered, so ill at ease. To add to his discomfort, his eyes distressed him and he saw
objects in double. Soon he lost his sense of distance, and his glass seemed to be a league
away. He told himself that he was the play-thing of sensorial illusions and that he was incapable
of reacting. He stretched out on a couch, but instantly he was cradled as by the tossing of
a moving ship, and the affection of his heart increased.

He rose to his feet, determined to rid himself, by means of a digestive, of the food which
was choking him.

He again reached the dining room and sadly compared himself, in this
cabin, to passengers seized with sea-sickness.

Stumbling, he made his way to the closet, examined the mouth organ
without opening any of the stops, but instead took from a high shelf
a bottle of benedictine which he kept because of its form which to
him seemed suggestive of thoughts that were at once gently wanton
and vaguely mystic.

            
                                                   

But at this moment he remained indifferent, gazing with lack-lustre, staring eyes at this squat,
dark-green bottle which, at other times, had brought before him images of the medieval priories
by its old-fashioned monkish paunch, its head and neck covered with a parchment hood, its red wax
stamp quartered with three silver mitres against a field of azure and fastened at the neck, like
a papal bull, with bands of lead, its label inscribed in sonorous Latin, on paper that seemed
to have yellowed with age: Liquor Monachorum Benedictinorum Abbatiae Fiscannensis.

Under this thoroughly abbatial robe, signed with a cross and the ecclesiastic initials 'D.O.M.',
pressed in between its parchments and ligatures, slept an exquisitely fine saffron-colored liquid.
It breathed an aroma that seemed the quintessence of angelica and hyssop blended with sea-weeds
and of iodines and bromes hidden in sweet essences, and it stimulated
the palate with a spiritous ardor concealed under a virginal daintiness,
and charmed the sense of smell by a pungency enveloped in a caress
innocent and devout.

This deceit which resulted from the extraordinary disharmony between contents and container, between
the liturgic form of the flask and its so feminine and modern soul, had formerly stimulated Des
Esseintes to revery and, facing the bottle, he was inclined to think at great length of the
monks who sold it, the Benedictines of the Abbey of Fecamp who, belonging to the brotherhood
of Saint-Maur which had been celebrated for its controversial works
under the rule of Saint Benoit, followed neither the observances of
the white monks of Citeaux nor of the black monks of Cluny.

He could not but think of them as being like their brethren of the Middle Ages, cultivating simples,
heating retorts and distilling faultless panaceas and prescriptions.

He tasted a drop of this liquor and, for a few moments, had relief. But soon the fire, which
the dash of wine had lit in his bowels, revived. He threw down his napkin, returned to his
study, and paced the floor. He felt as if he were under a pneumatic clock, and a numbing weakness
stole from his brain through his limbs. Unable to endure it longer, he betook himself to the
garden. It was the first time he had done this since his arrival at Fontenay. There he found shelter beneath
a tree which radiated a circle of shadow. Seated on the lawn, he looked around with a besotted
air at the square beds of vegetables planted by the servants. He gazed, but it was only at the
end of an hour that he really saw them, for a greenish film floated before his eyes, permitting
him only to see, as in the depths of water, flickering images of
shifting tones.

But when he recovered his balance, he clearly distinguished the onions and cabbages, a garden
bed of lettuce further off, and, in the distance along the hedge, a row of white lillies recumbent
in the heavy air.

A smile played on his lips, for he suddenly recalled the strange comparison of old Nicandre,
who likened, in the point of form, the pistils of lillies to the genital organs of a donkey; and
he recalled also a passage from Albert le Grand, in which that thaumaturgist describes a strange way
of discovering whether a girl is still a virgin, by means of a lettuce.

These remembrances distracted him somewhat.

He examined the garden, interesting himself in the plants withered by the heat, and in the hot
ground whose vapors rose into the dusty air. Then, above the hedge which separated the garden
below from the embankment leading to the fort, he watched the urchins struggling and tumbling
on the ground.

He was concentrating his attention upon them when another younger, sorry little specimen appeared.
He had hair like seaweed covered with sand, two green bubbles beneath
his nose, and disgusting lips surrounded by a dirty white frame formed
by a slice of bread smeared with cheese and filled with pieces of
scallions.

Des Esseintes inhaled the air. A perverse appetite seized him.

This dirty slice made his mouth water. It seemed to him that his stomach, refusing all other nourishment,
could digest this shocking food, and that his palate would enjoy it as though it were a feast.

He
leaped up, ran to the kitchen and ordered a loaf, white cheese and green onions to be brought
from the village, emphasizing his desire for a slice exactly like the one being eaten by the child.
Then he returned to sit beneath the tree.

The little chaps were fighting with one another. They struggled for bits of bread which they shoved
into their cheeks, meanwhile sucking their fingers. Kicks and blows rained freely, and the weakest,
trampled upon, cried out.

At this sight, Des Esseintes recovered his animation. The interest he took in this fight distracted
his thoughts from his illness. Contemplating the blind fury of these urchins, he thought of
the cruel and abominable law of the struggle of existence; and, although these children were
mean, he could not help being interested in their futures, yet could not but believe that it
had been better for them had their mothers never given them birth.

In fact, all they could expect of life was rash, colic, fever, and measles in their earliest years;
slaps in the face and degrading drudgeries up to thirteen years; deceptions by women, sicknesses and
infidelity during manhood and, toward the last, infirmities and agonies in a poorhouse or asylum.

And
the future was the same for every one, and none in his good senses could envy his neighbor. The rich had
the same passions, the same anxieties, the same pains and the same illnesses, but in a different
environment; the same mediocre enjoyments, whether alcoholic, literary or carnal. There was
even a vague compensation in evils, a sort of justice which re-established the balance of misfortune
between the classes, permitting the poor to bear physical suffering
more easily, and making it difficult for the unresisting, weaker bodies
of the rich to withstand it.

How vain, silly and mad it is to beget brats!

And Des Esseintes thought of those ecclesiastics who had taken vows of sterility, yet were so
inconsistent as to canonize Saint Vincent de Paul, because he brought
vain tortures to innocent creatures.

By means of his hateful precautions, Vincent de Paul had deferred for years the death of unintelligent
and insensate beings, in such a way that when they later became almost intelligent and sentient
to grief, they were able to anticipate the future, to await and fear that death of whose very
name they had of late been ignorant, some of them going as far to invoke it, in hatred of
that sentence of life which the monk inflicted upon them by an absurd theological code.

And since this old man's death, his ideas had prevailed. Abandoned children were sheltered instead
of being killed and yet their lives daily became increasingly rigorous
and barren!

Then, under pretext of liberty and progress, Society had discovered another means of increasing
man's miseries by tearing him from his home, forcing him to don a ridiculous uniform and carry
weapons, by brutalizing him in a slavery in every respect like that from which he had compassionately
freed the negro, and all to enable him to slaughter his neighbor without risking the scaffold
like ordinary murderers who operate single-handed, without uniforms
and with weapons that are less swift and deafening.

Des Esseintes wondered if there had ever been such a time as ours.

Our age invokes the causes of humanity, endeavors to perfect anaesthesia to suppress physical suffering.
Yet at the same time it prepares these very stimulants to increase moral wretchedness.

Ah! if ever this useless procreation should be abolished, it were now. But here, again, the laws enacted
by men like Portalis and Homais appeared strange and cruel.

In the matter of generation, Justice finds the agencies for deception to be quite natural. It is
a recognized and acknowledged fact. There is scarcely a home of any station that does not confide
its children to the drain pipes, or that does not employ contrivances
that are freely sold, and which it would enter no person's mind to
prohibit.

And yet, if these subterfuges proved insufficient, if the attempt miscarried and if, to remedy
matters, one had recourse to more efficacious measures, ah! then there were not prisons enough,
not municipal jails enough to confine those who, in good faith, were
condemned by other individuals who had that very evening, on the conjugal
bed, done their utmost to avoid giving birth to children.

The deceit itself was not a crime, it seemed. The crime lay in the justification of the deceit.

What Society considered a crime was the act of killing a being endowed with life; and yet, in
expelling a foetus, one destroyed an animal that was less formed and living and certainly less
intelligent and more ugly than a dog or a cat, although it is permissible to strangle these creatures
as soon as they are born.

It is only right to add, for the sake of fairness, thought Des Esseintes, that it is not the
awkward man, who generally loses no time in disappearing, but rather the woman, the victim of
his stupidity, who expiates the crime of having saved an innocent life.

Yet was it right that the world should be filled with such prejudice as to wish to repress manoeuvres
so natural that primitive man, the Polynesian savage, for instance, instinctively practices
them?

The servant interrupted the charitable reflections of Des Esseintes, who received the slice of
bread on a plate of vermeil. Pains shot through his heart. He did not have the courage to eat
this bread, for the unhealthy excitement of his stomach had ceased. A sensation of frightful
decay swept upon him. He was compelled to rise. The sun turned, and
slowly fell upon the place that he had lately occupied.

The heat became more heavy and fierce.

"Throw this slice of bread to those children who are murdering each other on the road," he ordered
his servant. "Let the weakest be crippled, be denied share in the prize, and be soundly thrashed
into the bargain, as they will be when they return to their homes with torn trousers and bruised
eyes.

This will give them an idea of the life that awaits them!"

And he entered the house and sank into his armchair.

"But I must try to eat something," he said.

And he attempted to soak a biscuit in old Constantia wine, several bottles of which remained in
his cellar.

That wine, the color of slightly burned onions, partaking of Malaga and Port, but with a specially
luscious flavor, and an after-taste of grapes dried by fiery suns, had often comforted him,
given a new energy to his stomach weakened by the fasts which he was forced to undergo. But
this cordial, usually so efficacious, now failed. Then he thought that an emollient might perhaps
counteract the fiery pains which were consuming him, and he took out the Nalifka, a Russian
liqueur, contained in a bottle frosted with unpolished glass.

This unctuous raspberry-flavored syrup also failed. Alas! the time was far off when, enjoying
good health, Des Esseintes had ridden to his house in the hot summer days in a sleigh, and there, covered
with furs wrapped about his chest, forced himself to shiver, saying, as he listened attentively
to the chattering of his teeth: "Ah, how biting this wind is! It is freezing!" Thus he had
almost succeeded in convincing himself that it was cold.

Unfortunately, such remedies as these had failed of their purpose ever since his sickness became
vital.

With all this, he was unable to make use of laudanum: instead of allaying the pain, this sedative
irritated him even to the degree of depriving him of rest. At one time he had endeavored to procure
visions through opium and hashish, but these two substances had led
to vomitings and intense nervous disturbances.

He had instantly been forced to give up the idea of taking them, and without the aid of these
coarse stimulants, demand of his brain alone to transport him into the land of dreams, far,
far from life.

"What a day!" he said to himself, sponging his neck, feeling every ounce of his strength dissolve
in perspiration; a feverish agitation still prevented him from remaining
in one spot; once more he walked up and down, trying every chair in
the room in turn.

Wearied of the struggle, at last he fell against his bureau and leaning mechanically against the
table, without thinking of anything, he touched an astrolabe which rested on a mass of books
and notes and served as a paper weight.

He had purchased this engraved and gilded copper instrument (it had come from Germany and dated from
the seventeenth century) of a second-hand Paris dealer, after a visit to the Cluny Museum,
where he had stood for a long while in ecstatic admiration before a marvelous astrolabe made
of chiseled ivory, whose cabalistic appearance enchanted him.

This
paper weight evoked many reminiscences within him. Aroused and actuated
by the appearance of this trinket, his thoughts rushed from Fontenay
to Paris, to the curio shop where he had purchased it, then returned
to the Museum, and he mentally beheld the ivory astrolabe, while his
unseeing eyes continued to gaze upon the copper astrolabe on the table.

Then
he left the Museum and, without quitting the town, strolled down the
streets, wandered through the rue du Sommerard and the boulevard Saint-Michel,
branched off into the neighboring streets, and paused before certain
shops whose quite extraordinary appearance and profusion had often
attracted him.

Beginning with an astrolabe, this spiritual jaunt
ended in the cafes of the Latin Quarter.

He remembered how these
places were crowded in the rue Monsieur-le-Prince and at the end of
the rue de Vaugirard, touching the Odeon; sometimes they followed
one another like the old riddecks of the Canal-aux-Harengs, at Antwerp,
each of which revealed a front, the counterpart of its neighbor.

Through
the half-opened doors and the windows dimmed with colored panes or
curtains, he had often seen women who walked about like geese; others,
on benches, rested their elbows on the marble tables, humming, their
temples resting between their hands; still others strutted and posed
in front of mirrors, playing with their false hair pomaded by hair-dressers;
others, again, took money from their purses and methodically sorted
the different denominations in little heaps.

Most of them had heavy
features, hoarse voices, flabby necks and painted eyes; and all of
them, like automatons, moved simultaneously upon the same impulse,
flung the same enticements with the same tone and uttered the identical
queer words, the same odd inflections and the same smile.

Certain
ideas associated themselves in the mind of Des Esseintes, whose reveries
came to an end, now that he recalled this collection of coffee-houses
and streets.

He understood the significance of those cafes which
reflected the state of soul of an entire generation, and from it he
discovered the synthesis of the period.

And, in fact, the symptoms
were certain and obvious. The houses of prostitution disappeared,
and as soon as one of them closed, a cafe began to operate.

This
restriction of prostitution which proved profitable to clandestine
loves, evidently arose from the incomprehensible illusions of men
in the matter of carnal life.

Monstrous as it may appear, these haunts
satisfied an ideal.

The air of settled gloom, which had taken possession of the squatter's countenance, lighted
for an instant with a look of dull drollery, as he answered--

"Different people might judge differently, Esther, of the virtue of the man's art. But sin'
it is your wish to let him depart, I will not plough the prairie to make the walking rough.
Friend, you are at liberty to go into the settlements, and there I would advise you to tarry,
as men like me who make but few contracts, do not relish the custom of breaking them so easily."

"And now, Ishmael," resumed his conquering wife, "in order to keep a quiet family and to smother
all heart-burnings between us, show yonder Red-skin and his daughter," pointing to the aged
Le Balafre and the widowed Tachechana, "the way to their village, and let us say to them--God
bless you, and farewell, in the same breath!"

"They are the captives of the Pawnee, according to the rules of Indian warfare, and I cannot
meddle with his rights."

"Beware the devil, my man! He's a cheat and a tempter, and none can say they ar' safe with
his awful delusions before their eyes! Take the advice of one who has the honour of your name
at heart, and send the tawny Jezebel away."

The squatter laid his broad hand on her shoulder, and looking her steadily in the eye, he answered,
in tones that were both stern and solemn--

"Woman, we have that before us which calls our thoughts to other matters than the follies you
mean. Remember what is to come, and put your silly jealousy to sleep."

"It is true, it is true," murmured his wife, moving back among her daughters; "God forgive
me, that I should forget it!"

"And now, young man; you, who have so often come into my clearing, under the pretence of lining
the bee into his hole," resumed Ishmael, after a momentary pause, as if to recover the equilibrium
of his mind, "with you there is a heavier account to settle. Not satisfied with rummaging my
camp, you have stolen a girl who is akin to my wife, and who I had calculated to make one day
a daughter of my own."

A stronger sensation was produced by this, than by any of the preceding interrogations. All
the young men bent their curious eyes on Paul and Ellen, the former of whom seemed in no small
mental confusion, while the latter bent her face on her bosom in shame.

"Harkee, friend Ishmael Bush," returned the bee-hunter, who found that he was expected to answer
to the charge of burglary, as well as to that of abduction; "that I did not give the most civil
treatment to your pots and pails, I am not going to gainsay. If you will name the price you
put upon the articles, it is possible the damage may be quietly settled between us, and all
hard feelings forgotten. I was not in a church-going humour when we got upon your rock, and
it is more than probable there was quite as much kicking as preaching among your wares; but
a hole in the best man's coat can be mended by money. As to the matter of Ellen Wade, here,
it may not be got over so easily. Different people have different opinions on the subject of
matrimony. Some think it is enough to say yes and no, to the questions of the magistrate, or
of the parson, if one happens to be handy, in order to make a quiet house; but I think that
where a young woman's mind is fairly bent on going in a certain direction, it will be quite
as prudent to let her body follow. Not that I mean to say Ellen was not altogether forced to
what she did, and therefore she is just as innocent, in this matter, as yonder jackass, who
was made to carry her, and greatly against his will, too, as I am ready to swear he would say
himself, if he could speak as loud as he can bray."

"Nelly," resumed the squatter, who paid very little attention to what Paul considered a highly
creditable and ingenious vindication, "Nelly, this is a wide and a wicked world, on which you
have been in such a hurry to cast yourself. You have fed and you have slept in my camp for
a year, and I did hope that you had found the free air of the borders, enough to your mind
to wish to remain among us."

"Let the girl have her will," muttered Esther, from the rear; "he, who might have persuaded
her to stay, is sleeping in the cold and naked prairie, and little hope is left of changing
her humour; besides, a woman's mind is a wilful thing, and not easily turned from its waywardness,
as you know yourself, my man, or I should not be here the mother of your sons and daughters."

The squatter seemed reluctant to abandon his views of the abashed girl, so easily; and before
he answered to the suggestion of his wife, he turned his usual dull look along the line of
the curious countenances of his boys, as if to see whether there was not one among them fit
to fill the place of the deceased. Paul was not slow to observe the expression, and hitting
nigher than usual on the secret thoughts of the other, he believed he had fallen on an expedient
which might remove every difficulty.

"It is quite plain, friend Bush," he said, "that there are two opinions in this matter; yours
for your sons, and mine for myself. I see but one amicable way of settling this dispute, which
is as follows:--do you make a choice among your boys of any you will, and let us walk off together
for the matter of a few miles into the prairies; the one who stays behind, can never trouble
any man's house or his fixen, and the one who comes back may make the best of his way he can,
in the good wishes of the young woman."

"Paul!" exclaimed the reproachful, but smothered voice of Ellen.

"Never fear, Nelly," whispered the literal bee-hunter, whose straight-going mind suggested
no other motive of uneasiness, on the part of his mistress, than concern for himself; "I have
taken the measure of them all, and you may trust an eye that has seen to line many a bee into
his hole!"

"I am not about to set myself up as a ruler of inclinations," observed the squatter. "If the
heart of the child is truly in the settlements, let her declare it; she shall have no let or
hinderance from me. Speak, Nelly, and let what you say come from your wishes, without fear
or favour. Would you leave us to go with this young man into the settled countries, or will
you tarry and share the little we have to give, but which to you we give so freely?"

Thus called upon to decide, Ellen could no longer hesitate. The glance of her eye was at first
timid and furtive. But as the colour flushed her features, and her breathing became quick and
excited, it was apparent that the native spirit of the girl was gaining the ascendency over
the bashfulness of sex.

"You took me a fatherless, impoverished, and friendless orphan," she said, struggling to command
her voice, "when others, who live in what may be called affluence compared to your state, chose
to forget me; and may Heaven in its goodness bless you for it! The little I have done, will
never pay you for that one act of kindness. I like not your manner of life; it is different
from the ways of my childhood, and it is different from my wishes; still, had you not led this
sweet and unoffending lady from her friends, I should never have quitted you, until you yourself
had said, Go, and the blessing of God go with you!'"

"The act was not wise, but it is repented of; and so far as it can be done, in safety, it shall
be repaired. Now, speak freely, will you tarry, or will you go?"

"I have promised the lady," said Ellen, dropping her eyes again to the earth, "not to leave
her; and after she has received so much wrong from our hands, she may have a right to claim
that I keep my word."

"Take the cords from the young man," said Ishmael. When the order was obeyed, he motioned for
all his sons to advance, and he placed them in a row before the eyes of Ellen. "Now let there
be no trifling, but open your heart. Here ar' all I have to offer, besides a hearty welcome."

The distressed girl turned her abashed look from the countenance of one of the young men to
that of another, until her eye met the troubled and working features of Paul. Then nature got
the better of forms. She threw herself into the arms of the bee-hunter, and sufficiently proclaimed
her choice by sobbing aloud. Ishmael signed to his sons to fall back, and evidently mortified,
though perhaps not disappointed by the result, he no longer hesitated.

"Take her," he said, "and deal honestly and kindly by her. The girl has that in her which should
make her welcome, in any man's house, and I should be loth to hear she ever came to harm. And
now I have settled with you all, on terms that I hope you will not find hard, but, on the contrary,
just and manly. I have only another question to ask, and that is of the Captain; do you choose
to profit by my teams in going into the settlements, or not?"

"I hear, that some soldiers of my party are looking for me near the villages of the Pawnees,"
said Middleton, "and I intend to accompany this chief, in order to join my men."

"Then the sooner we part the better. Horses are plenty on the bottom. Go; make your choice,
and leave us in peace."

"That is impossible, while the old man, who has been a friend of my family near half a century,
is left a prisoner. What has he done, that he too is not released?

"Ask no questions that may lead to deceitful answers," sullenly returned the squatter; "I have
dealings of my own with that trapper, that it may not befit an officer of the States to meddle
with. Go, while your road is open."

"The man may be giving you honest counsel, and that which it concerns you all to hearken to,"
observed the old captive, who seemed in no uneasiness at the extraordinary condition in which
he found himself. "The Siouxes are a numberless and bloody-minded race, and no one can say
how long it may be, afore they will be out again on the scent of revenge. Therefore I say to
you, go, also; and take especial heed, in crossing the bottoms, that you get not entangled
again in the fires, for the honest hunters often burn the grass at this season, in order that
the buffaloes may find a sweeter and a greener pasturage in the spring."

"I should forget not only my gratitude, but my duty to the laws, were I to leave this prisoner
in your hands, even by his own consent, without knowing the nature of his crime, in which we
may have all been his innocent accessaries."

"Will it satisfy you to know, that he merits all he will receive?"

"It will at least change my opinion of his character."

"Look then at this," said Ishmael, placing before the eyes of the Captain the bullet that had
been found about the person of the dead Asa; "with this morsel of lead did he lay low as fine
a boy as ever gave joy to a parent's eyes!"

"I cannot believe that he has done this deed, unless in self-defence, or on some justifiable
provocation. That he knew of the death of your son, I confess, for he pointed out the brake
in which the body lay, but that he has wrongfully taken his life, nothing but his own acknowledgment
shall persuade me to believe."

"I have lived long," commenced the trapper, who found, by the general pause, that he was expected
to vindicate himself from the heavy imputation, "and much evil have I seen in my day. Many
are the prowling bears and leaping panthers that I have met, fighting for the morsel which
has been thrown in their way; and many are the reasoning men, that I have looked on striving
against each other unto death, in order that human madness might also have its hour. For myself,
I hope, there is no boasting in saying, that though my hand has been needed in putting down
wickedness and oppression, it has never struck a blow of which its owner will be ashamed to
hear, at a reckoning that shall be far mightier than this."

"If my father has taken life from one of his tribe," said the young Pawnee, whose quick eye
had read the meaning of what was passing, in the bullet and in the countenances of the others,
"let him give himself up to the friends of the dead, like a warrior. He is too just to need
thongs to lead him to judgment."

"Boy, I hope you do me justice. If I had done the foul deed, with which they charge me, I should
have manhood enough to come and offer my head to the blow of punishment, as all good and honest
Red-men do the same." Then giving his anxious Indian friend a look, to re-assure him of his
innocence, he turned to the rest of his attentive and interested listeners, as he continued
in English, "I have a short story to tell, and he that believes it will believe the truth,
and he that disbelieves it will only lead himself astray, and perhaps his neighbour too. We
were all out-lying about your camp, friend squatter, as by this time you may begin to suspect,
when we found that it contained a wronged and imprisoned lady, with intentions neither more
honest nor dishonest than to set her free, as in nature and justice she had a right to be.
Seeing that I was more skilled in scouting than the others, while they lay back in the cover,
I was sent upon the plain, on the business of the reconnoitrings. You little thought that one
was so nigh, who saw into all the circumventions of your hunt; but there was I, sometimes flat
behind a bush or a tuft of grass, sometimes rolling down a hill into a bottom, and little did
you dream that your motions were watched, as the panther watches the drinking deer. Lord, squatter,
when I was a man in the pride and strength of my days, I have looked in at the tent door of
the enemy, and they sleeping, ay, and dreaming too, of being at home and in peace! I wish there
was time to give you the partic--"

"Proceed with your explanation," interrupted Middleton.

"Ah! and a bloody and wicked sight it was. There I lay in a low bed of grass, as two of the
hunters came nigh each other. Their meeting was not cordial, nor such as men, who meet in a
desert, should give each other; but I thought they would have parted in peace, until I saw
one put his rifle to the other's back, and do what I call a treacherous and sinful murder.
It was a noble and a manly youth, that boy--Though the powder burnt his coat, he stood the
shock for more than a minute, before he fell. Then was he brought to his knees, and a desperate
and manful fight he made to the brake, like a wounded bear seeking a cover!"

"And why, in the name of heavenly justice, did you conceal this?" cried Middleton.

"What! think you, Captain, that a man, who has spent more than threescore years in the wilderness,
has not learned the virtue of discretion. What red warrior runs to tell the sights he has seen,
until a fitting time? I took the Doctor to the place, in order to see whether his skill might
not come in use; and our friend, the bee-hunter, being in company, was knowing to the fact
that the bushes held the body."

"Ay; it ar' true," said Paul; "but not knowing what private reasons might make the old trapper
wish to hush the matter up, I said as little about the thing as possible, which was just nothing
at all."

"And who was the perpetrator of this deed?" demanded Middleton.

"If by perpetrator you mean him who did the act, yonder stands the man; and a shame, and a
disgrace is it to our race, that he is of the blood and family of the dead."

"He lies! he lies!" shrieked Abiram. "I did no murder; I gave but blow for blow."

The voice of Ishmael was deep, and even awful, as he answered--

"It is enough. Let the old man go. Boys, put the brother of your mother in his place."

"Touch me not!" cried Abiram. "I'll call on God to curse you if you touch me!"

The wild and disordered gleam of his eye, at first induced the young men to arrest their steps;
but when Abner, older and more resolute than the rest, advanced full upon him, with a countenance
that bespoke the hostile state of his mind, the affrighted criminal turned, and, making an
abortive effort to fly, fell with his face to the earth, to all appearance perfectly dead.
Amid the low exclamations of horror which succeeded, Ishmael made a gesture which commanded
his sons to bear the body into the tent.

"Now," he said, turning to those who were strangers in his camp, "nothing is left to be done,
but for each to go his own road. I wish you all well; and to you, Ellen, though you may not
prize the gift, I say, God bless you!"

Middleton, awe-struck by what he believed a manifest judgment of Heaven, made no further resistance,
but prepared to depart. The arrangements were brief, and soon completed. When they were all
ready, they took a short and silent leave of the squatter and his family; and then the whole
of the singularly constituted party were seen slowly and silently following the victorious
Pawnee towards his distant villages.

CHAPTER XXXII

                       And I beseech you,
               Wrest once the law, to your authority:
               To do a great right, do a little wrong.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

Ishmael awaited long and patiently for the motley train of Hard-Heart to disappear. When his
scout reported that the last straggler of the Indians, who had joined their chief so soon as
he was at such a distance from the encampment as to excite no jealousy by their numbers, had
gone behind the most distant swell of the prairie, he gave forth the order to strike his tents.
The cattle were already in the gears, and the movables were soon transferred to their usual
places in the different vehicles. When all these arrangements were completed, the little wagon,
which had so long been the tenement of Inez, was drawn before the tent, into which the insensible
body of the kidnapper had been borne, and preparations were evidently made for the reception
of another prisoner. Then it was, as Abiram appeared, pale, terrified, and tottering beneath
a load of detected guilt, that the younger members of the family were first apprised that he
still belonged to the class of the living. A general and superstitious impression had spread
among them, that his crime had been visited by a terrible retribution from Heaven; and they
now gazed at him, as at a being who belonged rather to another world, than as a mortal, who,
like themselves, had still to endure the last agony before the great link of human existence
could be broken. The criminal himself appeared to be in a state, in which the most sensitive
and startling terror was singularly combined with total physical apathy. The truth was, that
while his person had been numbed by the shock, his susceptibility to apprehension kept his
agitated mind in unrelieved distress. When he found himself in the open air, he looked about
him, in order to gather, if possible, some evidences of his future fate, from the countenances
of those gathered round. Seeing every where grave but composed features, and meeting in no
eye any expression that threatened immediate violence, the miserable man began to revive; and,
by the time he was seated in the wagon, his artful faculties were beginning to plot the expedients
of parrying the just resentment of his kinsmen, or, if these should fail him, the means of
escaping from a punishment that his forebodings told him would be terrible.

Throughout the whole of these preparations Ishmael rarely spoke. A gesture, or a glance of
the eye, served to indicate his pleasure to his sons, and with these simple methods of communication,
all parties appeared content. When the signal was made to proceed, the squatter threw his rifle
into the hollow of his arm, and his axe across his shoulder, taking the lead as usual. Esther
buried herself in the wagon which contained her daughters; the young men took their customary
places among the cattle, or nigh the teams, and the whole proceeded, at their ordinary, dull,
but unremitted gait.

For the first time, in many a day, the squatter turned his back towards the setting sun. The
route he held was in the direction of the settled country, and the manner in which he moved
sufficed to tell his children, who had learned to read their father's determinations in his
mien, that their journey on the prairie was shortly to have an end. Still nothing else transpired
for hours, that might denote the existence of any sudden, or violent, revolution in the purposes
or feelings of Ishmael. During all that time he marched alone, keeping a few hundred rods in
front of his teams, seldom giving any sign of extraordinary excitement. Once or twice, indeed,
his huge figure was seen standing on the summit of some distant swell, with the head bent towards
the earth, as he leaned on his rifle; but then these moments of intense thought were rare,
and of short continuance. The train had long thrown its shadows towards the east, before any
material alteration was made in the disposition of their march. Water-courses were waded, plains
were passed, and rolling ascents risen and descended, without producing the smallest change.
Long practised in the difficulties of that peculiar species of travelling in which he was engaged,
the squatter avoided the more impracticable obstacles of their route by a sort of instinct,
invariably inclining to the right or left in season, as the formation of the land, the presence
of trees, or the signs of rivers forewarned him of the necessity of such movements.

At length the hour arrived when charity to man and beast required a temporary suspension of
labour. Ishmael chose the required spot with his customary sagacity. The regular formation
of the country, such as it has been described in the earlier pages of our book, had long been
interrupted by a more unequal and broken surface. There were, it is true, in general, the same
wide and empty wastes, the same rich and extensive bottoms, and that wild and singular combination
of swelling fields and of nakedness, which gives that region the appearance of an ancient country,
incomprehensibly stripped of its people and their dwellings. But these distinguishing features
of the rolling prairies had long been interrupted by irregular hillocks, occasional masses
of rock, and broad belts of forest.

Ishmael chose a spring, that broke out of the base of a rock some forty or fifty feet in elevation,
as a place well suited to the wants of his herds. The water moistened a small swale that lay
beneath the spot, which yielded, in return for the fecund gift, a scanty growth of grass. A
solitary willow had taken root in the alluvion, and profiting by its exclusive possession of
the soil, the tree had sent up its stem far above the crest of the adjacent rock, whose peaked
summit had once been shadowed by its branches. But its loveliness had gone with the mysterious
principle of life. As if in mockery of the meagre show of verdure that the spot exhibited,
it remained a noble and solemn monument of former fertility. The larger, ragged, and fantastic
branches still obtruded themselves abroad, while the white and hoary trunk stood naked and
tempest-riven. Not a leaf, nor a sign of vegetation, was to be seen about it. In all things
it proclaimed the frailty of existence, and the fulfilment of time.

Here Ishmael, after making the customary signal for the train to approach, threw his vast frame
upon the earth, and seemed to muse on the deep responsibility of his present situation. His
sons were not long in arriving; for the cattle no sooner scented the food and water than they
quickened their pace, and then succeeded the usual bustle and avocations of a halt.

The impression made by the scene of that morning was not so deep, or lasting, on the children
of Ishmael and Esther, as to induce them to forget the wants of nature. But while the sons
were searching among their stores, for something substantial to appease their hunger, and the
younger fry were wrangling about their simple dishes, the parents of the unnurtured family
were differently employed.

When the squatter saw that all, even to the reviving Abiram, were busy in administering to
their appetites, he gave his downcast partner a glance of his eye, and withdrew towards a distant
roll of the land, which bounded the view towards the east. The meeting of the pair, in this
naked spot, was like an interview held above the grave of their murdered son. Ishmael signed
to his wife to take a seat beside him on a fragment of rock, and then followed a space, during
which neither seemed disposed to speak.

"We have journeyed together long, through good and bad," Ishmael at length commenced: "much
have we had to try us, and some bitter cups have we been made to swallow, my woman; but nothing
like this has ever before lain in my path."

"It is a heavy cross for a poor, misguided, and sinful woman to bear!" returned Esther, bowing
her head to her knees, and partly concealing her face in her dress. "A heavy and a burdensome
weight is this to be laid upon the shoulders of a sister and a mother!"

"Ay; therein lies the hardship of the case. I had brought my mind to the punishment of that
houseless trapper, with no great strivings, for the man had done me few favours, and God forgive
me if I suspected him wrongfully of much evil! This is, however, bringing shame in at one door
of my cabin, in order to drive it out at the other. But shall a son of mine be murdered, and
he who did it go at large?--the boy would never rest!"

"Oh, Ishmael, we pushed the matter far. Had little been said, who would have been the wiser?
Our consciences might then have been quiet."

"Eest'er," said the husband, turning on her a reproachful but still a dull regard, "the hour
has been, my woman, when you thought another hand had done this wickedness."

"I did, I did the Lord gave me the feeling, as a punishment for my sins! but his mercy was
not slow in lifting the veil; I looked into the book, Ishmael, and there I found the words
of comfort."

"Have you that book at hand, woman; it may happen to advise in such a dreary business."

Esther fumbled in her pocket, and was not long in producing the fragment of a Bible, which
had been thumbed and smoke-dried till the print was nearly illegible. It was the only article,
in the nature of a book, that was to be found among the chattels of the squatter, and it had
been preserved by his wife, as a melancholy relic of more prosperous, and possibly of more
innocent, days. She had long been in the habit of resorting to it, under the pressure of such
circumstances as were palpably beyond human redress, though her spirit and resolution rarely
needed support under those that admitted of reparation through any of the ordinary means of
reprisal. In this manner Esther had made a sort of convenient ally of the word of God; rarely
troubling it for counsel, however, except when her own incompetency to avert an evil was too
apparent to be disputed. We shall leave casuists to determine how far she resembled any other
believers in this particular, and proceed directly with the matter before us.

"There are many awful passages in these pages, Ishmael," she said, when the volume was opened,
and the leaves were slowly turning under her finger, "and some there ar' that teach the rules
of punishment."

Her husband made a gesture for her to find one of those brief rules of conduct, which have
been received among all Christian nations as the direct mandates of the Creator, and which
have been found so just, that even they, who deny their high authority, admit their wisdom.
Ishmael listened with grave attention, as his companion read all those verses, which her memory
suggested, and which were thought applicable to the situation in which they found themselves.
He made her show him the words, which he regarded with a sort of strange reverence. A resolution
once taken was usually irrevocable, in one who was moved with so much difficulty. He put his
hand upon the book, and closed the pages himself, as much as to apprise his wife that he was
satisfied. Esther, who so well knew his character, trembled at the action, and casting a glance
at his steady eye, she said--

"And yet, Ishmael, my blood, and the blood of my children, is in his veins, cannot mercy be shown?"

"Woman," he answered sternly, "when we believed that miserable old trapper had done this deed,
nothing was said of mercy!"

Esther made no reply, but folding her arms upon her breast, she sat silent and thoughtful for
many minutes. Then she once more turned her anxious gaze upon the countenance of her husband,
where she found all passion and care apparently buried in the coldest apathy. Satisfied now,
that the fate of her brother was sealed, and possibly conscious how well he merited the punishment
that was meditated, she no longer thought of mediation. No more words passed between them.
Their eyes met for an instant, and then both arose and walked in profound silence towards the
encampment.

The squatter found his children expecting his return in the usual listless manner with which
they awaited all coming events. The cattle were already herded, and the horses in their gears,
in readiness to proceed, so soon as he should indicate that such was his pleasure. The children
were already in their proper vehicle, and, in short, nothing delayed the departure but the
absence of the parents of the wild brood.

"Abner," said the father, with the deliberation with which all his proceedings were characterised,
"take the brother of your mother from the wagon, and let him stand on the 'arth."

Abiram issued from his place of concealment, trembling, it is true, but far from destitute
of hopes, as to his final success in appeasing the just resentment of his kinsman. After throwing
a glance around him, with the vain wish of finding a single countenance in which he might detect
a solitary gleam of sympathy, he endeavoured to smother those apprehensions, that were by this
time reviving in their original violence, by forcing a sort of friendly communication between
himself and the squatter--

"The beasts are getting jaded, brother," he said, "and as we have made so good a march already,
is it not time to camp. To my eye you may go far, before a better place than this is found
to pass the night in."

"Tis well you like it. Your tarry here ar' likely to be long. My sons, draw nigh and listen.
Abiram White," he added, lifting his cap, and speaking with a solemnity and steadiness, that
rendered even his dull mien imposing, "you have slain my first-born, and according to the laws
of God and man must you die!"

The kidnapper started at this terrible and sudden sentence, with the terror that one would
exhibit who unexpectedly found himself in the grasp of a monster, from whose power there was
no retreat. Although filled with the most serious forebodings of what might be his lot, his
courage had not been equal to look his danger in the face, and with the deceitful consolation,
with which timid tempers are apt to conceal their desperate condition from themselves, he had
rather courted a treacherous relief in his cunning, than prepared himself for the worst.

"Die!" he repeated, in a voice that scarcely issued from his chest; "a man is surely safe among
his kinsmen!"

"So thought my boy," returned the squatter, motioning for the team, that contained his wife
and the girls, to proceed, as he very coolly examined the priming of his piece. "By the rifle
did you destroy my son; it is fit and just that you meet your end by the same weapon."

Abiram stared about him with a gaze that bespoke an unsettled reason. He even laughed, as if
he would not only persuade himself but others that what he heard was some pleasantry, intended
to try his nerves. But nowhere did his frightful merriment meet with an answering echo. All
around was solemn and still. The visages of his nephews were excited, but cold towards him,
and that of his former confederate frightfully determined. This very steadiness of mien was
a thousand times more alarming and hopeless than any violence could have proved. The latter
might possibly have touched his spirit and awakened resistance, but the former threw him entirely
on the feeble resources of himself.

"Brother," he said, in a hurried, unnatural whisper, "did I hear you?"

"My words are plain, Abiram White: thou hast done murder, and for the same must thou die!"

"Esther! sister, sister, will you leave me! Oh sister! do you hear my call?"

"I hear one speak from the grave!" returned the husky tones of Esther, as the wagon passed
the spot where the criminal stood. "It is the voice of my firstborn, calling aloud for justice!
God have mercy, God have mercy, on your soul!"

The team slowly pursued its route, and the deserted Abiram now found himself deprived of the
smallest vestige of hope. Still he could not summon fortitude to meet his death, and had not
his limbs refused to aid him, he would yet have attempted to fly. Then, by a sudden revolution
from hope to utter despair, he fell upon his knees, and commenced a prayer, in which cries
for mercy to God and to his kinsman were wildly and blasphemously mingled. The sons of Ishmael
turned away in horror at the disgusting spectacle, and even the stern nature of the squatter
began to bend before so abject misery.

"May that, which you ask of Him, be granted," he said; "but a father can never forget a murdered
child."

He was answered by the most humble appeals for time. A week, a day, an hour, were each implored,
with an earnestness commensurate to the value they receive, when a whole life is compressed
into their short duration. The squatter was troubled, and at length he yielded in part to the
petitions of the criminal. His final purpose was not altered, though he changed the means.
"Abner," he said, "mount the rock, and look on every side, that we may be sure none are nigh."

While his nephew was obeying this order, gleams of reviving hope were seen shooting across
the quivering features of the kidnapper. The report was favourable, nothing having life, the
retiring teams excepted, was to be seen. A messenger was, however, coming from the latter,
in great apparent haste. Ishmael awaited its arrival. He received from the hands of one of
his wondering and frighted girls a fragment of that book, which Esther had preserved with so
much care. The squatter beckoned the child away, and placed the leaves in the hands of the
criminal.

"Eest'er has sent you this," he said, "that, in your last moments, you may remember God."

"Bless her, bless her! a good and kind sister has she been to me. But time must be given, that
I may read; time, my brother, time!"

"Time shall not be wanting. You shall be your own executioner, and this miserable office shall
pass away from my hands."

Ishmael proceeded to put his new resolution in force. The immediate apprehensions of the kidnapper
were quieted, by an assurance that he might yet live for days, though his punishment was inevitable.
A reprieve, to one abject and wretched as Abiram, temporarily produced the same effects as
a pardon. He was even foremost in assisting in the appalling arrangements, and of all the actors,
in that solemn tragedy, his voice alone was facetious and jocular.

A thin shelf of the rock projected beneath one of the ragged arms of the willow. It was many
feet from the ground, and admirably adapted to the purpose which, in fact, its appearance had
suggested. On this little platform the criminal was placed, his arms bound at the elbows behind
his back, beyond the possibility of liberation, with a proper cord leading from his neck to
the limb of the tree. The latter was so placed, that when suspended the body could find no
foot-hold. The fragment of the Bible was placed in his hands, and he was left to seek his consolation
as he might from its pages.

"And now, Abiram White," said the squatter, when his sons had descended from completing this
arrangement, "I give you a last and solemn asking. Death is before you in two shapes. With
this rifle can your misery be cut short, or by that cord, sooner or later, must you meet your end."

"Let me yet live! Oh, Ishmael, you know not how sweet life is, when the last moment draws so nigh!"

"'Tis done," said the squatter, motioning for his assistants to follow the herds and teams.
"And now, miserable man, that it may prove a consolation to your end, I forgive you my wrongs,
and leave you to your God."

Ishmael turned and pursued his way across the plain, at his ordinary sluggish and ponderous
gait. Though his head was bent a little towards the earth, his inactive mind did not prompt
him to cast a look behind. Once, indeed, he thought he heard his name called, in tones that
were a little smothered, but they failed to make him pause.

At the spot where he and Esther had conferred, he reached the boundary of the visible horizon
from the rock. Here he stopped, and ventured a glance in the direction of the place he had
just quitted. The sun was near dipping into the plains beyond, and its last rays lighted the
naked branches of the willow. He saw the ragged outline of the whole drawn against the glowing
heavens, and he even traced the still upright form of the being he had left to his misery.
Turning the roll of the swell, he proceeded with the feelings of one, who had been suddenly
and violently separated from a recent confederate, for ever.

Within a mile, the squatter overtook his teams. His sons had found a place suited to the encampment
for the night, and merely awaited his approach to confirm their choice. Few words were necessary
to express his acquiescence. Every thing passed in a silence more general and remarkable than
ever. The chidings of Esther were not heard among her young, or if heard, they were more in
the tones of softened admonition, than in her usual, upbraiding, key.

No questions nor explanations passed between the husband and his wife. It was only as the latter
was about to withdraw among her children, for the night, that the former saw her taking a furtive
look at the pan of his rifle. Ishmael bade his sons seek their rest, announcing his intention
to look to the safety of the camp in person. When all was still, he walked out upon the prairie,
with a sort of sensation that he found his breathing among the tents too straitened. The night
was well adapted to heighten the feelings, which had been created by the events of the day.

The wind had risen with the moon, and it was occasionally sweeping over the plain, in a manner
that made it not difficult for the sentinel to imagine strange and unearthly sounds were mingling
in the blasts. Yielding to the extraordinary impulses of which he was the subject, he cast
a glance around, to see that all were slumbering in security, and then he strayed towards the
swell of land already mentioned. Here the squatter found himself at a point that commanded
a view to the east and to the west. Light fleecy clouds were driving before the moon, which
was cold and watery though there were moments, when its placid rays were shed from clear blue
fields, seeming to soften objects to its own mild loveliness.

For the first time, in a life of so much wild adventure, Ishmael felt a keen sense of solitude.
The naked prairies began to assume the forms of illimitable and dreary wastes and the rushing
of the wind sounded like the whisperings of the dead. It was not long before he thought a shriek
was borne past him on a blast. It did not sound like a call from earth but it swept frightfully
through the upper air mingled with the hoarse accompaniment of the wind. The teeth of the squatter
were compressed, and his huge hand grasped the rifle, as if it would crush the metal. Then
came a lull, a fresher blast, and a cry of horror that seemed to have been uttered at the very
portals of his ears. A sort of echo burst involuntarily from his own lips, as men shout under
unnatural excitement, and throwing his rifle across his shoulder he proceeded towards the rock
with the strides of a giant.

It was not often that the blood of Ishmael moved at the rate with which the fluid circulates
in the veins of ordinary men; but now he felt it ready to gush from every pore in his body.
The animal was aroused, in his most latent energies. Ever as he advanced he heard those shrieks,
which sometimes seemed ringing among the clouds, and sometimes passed so nigh, as to appear
to brush the earth. At length there came a cry, in which there could be no delusion, or to
which the imagination could lend no horror. It appeared to fill each cranny of the air, as
the visible horizon is often charged to fulness by one dazzling flash of the electric fluid.
The name of God was distinctly audible, but it was awfully and blasphemously blended with sounds
that may not be repeated. The squatter stopped, and for a moment he covered his ears with his
hands. When he withdrew the latter, a low and husky voice at his elbow asked in smothered tones--

"Ishmael, my man, heard ye nothing?"

"Hist," returned the husband, laying a powerful arm on Esther, without manifesting the smallest
surprise at the unlooked-for presence of his wife. "Hist, woman! if you have the fear of Heaven,
be still!"

A profound silence succeeded. Though the wind rose and fell as before, its rushing was no longer
mingled with those fearful cries. The sounds were imposing and solemn, but it was the solemnity
and majesty of nature.

"Let us go on," said Esther; "all is hushed."

"Woman, what has brought you here?" demanded her husband, whose blood had returned into its
former channels, and whose thoughts had already lost a portion of their excitement.

"Ishmael, he murdered our first-born; but it is not meet that the son of my mother should lie
upon the ground, like the carrion of a dog!"

"Follow," returned the squatter, again grasping his rifle, and striding towards the rock. The
distance was still considerable; and their approach, as they drew nigh the place of execution,
was moderated by awe. Many minutes had passed, before they reached a spot where they might
distinguish the outlines of the dusky objects.

"Where have you put the body?" whispered Esther. "See, here are pick and spade, that a brother
of mine may sleep in the bosom of the earth!"

The moon broke from behind a mass of clouds, and the eye of the woman was enabled to follow
the finger of Ishmael. It pointed to a human form swinging in the wind, beneath the ragged
and shining arm of the willow. Esther bent her head and veiled her eyes from the sight. But
Ishmael drew nigher, and long contemplated his work in awe, though not in compunction. The
leaves of the sacred book were scattered on the ground, and even a fragment of the shelf had
been displaced by the kidnapper in his agony. But all was now in the stillness of death. The
grim and convulsed countenance of the victim was at times brought full into the light of the
moon, and again as the wind lulled, the fatal rope drew a dark line across its bright disk.
The squatter raised his rifle, with extreme care, and fired. The cord was cut and the body
came lumbering to the earth a heavy and insensible mass.

Until now Esther had not moved nor spoken. But her hand was not slow to assist in the labour
of the hour. The grave was soon dug. It was instantly made to receive its miserable tenant.
As the lifeless form descended, Esther, who sustained the head, looked up into the face of
her husband with an expression of anguish, and said--

"Ishmael, my man, it is very terrible! I cannot kiss the corpse of my father's child!"

The squatter laid his broad hand on the bosom of the dead, and said--

"Abiram White, we all have need of mercy; from my soul do I forgive you! May God in Heaven
have pity on your sins!"

The woman bowed her face and imprinted her lips long and fervently on the pallid forehead of
her brother. After this came the falling clods and all the solemn sounds of filling a grave.
Esther lingered on her knees, and Ishmael stood uncovered while the woman muttered a prayer.
All was then finished.

On the following morning the teams and herds of the squatter were seen pursuing their course
towards the settlements. As they approached the confines of society the train was blended among
a thousand others. Though some of the numerous descendants of this peculiar pair were reclaimed
from their lawless and semi-barbarous lives, the principals of the family, themselves, were
never heard of more.

CHAPTER XXXIII

              --No leave take I; for I will ride
              As far as land will let me, by your side.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The passage of the Pawnee to his village was interrupted by no scene of violence. His vengeance
had been as complete as it was summary. Not even a solitary scout of the Siouxes was left on
the hunting grounds he was obliged to traverse, and of course the journey of Middleton's party
was as peaceful as if made in the bosom of the States. The marches were timed to meet the weakness
of the females. In short, the victors seemed to have lost every trace of ferocity with their
success, and appeared disposed to consult the most trifling of the wants of that engrossing
people, who were daily encroaching on their rights, and reducing the Red-men of the west, from
their state of proud independence to the condition of fugitives and wanderers.

Our limits will not permit a detail of the triumphal entry of the conquerors. The exultation
of the tribe was proportioned to its previous despondency. Mothers boasted of the honourable
deaths of their sons; wives proclaimed the honour and pointed to the scars of their husbands,
and Indian girls rewarded the young braves with songs of triumph. The trophies of their fallen
enemies were exhibited, as conquered standards are displayed in more civilised regions. The
deeds of former warriors were recounted by the aged men, and declared to be eclipsed by the
glory of this victory. While Hard-Heart himself, so distinguished for his exploits from boyhood
to that hour, was unanimously proclaimed and re-proclaimed the worthiest chief and the stoutest
brave that the Wahcondah had ever bestowed on his most favoured children, the Pawnees of the Loup.

Notwithstanding the comparative security in which Middleton found his recovered treasure, he
was not sorry to see his faithful and sturdy artillerists standing among the throng, as he
entered in the wild train, and lifting their voices, in a martial shout, to greet his return.
The presence of this force, small as it was, removed every shadow of uneasiness from his mind.
It made him master of his movements, gave him dignity and importance in the eyes of his new
friends, and would enable him to overcome the difficulties of the wide region which still lay
between the village of the Pawnees and the nearest fortress of his countrymen. A lodge was
yielded to the exclusive possession of Inez and Ellen; and even Paul, when he saw an armed
sentinel in the uniform of the States, pacing before its entrance, was content to stray among
the dwellings of the "Red-skins," prying with but little reserve into their domestic economy,
commenting sometimes jocularly, sometimes gravely, and always freely, on their different expedients,
or endeavouring to make the wondering housewives comprehend his quaint explanations of what
he conceived to be the better customs of the whites.

This enquiring and troublesome spirit found no imitators among the Indians. The delicacy and
reserve of Hard-Heart were communicated to his people. When every attention, that could be
suggested by their simple manners and narrow wants, had been fulfilled, no intrusive foot presumed
to approach the cabins devoted to the service of the strangers. They were left to seek their
repose in the manner which most comported with their habits and inclinations. The songs and
rejoicings of the tribe, however, ran far into the night, during the deepest hours of which,
the voice of more than one warrior was heard, recounting from the top of his lodge, the deeds
of his people and the glory of their triumphs.

Every thing having life, notwithstanding the excesses of the night, was abroad with the appearance
of the sun. The expression of exultation, which had so lately been seen on every countenance,
was now changed to one better suited to the feeling of the moment. It was understood by all,
that the Pale-faces, who had befriended their chief were about to take their final leave of
the tribe. The soldiers of Middleton, in anticipation of his arrival, had bargained with an
unsuccessful trader for the use of his boat, which lay in the stream ready to receive its cargo,
and nothing remained to complete the arrangements for the long journey.

Middleton did not see this moment arrive entirely without distrust. The admiration with which
Hard-Heart regarded Inez, had not escaped his jealous eye, any more than had the lawless wishes
of Mahtoree. He knew the consummate manner in which a savage could conceal his designs, and
he felt that it would be a culpable weakness to be unprepared for the worst. Secret instructions
were therefore given to his men, while the preparations they made were properly masked behind
the show of military parade, with which it was intended to signalise their departure.

The conscience of the young soldier reproached him, when he saw the whole tribe accompanying
his party to the margin of the stream, with unarmed hands and sorrowful countenances. They
gathered in a circle around the strangers and their chief, and became not only peaceful, but
highly interested observers of what was passing. As it was evident that Hard-Heart intended
to speak, the former stopped, and manifested their readiness to listen, the trapper performing
the office of interpreter. Then the young chief addressed his people, in the usual metaphorical
language of an Indian. He commenced by alluding to the antiquity and renown of his own nation.
He spoke of their successes in the hunts and on the war-path; of the manner in which they had
always known how to defend their rights and to chastise their enemies. After he had said enough
to manifest his respect for the greatness of the Loups, and to satisfy the pride of the listeners,
he made a sudden transition to the race of whom the strangers were members. He compared their
countless numbers to the flights of migratory birds in the season of blossoms, or in the fall
of the year. With a delicacy, that none know better how to practise than an Indian warrior,
he made no direct mention of the rapacious temper, that so many of them had betrayed, in their
dealings with the Red-men. Feeling that the sentiment of distrust was strongly engrafted in
the tempers of his tribe, he rather endeavoured to soothe any just resentment they might entertain,
by indirect excuses and apologies. He reminded the listeners that even the Pawnee Loups had
been obliged to chase many unworthy individuals from their villages. The Wahcondah sometimes
veiled his countenance from a Red-man. No doubt the Great Spirit of the Pale-faces often looked
darkly on his children. Such as were abandoned to the worker of evil could never be brave or
virtuous, let the colour of the skin be what it might. He bade his young men look at the hands
of the Big-knives. They were not empty, like those of hungry beggars. Neither were they filled
with goods, like those of knavish traders. They were, like themselves, warriors, and they carried
arms which they knew well how to use--they were worthy to be called brothers!

Then he directed the attention of all to the chief of the strangers. He was a son of their
great white father. He had not come upon the prairies to frighten the buffaloes from their
pastures, or to seek the game of the Indians. Wicked men had robbed him of one of his wives;
no doubt she was the most obedient, the meekest, the loveliest of them all. They had only to
open their eyes to see that his words must be true. Now, that the white chief had found his
wife, he was about to return to his own people in peace. He would tell them that the Pawnees
were just, and there would be a line of wampum between the two nations. Let all his people
wish the strangers a safe return to their towns. The warriors of the Loups knew both how to
receive their enemies, and how to clear the briars from the path of their friends. 

A snapping sound was heard, the molar had broken while being extracted. It seemed that his
head was being shattered, that his skull was being smashed; he lost his senses, howled as
loudly as he could, furiously defending himself from the man who rushed at him anew as if he
wished to implant his whole arm in the depths of his bowels, brusquely recoiled a step and,
lifting the tooth attached to the jaw, brutally let him fall back into the chair. Breathing
heavily, his form filling the window, he brandished at one end of his forceps, a blue tooth with
blood at one end.

Faint and prostrate, Des Esseintes spat blood into a basin, refused
with a gesture, the tooth which the old woman was about to wrap in
a piece of paper and fled, after paying two francs.

    Expectorating blood, in his turn, down the steps, he at length found
    himself in the street, joyous, feeling ten years younger, interested
    in every little occurrence.
    
    "Phew!" he exclaimed, saddened by the assault of these memories.
    He rose to dissipate the horrible spell of this vision and,
    returning to reality, began to be concerned with the tortoise.

It did not budge at all and he tapped it. The animal was dead. Doubtless accustomed to a sedentary
existence, to a humble life spent underneath its poor shell, it had been unable to support
the dazzling luxury imposed on it, the rutilant cope with which it had been covered, the jewels
with which its back had been paved, like a pyx.

Chapter 6

With the sharpening of his desire to withdraw from a hated age, he felt a despotic urge to shun
pictures representing humanity striving in little holes or running to and fro in quest of money.

With
his growing indifference to contemporary life he had resolved not
to introduce into his cell any of the ghosts of distastes or regrets,
but had desired to procure subtle and exquisite paintings, steeped
in ancient dreams or antique corruptions, far removed from the manner
of our present day.

For the delight of his spirit and the joy of his eyes, he had desired a few suggestive creations
that cast him into an unknown world, revealing to him the contours of new conjectures, agitating
the nervous system by the violent deliriums, complicated nightmares, nonchalant or atrocious
chimerae they induced.

Among these were some executed by an artist
whose genius allured and entranced him: Gustave Moreau.

In the center
of the tabernacle, surmounting an altar approached by semi-circular
steps, sat Herod the Tetrarch, a tiara upon his head, his legs pressed
closely together, his hands resting upon his knees.

His face was
the color of yellow parchment; it was furrowed with wrinkles, ravaged
with age. His long beard floated like a white cloud upon the star-like
clusters of jewels constellating the orphrey robe fitting tightly
over his breast.
I know that some are to be found, who both think and say that an Indian is but little better
than the beasts of these naked plains. But it is needful to be honest in one's self, to be
a fitting judge of honesty in others. No doubt, no doubt they know their enemies, and little
do they care to show to such any great confidence, or love."

"It is the way of man," returned the Captain; "and it is probable they are not wanting in any
of his natural qualities."

"No, no; it is little that they want, that natur' has had to give. But as little does he know
of the temper of a Red-skin, who has seen but one Indian, or one tribe, as he knows of the
colour of feathers who has only looked upon a crow. Now, friend steersman, just give the boat
a sheer towards yonder, low, sandy point, and a favour will be granted at a short asking."

"For what?" demanded Middleton; "we are now in the swiftest of the current, and by drawing
to the shore we shall lose the force of the stream."

"Your tarry will not be long," returned the old man, applying his own hand to the execution
of that which he had requested. The oarsmen had seen enough of his influence, with their leader,
not to dispute his wishes, and before time was given for further discussion on the subject,
the bow of the boat had touched the land.

"Captain," resumed the other, untying his little wallet with great deliberation, and even in
a manner to show he found satisfaction in the delay, "I wish to offer you a small matter of
trade. No great bargain, mayhap; but still the best that one, of whose hand the skill of the
rifle has taken leave, and who has become no better than a miserable trapper, can offer before
we part."

"Part!" was echoed from every mouth, among those who had so recently shared his dangers, and
profited by his care.

"What the devil, old trapper, do you mean to foot it to the settlements, when here is a boat
that will float the distance in half the time, that the jackass, the Doctor has given the Pawnee,
could trot along the same."

"Settlements, boy! It is long sin' I took my leave of the waste and wickedness of the settlements
and the villages. If I live in a clearing, here, it is one of the Lord's making, and I have
no hard thoughts on the matter; but never again shall I be seen running wilfully into the danger
of immoralities."

"I had not thought of parting," answered Middleton, endeavouring to seek some relief from the
uneasiness he felt, by turning his eyes on the sympathising countenances of his friends; "on
the contrary, I had hoped and believed that you would have accompanied us below, where I give
you a sacred pledge, nothing shall be wanting to make your days comfortable."

"Yes, lad, yes; you would do your endeavours; but what are the strivings of man against the
working of the devil! Ay, if kind offers and good wishes could have done the thing, I might
have been a congress man, or perhaps a governor, years agone. Your grand'ther wished the same,
and there are them still lying in the Otsego mountains, as I hope, who would gladly have given
me a palace for my dwelling. But what are riches without content! My time must now be short,
at any rate, and I hope it's no mighty sin for one, who has acted his part honestly near ninety
winters and summers, to wish to pass the few hours that remain in comfort. If you think I have
done wrong in coming thus far to quit you again, Captain, I will own the reason of the act,
without shame or backwardness. Though I have seen so much of the wilderness, it is not to be
gainsayed, that my feelings, as well as my skin, are white. Now it would not be a fitting spectacle,
that yonder Pawnee Loups should look upon the weakness of an old warrior, if weakness he should
happen to show in parting for ever from those he has reason to love, though he may not set
his heart so strongly on them, as to wish to go into the settlements in their company."

"Harkee, old trapper," said Paul, clearing his throat with a desperate effort, as if determined
to give his voice a clear exit; "I have just one bargain to make, since you talk of trading,
which is neither more or less than this. I offer you, as my side of the business, one half
of my shanty, nor do I much care if it be the biggest half; the sweetest and the purest honey
that can be made of the wild locust; always enough to eat, with now and then a mouthful of
venison, or, for that matter, a morsel of buffaloe's hump, seeing that I intend to push my
acquaintance with the animal, and as good and as tidy cooking as can come from the hands of
one like Ellen Wade, here, who will shortly be Nelly somebody-else, and altogether such general
treatment as a decent man might be supposed to pay to his best friend, or for that matter,
to his own father; in return for the same, you ar' to give us at odd moments some of your ancient
traditions, perhaps a little wholesome advice on occasions, in small quantities at a time,
and as much of your agreeable company as you please."

"It is well--it is well, boy," returned the old man, fumbling at his wallet; "honestly offered,
and not unthankfully declined--but it cannot be; no, it can never be."

"Venerable venator," said Dr. Battius; "there are obligations, which every man owes to society
and to human nature. It is time that you should return to your countrymen, to deliver up some
of those stores of experimental knowledge that you have doubtless obtained by so long a sojourn
in the wilds, which, however they may be corrupted by preconceived opinions, will prove acceptable
bequests to those whom, as you say, you must shortly leave for ever."

"Friend physicianer," returned the trapper, looking the other steadily in the face, "as it
would be no easy matter to judge of the temper of the rattler by considering the fashions of
the moose, so it would be hard to speak of the usefulness of one man by thinking too much of
the deeds of another. You have your gifts like others, I suppose, and little do I wish to disturb
them. But as to me, the Lord has made me for a doer and not a talker, and therefore do I consider
it no harm to shut my ears to your invitation."

"It is enough," interrupted Middleton, "I have seen and heard so much of this extraordinary
man, as to know that persuasions will not change his purpose. First we will hear your request,
my friend, and then we will consider what may be best done for your advantage."

"It is a small matter, Captain," returned the old man, succeeding at length in opening his
bundle. "A small and trifling matter is it, to what I once used to offer in the way of bargain;
but then it is the best I have, and therein not to be despised. Here are the skins of four
beavers, that I took, it might be a month afore we met, and here is another from a racoon,
that is of no great matter to be sure, but which may serve to make weight atween us."

"And what do you propose to do with them?"

"I offer them in lawful barter. Them knaves the Siouxes, the Lord forgive me for ever believing
it was the Konzas! have stolen the best of my traps, and driven me altogether to make-shift
inventions, which might foretell a dreary winter for me, should my time stretch into another
season. I wish you therefore to take the skins, and to offer them to some of the trappers you
will not fail to meet below in exchange for a few traps, and to send the same into the Pawnee
village in my name. The rain entered diagonally through the carriage doors. Des Esseintes was
obliged to lift the carriage windows down which the water ran, while drops of mud furrowed
their way like fireworks on each side of the fiacre. To the monotonous sound of sacks of peas
shaking against his head through the action of the showers pattering
against the trunks and on the carriage rug, Des Esseintes dreamed
of his voyage.

This already was a partial realization of his England, enjoyed in Paris through the means of
this frightful weather: a rainy, colossal London smelling of molten metal and of soot, ceaselessly
steaming and smoking in the fog now spread out before his eyes; then
rows of docks sprawled ahead, as far as the eye could reach, docks
full of cranes, hand winches and bales, swarming with men perched
on masts or astride yard sails, while myriads of other men on the
quays pushed hogsheads into cellars.

All this was transpiring in vast warehouses along the river banks
which were bathed by the muddy and dull water of an imaginary Thames,
in a forest of masts and girders piercing the wan clouds of the firmament,
while trains rushed past at full speed or rumpled underground uttering
horrible cries and vomiting waves of smoke, and while, through every
street, monstrous and gaudy and infamous advertisements flared through
the eternal twilight, and strings of carriages passed between rows
of preoccupied and taciturn people whose eyes stared ahead and whose
elbows pressed closely against their bodies.

Des Esseintes shivered deliciously to feel himself mingling in this terrible world of merchants,
in this insulating mist, in this incessant activity, in this pitiless gearing which ground
millions of the disinherited, urged by the comfort-distilling philanthropists to recite Biblical
verses and to sing psalms.

Then the vision faded suddenly with a jolt of the fiacre which made
him rebound in his seat.

He gazed through the carriage windows. Night had fallen; gas burners blinked through the fog,
amid a yellowish halo; ribbons of fire swam in puddles of water and seemed to revolve around
wheels of carriages moving through liquid and dirty flame. He endeavored to get his bearings,
perceived the Carrousel and suddenly, unreasoningly, perhaps through the simple effect of the high
fall from fanciful spaces, his thought reverted to a very trivial incident. He remembered that
his domestic had neglected to put a tooth brush in his belongings. Then, he passed in review
the list of objects packed up; everything had been placed in his
valise, but the annoyance of having omitted this brush persisted until
the driver, pulling up, broke the chain of his reminiscences and regrets.

He

was in the rue de Rivoli, in front of Galignani's Messenger. Separated by a door whose unpolished
glass was covered with inscriptions and with strips of passe-partout framing newspaper clippings
and telegrams, were two vast shop windows crammed with albums and books.
 "Come hither, lad," he said, leading the bee-hunter by a button to the land, and
speaking apart in a tone of admonition and confidence; "much has passed atween us on the pleasures
and respectableness of a life in the woods, or on the borders. I do not now mean to say that
all you have heard is not true, but different tempers call for different employments. You have
taken to your bosom, there, a good and kind child, and it has become your duty to consider
her, as well as yourself, in setting forth in life. You are a little given to skirting the
settlements but, to my poor judgment, the girl would be more like a flourishing flower in the
sun of a clearing, than in the winds of a prairie. Therefore forget any thing you may have
heard from me, which is nevertheless true, and turn your mind on the ways of the inner country."

Paul could only answer with a squeeze, that would have brought tears from the eyes of most
men, but which produced no other effect on the indurated muscles of the other, than to make
him laugh and nod, as if he received the same as a pledge that the bee-hunter would remember
his advice. The trapper then turned away from his rough but warm-hearted companion; and, having
called Hector from the boat, he seemed anxious still to utter a few words more.

"Captain," he at length resumed, "I know when a poor man talks of credit, he deals in a delicate
word, according to the fashions of the world; and when an old man talks of life, he speaks
of that which he may never see; nevertheless there is one thing I will say, and that is not
so much on my own behalf as on that of another person. Here is Hector, a good and faithful
pup, that has long outlived the time of a dog; and, like his master, he looks more to comfort
now, than to any deeds in running. But the creatur' has his feelings as well as a Christian.
He has consorted latterly with his kinsman, there, in such a sort as to find great pleasure
in his company, and I will acknowledge that it touches my feelings to part the pair so soon.
If you will set a value on your hound, I will endeavour to send it to you in the spring, more
especially should them same traps come safe to hand; or, if you dislike parting with the animal
altogether, I will just ask you for his loan through the winter. I think I can see my pup will
not last beyond that time, for I have judgment in these matters, since many is the friend,
both hound and Red-skin, that I have seen depart in my day, though the Lord hath not yet seen
fit to order his angels to sound forth my name."

"Take him, take him," cried Middleton; "take all, or any thing!"

The old man whistled the younger dog to the land; and then he proceeded to the final adieus.
Little was said on either side. The trapper took each person solemnly by the hand, and uttered
something friendly and kind to all. Middleton was perfectly speechless, and was driven to affect
busying himself among the baggage. Paul whistled with all his might, and even Obed took his
leave with an effort that bore the appearance of desperate philosophical resolution. When he
had made the circuit of the whole, the old man, with his own hands, shoved the boat into the
current, wishing God to speed them. Not a word was spoken, nor a stroke of the oar given, until
the travellers bad floated past a knoll that hid the trapper from their view. He was last seen
standing on the low point, leaning on his rifle, with Hector crouched at his feet, and the
younger dog frisking along the sands, in the playfulness of youth and vigour.

CHAPTER XXXIV

                    --Methought, I heard a voice.
                                                   --Shakspeare.

The water-courses were at their height, and the boat went down the swift current like a bird.
The passage proved prosperous and speedy. In less than a third of the time, that would have
been necessary for the same journey by land, it was accomplished by the favour of those rapid
rivers. Issuing from one stream into another, as the veins of the human body communicate with
the larger channels of life, they soon entered the grand artery of the western waters, and
landed safely at the very door of the father of Inez.

The joy of Don Augustin, and the embarrassment of the worthy father Ignatius, may be imagined.
The former wept and returned thanks to Heaven; the latter returned thanks, and did not weep.
The mild provincials were too happy to raise any questions on the character of so joyful a
restoration; and, by a sort of general consent, it soon came to be an admitted opinion that
the bride of Middleton had been kidnapped by a villain, and that she was restored to her friends
by human agency. There were, as respects this belief, certainly a few sceptics, but then they
enjoyed their doubts in private, with that species of sublimated and solitary gratification
that a miser finds in gazing at his growing, but useless, hoards.

In order to give the worthy priest something to employ his mind, Middleton made him the instrument
of uniting Paul and Ellen. The former consented to the ceremony, because he found that all
his friends laid great stress on the matter; but shortly after he led his bride into the plains
of Kentucky, under the pretence of paying certain customary visits to sundry members of the
family of Hover. While there, he took occasion to have the marriage properly solemnised, by
a justice of the peace of his acquaintance, in whose ability to forge the nuptial chain he
had much more faith than in that of all the gownsmen within the pale of Rome. Ellen, who appeared
conscious that some extraordinary preventives might prove necessary to keep one of so erratic
a temper as her partner, within the proper matrimonial boundaries, raised no objections to
these double knots, and all parties were content.

The local importance Middleton had acquired, by his union with the daughter of so affluent
a proprietor as Don Augustin, united to his personal merit, attracted the attention of the
government. He was soon employed in various situations of responsibility and confidence, which
both served to elevate his character in the public estimation, and to afford the means of patronage.
The bee-hunter was among the first of those to whom he saw fit to extend his favour. It was
far from difficult to find situations suited to the abilities of Paul, in the state of society
that existed three-and-twenty years ago in those regions. The efforts of Middleton and Inez,
in behalf of her husband, were warmly and sagaciously seconded by Ellen, and they succeeded,
in process of time, in working a great and beneficial change in his character. He soon became
a land-holder, then a prosperous cultivator of the soil, and shortly after a town-officer.
By that progressive change in fortune, which in the republic is often seen to be so singularly
accompanied by a corresponding improvement in knowledge and self-respect, he went on, from
step to step, until his wife enjoyed the maternal delight of seeing her children placed far
beyond the danger of returning to that state from which both their parents had issued. Paul
is actually at this moment a member of the lower branch of the legislature of the State where
he has long resided; and he is even notorious for making speeches that have a tendency to put
that deliberative body in good humour, and which, as they are based on great practical knowledge
suited to the condition of the country, possess a merit that is much wanted in many more subtle
and fine-spun theories, that are daily heard in similar assemblies, to issue from the lips
of certain instinctive politicians. But all these happy fruits were the results of much care,
and of a long period of time. Middleton, who fills, with a credit better suited to the difference
in their educations, a seat in a far higher branch of legislative authority, is the source
from which we have derived most of the intelligence necessary to compose our legend. In addition
to what he has related of Paul, and of his own continued happiness, he has added a short narrative
of what took place in a subsequent visit to the prairies, with which, as we conceive it a suitable
termination to what has gone before, we shall judge it wise to conclude our labours.

In the autumn of the year, that succeeded the season, in which the preceding events occurred,
the young man, still in the military service, found himself on the waters of the Missouri,
at a point not far remote from the Pawnee towns. Released from any immediate calls of duty,
and strongly urged to the measure by Paul, who was in his company, he determined to take horse,
and cross the country to visit the partisan, and to enquire into the fate of his friend the
trapper. As his train was suited to his functions and rank, the journey was effected, with
the privations and hardships that are the accompaniments of all travelling in a wild, but without
any of those dangers and alarms that marked his former passage through the same regions. When
within a proper distance, he despatched an Indian runner, belonging to a friendly tribe, to
announce the approach of himself and party, continuing his route at a deliberate pace, in order
that the intelligence might, as was customary, precede his arrival. To the surprise of the
travellers their message was unanswered. Hour succeeded hour, and mile after mile was passed,
without bringing either the signs of an honourable reception, or the more simple assurances
of a friendly welcome. At length the cavalcade, at whose head rode Middleton and Paul, descended
from the elevated plain, on which they had long been journeying, to a luxuriant bottom, that
brought them to the level of the village of the Loups. The sun was beginning to fall, and a
sheet of golden light was spread over the placid plain, lending to its even surface those glorious
tints and hues, that, the human imagination is apt to conceive, forms the embellishment of
still more imposing scenes. The verdure of the year yet remained, and herds of horses and mules
were grazing peacefully in the vast natural pasture, under the keeping of vigilant Pawnee boys.
Paul pointed out among them, the well-known form of Asinus, sleek, fat, and luxuriating in
the fulness of content, as he stood with reclining ears and closed eye-lids, seemingly musing
on the exquisite nature of his present indolent enjoyment.

The route of the party led them at no great distance from one of those watchful youths, who
was charged with a trust heavy as the principal wealth of his tribe. He heard the trampling
of the horses, and cast his eye aside, but instead of manifesting curiosity or alarm, his look
instantly returned whence it had been withdrawn, to the spot where the village was known to stand.

"There is something remarkable in all this," muttered Middleton, half offended at what he conceived
to be not only a slight to his rank, but offensive to himself, personally; "yonder boy has
heard of our approach, or he would not fail to notify his tribe; and yet he scarcely deigns
to favour us with a glance. Look to your arms, men; it may be necessary to let these savages
feel our strength."

"Therein, Captain, I think you're in an error," returned Paul, "if honesty is to be met on
the prairies at all, you will find it in our old friend Hard-Heart; neither is an Indian to
be judged of by the rules of a white. See! we are not altogether slighted, for here comes a
party at last to meet us, though it is a little pitiful as to show and numbers."

Paul was right in both particulars. A group of horsemen were at length seen wheeling round
a little copse, and advancing across the plain directly towards them. The advance of this party
was slow and dignified. As it drew nigh, the partisan of the Loups was seen at its head, followed
by a dozen younger warriors of his tribe. They were all unarmed, nor did they even wear any
of those ornaments or feathers, which are considered testimonials of respect to the guest an
Indian receives, as well as evidence of his own importance.

The meeting was friendly, though a little restrained on both sides. Middleton, jealous of his
own consideration no less than of the authority of his government, suspected some undue influence
on the part of the agents of the Canadas; and, as he was determined to maintain the authority
of which he was the representative, he felt himself constrained to manifest a hauteur, that
he was far from feeling. It was not so easy to penetrate the motives of the Pawnees. Calm,
dignified, and yet far from repulsive, they set an example of courtesy, blended with reserve,
that many a diplomatist of the most polished court might have strove in vain to imitate.

In this manner the two parties continued their course to the town. Middleton had time, during
the remainder of the ride, to revolve in his mind, all the probable reasons which his ingenuity
could suggest for this strange reception. Although he was accompanied by a regular interpreter,
the chiefs made their salutations in a manner that dispensed with his services. Twenty times
the Captain turned his glance on his former friend, endeavouring to read the expression of
his rigid features. But every effort and all conjectures proved equally futile. The eye of
Hard-Heart was fixed, composed, and a little anxious; but as to every other emotion, impenetrable.
He neither spoke himself, nor seemed willing to invite discourse in his visiters; it was therefore
necessary for Middleton to adopt the patient manners of his companions, and to await the issue
for the explanation.

When they entered the town, its inhabitants were seen collected in an open space, where they
were arranged with the customary deference to age and rank. The whole formed a large circle,
in the centre of which, were perhaps a dozen of the principal chiefs. Hard-Heart waved his
hand as he approached, and, as the mass of bodies opened, he rode through, followed by his
companions. It wanted a few minutes to the hour. Shima, the Japanese butler, came in softly with the
evening papers. She took them from him.

Nothing bored her so much as a paper, but to-night she knew it contained something she really wanted
to see. His uneasiness, not to say apprehensions,
was shared by all his followers. Determination and stern resolution began to assume the place
of anxiety in every eye, as each man silently felt for his arms, and assured himself, that
his several weapons were in a state for service. But there was no answering symptom of hostility
on the part of their hosts. Hard-Heart beckoned for Middleton and Paul to follow, leading the
way towards the cluster of forms, that occupied the centre of the circle. Here the visiters
found a solution of all the movements, which had given them so much reason for apprehension.
His eye was glazed, and apparently as devoid of sight as of expression. His features were a
little more sunken and strongly marked than formerly; but there, all change, so far as exterior
was concerned, might be said to have ceased. His approaching end was not to be ascribed to
any positive disease, but had been a gradual and mild decay of the physical powers. Life, it
is true, still lingered in his system; but it was as if at times entirely ready to depart,
and then it would appear to re-animate the sinking form, reluctant to give up the possession
of a tenement, that had never been corrupted by vice, or undermined by disease. It would have
been no violent fancy to have imagined, that the spirit fluttered about the placid lips of
the old woodsman, reluctant to depart from a shell, that had so long given it an honest and
an honourable shelter. His rifle lay upon his knee, and the other accoutrements of the chase
were placed at his side, within reach of his hand. Between his feet lay the figure of a hound,
with its head crouching to the earth as if it slumbered; and so perfectly easy and natural
was its position, that a second glance was necessary to tell Middleton, he saw only the skin
of Hector, stuffed by Indian tenderness and ingenuity in a manner to represent the living animal.
His own dog was playing at a distance, with the child of Tachechana and Mahtoree. The mother
herself stood at hand, holding in her arms a second offspring, that might boast of a parentage
no less honourable, than that which belonged to the son of Hard-Heart. Le Balafre was seated
nigh the dying trapper, with every mark about his person, that the hour of his own departure
was not far distant. The rest of those immediately in the centre were aged men, who had apparently
drawn near, in order to observe the manner, in which a just and fearless warrior would depart
on the greatest of his journeys.

The old man was reaping the rewards of a life remarkable for temperance and activity, in a
tranquil and placid death. His vigour in a manner endured to the very last. Decay, when it
did occur, was rapid, but free from pain. He had hunted with the tribe in the spring, and even
throughout most of the summer, when his limbs suddenly refused to perform their customary offices.
A sympathising weakness took possession of all his faculties; and the Pawnees believed, that
they were going to lose, in this unexpected manner, a sage and counsellor, whom they had begun
both to love and respect. But as we have already said, the immortal occupant seemed unwilling
to desert its tenement. The lamp of life flickered without becoming extinguished. There are many conventionalized
floral patterns on appliqué quilts that give evidence of much ability and originality in their
construction. For the pioneer woman there was no convenient school of design, and when she tired
of the oft-repeated quilt patterns of her neighbourhood she turned to her garden for suggestions.
The striking silhouettes of familiar blossoms seen on many quilts are the direct result of
her nature study.

CHAPTER VI

QUILT NAMES

Among the most fascinating features of quilt lore are the great number
and wonderful variety of names given to quilt designs.

A distinct individuality is worked into every quilt by its maker, which in most instances makes it worthy
of a name. The many days spent in creating even a simple quilt give the maker ample time in which
to ponder over a name for the design, so that the one selected generally
reflects some peculiarity in her personality.

History, politics, religion, nature, poetry, and romance, all are stitched into the gayly coloured
blocks and exert their influence on quilt appellations. Careful consideration of a large number
of quilts reveals but few that have been named in a haphazard way; in nearly every instance there
was a reason or at least a suggestion for the name.

In most cases
the relation between name and design is so evident that the correct
name at once suggests itself, even to the novice in quilt making.
The common "star" pattern, in which one star is made the centre of
each block, is invariably known as the "Five-pointed Star." Horses and arms are not needed to
stand in the presence of the Great Spirit of my people. He knows my colour, and according to
my gifts will he judge my deeds."

"My father will tell my young men, how many Mingoes he has struck, and what acts of valour
and justice he has done, that they may know how to imitate him."

"A boastful tongue is not heard in the heaven of a white man," solemnly returned the old man.
"What I have done, He has seen. His eyes are always open. That, which has been well done, will
He remember; wherein I have been wrong will He not forget to chastise, though He will do the
same in mercy. No, my son; a Pale-face may not sing his own praises, and hope to have them
acceptable before his God."

A little disappointed, the young partisan stepped modestly back, making way for the recent
comers to approach. Middleton took one of the meagre hands of the trapper, and struggling to
command his voice, he succeeded in announcing his presence. The old man listened like one whose
thoughts were dwelling on a very different subject, but when the other had succeeded in making
him understand, that he was present, an expression of joyful recognition passed over his faded
features--"I hope you have not so soon forgotten those, whom you so materially served!" Middleton
concluded. "It would pain me to think my hold on your memory was so light."

"Little that I have ever seen is forgotten," returned the trapper: "I am at the close of many
weary days, but there is not one among them all, that I could wish to overlook. I remember
you with the whole of your company; ay, and your grand'ther, that went before you. I am glad,
that you have come back upon these plains, for I had need of one, who speaks the English, since
little faith can be put in the traders of these regions. Will you do a favour to an old and
dying man?"

"Name it," said Middleton; "it shall be done."

"It is a far journey to send such trifles," resumed the old man, who spoke at short intervals,
as strength and breath permitted; "a far and weary journey is the same; but kindnesses and
friendships are things not to be forgotten. There is a settlement among the Otsego hills--"

"I know the place," interrupted Middleton, observing that he spoke with increasing difficulty;
"proceed to tell me, what you would have done."

"Take this rifle, and pouch, and horn, and send them to the person, whose name is graven on
the plates of the stock,--a trader cut the letters with his knife,--for it is long, that I
have intended to send him such a token of my love."

"It shall be so. Is there more that you could wish?"

"Little else have I to bestow. My traps I give to my Indian son; for honestly and kindly has
he kept his faith. Let him stand before me."

Middleton explained to the chief what the trapper had said and relinquished his own place to
the other.

"Pawnee," continued the old man, always changing his language to suit the person he addressed,
and not unfrequently according to the ideas he expressed, "it is a custom of my people for
the father to leave his blessing with the son, before he shuts his eves for ever. This blessing
I give to you; take it, for the prayers of a Christian man will never make the path of a just
warrior, to the blessed prairies, either longer, or more tangled. May the God of a white man
look on your deeds with friendly eyes, and may you never commit an act, that shall cause Him
to darken His face. I know not whether we shall ever meet again. There are many traditions
concerning the place of Good Spirits. It is not for one like me, old and experienced though
I am, to set up my opinions against a nation's. You believe in the blessed prairies, and I
have faith in the sayings of my fathers. Some of these Des Esseintes found charming, confessing
as they did the monk's yearning for affection, while others were even imposing when they sought to
sustain courage and dissipate doubts by the inimitable certainties
of Faith. There is
much to be said in favour of both religions, for each seems suited to its own people, and no
doubt it was so intended. I fear, I have not altogether followed the gifts of my colour, inasmuch
as I find it a little painful to give up for ever the use of the rifle, and the comforts of
the chase. But then the fault has been my own, seeing that it could not have been His. Ay,
Hector," he continued, leaning forward a little, and feeling for the ears of the hound, "our
parting has come at last, dog, and it will be a long hunt. You have been an honest, and a bold,
and a faithful hound. Pawnee, you cannot slay the pup on my grave, for where a Christian dog
falls, there he lies for ever; but you can be kind to him, after I am gone, for the love you
bear his master."

"The words of my father are in my ears," returned the young partisan, making a grave and respectful
gesture of assent.

"Do you hear, what the chief has promised, dog?" demanded the trapper, making an effort to
attract the notice of the insensible effigy of his hound. Receiving no answering look, nor
hearing any friendly whine, the old man felt for the mouth and endeavoured to force his hand
between the cold lips. The truth then flashed upon him, although he was far from perceiving
the whole extent of the deception. Falling back in his seat, he hung his head, like one who
felt a severe and unexpected shock. Profiting by this momentary forgetfulness, two young Indians
removed the skin with the same delicacy of feeling, that had induced them to attempt the pious
fraud.

"The dog is dead!" muttered the trapper, after a pause of many minutes; "a hound has his time
as well as a man and well has he filled his days! Captain," he added, making an effort to wave
his hand for Middleton, "I am glad you have come; for though kind, and well meaning according
to the gifts of their colour, these Indians are not the men, to lay the head of a white man
in his grave. I have been thinking too, of this dog at my feet; it will not do to set forth
the opinion, that a Christian can expect to meet his hound again; still there can be little
harm in placing what is left of so faithful a servant nigh the bones of his master."

"It shall be as you desire."

"I'm glad, you think with me in this matter. In order then to save labour, lay the pup at my
feet, or for that matter put him, side by side. A hunter need never be ashamed to be found
in company with his dog!"

"I charge myself with your wish."

The old man made a long, and apparently a musing pause. At times he raised his eyes wistfully,
as if he would again address Middleton, but some innate feeling appeared always to suppress
his words. The other, who observed his hesitation, enquired in a way most likely to encourage
him to proceed, whether there was aught else that he could wish to have done. 

The new report of Professor Hyslop, which I am about briefly to analyse, will show us the new
phase of Mrs Piper's mediumship. The results are already good. Imperator asserts nevertheless
that the "machine" still needs repair, and that he will obtain still more wonderful results by-and-by.

FOOTNOTES:

[74]
For an account of the mediumship of W. Stainton Moses the reader
is referred to Mr F. W. H. Myers's articles in the Proc. of S.P.R.,
vol. ix. p. 245, and vol. xi. p. 24.


Still I see no need, why the grave of an honest man should be hid, like a Red-skin in his ambushment.
I paid a man in the settlements to make and put a graven stone at the head of my father's resting
place. It was of the value of twelve beaver-skins, and cunningly and curiously was it carved!
Then it told to all comers that the body of such a Christian lay beneath; and it spoke of his
manner of life, of his years, and of his honesty. When we had done with the Frenchers in the
old war, I made a journey to the spot, in order to see that all was rightly performed, and
glad I am to say, the workman had not forgotten his faith."

"And such a stone you would have at your grave?" 

The first battle has the most particular similarity to first love. How many hopes! how many illusions!
before this ceremonial action, which resolves the fate of nations, any recruit feels obliged to
play at least a role… as a hero of history or a romance. The rifle might bring the value of such a thing--but then I know, it will
give the boy pleasure to hang the piece in his hall, for many is the deer and the bird that
he has seen it destroy. No, no, the gun must be sent to him, whose name is graven on the lock!"

"But there is one, who would gladly prove his affection in the way you wish; he, who owes you
not only his own deliverance from so many dangers, but who inherits a heavy debt of gratitude
from his ancestors. The stone shall be put at the head of your grave."

The old man extended his emaciated hand, and gave the other a squeeze of thanks.

"I thought, you might be willing to do it, but I was backward in asking the favour," he said,
"seeing that you are not of my kin. Put no boastful words on the same, but just the name, the
age, and the time of the death, with something from the holy book; no more no more. My name
will then not be altogether lost on 'arth; I need no more."

Middleton intimated his assent, and then followed a pause, that was only broken by distant
and broken sentences from the dying man. He appeared now to have closed his accounts with the
world, and to await merely for the final summons to quit it. I suppose not. There never is; and
if there was, what would be the odds to me?"
"In the blues?" remarked the hunter, regarding Jack with a peculiar
smile through his first puff of smoke.

"Rather!" said Jack.

"Grog?"
inquired Joe. The expression of
his faded and time-worn features was that of a calm and dignified repose. From time to time
he spoke, uttering some brief sentence in the way of advice, or asking some simple questions
concerning those in whose fortunes he still took a friendly interest. During the whole of that
solemn and anxious period each individual of the tribe kept his place, in the most self-restrained
patience. When the old man spoke, all bent their heads to listen; and when his words were uttered,
they seemed to ponder on their wisdom and usefulness.

As the flame drew nigher to the socket, his voice was hushed, and there were moments, when
his attendants doubted whether he still belonged to the living. Middleton, who watched each
wavering expression of his weather-beaten visage, with the interest of a keen observer of human
nature, softened by the tenderness of personal regard, fancied he could read the workings of
the old man's soul in the strong lineaments of his countenance. Perhaps what the enlightened
soldier took for the delusion of mistaken opinion did actually occur, for who has returned
from that unknown world to explain by what forms, and in what manner, he was introduced into
its awful precincts? Without pretending to explain what must ever be a mystery to the quick,
we shall simply relate facts as they occurred. She always faced her chaperon with a little nervousness,
and with the same sense of strangeness with which she so frequently regarded her house.

"It's fifteen minutes after eight," Mrs. Britton observed. "We would
better not wait any longer."

"A valiant, a just, and a wise warrior has gone on the path, which will lead him to the blessed
grounds of his people!" he said. "When the voice of the Wahcondah called him, he was ready
to answer. Go, my children; remember the just chief of the Pale-faces, and clear your own tracks
from briars."

The grave was made beneath the shade of some noble oaks. It has been carefully watched to the
present hour by the Pawnees of the Loop, and is often shown to the traveller and the trader
as a spot where a just Whiteman sleeps. In due time the stone was placed at its head, with
the simple inscription, which the trapper had himself requested. The only liberty, taken by
Middleton, was to add--"May no wanton hand ever disturb his remains!"

