"Yes, yes. Quite so," Mr. Lewis agreed. "I recall the whole matter very clearly. Conditions
at that time were very bad, you know. It was impossible to find a purchaser on short notice.
Early in 1917 there was a chance to sell, at a considerably reduced figure. But I couldn't
get in touch with you. You didn't answer our cable. I couldn't take the responsibility of a
sacrifice sale."

Hollister nodded. In 1917 he was a nameless convalescent in a German hospital; officially he
was dead. Months before that such things as distant property rights had ceased to be of any
moment. He had forgotten this holding of timber in British Columbia. He was too full of bitter
personal misery to trouble about money.

"Failing to reach you we waited until we should hear from you--or from your estate." Mr. Lewis
cleared his throat as if it embarrassed him to mention that contingency. "In war--there was
that possibility, you understand. We did not feel justified; so much time had elapsed. There
was risk to us in acting without verifying our instructions."

"So this property is still to be marketed. The carrying charges, as I remember, were small.
I presume you carried them."

"Oh, assuredly," Mr. Lewis asserted. "We protected your interests to the very best of our ability."

"Well, find me a buyer for that limit as soon as you can," Hollister said abruptly. "I want
to turn it into cash."

"We shall set about this at once," Mr. Lewis said. "It may take a little time--conditions,
as a result of the armistice, are again somewhat unsettled in the logging industry. Airplane
spruce production is dead--dead as a salt mackerel--and fir and cedar slumped with it. However
we shall do our best. Have you a price in mind, Mr. Hollister, for a quick sale?"

"I paid ten thousand for it. On the strength of your advice as a specialist in timber investments,"
he added with a touch of malice. He had taken a dislike to Mr. Lewis. He had not been so critical
of either men or motives in the old days. He had remembered Lewis as a good sort. Now he disliked
the man, distrusted him. He was too smooth, too sleek. "I'll discount that twenty percent,
for a cash sale."

Mr. Lewis made a memorandum.

"Very good," said he, raising his head with an inquiring air, as if to say "If that is all----"

"If you will kindly identify me at a bank,"--Hollister rose from his chair, "I shall cease
to trouble you. I have a draft on the Bank of B.N.A. I do not know any one in Vancouver."

"No trouble, I assure you," Lewis hastened to assent, but his tone lacked heartiness, sincerity.

It was only a little distance to the bank, but Lewis insisted on making the journey in a motorcar
which stood at the curb. It was plain to Hollister that Mr. Lewis disliked the necessity of
appearing in public with him, that he took this means of avoiding the crowded sidewalks, of
meeting people. He introduced Hollister, excused himself on the plea of business pressure,
and left Hollister standing before the teller's wicket.

This was not a new attitude to Hollister. People did that,--as if he were a plague. There came
into his mind--as he stood counting the sheaf of notes slide through a grill by a teller who
looked at him once and thereafter kept his eyes averted--a paraphrase of a hoary quotation,
"I am a monster of such frightful mien, as to be hated needs but to be seen." The rest of it,
Hollister thought grimly, could never apply to him.

He put the money in his pocket and walked out on the street. It was a busy corner on a humming
thoroughfare. Electric cars rumbled and creaked one behind another on the double tracks. Waves
of vehicular traffic rolled by the curb. A current of humanity flowed past him on the sidewalk.

Standing there for a minute, Hollister felt again the slow rising of his resentment against
these careless, fortunate ones. He could not say what caused that feeling. A look, a glance,--the
inevitable shrinking. He was morbidly sensitive. He knew that, knew it was a state of mind
that was growing upon him. But from whatever cause, that feeling of intolerable isolation gave
way to an inner fury.

As he stood there, he felt a wild desire to shout at these people, to curse them, to seize
one of these dainty women by the arms, thrust his disfigured face close to hers and cry: "Look
at me as if I were a man, not a monstrosity. I'm what I am so that you could be what you are.
Look at me, damn you!"

He pulled himself together and walked on. Certainly he would soon run amuck if he did not get
over feeling like that, if he did not master these impulses which bordered on insanity. He
wondered if that inner ferment would drive him insane.

He went back to the second-rate hotel where he had taken refuge, depressed beyond words, afraid
of himself, afraid of the life which lay in fragments behind him and spread away before him
in terrifying drabness. Yet he must go on living. To live was the dominant instinct. A man
did not put on or off the desire to live as he put on or off his coat. But life promised nothing.
It was going to be a sorry affair. It struck Hollister with disheartening force that an individual
is nothing--absolutely nothing--apart from some form of social grouping. And society, which
had exacted so much from him, seemed peculiarly indifferent to the consequences of those imperative
exactions, seemed wholly indifferent to his vital need. 

There was no moon in the heavens, nevertheless the horizon was well defined, and a large object
could be seen at the distance of a couple of miles. I took a careful look around the horizon,
waited a short time and looked again. I suffered my eyes to dwell on that quarter, in a north-east
direction, where the schooner had been seen the evening before, and after a while I beheld a speck
darker than the surrounding atmosphere.

Might it not exist only in imagination? A man cannot go on forever enduring the pressure of the intolerable.
Hollister felt that he must soon arrive at a crisis. What form it would take he did not know,
and in certain moods he did not care.

On the landing at the end of the narrow corridor off which his room opened he met a man in
uniform whom he recognized,--a young man who had served under him in the Forty-fourth, who
had won a commission on the field. He wore a captain's insignia now. Hollister greeted him by name.

"Hello, Tommy."

The captain looked at him. His face expressed nothing whatever. Hollister waited for that familiar
shadow of distaste to appear. Then he remembered that, like himself, Rutherford must have seen
thousands upon thousands of horribly mutilated men.

"Your voice," Rutherford remarked at length, "has a certain familiar sound. Still, I can't
say I know you. What's the name?"

"Bob Hollister. Do you remember the bottle of Scotch we pinched from the Black Major behind
the brick wall on the Albert Road? Naturally you wouldn't know me--with this face."

"Well," Rutherford said, as he held out his hand, "a fellow shouldn't be surprised at anything
any more. I understood you'd gone west. Your face is mussed up a bit. Rotten luck, eh?"

Hollister felt a lump in his throat. It was the first time for months that any human being
had met him on common ground. He experienced a warm feeling for Rutherford. And the curious
thing about that was that out of the realm of the subconscious rose instantly the remembrance
that he had never particularly liked Tommy Rutherford. He was one of the wild men of the battalion.
When they went up the line Rutherford was damnably cool and efficient, a fatalist who went
about his grim business unmoved. Back in rest billets he was always pursuing some woman, unearthing
surplus stores of whisky or wine, intent upon dubious pleasures,--a handsome, self-centered
debonair animal.

"My room's down here," Hollister said. "Come in and gas a bit--if you aren't bound somewhere."

"Oh, all right. I came up here to see a chap, but he's out. I have half an hour or so to spare."

Rutherford stretched himself on Hollister's bed. They lit cigarettes and talked. And as they
talked, Rutherford kept looking at Hollister's face, until Hollister at last said to him:

"Doesn't it give you the willies to look at me?"

Rutherford shook his head.

"Oh, no. I've got used to seeing fellows all twisted out of shape. You seem to be fit enough
otherwise."

"I am," Hollister said moodily. "But it's a devil of a handicap to have a mug like this."

"Makes people shy off, eh? Women particularly. I can imagine," Rutherford drawled. "Tough luck,
all right. People don't take very much stock in fellows that got smashed. Not much of a premium
on disfigured heroes these days."

Hollister laughed harshly.

"No. We're at a discount. We're duds."

For half an hour they chatted more or less one-sidedly. Rutherford had a grievance which he
took pains to air. He was on duty at Hastings Park, having been sent there a year earlier to
instruct recruits, after recovering from a wound. He was the military man par excellence. War
was his game. He had been anxious to go to Siberia with the Canadian contingent which had just
departed. And the High Command had retained him here to assist in the inglorious routine of
demobilization. Rutherford was disgruntled. Siberia had promised new adventure, change, excitement.

The man, Hollister soon perceived, was actually sorry the war was over, sorry that his occupation
was gone. He talked of resigning and going to Mexico, to offer his sword to whichever proved
the stronger faction. It would be a picnic after the Western Front. A man could whip a brigade
of those greasers into shape and become a power. There ought to be good chances for loot.

Yet Hollister enjoyed his company. Rutherford was genial. He was the first man for long to
accept Hollister as a human being. He promised to look Hollister up again before he went away.

The world actually seemed cheerful to Hollister, after Rutherford had gone,--until in moving
about the room he caught sight of his face in the mirror.

CHAPTER III

About ten days later Tommy Rutherford walked into Hollister's room at eight in the evening.
He laid his cap and gloves on the bed, seated himself, swung his feet to and fro for a second,
and reached for one of Hollister's cigarettes.

"It's a hard world, old thing," he complained. "Here was I all set for an enjoyable winter.
Nice people in Vancouver. All sorts of fetching affairs on the tapis. And I'm to be demobilized
myself next week. Chucked out into the blooming street with a gratuity and a couple of medals.
Damn the luck."

He remained absorbed in his own reflections for a minute, blowing smoke rings with meticulous care.

"I wonder if a fellow could make it go in Mexico?" he drawled.

Hollister made no comment.

"Oh, well, hang it, sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof," he remarked, with an abrupt
change of tone. "I'm going to a hop at the Granada presently. Banish dull care and all that,
for the time being, anyway."

His gaze came to an inquiring rest on Hollister.

"What's up, old thing?" he asked lightly. "Why so mum?"

"Oh, nothing much," Hollister answered.

"Bad thing to get in the dumps," Rutherford observed sagely. "You ought to keep a bottle of
Scotch handy for that."

"Drink myself into a state of mind where the world glitters and becomes joyful, eh? No, I don't
fancy your prescription. I'd be more apt to run amuck."

"Oh, come now," Rutherford remonstrated. "It isn't so bad as that. Cheer up, old man. Things
might be worse, you know.

"Oh, hell!" Hollister exploded.

After which he relapsed into sullen silence, to which Rutherford, frankly mystified and somewhat
inclined to resent this self-contained mood, presently left him.

Hollister was glad when the man went away. He had a feeling of relief when the door closed
and retreating footsteps echoed down the hall. He had grasped at a renewal of Rutherford's
acquaintance as a man drowning in a sea of loneliness would grasp at any friendly straw. And
Rutherford, Hollister quickly realized, was the most fragile sort of straw. The man was a profound,
non-thinking egotist, the adventurer pure and simple, whose mentality never rose above grossness
of one sort and another, in spite of a certain outward polish. He could tolerate Hollister's
mutilated countenance because he had grown accustomed to horrible sights,--not because he had
any particular sympathy for a crippled, mutilated man's misfortune, or any understanding of
such a man's state of feeling. To Rutherford that was the fortune of war. So many were killed.
So many crippled. So many disfigured. It was luck. He believed in his own luck. The evil that
befell other men left him rather indifferent. That was all. When Hollister once grasped Rutherford's
attitude, he almost hated the man.

He sat now staring out the window. A storm had broken over Vancouver that day. To-night it
was still gathering force. The sky was a lowering, slate-colored mass of clouds, spitting squally
bursts of rain that drove in wet lines against his window and made the street below a glistening
area shot with tiny streams and shallow puddles that were splashed over the curb by rolling
motor wheels. The wind droned its ancient, melancholy chant among the telephone wires, shook
with its unseen, powerful hands a row of bare maples across the way, rattled the windows in
their frames. Now and then, in a momentary lull of the wind, a brief cessation of the city
noises, Hollister could hear far off the beat of the Gulf seas bursting on the beach at English
Bay, snoring in the mouth of False Creek. A dreary, threatening night that fitted his mood.

He sat pondering over the many-horned dilemma upon which he hung impaled. He had done all that
a man could do. He had given the best that was in him, played the game faithfully, according
to the rules. And the net result had been for him the most complete disaster. So far as Myra
went, he recognized that domestic tragedy as a natural consequence. He did not know, he was
unable to say if his wife had simply been a weak and shallow woman, left too long alone, thrown
too largely on her own resources in an environment so strongly tinctured by the high-pitched
and reckless spirit generated by the war. He had always known that his wife--women generally
were the same, he supposed--was dominated by emotional urges, rather than cold reason. But
that had never struck him as of great significance. Women were like that. A peculiar obtuseness
concealed from him, until now, that men also were much the same. He was, himself. When his
feelings and his reason came into conflict, it was touch and go which should triumph. The fact
remained that for a long time the war had separated them as effectually as a divorce court.
Hollister had always had a hazy impression that Myra was the sort of woman to whom love was
necessary, but he had presumed that it was the love of a particular man, and that man himself.
This, it seemed, was a mistake, and he had paid a penalty for making that mistake.

So he accepted this phase of his unhappiness without too much rancor. Myra had played fair,
he perceived. She had told him what to expect. And the accident of a misleading report had
permitted her to follow her bent with a moral sanction. That she had bestowed herself and some
forty thousand dollars of his money on another man was not the thing Hollister resented. He
resented only the fact that her glow of love for him had not endured, that it had gone out
like an untended fire. But for some inscrutable reason that had happened. He had built a dream-house
on an unstable foundation. It had tumbled down. Very well. He accepted that.

But he did not accept this unuttered social dictum that he should be kept at arm's length because
he had suffered a ghastly disarrangement of his features while acting as a shield behind which
the rest of society rested secure. No, he would never accept that as a natural fact. He could not.

No one said that he was a terrible object which should remain in the background along with
family skeletons and unmentionable diseases. He was like poverty and injustice,--present but
ignored. And this being shunned and avoided, as if he were something which should go about
in furtive obscurity, was rapidly driving Hollister to a state approaching desperation.

For he could not rid himself of the social impulse any more than a healthy man can rid himself
of the necessity for food and drink at certain intervals. If Hollister had been so crushed
in body and mind that his spirit was utterly quenched, if his vitality had been so drained
that he could sit passive and let the world go by unheeded, then he would have been at peace.

He had seen men like that--many of them--content to sit in the sun, to be fed and let alone.
Their hearts were broken as well as their bodies.

But except for the distortion of his face, he returned as he had gone away, a man in full possession
of his faculties, his passions, his strength. He could not be passive either physically or
mentally. His mind was too alert, his spirit too sensitive, his body too crammed with vitality
to see life go swinging by and have no hand in its manifestations and adventures.

Yet he was growing discouraged. People shunned him, shrank from contact. His scarred face seemed
to dry up in others the fountain of friendly intercourse. If he were a leper or a man convicted
of some hideous crime, his isolation could not be more complete. It was as if the sight of
him affected men and women with a sense of something unnatural, monstrous. He sweated under
this. But he was alive, and life was a reality to him, the will to live a dominant force. Unless
he succumbed in a moment of madness, he knew that he would continue to struggle for life and
happiness because that was instinctive, and fundamental instincts are stronger than logic,
reason, circumstance.

How he was going to make his life even tolerably worth living was a question that harassed
him with disheartening insistence as he watched through his window the slanting lines of rain
and listened to the mournful cadences of the wind.

"I must get to work at something," he said to himself. "If I sit still and think much more----"

He did not carry that last sentence to its logical conclusion. The helm was accordingly put up,
and with a free wind we now steered to the south-west, to fall in with the coast somewhere
near Cape Codera.

We made the land about fifty miles to windward of LaGuayra, in the afternoon, about three o'clock.
 He knew timber, the making and marketing of it, from top to bottom. But he could
not see himself behind a desk, directing or selling. His face would frighten clients. He smiled;
that rare grimace he permitted himself when alone. Very likely he would have to accept the
commonest sort of labor, in a mill yard, or on a booming ground, among workers not too sensitive
to a man's appearance.

