Le Notre was Overseer of the Public Buildings, and lodged at the Tuileries, the garden of which
(his design), together with the Palace, being under his charge.  All that he did is still much
superior to everything that has been done since, whatever care may have been taken to imitate
and follow him as closely as possible.  He used to say of flower- beds that they were only
good for nurses, who, not being able to quit the children, walked on them with their eyes,
and admired them from the second floor.  He excelled, nevertheless, in flowerbeds, as in everything
concerning gardens; but he made little account of them, and he was right, for they are the
spots upon which people never walk.

The King of England (William III.) lost the Duke of Gloucester, heir- presumptive to the crown.
He was eleven years of age, and was the only son of the Princess of Denmark, sister of the
defunct Queen Mary, wife of William.  His preceptor was Doctor Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury,
who was in the secret of the invasion, and who passed into England with the Prince of Orange
at the Revolution, of which Revolution he has left a very fraudulent history, and many other
works of as little truth and good faith.  The underpreceptor was the famous Vassor, author
of the "History of Louis XIII.,"  which would be read with more pleasure if there were less
spite against the Catholic religion, and less passion against the King.  With those exceptions
it is excellent and true.  Vassor must have been singularly well informed of the anecdotes
that he relates, and which escape almost all historians.  I have found there, for instance,
the Day of the Dupes related precisely as my father has related it to me, and several other
curious things not less exact.  This author has made such a stir that it is worth while to
say something about him.  He was a priest of the Oratory, and in much estimation as a man whose
manners were without reproach.  After a time, however, he was found to have disclosed a secret
that had been entrusted to him, and to have acted the spy on behalf of the Jesuits.  The proofs
of his treason were found upon his table, and were so conclusive that there was nothing for
him but to leave the Oratory.  He did so, and being deserted by his Jesuit employers, threw
himself into La Trappe.  But he did not enter the place in a proper spirit, and in a few days
withdrew.  After this he went to the Abbey of Perseigne, hired a lodging there, and remained
several months.  But he was continually at loggerheads with the monks.  Their garden was separate
from his only by a thick hedge; their fowls could jump over it.  He laid the blame upon the
monks, and one day caught as many of their fowls as he could; cut off their beaks and their
spurs with a cleaver, and threw them back again over the hedge.  This was cruelty so marked
that I could not refrain from relating it.

Vassor did not long remain in this retreat, but returned to Paris, and still being unable to
gain a living, passed into Holland, from rage and hunger became a Protestant, and set himself
to work to live by his pen. His knowledge, talent, and intelligence procured him many friends,
and his reputation reached England, into which country he passed, hoping to gain there more
fortune than in Holland.  Burnet received him with open arms, and obtained for him the post
of under-preceptor to the Duke of Gloucester.  It would have been difficult to have found two
instructors so opposed to the Catholics and to France, or so well suited to the King as teachers
of his successor.

Among so many things which paved the way for the greatest events, a very strange one happened,
which from its singularity merits a short recital. For many years the Comtesse de Verrue lived
at Turin, mistress, publicly, of M. de Savoie.  The Comtesse de Verrue was daughter of the
Duc de Luynes, and had been married in Piedmont, when she was only fourteen years of age, to
the Comte de Verrue, young, handsome, rich, and honest; whose mother was lady of honour to
Madame de Savoie.

M. de Savoie often met the Comtesse de Verrue, and soon found her much to his taste.  She saw
this, and said so to her husband and her mother-in- law.  They praised her, but took no further
notice of the matter.  M. de Savoie redoubled his attentions, and, contrary to his usual custom,
gave fetes, which the Comtesse de Verrue felt were for her.  She did all she could not to attend
them, but her mother-in-law quarrelled with her, said she wished to play the important, and
that it was her vanity which gave her these ideas.  Her husband, more gentle, desired her to
attend these fetes, saying that even if M. de Savoie were really in love with her, it would
not do to fail in anything towards him.  Soon after M. de Savoie spoke to the Comtesse de Verrue.
She told her husband and her mother-in- law, and used every entreaty in order to prevail upon
them to let her go and pass some time in the country.  They would not listen to her, and seeing
no other course open, she feigned to be ill, and had herself sent to the waters of Bourbon.
She wrote to her father, the Duc de Luynes, to meet her there, and set out under the charge
of the Abbe de Verrue; uncle of her husband.  As soon as the Duc de Luynes arrived at Bourbon,
and became acquainted with the danger which threatened his daughter; he conferred with the
Abbe as to the best course to adopt, and agreed with him that the Countess should remain away
from Turin some time, in order that M. de Savoie might get cured of his passion.  M. de Luynes
little thought that he had conferred with a wolf who wished to carry off his lamb.  The Abbe
de Verrue, it seems, was himself violently in love with the Countess, and directly her father
had gone declared the state of his heart.  Finding himself only repulsed, the miserable old
man turned his love into hate; ill-treated the Countess, and upon her return to Turin, lost
no opportunity of injuring her in the eyes of her husband and her mother-in-law.

The Comtesse de Verrue suffered this for some time, but at last her virtue yielded to the bad
treatment she received.  She listened to M. de Savoie, and delivered herself up to him in order
to free herself from persecution.  Is not this a real romance?  But it happened in our own
time, under the eyes and to the knowledge of everybody.

When the truth became known, the Verrues were in despair, although they had only themselves
to blame for what had happened.  Soon the new mistress ruled all the Court of Savoy, whose
sovereign was at her feet as before a goddess.  She disposed of the favours of her lover, and
was feared and courted by the ministry.  Her haughtiness made her hated; she was poisoned;
M. de Savoie gave her a subtle antidote, which fortunately cured her, and without injury to
her beauty.  Her reign still lasted. After a while she had the small-pox.  M. de Savoie tended
her during this illness, as though he had been a nurse; and although her face suffered a little
by it, he loved her not the less.  But he loved her after his own fashion.  He kept her shut
up from view, and at last she grew so tired of her restraint that she determined to fly.  She
conferred with her brother, the Chevalier de Luynes, who served with much distinction in the
navy, and together they arranged the matter.

They seized an opportunity when M. de Savoie had gone on a tour to Chambery, and departed furtively.
Crossing our frontier, they arrived m Paris, where the Comtesse de Verrue, who had grown very
rich, took a house, and by degrees succeeded in getting people to come and see her, though,
at first, owing to the scandal of her life, this was difficult. In the end, her opulence gained
her a large number of friends, and she availed herself so well of her opportunities, that she
became of much importance, and influenced strongly the government.  But that time goes beyond
my memoirs.  She left in Turin a son and a daughter, both recognised by M. de Savoie, after
the manner of our King.  He loved passionately these, illegitimate children, and married the
daughter to the Prince de Carignan.

Mademoiselle de Conde died at Paris on October 24th, after a long illness, from a disease in
the chest, which consumed her less than the torments she experienced without end from M. le
Prince, her father, whose continual caprices were the plague of all those over whom he could
exercise them.  Almost all the children of M. le Prince were little bigger than dwarfs, which
caused M. le Prince, who was tall, to say in pleasantry, that if his race went on always thus
diminishing it would come to nothing.  People attributed the cause to a dwarf that Madame la
Princesse had had for a long time near her.

At the funeral of Mademoiselle de Conde, a very indecorous incident happened.  My mother, who
was invited to take part in the ceremony, went to the Hotel de Conde, in a coach and six horses,
to join Mademoiselle d'Enghien.  When the procession was about to start the Duchesse de Chatillon
tried to take precedence of my mother.  But my mother called upon Mademoiselle d'Enghien to
prevent this, or else to allow her to return.  Madame de Chatillon persisted in her attempt,
saying that relationship decided the question of precedence on these occasions, and that she
was a nearer relative to the deceased than my mother.  My mother, in a cold but haughty tone,
replied that she could pardon this mistake on account of the youth and ignorance of Madame
de Chatillon; but that in all such cases it was rank and not relationship which decided the
point.  The dispute was at last put to an end by Madame de Chatillon giving way.  But when
the procession started an attempt was made by her coachman to drive before the coach of my
mother, and one of the company had to descend and decide the dispute.  On the morrow M. le
Prince sent to apologise to my mother for the occurrence that had taken place, and came himself
shortly afterwards full of compliments and excuses.  I never could understand what induced
Madame de Chatillon to take this fancy into her head; but she was much ashamed of it afterwards,
and made many excuses to my mother.

I experienced, shortly after this, at Fontainebleau, one of the greatest afflictions I had
ever endured.  I mean the loss of M. de La Trappe, These Memoirs are too profane to treat slightly
of a life so sublimely holy, and of a death so glorious and precious before God.  I will content
myself with saying here that praises of M. de La Trappe were so much the more great and prolonged
because the King eulogised him in public; that he wished to see narrations of his death; and
that he spoke more than once of it to his grandsons by way of instruction.  In every part of
Europe this great loss was severely felt.  The Church wept for him, and the world even rendered
him justice.  His death, so happy for him and so sad for his friends, happened on the 26th
of October, towards half-past twelve, in the arms of his bishop, and in presence of his community,
at the age of nearly seventy-seven years, and after nearly forty years of the most prodigious
penance.  I cannot omit, however, the most touching and the most honourable mark of his friendship.
Lying upon the ground, on straw and ashes, in order to die like all the brethren of La Trappe,
he deigned, of his own accord, to recollect me, and charged the Abbe La Trappe to send word
to me, on his part, that as he was quite sure of my affection for him, he reckoned that I should
not doubt of his tenderness for me.  I check myself at this point; everything I could add would
be too much out of place here.