The protestant subjects of Ireland were extremely disgusted at these concessions made in favour
of vanquished rebels, who had exercised such acts of cruelty and rapine. They complained, That
they themselves, who had suffered for their loyalty to king William, were neglected, and obliged
to sit down with their losses; while their enemies, who had shed so much blood in opposing
his government, were indemnified by the articles of the capitulation, and even favoured with
particular indulgencies. They were dismissed with the honours of war; they were transported
at the government's expense, to fight against the English in foreign countries; an honourable
provision was made for the rapparees, who were professed banditti; the Roman catholic interest
in Ireland obtained the sanction of regal authority; attainders were overlooked, forfeitures
annulled, pardons extended, and laws set aside, in order to effect a pacification. Ginckel
had received orders to put an end to the war at any rate, that William might convert his whole
influence and attention to the affairs of the continent. When the articles of capitulation
were ratified, and hostages exchanged for their being duly executed, about two thousand Irish
foot, and three hundred horse, began their march for Cork, where they proposed to take shipping
for France, under the conduct of Sarsfield; but three regiments refusing to quit the kingdom,
delivered up their arms and dispersed to their former habitations. Those who remained at Limerick
embarked on the seventh day of November, in French transports; and sailed immediately to France,
under the convoy of a French squadron which had arrived in the bay of Dangle immediately after
the capitulation was signed. Twelve thousand men chose to undergo exile from their native country
rather than submit to the government of king William. When they arrived in France they were
welcomed by a letter from James, who thanked them for their loyalty, assured them they should
still serve under his commission and command, and that the king of France had already given
orders for their being new clothed and put into quarters of refreshment.

MEETING OF THE ENGLISH PARLIAMENT.

The reduction of Ireland being thus completed, baron Ginckel returned to England, where he
was solemnly thanked by the house of commons for his great services, after he had been created
earl of Athlone by his majesty. When the parliament met on the twenty-second day of October,
the king in his speech insisted upon the necessity of sending a strong fleet to sea early in
the season, and of maintaining a considerable army to annoy the enemy abroad, as well as to
protect the kingdom from insult and invasion; for which purposes, he said, sixty-five thousand
men would be barely sufficient. Each house presented an address of congratulation upon his
majesty's safe return to England, and on the reduction of Ireland: they promised to assist
him to the utmost of their power, in prosecuting the war with France; and, at the same time,
drew up addresses to the queen, acknowledging her prudent administration during his majesty's
absence. Notwithstanding this appearance of cordiality and complaisance, a spirit of discontent
had insinuated itself into both houses of parliament, and even infected great part of the nation.

A great number of individuals who wished well to their country, could not, without anxiety
and resentment, behold the interest of the nation sacrificed to foreign connexions, and the
king's favour so partially bestowed upon Dutchmen in prejudice to his English subjects. They
observed, that the number of forces he demanded was considerably greater than that of any army
which had ever been paid by the public, even when the nation was in the most imminent danger;
that instead of contributing as allies to the maintenance of the war upon the continent, they
had embarked as principals and bore the greatest part of the burden, though they had the least
share of the profit. They even insinuated that such a standing army was more calculated to
make the king absolute at home, than to render him formidable abroad; and the secret friends
of the late king did not fail to enforce these insinuations. They renewed their animadversions
upon the disagreeable part of his character; they dwelt upon his proud reserve, his sullen
silence, his imperious disposition, and his base ingratitude, particularly to the earl of Marlborough,
whom he had dismissed from all his employments immediately after the signal exploits he had
performed in Ireland. The disgrace of this nobleman was partly ascribed to the freedom with
which he had complained of the king's undervaluing his services, and partly to the intrigues
of his wife, who had gained an ascendancy over the princess Anne of Denmark, and is said to
have employed her influence in fomenting a jealousy between the two sisters. The malcontents
of the whiggish faction, enraged to find their credit declining at court, joined in the cry
which the Jacobites had raised against the government. They scrupled not to say, that the arts
of corruption were shamefully practised to secure a majority in parliament; that the king was
as tender of the prerogative as any of his predecessors had ever been; and that he even ventured
to admit Jacobites into his council, because they were known tools of arbitrary power. These
reflections alluded to the earls of Rochester and Kanelagh, who, with sir Edward Seymour, had
been lately created privy-counsellors. Rochester entertained very high notions of regal authority;
he proposed severity as one of the best supports of government; was clear in his understanding,
violent in his temper, and incorrupt in his principles. Ranelagh was a man of parts and pleasure,
who possessed the most plausible and winning address; and was capable of transacting the most
important and intricate affairs, in the midst of riot and debauchery. He had managed the revenue
of Ireland in the reign of Charles II.; he enjoyed the office of paymaster in the army of King
James, and now maintained the same footing under the government of William and Mary. Sir Edward
Seymour was the proudest commoner in England, and the boldest orator that ever filled the speaker's
chair. He was intimately acquainted with the business of the house, and knew every individual
member so exactly, that with one glance of his eye he could prognosticate the fate of every
motion. He had opposed the court with great acrimony, questioned the king's title, censured
his conduct, and reflected upon his character. Nevertheless, he now became a proselyte, and
was brought into the treasury.

TRANSACTIONS IN PARLIAMENT.

The commons voted three millions, four hundred and eleven thousand, six hundred and seventy-five
pounds, for the use of the ensuing year: but the establishment of funds for raising these supplies
was retarded, partly by the ill-humour of the opposition, and partly by intervening affairs
that diverted the attention of the commons. Several eminent merchants presented a petition
to the house against the East-India company, charging them with manifold abuses; at the same
time, a counter-petition was delivered by the company, and the affair referred to the examination
of a committee appointed for that purpose. After a minute inquiry into the nature of the complaints,
the commons voted certain regulations with respect to the stock and the traffic; and resolved
to petition his majesty, that, according to the said regulations, the East-India company should
be incorporated by charter. The committee was ordered to bring in a bill for this establishment;
but divers petitions being presented against it, and the company's answers proving unsatisfactory,
the house addressed the king to dissolve it, and grant a charter to a new company. He said
it was an affair of great importance to the trade of the kingdom; therefore, he would consider
the subject, and in a little time return a positive answer. The parliament was likewise amused
by a pretended conspiracy of the papists in Lancashire, to raise a rebellion and restore James
to the throne. Several persons were seized, and some witnesses examined: but nothing appeared
to justify the information. At length one Fuller, a prisoner in the king's bench, offered his
evidence, and was brought to the bar of the house of commons, where he produced some papers.
He obtained a blank pass from the king for two persons, who he said would come from the continent
to give evidence. He was afterwards examined at his own lodgings, where he affirmed that colonel
Thomas Délavai and James Hayes were the witnesses for whom he had procured the pass and the
protection. Search was made for them according to his direction, but no such persons were found.
Then the house declared Fuller a notorious impostor, cheat, and false accuser. He was, at the
request of the commons, prosecuted by the attorney-general, and sentenced to stand in the pillory;
a disgrace which he accordingly underwent.

A bill for regulating trials in cases of high treason having been laid aside by the lords in
the preceding session, was now again brought upon the carpet, and passed the lower house. The
design of this bill was to secure the subject from the rigours to which he had been exposed
in the late reigns: it provided, That the prisoner should be furnished with a copy of his indictment,
as also of the panel, ten days before his trial; and, that his witnesses should be examined
upon oath as well as those of the crown. The lords, in their own behalf, added a clause enacting,
That upon the trials of any peer or peeress, for treason or misprison of treason, all the peers
who have a right to sit and vote in parliament, should be duly summoned to assist at the trial;
that this notice should be given twenty days before the trial; and that every peer so summoned,
and appearing, should vote upon the occasion. The commons rejected this amendment; and a free
conference ensued. The point was argued with great vivacity on both sides, which served only
to inflame the dispute, and render each party the more tenacious of their own opinion. After
three conferences that produced nothing but animosity, the bill was dropped; for the commons
resolved to bear the hardships of which they complained, rather than be relieved at the expense
of purchasing a new privilege to the lords; and without this advantage, the peers would not
contribute to their relief.

{WILLIAM AND MARY, 1688--1701.}

THE ENGLISH AND DUTCH FLEETS BAFFLED BY THE FRENCH.

The next object that engrossed the attention of the lower house, was the miscarriage of the
fleet during the summer's expedition. Admiral Russel, who commanded at sea, having been joined
by a Dutch squadron, sailed in quest of the enemy; but as the French king had received undoubted
intelligence that the combined squadrons were superior to his navy in number of ships and weight
of metal, he ordered Tourville to avoid an engagement. This officer acted with such vigilance,
caution, and dexterity, as baffled all the endeavours of Russel, who was moreover perplexed
with obscure and contradictory orders. Nevertheless, he cruised all summer either in the channel
or in soundings, for the protection of the trade, and in particular secured the homeward-bound
Smyrna fleet, in which the English and Dutch had a joint concern amounting to four millions
sterling. Having scoured the channel, and sailed along great part of the French coast, he returned
to Torbay in the beginning of August, and received fresh orders to put to sea again, notwithstanding
his repeated remonstrances against exposing large ships to the storms that always blow about
the time of the equinox. He therefore sailed back to soundings, where he continued cruising
till the second day of September, when he was overtaken by a violent tempest, which drove him
into the channel, and obliged him to make for the port of Plymouth. The weather being hazy,
he reached the Sound with great difficulty: the Coronation, a second-rate, foundered at anchor
off the Ram-head; the Harwich, a third-rate, bulged upon the rocks and perished; two others
ran ashore, but were got off with little damage; but the whole fleet was scattered and distressed.
The nation murmured at the supposed misconduct of the admiral, and the commons subjected him
to an inquiry: but when they examined his papers, orders, and instructions, they perceived
he had adhered to them with great punctuality, and thought proper to drop the prosecution out
of tenderness to the ministry. Then the house took into consideration some letters which had
been intercepted in a French ship taken by sir Ralph Delaval. Three of these are said to have
been written by king James, and the rest sealed with his seal. They related to the plan of
an insurrection in Scotland, and in the northern parts of England: Legge, lord Dartmouth, with
one Crew, being mentioned in them as agents and abettors in the design, warrants were immediately
issued against them; Crew absconded, but lord Dartmouth was committed to the Tower. Lord Preston
was examined touching some ciphers which they could not explain, and, pretending ignorance,
was imprisoned in Newgate, from whence however he soon obtained his release. The funds for
the supplies of the ensuing year being established, and several acts* passed relating to domestic
regulations, the king on the twenty-fourth day of February closed the session with a short
speech, thanking the parliament for their demonstrations of affection in the liberal supplies
they had granted, and communicating his intention of repairing speedily to the continent. Then
the two houses, at his desire, adjourned themselves to the twelfth day of April, and the parliament
was afterwards prorogued to the twenty-ninth day of May, by proclamation. [035] [See note H,
at the end of this Vol.]

     * The laws enacted in this session were those: an act for
     abrogating the oath of supremacy in Ireland, and appointing
     other oaths; an act for taking away clergy from some
     offenders, and bringing others to punishment; an act against
     deer-stealing; an act for repairing the highways, and
     settling the rates of carriage of goods; an act for the
     relief of creditors against fraudulent devices; an act for
     explaining and supplying the defects of former laws for the
     settlement of the poor; an act for the encouragement of the
     breeding and feeding of cattle; and an act for ascertaining
     the tithes of hemp and flax.

THE KING DISOBLIGES THE PRESBYTERIANS OF SCOTLAND.

