Transcriber's note:

   Chapter numbering skips Chapter XI in the printed text. The
   original numbering has been retained in this transcription.

"What d'ye think of that girl I introduced you to the other night, Harry? Isn't she a pippin?"
asked the second lieutenant taking a luxurious puff at his cigarette.

"I should say, Bobbie, she's some girl! Where d'ye pick her up? I certainly owe you one for
a good time."

"Don't speak of it, Harry. Come on with me and try it again. I'm going to see her friend to-night
and can get her over the 'phone any time. She's just nuts about you. What do you say? Shall
I call her up?"

"Well, hardly to-night, Bob," said the first lieutenant thoughtfully, "she's a ripping fine
girl and all that, of course, but the fact is, Bob, I've decided to marry Ruth Macdonald and
I haven't much time left before I go over. I think I'll have to get things fixed up between
us to-night, you see. Perhaps--later----. But no. I guess that wouldn't do. Ruth's folks are
rather fussy about such things. It might get out. No, Bob, I'll have to forego the pleasures
you offer me this time."

The second lieutenant sat up and whistled:

"You've decided to marry Ruth Macdonald!" he ejaculated, staring. "But has Ruth Macdonald decided
to marry you?"

"I hardly think there'll be any trouble on that score when I get ready to propose," smiled
the first lieutenant complacently, as he lolled back in his seat. "You seem surprised," he added.

"Well, rather!" said the other officer dryly, still staring.

"What's there so surprising about that?" The first lieutenant was enjoying the sensation he
was creating. He knew that the second lieutenant had always been "sweet" on Ruth Macdonald.

"Well, you know, Harry, you're pretty rotten!" said the second lieutenant uneasily, a flush
beginning to rise in his face. "I didn't think you'd have the nerve. She's a mighty fine girl,
you know. She's--unusual!"

"Exactly. Didn't you suppose I would want a fine girl when I marry?"

"I don't believe you're really going to do it!" burst forth the second lieutenant. "In fact,
I don't believe I'll let you do it if you try!"

"You couldn't stop me, Bob!" with an amiable sneer. "One word from you, young man, and I'd
put your captain wise about where you were the last time you overstayed your leave and got
away with it. You know I've got a pull with your captain. It never pays for the pot to call
the kettle black."

The second lieutenant sat back sullenly with a deep red streaking his cheeks.

"You're no angel yourself, Bob, see?" went on the first lieutenant lying back in his seat in
satisfied triumph, "and I'm going to marry Ruth Macdonald next week and get a ten days' leave!
Put that in your pipe and smoke it!"

There ensued a long and pregnant silence. One glance at the second lieutenant showed that he
was most effectually silenced.

The front door of the car slammed open and shut, and a tall slim officer with touches of silver
about the edges of his dark hair, and a look of command in his keen eyes came crisply down
the aisle. The two young lieutenants sat up with a jerk, and an undertone of oaths, and prepared
to salute as he passed them. The captain gave them a quick searching glance as he saluted and
went on to the next car.

The two jerked out salutes and settled back uneasily.

"That man gives me a pain!" said Harry Wainwright preparing to soothe his ruffled spirits by
a fresh cigarette.

"He thinks he's so doggone good himself that he has to pry into other people's business and
get them in wrong. It beats me how he ever got to be a captain--a prim old fossil like him!"

"It might puzzle some people to know how you got your commission, Harry. You're no fossil,
of course, but you're no angel, either, and there are some things in your career that aren't
exactly laid down in military manuals."

"Oh, my uncle Henry looked after my commission. It was a cinch! He thinks the sun rises and
sets in me, and he had no idea how he perjured himself when he put me through. Why, I've got
some of the biggest men in the country for my backers, and wouldn't they lie awake at night
if they knew! Oh Boy! I thought I'd croak when I read some of those recommendations, they fairly
gushed with praise. You'd have died laughing, Bob, if you had read them. They had such adjectives
as 'estimable, moral, active, efficient,' and one went so far as to say that I was equally
distinguished in college in scholarship and athletics! Some stretch of imagination, eh, what?"

The two laughed loudly over this.

"And the best of it is," continued the first lieutenant, "the poor boob believed it was all true!"

"But your college records, Harry, how could they get around those? Or didn't they look you up?"

"Oh, mother fixed that all up. She sent the college a good fat check to establish a new scholarship
or something."

"Lucky dog!" sighed his friend. "Now I'm just the other way. I never try to put anything over
but I get caught, and nobody ever tried to cover up my tracks for me when I got gay!"

"You worry too much, Bobby, and you never take a chance. Now I----"

The front door of the car opened and shut with a slam, and a tall young fellow with a finely
cut face and wearing workman's clothes entered. He gave one quick glance down the car as though
he was searching for someone, and came on down the aisle. The sight of him stopped the boast
on young Wainwright's tongue, and an angry flush grew, and rolled up from the top of his immaculate
olive-drab collar to his close, military hair-cut.

Slowly, deliberately, John Cameron walked down the aisle of the car looking keenly from side
to side, scanning each face alertly, until his eyes lighted on the two young officers. At Bob
Wetherill he merely glanced knowingly, but he fixed his eyes on young Wainwright with a steady,
amused, contemptuous gaze as he came toward him; a gaze so noticeable that it could not fail
to arrest the attention of any who were looking; and he finished the affront with a lingering
turn of his head as he passed by, and a slight accentuation of the amusement as he finally
lifted his gaze and passed on out of the rear door of the car. Those who were sitting in the
seats near the door might have heard the words: "And they killed such men as Lincoln!" muttered
laughingly as the door slammed shut behind him.

Lieutenant Wainwright uttered a low oath of imprecation and flung his half spent cigarette
on the floor angrily:

"Did you see that, Bob?" he complained furiously, "If I don't get that fellow!"

"I certainly did! Are you going to stand for that? What's eating him, anyway? Has he got it
in for you again? But he isn't a very easy fellow to get, you know. He has the reputation----"

"Oh, I know! Yes, I guess anyhow I know!"

"Oh, I see! Licked you, too, once, did he?" laughed Wetherill, "what had you been up to?"

"Oh, having some fun with his girl! At least I suppose she must have been his girl the way
he carried on about it. He said he didn't know her, but of course that was all bluff. Then,
too, I called his father a name he didn't like and he lit into me again. Good night! I thought
that was the end of little Harry! I was sick for a week after he got through with me. He certainly
is some brute. Of course, I didn't realize what I was up against at first or I'd have got the
upper hand right away. I could have, you know! I've been trained! But I didn't want to hurt
the fellow and get into the papers. You see, the circumstances were peculiar just then----"

"I see! You'd just applied for Officer's Training Camp?"

"Exactly, and you know you never can tell what rumor a person like that can start. He's keen
enough to see the advantage, of course, and follow it up. Oh, he's got one coming to him all
right!"

"Yes, he's keen all right. That's the trouble. It's hard to get him."

"Well, just wait. I've got him now. If I don't make him bite the dust! Ye gods! When I think
of the way he looks at me every time he sees me I could skin him alive!"

"I fancy he'd be rather slippery to skin. I wouldn't like to try it, Harry!"

"Well, but wait till you see where I've got him! He's in the draft. He goes next week. And
they're sending all those men to our camp! He'll be a private, of course, and he'll have to
salute me! Won't that gall him?"

"He won't do it! I know him, and he won't do it!"

"I'll take care that he does it all right! I'll put myself in his way and make him do it. And
if he refuses I'll report him and get him in the guard house. See? I can, you know. Then I
guess he'll smile out of the other side of his mouth!"

"He won't likely be in your company."

"That doesn't make any difference. I can get him into trouble if he isn't, but I'll try to
work it that he is if I can. I've got 'pull,' you know, and I know how to 'work' my superiors!"
he swaggered.

"That isn't very good policy," advised the other, "I've heard of men picking off officers they
didn't like when it came to battle."

"I'll take good care that he's in front of me on all such occasions!"

A sudden nudge from his companion made him look up, and there looking sharply down at him,
was the returning captain, and behind him walked John Cameron still with that amused smile
on his face. It was plain that they had both heard his boast. His face crimsoned and he jerked
out a tardy salute, as the two passed on leaving him muttering imprecations under his breath.

When the front door slammed behind the two Wainwright spoke in a low shaken growl:

"Now what in thunder is that Captain La Rue going on to Bryne Haven for? I thought, of course,
he got off at Spring Heights. That's where his mother lives. I'll bet he is going up to see
Ruth Macdonald! You know they're related. If he is, that knocks my plans all into a cocked
hat. I'd have to sit at attention all the evening, and I couldn't propose with that cad around!"

"Better put it off then and come with me," soothed his friend. "Athalie Britt will help you
forget your troubles all right, and there's plenty of time. You'll get another leave soon."

"How the dickens did John Cameron come to be on speaking terms with Captain La Rue, I'd like
to know?" mused Wainwright, paying no heed to his friend.

"H'm! That does complicate matters for you some, doesn't it? Captain La Rue is down at your
camp, isn't he? Why, I suppose Cameron knew him up at college, perhaps. Cap used to come up
from the university every week last winter to lecture at college."

Wainwright muttered a chain of choice expletives known only to men of his kind.

"Forget it!" encouraged his friend slapping him vigorously on the shoulder as the train drew
into Bryne Haven. "Come off that grouch and get busy! You're on leave, man! If you can't visit
one woman there's plenty more, and time enough to get married, too, before you go to France.
Marriage is only an incident, anyway. Why make such a fuss about it?"

By the fitful glare of the station lights they could see that Cameron was walking with the
captain just ahead of them in the attitude of familiar converse. The sight did not put Wainwright
into a better humor.

At the great gate of the Macdonald estate Cameron and La Rue parted. They could hear the last
words of their conversation as La Rue swung into the wide driveway and Cameron started on up
the street:

"I'll attend to it the first thing in the morning, Cameron, and I'm glad you spoke to me about
it! I don't see any reason why it shouldn't go through! I shall be personally gratified if
we can make the arrangement. Good-night and good luck to you!"

The two young officers halted at a discreet distance until John Cameron had turned off to the
right and walked away into the darkness. The captain's quick step could be heard crunching
along the gravel drive to the Macdonald house.

"Well, I guess that about settles me for the night, Bobbie!" sighed Wainwright. "Come on, let's
pass the time away somehow. I'll stop at the drug store to 'phone and make a date with Ruth
for to-morrow morning. Wonder where I can get a car to take her out? No, I don't want to go
in her car because she always wants to run it herself. When you're proposing to a woman you
don't want her to be absorbed in running a car. See?"

"I don't know. I haven't so much experience in that line as you have, Harry, but I should think
it might be inconvenient," laughed the other.

They went back to the station. A few minutes later Wainwright emerged from the telephone booth
in the drug store with a lugubrious expression.

"Doggone my luck! She's promised to go to church with that smug cousin of hers, and she's busy
all the rest of the day. But she's promised to give me next Saturday if I can get off!" His
face brightened with the thought.

"I guess I can make it. If I can't do anything else I'll tell 'em I'm going to be married,
and then I can make her rush things through, perhaps. Girls are game for that sort of thing
just now; it's in the air, these war marriages. By George, I'm not sure but that's the best
way to work it after all. She's the kind of a girl that would do almost anything to help you
out of a fix that way, and I'll just tell her I had to say that to get off and that I'll be
court-martialed if they find out it wasn't so. How about it?"

"I don't know, Harry. It's all right, of course, if you can get away with it, but Ruth's a
pretty bright girl and has a will of her own, you know. But now, come on. It's getting late.
What do you say if we get up a party and run down to Atlantic City over Sunday, now that you're
free? I know those two girls would be tickled to death to go, especially Athalie. She's a Westerner,
you know, and has never seen the ocean."

"All right, come on, only you must promise there won't be any scrapes that will get me into
the papers and blow back to Bryne Haven. You know there's a lot of Bryne Haven people go to
Atlantic City this time of year and I'm not going to have any stories started. I'm going to
marry Ruth Macdonald!"

"All right. Come on."

II

Ruth Macdonald drew up her little electric runabout sharply at the crossing, as the station
gates suddenly clanged down in her way, and sat back with a look of annoyance on her face.

Michael of the crossing was so overcareful sometimes that it became trying. She was sure there
was plenty of time to cross before the down train. She glanced at her tiny wrist watch and
frowned. Why, it was fully five minutes before the train was due! What could Michael mean,
standing there with his flag so importantly and that determined look upon his face?

She glanced down the platform and was surprised to find a crowd. There must be a special expected.
What was it? A convention of some sort? Or a picnic? It was late in the season for picnics,
and not quite soon enough for a college football game. Who were they, anyway? She looked them
over and was astonished to find people of every class, the workers, the wealthy, the plain
every-day men, women and children, all with a waiting attitude and a strange seriousness upon
them. As she looked closer she saw tears on some faces and handkerchiefs everywhere in evidence.
Had some one died? Was this a funeral train they were awaiting? Strange she had not heard!

Then the band suddenly burst out upon her with the familiar wail:

                  There's a long, long trail awinding,
                    Into the land of our dreams,--

and behind came the muffled tramping of feet not accustomed to marching together.

Ruth suddenly sat up very straight and began to watch, an unfamiliar awe upon her. This must
be the first draft men just going away! Of course! Why had she not thought of it at once. She
had read about their going and heard people mention it the last week, but it had not entered
much into her thoughts. She had not realized that it would be a ceremony of public interest
like this. She had no friends whom it would touch. The young men of her circle had all taken
warning in plenty of time and found themselves a commission somewhere, two of them having settled
up matters but a few days before. She had thought of these draft men, when she had thought
of them at all, only when she saw mention of them in the newspapers, and then as a lot of workingmen
or farmers' boys who were reluctant to leave their homes and had to be forced into patriotism
in this way. It had not occurred to her that there were many honorable young men who would
take this way of putting themselves at the disposal of their country in her time of need, without
attempting to feather a nice little nest for themselves. Now she watched them seriously and
found to her astonishment that she knew many of them. There were three college fellows in the
front ranks whom she had met. She had danced with them and been taken out to supper by them,
and had a calling acquaintance with their sisters. The sister of one stood on the sidewalk
now in the common crowd, quite near to the runabout, and seemed to have forgotten that anybody
was by. Her face was drenched with tears and her lips were quivering. Behind her was a gray-haired
woman with a skewey blouse and a faded dark blue serge skirt too long for the prevailing fashion.
The tears were trickling down her cheeks also; and an old man with a crutch, and a little round-eyed
girl, seemed to belong to the party. The old man's lips were set and he was looking at the
boys with his heart in his eyes.

Ruth shrank back not to intrude upon such open sorrow, and glanced at the line again as they
straggled down the road to the platform; fifty serious, grave-eyed young men with determined
mien and sorrow in the very droop of their shoulders. One could see how they hated all this
publicity and display, this tense moment of farewell in the eyes of the town; and yet how tender
they felt toward those dear ones who had gathered thus to do them honor as they went away to
do their part in the great world-struggle for liberty.

As she looked closer the girl saw they were not mature men as at first glance they had seemed,
but most of them mere boys. There was the boy that mowed the Macdonald lawn, and the yellow-haired
grocery boy. There was the gas man and the nice young plumber who fixed the leak in the water
pipes the other day, and the clerk from the post office, and the cashier from the bank! What
made them look so old at first sight? Why, it was as if sorrow and responsibility had suddenly
been put upon them like a garment that morning for a uniform, and they walked in the shadow
of the great sadness that had come upon the world. She understood that perhaps even up to the
very day before, they had most of them been merry, careless boys; but now they were men, made
so in a night by the horrible sin that had brought about this thing called War.

For the first time since the war began Ruth Macdonald had a vision of what the war meant. She
had been knitting, of course, with all the rest; she had spent long mornings at the Red Cross
rooms--she was on her way there this very minute when Michael and the procession had interrupted
her course--she had made miles of surgical dressings and picked tons of oakum. 

This in turn aroused the envy of the Holy equerry. He hastened to the Roßmist quickly to mix new
sputum. So it happened that the two saints alternately in noble emulation spat in the boiler and
thereby achieved that great Arcanum, which up to today's Time does the people in subjection and
reverence for all facilities of the sacred Bürokrazius makes shudder.

At that time of the two saints, the same had recognized that the mixture of mildew manure and their holy
sputum alone the right mix for its planned Dekoktum, enjoyed said, in the most sweetly scented
Devotion Dekoktum the respectful Ergebenheitstränklein brewed, which St. Bürokrazius henceforth
the his administration and his leading-strings urgent need of people brought.

As people were unfortunately unable to their poor natural disposition to manage themselves and to
learn to walk special sway, they had to go through this obvious heavenly inspiration that were found
respectful Ergebenheitstränklein the final belief in the need to Grandeur, intellectual sharpness,
indispensability and infallibility of earthly foundations of St. Bürokrazius be taught.

The saint ordered that this potion already the children would be given in the Lullbüchsen, so that
it simultaneously with the breast milk were given and compared with the respectful devotion Bürokrazius
in the holy body were already in their diapers.

We are all praise since this potion in veins, bone, and flax, and were, a integral part of our
earthly nature ausmachet, it has up to today Days, the poor man never yet begun to dawn quite
know what a gigantic Rindviech St. Bürokrazius basically really is. The components respectful
Ergebenheitstränkleins people never come to consciousness, seeing that it should be with a secret
product containing dokumentieret only in its effects.

have any drugs but all the while their Latin names must be learned so that they appear to the reverential
Publiko more incomprehensible, mysterious and enigmatic, hochgelahrter has a college professors,
doctors, chemists, alchemists and pharmacists After years of difficult discussions and for the respectful
Ergebenheitstränklein which the world to the holy Bürokrazius with vigorous participation of the
Holy Stultissimus verdanket, the definitive scientific name displayed. It is to you, oh joyous
readers do not be withheld. Arm yourself with all the classic but your knowledge and contort
the tongue while you do not ... Bürokrazii sanctorum atque Stultissimi Mixtura famosa gloriosa
miraculosa amabilis admirabilis honorabilis Venerable respectabilis devotionalis mystica decocta
speibensis saufdusi.

  

    [Decoration]
    

  As St. Bürokrazius corns in the brain was and grew into a braid
  made.
  
  O hellish brew kettles are like your terrible tortures
  Not to describe and also not to paint! When you damned from the
  front and rear Tugging the relentlessly vicious
  and malicious flay, Then you will juhzen sheer
  hell of torment day and night, But you will use sotanes Gejuhze nothing.
  And when you yodel in the skies, If your song only beautify
  the schadenfreude of the powers of hell. Fire and brimstone will
  you burn your sinful body, Do you whine and cry and still so,
          and spit and
  whine. While a beef brewing kettle is Gradually softer and Linder,
          Are you
  staying in it for all eternity the same hard-boiled Sinners.
  And your soup entsteiget a thousand times woe and misery, Helps
  you's a damn, you remain in saecula saeculorum zach. And they give
          you too for
  a change to fry up and , Stew In the hellish pans, it is up to you
  all Love's Labour's Lost. Dahero you can measure it, you sin lout
  godforsaken, How stupid it was of you to go to hell rather than heaven.
  But if you want to hellish tortures zwecktunliche comparisons Explore
          An earthly
  torments, oppressions, tortures and terror, One salutary comparation
  stand with the diabolical Pitch and Sweden fur eyes Then you need
          to think only with due reverence
  to your Corns. The make of thee, O pious Christian, and sometimes
          so miserably
  , Juhzen That would do you like best to your admirers braced toes.

Writer
          of this
  sacred legend has indeed already in the previous which fraudulent
poet Lotter than a rabble abgesaget and solemnly renounced.

That's why he has it but but can not fail, this main piece with delicate and well-chosen Reimlein
launch. He wants to protest against very virulent to this Reimlein sake under the einverleibet
be contemptuous of the rabble of poets. His Reimlein are not poetry, but the reflection and mirror of
truth, speculum veritatis. He has not sealed and nothing invented, nothing sulfurized with
sulfur Abschilderung of hell, but only the truth given a robe that falls more clearly in the
eye, as the simple Prose and a tone that you should sound in the ears like the trumpets of Jericho.

He
made you want to show but the pain of corns forcefully again, so You can find the right one, building
up of thought and understanding of the following, which he you can be reported in the principal
piece of the holy Bürokrazio and report added.

It happened, namely, that the sacred chickens Bürokrazius his eyes again terrible turmanterten,
id est tortured.

The enrolled dahero, seeing different wicked Man, not the cattle were his sacred mission and derohalben
yet erfasset had not repeated in the Holy vile and insidious intent special mercy on these sensitive
body damage to his toes were.

This made the Holy juhzen always so pathetic as the damned in hell
brewing kettle.

He would have liked to endure ad dei gloriam majorem these agonies of his earthly change even further.
Said Gejuhze agreed to but not his dignity, his power of his heavenly mission had to wear everywhere
on display.

Since the holy Bürokrazio the tone in which the inner voice of the Archangel Michael with had
spoken to him for the duration was not acceptable, he ventured to the less, at these to turn heavenly
voice, because even the matter of his corns ever between him and the Archangel Michael had been
treated.

The Holy Bürokrazius dahero sat down again for several days and nights, as he this is known to always
do the thinking habit, and thought earnestly about it, to which Way he could get rid of the pain
of corns, him seeing that because of the wickedness of sinful human nature and the sublime Beritt
on the red tape but a temporary one, but not a perpetual exemption from that huge physical
custody of his earthly Change had brought.

After the saint had been thinking deeply and maturely, it was an inner
voice the opening of "turning up in a duly substantiated request by
the highest authority on the love of God!

"

To whom this voice belonged from above, could never fathom the sacred Bürokrazius. She said But
to him in a polite and amiable tone.

It was jetzo but that to write the required input in God. And that was no small thing. For such
an input was the sacred in his Bürokrazius whole practice never happened.

He also had this purpose no formularies or other aids. Not even in the dung of red tape were any
suggestion for the marketing of to find the good God.

The Holy Bürokrazius pflog dahero careful consultation with his groom, the holy Stultissimus.
The had him before the holy Bürokrazius to the recent deep reflection on his corns, moved ever given
to the genuine friendly advice that he should his corns can be shod
with the farrier.

This Council was at that time of the St. Bürokrazius was dismissed by a legitimate horror, although
he views the well- same fully recognized.

The Holy Stultissimus nunmehro was after him the holy Bürokrazius of his latest divine inspiration
had been notified, the view that it is actually a nerve was to harass the good God with his corns.
But if the Holy Bürokrazius already think he should do it anyway, then yes he should be careful
not to God for the anzusumsen complete exemption from the corns. Such utter discounts earthly torments
were an unheard-of request to the merciful love of God.

Because something had to man have yet to suffer on earth. And otherwise the holy Bürokrazius've
nothing Arges endure. Not even a headache he would ever heimgesuchet.

The lighted the holy Bürokrazius because a well, and so the two decided Saints after diligent mutual
consultations, that the input in God only please should contain, and God may be merciful, the holy Bürokrazius
his corns to move to a place of his holy body where it can not hurt
him so terribly would.

A stump pain he would endure even in the most humble submission happy. But the current Condition
was intolerable and a serious professional injury.

The input to the love God has been so soon erlediget. arose in the holy Bürokrazius After a devotional
time, but meeting a powerful voice, which he described as the voice
love of God realized.

The voice was not much more polite than that of the Archangel Michael, they indulged but not
in such expressions as she loved the Archangel.

The voice said, something like this: "Chickens have eyes?

Where else they want? The can 'say that. Let me think bissel, where they with you are most likely
course. For know, each thing will have its place. The corns. Stop! I've got it. I Handle is' Get the
corn to the brain.

There you have the most space for it. Without this nothing in it. 'd Otherwise not even the
holy Bürokrazius. See how good it is when the skull has an empty chamber. "

The good Lord said. And the miracle happened. The good Lord said in his heavenly Grace and power
of the Holy Bürokrazius his corn in the brain, where they serve as billeting were in good hands.

And
how gracious the Lord was.

Now he had the good Lord's corns in the transplanted brain, and as the Holy Bürokrazius felt
absolutely no pain anymore. For requires any pain, so it would gefühlet, an entering into the consciousness.
However, after the holy Bürokrazius the corns to that part of his holy body transplanted have
been, who with his mind or intellect to do anything, it could the
corn in the brain more torment impossible.

However, it is proven in numerous theological writings, that the divine wisdom nothing do without
their eternal forethought.

Such was also the moving of the Holy corns Bürokrazius premeditated in his brain for ever. And
this vorbedenkende wisdom of God should show so soon.

Since the corn nunmehro had an unobstructed sanctuary to spread luxuriantly, and they expressed
no more shoe, they celebrated in the mind of the Holy orgies of reproduction. They proliferated
like sponges at the time of Jupiter Pluvius would say like the antiques,
Gradually, and expressed powerfully against the skull wall.

For since, however, due to the peculiar nature of the saint with which he thought could not possibly
get a headache, so it's corns also interfered with their uncanny Propagating not in the least
in his profession.

Somehow they had to fulfill their destiny but still. With their pressure against the skull walls
was involuntarily pressure on the hair roots attached. The hair has fallen out of Holy dahero
suddenly began to grow again.

There arose in a short time such a rich growth of hair that is holy Bürokrazius bemüßiget found
to weave a braid of it. The braid but he stood great to countenance.

These were also the holy Stultissimus and all the people who gewürdiget his sights were. Yes, since
the Holy Bürokrazius wore a ponytail, he gained even more prestige among humans.

The braid had he still erred. Deceit and even of red tape behind a
tail.

Why should the holy Bürokrazius unbezopft walk the earth.

The Almighty will divine wisdom had with the braid of the Holy Bürokrazius but still quite otherwise
bezwecket what all the values ​​behind their scoffers write Ohrwascheln
should have about this braid ever made derogatory remarks.

And these derogatory comments were made. Dare but the humanity, the shiny to black and drag the sublime
into the dust. It must be somewhere some poets said have the sotanen by saying in a moment of
divine inspiration for this one Moment of the other poets rabble detaches.

The braid of St. Bürokrazius derohalben is the subject of outrageous wit become because humanity has not
arrived here to recognize the mysterious sinking of the divine will.

Therefore Passet to fine and listen to. The writer of this legend will give you attentive readers the
divine destiny of the braid explain the holy Bürokrazius.

Due to the peculiar mindset of the saint could not document his brain out. Since this would, however,
with time lead to misinterpretations and would the reputation of the Holy can harm the good Lord
was in His eternal wisdom, intent on the brain of Saints have also
outwardly appear.

On the detours of corn he was condemned to inaction dahero the brain of the Holy outward in the shape
of his braid can see.

Dahero is the braid of the Holy Bürokrazius, other of his disciples and followers was taken
reverently in unmodified form, something sacred and must all of us
worship are due.

He is the visible discharge of his mind on that allegorical Place where it should be natural,
but not to be found is.

The actual seat of the mind and spirit of the holy Bürokrazius can easily understood from Reasons
coram publico not be entblößet, so the Pleno titulo Publico its emblematic Suffice seat and
its visible embodiment in the form of the braid.

  What this writer Legend all the scoffers, Blamey and Brokers in aeternum
the water to the blasphemous Klapper mills dug their jealousy to have
vermeinet.

    
    

But it is above matter with the displacement of the corn after the brain of St. Bürokrazius and the
consequent growth of the braid caused by no means erlediget.

I hope that the Holy by immunity from earthly torment not to secular Arrogance would be misled,
the evil enemy known as Old Nick, or a diabolical Lucifer Streichlein been verstattet.

Under the influence and under the guidance of the infernal Schürmeisters,
experience with the Migration of corn to the brain of the saints particularly
vile, erzinfames wicked and devilish corn to that of body parts of
his holy body astray, with what he thought.

The Holy Bürokrazius his wicked presence should be aware so soon. This a stray corn was beginning
in a new form of torture angry, and it flourished further and got
siblings and relatives.

This time, seized the hochgelahrten doctores universalis medicinae the suffering of the St. Bürokrazius
as The same as it were sprouted into a public affair in that it was the seat of his mind threatened.
She could not but thoroughly to help, but the largest medical faculties of the Earth gave
the holy Bürokrazius graduation ceremony in the title of Hämorrhoidarius what titulum Academicum
the Saint along with his pigtail with dignity, but not always carried
with aplomb.

[Decoration]

A delicious interlude of the Tyrolean Bacon dumplings.

At those times running, as the Holy Bürokrazius walked the earth,
were the Tyrolean bacon dumplings unfortunately not yet invented.

How could our otherwise admirable saint erlustieret it and delektieret. How about the trunk
of his nose sniffing has started to move if the charming and seductive Scent of the dumplings. Like
his donkey ears had gespitzet, and how would be thrilled Zopf wobbled.

The Krawattel he would never climb to unimagined heights.

It is not clear what St. Bürokrazius would have invented if he Tyrolean
Bacon dumplings would have dined.

So when his inventions without it even the whole world Meeting might be for the profusion of
his ideas have no place on earth if they were still fertilized by Tyrolean bacon dumplings.

It
may nunmehro perhaps a mischievous rascal ask the writer of this legend, why , the holy Saint
Bürokrazius not invent the Tyrolean bacon dumplings.

This fürwitzige
and undue gebühret question the questioner rightly an extensive Slaps.
The Holy Bürokrazius did not invent the Tyrolean bacon dumplings derohalben,
while he needed the bacon to a different invention or rather him the
while the Bacon by divine Providence for a different invention has
been destined, at the time was more necessary than the Tyrolean bacon
dumplings.

How the behaved, which will prove the following report
accurately.

Now you probably believe, you will find the same in the
next lines. Oh no, the writer This legend is your curiosity, large
gracious reader, nor a bissel on the rack and tension still further
spread about the Tyrolean bacon dumplings, for which he is a good
Believes to be right.

Once he wants aforementioned fürwitzigen questioners
like the mouth not only the role of bacon anselbsten in the life of
St. Bürokrazius, but also by the Tyrolean bacon dumplings waters .
Make

The second includes the Tyrolean bacon dumplings, as they too,
like the invention of the enormous Saints set to build on bacon and
even purely material, secundum materiam, in this legend. 

Thirdly,
the writer of this legend of the most heartfelt gratitude to the Tyrolean
Bacon dumplings fulfilled and may well allow it, at this point even
a Gesatzel weave pro domo.

Only the regular and abundant enjoyment
of the glorious dumpling has befähiget the writer, to explore the
lives of the saints, and up to this new turning point with due accompany
worship.

The world's full of matter of his opus was just from the
Tyrolean bacon dumplings at that Bring clarity and vividness that
you, devout readers appreciate, hopefully enough I taught you. And
justament sotane universal coverage of substance stands in the most
intimate causal Connexus with Tyrolean bacon dumplings.

"It would be beautiful!" said the older woman, "if you would care to take the time from your
own friends."

"I would love to have you for one of my friends," said the girl gracefully.

The woman smiled wistfully.

"I'm only here holidays and evenings," she conceded, "I'm doing some government work now."

"I shall come," said Ruth brightly. "I've enjoyed you ever so much." Then she started her car
and whirled away into the sunshine.

"She won't come, of course," said the woman to herself as she stood looking mournfully after
the car, reluctant to go into the empty house. "I wish she would! Isn't she just like a flower!
How wonderful it would be if things had been different, and there hadn't been any war, and
my boy could have had her for a friend! Oh!"

                    *       *       *       *       *

Down at the Club House the women waited for the fair young member who had charge of the wool.
They rallied her joyously as she hurried in, suddenly aware that she had kept them all waiting.

"I saw her in the crowd at the station this morning," called out Mrs. Pryor, a large placid
tease with a twinkle in her eye. "She was picking out the handsomest man for the next sweater
she knits. Which one did you choose, Miss Ruth? Tell us. Are you going to write him a letter
and stick it in the toe of his sock?"

The annoyed color swept into Ruth's face, but she paid no other heed as she went about her
morning duties, preparing the wool to give out. A thought had stolen into her heart that made
a tumult there and would not bear turning over even in her mind in the presence of all these
curious people. She put it resolutely by as she taught newcomers how to turn the heel of a
sock, but now and then it crept back again and was the cause of her dropping an occasional stitch.

Dottie Wetherill came to find out what was the matter with her sock, and to giggle and gurgle
about her brother Bob and his friends. Bob, it appeared, was going to bring five officers home
with him next week end and they were to have a dance Saturday night. Of course Ruth must come.
Bob was soon to get his first lieutenant's commission. There had been a mistake, of course,
or he would have had it before this, some favoritism shown; but now Bob had what they called
a "pull," and things were going to be all right for him. Bob said you couldn't get anywhere
without a "pull." And didn't Ruth think Bob looked perfectly fine in his uniform?

It annoyed Ruth to hear such talk and she tried to make it plain to Dottie that she was mistaken
about "pull." There was no such thing. It was all imagination. She knew, for her cousin, Captain
La Rue, was very close to the Government and he had told her so. He said that real worth was
always recognized, and that it didn't make any difference where it was found or who your friends
were. It mattered what you were.

She fixed Dottie's sock and moved on to the wool table to get ready an allotment for some of
the ladies to take home.

Mrs. Wainwright bustled in, large and florid and well groomed, with a bunch of photographer's
proofs of her son Harry in his uniform. She called loudly for Ruth to come and inspect them.
There were some twenty or more poses, each one seemingly fatter, more pompous and conceited
looking than the last. She stated in boisterous good humor that Harry particularly wanted Ruth's
opinion before he gave the order. At that Mrs. Pryor bent her head to her neighbor and nodded
meaningly, as if a certain matter of discussion were settled now beyond all question. Ruth
caught the look and its meaning and the color flooded her face once more, much to her annoyance.
She wondered angrily if she would never be able to stop that childish habit of blushing, and
why it annoyed her so very much this morning to have her name coupled with that of Harry Wainwright.
He was her old friend and playmate, having lived next door to her all her life, and it was
but natural when everybody was sweethearting and getting married, that people should speak
of her and wonder whether there might be anything more to their relationship than mere friendship.
Still it annoyed her. Continually as she turned the pages from one fat smug Wainwright countenance
to another, she saw in a mist the face of another man, with uplifted head and sorrowful eyes.
She wondered if when the time came for Harry Wainwright to go he would have aught of the vision,
and aught of the holiness of sorrow that had shown in that other face.

She handed the proofs back to the mother, so like her son in her ample blandness, and wondered
if Mrs. Cameron would have a picture of her son in his uniform, fine and large and lifelike
as these were.

She interrupted her thoughts to hear Mrs. Wainwright's clarion voice lifted in parting from
the door of the Club House on her way back to her car:

"Well, good-bye, Ruth dear. Don't hesitate to let me know if you'd like to have either of the
other two large ones for your own 'specials,' you know. I shan't mind changing the order a
bit. Harry said you were to have as many as you wanted. I'll hold the proofs for a day or two
and let you think it over."

Ruth lifted her eyes to see the gaze of every woman in the room upon her, and for a moment
she felt as if she almost hated poor fat doting Mamma Wainwright. Then the humorous side of
the moment came to help her and her face blossomed into a smile as she jauntily replied:

"Oh, no, please don't bother, Mrs. Wainwright. I'm not going to paper the wall with them. I
have other friends, you know. I think your choice was the best of them all."

Then as gaily as if she were not raging within her soul she turned to help poor Dottie Wetherill
who was hopelessly muddled about turning her heel.

Dottie chattered on above the turmoil of her soul, and her words were as tiny April showers
sizzling on a red hot cannon. By and by she picked up Dottie's dropped stitches. After all,
what did such things matter when there was war and men were giving their lives!

"And Bob says he doubts if they ever get to France. He says he thinks the war will be over
before half the men get trained. He says, for his part, he'd like the trip over after the submarines
have been put out of business. It would be something to tell about, don't you know? But Bob
thinks the war will be over soon. Don't you think so, Ruth?"

"I don't know what I think," said Ruth exasperated at the little prattler. It seemed so awful
for a girl with brains--or hadn't she brains?--to chatter on interminably in that inane fashion
about a matter of such awful portent. And yet perhaps the child was only trying to cover up
her fears, for she all too evidently worshipped her brother.

Ruth was glad when at last the morning was over and one by one the women gathered their belongings
together and went home. She stayed longer than the rest to put the work in order. When they
were all gone she drove around by the way of the post office and asked the old post master
who had been there for twenty years and knew everybody, if he could tell her the address of
the boys who had gone to camp that morning. He wrote it down and she tucked it in her blouse
saying she thought the Red Cross would be sending them something soon. Then she drove thoughtfully
away to her beautiful sheltered home, where the thought of war hardly dared to enter yet in
any but a playful form. But somehow everything was changed within the heart of Ruth Macdonald
and she looked about on all the familiar places with new eyes. What right had she to be living
here in all this luxury while over there men were dying every day that she might live?

IV

The sun shone blindly over the broad dusty drill-field. The men marched and wheeled, about-faced
and counter-marched in their new olive-drab uniforms and thought of home--those that had any
homes to think about. Some who did not thought of a home that might have been if this war had
not happened.

There were times when their souls could rise to the great occasion and their enthusiasm against
the foe could carry them to all lengths of joyful sacrifice, but this was not one of the times.
It was a breathless Indian summer morning, and the dust was inches thick. It rose like a soft
yellow mist over the mushroom city of forty thousand men, brought into being at the command
of a Nation's leader. Dust lay like a fine yellow powder over everything. An approaching company
looked like a cloud as it drew near. One could scarcely see the men near by for the cloud of
yellow dust everywhere.

The water was bad this morning when every man was thirsty. It had been boiled for safety and
was served warm and tasted of disinfectants. The breakfast had been oatmeal and salty bacon
swimming in congealed grease. The "boy" in the soldier's body was very low indeed that morning.
The "man" with his disillusioned eyes had come to the front. Of course this was nothing like
the hardships they would have to endure later, but it was enough for the present to their unaccustomed
minds, and harder because they were doing nothing that seemed worth while--just marching about
and doing sordid duties when they were all eager for the fray and to have it over with. They
had begun to see that they were going to have to learn to wait and be patient, to obey blindly;
they--who never had brooked commands from any one, most of them, not even from their own parents.
They had been free as air, and they had never been tied down to certain company. Here they
were all mixed up, college men and foreign laborers, rich and poor, cultured and coarse, clean
and defiled, and it went pretty hard with them all. They had come, a bundle of prejudices and
wills, and they had first to learn that every prejudice they had been born with or cultivated,
must be given up or laid aside. They were not their own. They belonged to a great machine.
The great perfect conception of the army as a whole had not yet dawned upon them. They were
occupied with unpleasant details in the first experimental stages. At first the discomforts
seemed to rise and obliterate even the great object for which they had come, and discontent
sat upon their faces.

Off beyond the drill-field whichever way they looked, there were barracks the color of the
dust, and long stark roads, new and rough, the color of the barracks, with jitneys and trucks
and men like ants crawling furiously back and forth upon them all animated by the same great
necessity that had brought the men here. Even the sky seemed yellow like the dust. The trees
were gone except at the edges of the camp, cut down to make way for more barracks, in even
ranks like men.

Out beyond the barracks mimic trenches were being dug, and puppets hung in long lines for mock
enemies. There were skeleton bridges to cross, walls to scale, embankments to jump over, and
all, everything, was that awful olive-drab color till the souls of the new-made soldiers cried
out within them for a touch of scarlet or green or blue to relieve the dreary monotony. Sweat
and dust and grime, weariness, homesickness, humbled pride, these were the tales of the first
days of those men gathered from all quarters who were pioneers in the first camps.

Corporal Cameron marched his awkward squad back and forth, through all the various manoeuvres,
again and again, giving his orders in short, sharp tones, his face set, his heart tortured
with the thought of the long months and years of this that might be before him. The world seemed
most unfriendly to him these days. Not that it had ever been over kind, yet always before his
native wit and happy temperament had been able to buoy him up and carry him through hopefully.
Now, however, hope seemed gone. This war might last till he was too old to carry out any of
his dreams and pull himself out of the place where fortune had dropped him. Gradually one thought
had been shaping itself clearly out of the days he had spent in camp. This life on earth was
not all of existence. There must be something bigger beyond. It wasn't sane and sensible to
think that any God would allow such waste of humanity as to let some suffer all the way through
with nothing beyond to compensate. There was a meaning to the suffering. There must be. It
must be a preparation for something beyond, infinitely better and more worth while. What was
it and how should he learn the meaning of his own particular bit?

John Cameron had never thought about religion before in his life. He had believed in a general
way in a God, or thought he believed, and that a book called the Bible told about Him and was
the authentic place to learn how to be good. The doubts of the age had not touched him because
he had never had any interest in them. In the ordinary course of events he might never have
thought about them in relation to himself until he came to die--perhaps not then. In college
he had been too much engrossed with other things to listen to the arguments, or to be influenced
by the general atmosphere of unbelief. He had been a boy whose inner thoughts were kept under
lock and key, and who had lived his heart life absolutely alone, although his rich wit and
bubbling merriment had made him a general favorite where pure fun among the fellows was going.
He loved to "rough house" as he called it, and his boyish pranks had always been the talk of
the town, the envied of the little boys; but no one knew his real, serious thoughts. Not even
his mother, strong and self-repressed like himself, had known how to get down beneath the surface
and commune with him. Perhaps she was afraid or shy.

Now that he was really alone among all this mob of men of all sorts and conditions, he had
retired more and more into the inner sanctuary of self and tried to think out the meaning of
life. From the chaos that reigned in his mind he presently selected a few things that he called
"facts" from which to work. These were "God, Hereafter, Death." These things he must reckon
with. He had been working on a wrong hypothesis all his life. He had been trying to live for
this world as if it were the end and aim of existence, and now this war had come and this world
had suddenly melted into chaos. It appeared that he and thousands of others must probably give
up their part in this world before they had hardly tried it, if they would set things right
again for those that should come after. But, even if he had lived out his ordinary years in
peace and success, and had all that life could give him, it would not have lasted long, seventy
years or so, and what were they after they were past? No, there was something beyond or it
all wouldn't have been made--this universe with the carefully thought out details working harmoniously
one with another. It wouldn't have been worth while otherwise. There would have been no reason
for a heart life.

There were boys and men in the army who thought otherwise. Who had accepted this life as being
all. Among these were the ones who when they found they were taken in the draft and must go
to camp, had spent their last three weeks of freedom drunk because they wanted to get all the
"fun" they could out of life that was left to them. They were the men who were plunging into
all the sin they could find before they went away to fight because they felt they had but a
little time to live and what did it matter? But John Cameron was not one of these. His soul
would not let him alone until he had thought it all out, and he had come thus far with these
three facts, "God, Death, A Life Hereafter." He turned these over in his mind for days and
then he changed their order, "Death, A Life Hereafter, God."

Death was the grim person he was going forth to meet one of these days or months on the field
of France or Italy, or somewhere "over there." He was not to wait for Death to come and get
him as had been the old order. This was WAR and he was going out to challenge Death. He was
convinced that whether Death was a servant of God or the Devil, in some way it would make a
difference with his own personal life hereafter, how he met Death. He was not satisfied with
just meeting Death bravely, with the ardor of patriotism in his breast, as he heard so many
about him talk in these days. That was well so far as it went, but it did not solve the mystery
of the future life nor make him sure how he would stand in that other world to which Death
stood ready to escort him presently. Death might be victor over his body, but he wanted to
be sure that Death should not also kill that something within him which he felt must live forever.
He turned it over for days and came to the conclusion that the only one who could help him
was God. God was the beginning of it all. If there was a God He must be available to help a
soul in a time like this. There must be a way to find God and get the secret of life, and so
be ready to meet Death that Death should not conquer anything but the body. How could one find
God? Had anybody ever found Him? Did anyone really think they had found Him? These were questions
that beat in upon his soul day after day as he drilled his men and went through the long hard
hours of discipline, or lay upon his straw tick at night while a hundred and fifty other men
about him slept.

His mother's secret attempts at religion had been too feeble and too hidden in her own breast
to have made much of an impression upon him. She had only hoped her faith was founded upon
a rock. She had not known. And so her buffeted soul had never given evidence to her son of
hidden holy refuge where he might flee with her in time of need.

Now and then the vision of a girl blurred across his thoughts uncertainly, like a bright moth
hovering in the distance whose shadow fell across his dusty path. But it was far away and vague,
and only a glance in her eyes belonged to him. She was not of his world.

He looked up to the yellow sky through the yellow dust, and his soul cried out to find the
way to God before he had to meet Death, but the heavens seemed like molten brass. Not that
he was afraid of death with a physical fear, but that his soul recoiled from being conquered
by it and he felt convinced that there was a way to meet it with a smile of assurance if only
he could find it out. He had read that people had met it that way. Was it all their imagination?
The mere illusion of a fanatical brain? Well, he would try to find out God. He would put himself
in the places where God ought to be, and when he saw any indication that God was there he would
cry out until he made God hear him!

The day he came to that conclusion was Sunday and he went over to the Y.M.C.A. Auditorium.
They were having a Mary Pickford moving picture show there. If he had happened to go at any
time during the morning he might have heard some fine sermons and perhaps have found the right
man to help him, but this was evening and the men were being amused.

He stood for a few moments and watched the pretty show. The sunlight on Mary's beautiful hair,
as it fell glimmering through the trees in the picture reminded him of the red-gold lights
on Ruth Macdonald's hair the morning he left home, and with a sigh he turned away and walked
to the edge of camp where the woods were still standing.

Alone he looked up to the starry sky. Amusement was not what he wanted now. He was in search
of something vague and great that would satisfy, and give him a reason for being and suffering
and dying perhaps. He called it God because he had no other name for it. Red-gold hair might
be for others but not for him. He might not take it where he would and he would not take it
where it lay easy to get. If he had been in the same class with some other fellows he knew
he would have wasted no time on follies. He would have gone for the very highest, finest woman.
But there! What was the use! Besides, even if he had been--and he had had--every joy of life
here was but a passing show and must sometime come to an end. And at the end would be this
old problem. Sometime he would have had to realize it, even if war had not come and brought
the revelation prematurely. What was it that he wanted? How could he find out how to die? Where
was God?

But the stars were high and cold and gave no answer, and the whispering leaves, although they
soothed him, sighed and gave no help.

The feeling was still with him next morning when the mail was distributed. There would be nothing
for him. His mother had written her weekly letter and it had reached him the day before. He
could expect nothing for several days now. Other men were getting sheaves of letters. How friendless
he seemed among them all. One had a great chocolate cake that a girl had sent him and the others
were crowding around to get a bit. It was doubtful if the laughing owner got more than a bite
himself. He might have been one of the group if he had chosen. They all liked him well enough,
although they knew him very little as yet, for he had kept much to himself. But he turned sharply
away from them and went out. Somehow he was not in the mood for fun. He felt he must be growing
morbid but he could not throw it off that morning. It all seemed so hopeless, the things he
had tried to do in life and the slow progress he had made upward; and now to have it all blocked
by war!

None of the other fellows ever dreamed that he was lonely, big, husky, handsome fellow that
he was, with a continuous joke on his lips for those he had chosen as associates, with an arm
of iron and a jaw that set like steel, grim and unmistakably brave. The awkward squad as they
wrathfully obeyed his stern orders would have told you he had no heart, the way he worked them,
and would not have believed that he was just plain homesick and lonesome for some one to care
for him.

He was not hungry that day when the dinner call came, and flung himself down under a scrub
oak outside the barracks while the others rushed in with their mess kits ready for beans or
whatever was provided for them. He was glad that they were gone, glad that he might have the
luxury of being miserable all alone for a few minutes. He felt strangely as if he were going
to cry, and yet he didn't know what about. Perhaps he was going to be sick. That would be horrible
down in that half finished hospital with hardly any equipment yet! He must brace up and put
an end to such softness. It was all in the idea anyway.

Then a great hand came down upon his shoulder with a mighty slap and he flung himself bolt
upright with a frown to find his comrade whose bunk was next to his in the barracks. He towered
over Cameron polishing his tin plate with a vigor.

"What's the matter with you, you boob? There's roast beef and its good. Cooky saved a piece
for you. I told him you'd come. Go in and get it quick! There's a letter for you, too, in the
office. I'd have brought it only I was afraid I would miss you. Here, take my mess kit and
hurry! There's some cracker-jack pickles, too, little sweet ones! Step lively, or some one
will swipe them all!"

Cameron arose, accepted his friend's dishes and sauntered into the mess hall. The letter couldn't
be very important. His mother had no time to write again soon, and there was no one else. It
was likely an advertisement or a formal greeting from some of the organizations at home. They
did that about fortnightly, the Red Cross, the Woman's Club, The Emergency Aid, The Fire Company.
It was kind in them but he wasn't keen about it just then. It could wait until he got his dinner.
They didn't have roast beef every day, and now that he thought about it he was hungry.

He almost forgot the letter after dinner until a comrade reminded him, handing over a thick
delicately scented envelope with a silver crest on the back. The boys got off their kidding
about "the girl he'd left behind him" and he answered with his old good-natured grin that made
them love him, letting them think he had all kinds of girls, for the dinner had somewhat restored
his spirits, but he crumpled the letter into his pocket and got away into the woods to read it.

Deliberately he walked down the yellow road, up over the hill by the signal corps tents, across
Wig-Wag Park to the woods beyond, and sat down on a log with his letter. He told himself that
it was likely one of those fool letters the fellows were getting all the time from silly girls
who were uniform-crazy. He wouldn't answer it, of course, and he felt a kind of contempt with
himself for being weak enough to read it even to satisfy his curiosity.

Then he tore open the envelope half angrily and a faint whiff of violets floated out to him.
Over his head a meadow lark trilled a long sweet measure, and glad surprise suddenly entered
into his soul.

V

The letter was written in a fine beautiful hand and even before he saw the silver monogram
at the top, he knew who was the writer, though he did not even remember to have seen the writing
before:

MY DEAR FRIEND:

I have hesitated a long time before writing because I do not know that I have the right to
call you a friend, or even an acquaintance in the commonly accepted sense of that term. It
is so long since you and I went to school together, and we have been so widely separated since
then that perhaps you do not even remember me, and may consider my letter an intrusion. I hope
not, for I should hate to rank with the girls who are writing to strangers under the license
of mistaken patriotism.

My reason for writing you is that a good many years ago you did something very nice and kind
for me one day, in fact you helped me twice, although I don't suppose you knew it. Then the
other day, when you were going to camp and I sat in my car and watched you, it suddenly came
over me that you were doing it again; this time a great big wonderful thing for me; and doing
it just as quietly and inconsequentially as you did it before; and all at once I realized how
splendid it was and wanted to thank you.

It came over me, too, that I had never thanked you for the other times, and very likely you
never dreamed that you had done anything at all.

You see I was only a little girl, very much frightened, because Chuck Woodcock had teased me
about my curls and said that he was going to catch me and cut them off, and send me home to
my aunt that way, and she would turn me out of the house. He had been frightening me for several
days, so that I was afraid to go to school alone, and yet I would not tell my aunt because
I was afraid she would take me away from the Public School and send me to a Private School
which I did not want. But that day I had seen Chuck Woodcock steal in behind the hedge, ahead
of the girls. The others were ahead of me and I was all out of breath--running to catch up
because I was afraid to pass him alone; and just as I got near two of them,--Mary Wurts and
Caroline Meadows, you remember them, don't you?--they gave a scream and pitched headlong on
the sidewalk. They had tripped over a wire he had stretched from the tree to the hedge. I stopped
short and got behind a tree, and I remember how the tears felt in my throat, but I was afraid
to let them out because Chuck would call me a crybaby and I hated that. And just then you came
along behind me and jumped through the hedge and caught Chuck and gave him an awful whipping.
"Licking" I believe we called it then. I remember how condemned I felt as I ran by the hedge
and knew in my heart that I was glad you were hurting him because he had been so cruel to me.
He used to pull my curls whenever he sat behind me in recitation.

I remember you came in to school late with your hair all mussed up beautifully, and a big tear
in your coat, and a streak of mud on your face. I was so worried lest the teacher would find
out you had been fighting and make you stay after school. Because you see I knew in my heart
that you had been winning a battle for me, and if anybody had to stay after school I wished
it could be me because of what you had done for me. But you came in laughing as you always
did, and looking as if nothing in the world unusual had happened, and when you passed my desk
you threw before me the loveliest pink rose bud I ever saw. That was the second thing you did
for me.

Perhaps you won't understand how nice that was, either, for you see you didn't know how unhappy
I had been. The girls hadn't been very friendly with me. They told me I was "stuck up," and
they said I was too young to be in their classes anyway and ought to go to Kindergarten. It
was all very hard for me because I longed to be big and have them for my friends. I was very
lonely in that great big house with only my aunt and grandfather for company. But the girls
wouldn't be friends at all until they saw you give me that rose, and that turned the tide.
They were crazy about you, every one of them, and, they made up to me after that and told me
their secrets and shared their lunch and we had great times. And it was all because you gave
me the rose that day. The rose itself was lovely and I was tremendously happy over it for its
own sake, but it meant a whole lot to me besides, and opened the little world of school to
my longing feet. I always wanted to thank you for it, but you looked as if you didn't want
me to, so I never dared; and lately I wasn't quite sure you knew me, because you never looked
my way any more.

But when I saw you standing on the platform the other day with the other drafted men, it all
came over me how you were giving up the life you had planned to go out and fight for me and
other girls like me. I hadn't thought of the war that way before, although, of course, I had
heard that thought expressed in speeches; but it never struck into my heart until I saw the
look on your face. It was a kind of "knightliness," if there is such a word, and when I thought
about it I realized it was the very same look you had worn when you burst through the hedge
after Chuck Woodcock, and again when you came back and threw that rose on my desk. Although,
you had a big, broad boy's-grin on your face then, and were chewing gum I remember quite distinctly;
and the other day you looked so serious and sorry as if it meant a great deal to you to go,
but you were giving up everything gladly without even thinking of hesitating. The look on your
face was a man's look, not a boy's.

It has meant so much to me to realize this last great thing that you are doing for me and for
the other girls of our country that I had to write and tell you how much I appreciate it.

I have been wondering whether some one has been knitting you a sweater yet, and the other things
that they knit for soldiers; and if they haven't, whether you would let me send them to you?
It is the only thing I can do for you who have done so much for me.

I hope you will not think I am presuming to have written this on the strength of a childish
acquaintance. I wish you all honors that can come to you on such a quest as yours, and I had
almost said all good luck, only that that word sounds too frivolous and pagan for such a serious
matter; so I will say all safety for a swift accomplishment of your task and a swift homecoming.
I used to think when I was a little child that nothing could ever hurt you or make you afraid,
and I cannot help feeling now that you will come through the fire unscathed. May I hope to
hear from you about the sweater and things? And may I sign myself

                                                           Your friend?

                                                         RUTH MACDONALD.

John Cameron lifted his eyes from the paper at last and looked up at the sky. Had it ever been
so blue before? At the trees. What whispering wonders of living green! Was that only a bird
that was singing that heavenly song--a meadow lark, not an angel? Why had he never appreciated
meadow larks before?

He rested his head back against a big oak and his soldier's hat fell off on the ground. He
closed his eyes and the burden of loneliness that had borne down upon him all these weeks in
the camp lifted from his heart. Then he tried to realize what had come to him. Ruth Macdonald,
the wonder and admiration of his childhood days, the admired and envied of the home town, the
petted beauty at whose feet every man fell, the girl who had everything that wealth could purchase!
She had remembered the little old rose he had dared to throw on her desk, and had bridged the
years with this letter!

He was carried back in spirit to the day he left for camp. To the look in her eyes as he moved
away on the train. The look had been real then, and not just a fleeting glance helped out by
his fevered imagination. There had been true friendliness in her eyes. She had intended to
say good-bye to him! She had put him on a level with her own beautiful self. She had knighted
him, as it were, and sent him forth! Even the war had become different since she chose to think
he was going forth to fight her battles. What a sacred trust!

Afar in the distance a bugle sounded that called to duty. He had no idea how the time had flown.
He glanced at his wrist watch and was amazed. He sprang to his feet and strode over the ground,
but the way no longer seemed dusty and blinded with sunshine. It shone like a path of glory
before his willing feet, and he went to his afternoon round of duties like a new man. He had
a friend, a real friend, one that he had known a long time. There was no fear that she was
just writing to him to get one more soldier at her feet as some girls would have done. Her
letter was too frank and sincere to leave a single doubt about what she meant. He would take
her at her word.

Sometime during the course of the afternoon it occurred to him to look at the date of the letter,
and he found to his dismay that it had been written nearly four weeks before and had been travelling
around through various departments in search of him, because it had not the correct address.
He readily guessed that she had not wanted to ask for his company and barracks; she would not
have known who to ask. She did not know his mother, and who else was there? His old companions
were mostly gone to France or camp somewhere.

And now, since all this time had elapsed she would think he had not cared, had scorned her
letter or thought it unmaidenly! He was filled with dismay and anxiety lest he had hurt her
frankness by his seeming indifference. And the knitted things, the wonderful things that she
had made with her fair hands! Would she have given them to some one else by this time? Of course,
it meant little to her save as a kind of acknowledgment for something she thought he had done
for her as a child, but they meant so much to him! Much more than they ought to do, he knew,
for he was in no position to allow himself to become deeply attached to even the handiwork
of any girl in her position. However, nobody need ever know how much he cared, had always cared,
for the lovely little girl with her blue eyes, her long curls, her shy sweet smile and modest
ways, who had seemed to him like an angel from heaven when he was a boy. She had said he did
not know that he was helping her when he burst through the hedge on the cowering Chuck Woodcock;
and he would likely never dare to tell her that it was because he saw her fright and saw her
hide behind that tree that he went to investigate and so was able to administer a just punishment.
He had picked that rose from the extreme west corner of a great petted rose bush on the Wainwright
lawn, reaching through an elaborate iron fence to get it as he went cross-lots back to school.
He would call it stealing now to do that same, but then it had been in the nature of a holy
rite offered to a vestal virgin. Yet he must have cast it down with the grin of an imp, boorish
urchin that he was; and he remembered blushing hotly in the dark afterwards at his presumption,
as he thought of it alone at night. And all the time she had been liking it. The little girl--the
little sweet girl! She had kept it in her heart and remembered it!

His heart was light as air as he went back to the barracks for retreat. A miracle had been
wrought for him which changed everything. No, he was not presuming on a friendly letter. Maybe
there would be fellows who would think there wasn't much in just a friendly letter to a lonely
soldier, and a sweater or two more or less. But then they would never have known what it was
to be so lonely for friendship, real friendship, as he was.

He would hurry through supper and get to the Y.M.C.A. hut to write her an answer. He would
explain how the letter had been delayed and say he hoped she had not given the things away
to someone else. He began planning sentences as he stood at attention during the captain's
inspection at retreat. Somehow the captain was tiresomely particular about the buttons and
pocket flaps and little details to-night. He waited impatiently for the command to break ranks,
and was one of the first at the door of the mess hall waiting for supper, his face alight,
still planning what he would say in that letter and wishing he could get some fine stationery
to write upon; wondering if there was any to be had with his caduces on it.

At supper he bubbled with merriment. An old schoolmate might have thought him rejuvenated.
He wore his schoolboy grin and rattled off puns and jokes, keeping the mess hall in a perfect roar.

At last he was out in the cool of the evening with the wonderful sunset off in the west, on
his way to the Y.M.C.A. hut. He turned a corner swinging into the main road and there, coming
toward him, not twenty feet away, he saw Lieutenant Wainwright!

VI

There was no possible way to avoid meeting him. John Cameron knew that with the first glance.
He also knew that Wainwright had recognized him at once and was lifting his chin already with
that peculiar, disagreeable tilt of triumph that had always been so maddening to one who knew
the small mean nature of the man.

Of course, there was still time to turn deliberately about and flee in the other direction,
but that would be all too obvious, and an open confession of weakness. John Cameron was never
at any time a coward.

His firm lips set a trifle more sternly than usual, his handsome head was held high with fine
military bearing. He came forward without faltering for even so much as the fraction of a waver.
There was not a flicker in his eyes set straight ahead. One would never have known from his
looks that he recognized the oncoming man, or had so much as realized that an officer was approaching,
yet his brain was doing some rapid calculation. He had said in his heart if not openly that
he would never salute this man. He had many times in their home town openly passed him without
salute because he had absolutely no respect for him, and felt that he owed it to his sense
of the fitness of things not to give him deference, but that was a different matter from camp.
He knew that Wainwright was in a position to do him injury, and no longer stood in fear of
a good thrashing from him as at home, because here he could easily have the offender put in
the guard house and disgraced forever. Nothing, of course, would delight him more than thus
to humiliate his sworn enemy. Yet Cameron walked on knowing that he had resolved not to salute him.

It was not merely pride in his own superiority. It was contempt for the nature of the man,
for his low contemptible plots and tricks, and cunning ways, for his entire lack of principle,
and his utter selfishness and heartlessness, that made Cameron feel justified in his attitude
toward Wainwright. "He is nothing but a Hun at heart," he told himself bitterly.

But the tables were turned. Wainwright was no longer in his home town where his detestable
pranks had goaded many of his neighbors and fellowtownsmen into a cordial hatred of him. He
was in a great military camp, vested with a certain amount of authority, with the right to
report those under him; who in turn could not retaliate by telling what they knew of him because
it was a court-martial offense for a private to report an officer. Well, naturally the United
States was not supposed to have put men in authority who needed reporting. Cameron, of course,
realized that these things had to be in order to maintain military discipline. But it was inevitable
that some unworthy ones should creep in, and Wainwright was surely one of those unworthy ones.
He would not bend to him, officer, or no officer. What did he care what happened to himself?
Who was there to care but his mother? And she would understand if the news should happen to
penetrate to the home town, which was hardly likely. Those who knew him would not doubt him,
those who did not mattered little. There was really no one who would care. Stay! A letter crackled
in his breast pocket and a cold chill of horror struggled up from his heart. Suppose she should
hear of it! Yes, he would care for that!

They were almost meeting now and Cameron's eyes were straight ahead staring hard at the big
green shape of the theatre a quarter of a mile away. His face under its usual control showed
no sign of the tumult in his heart, which flamed with a sudden despair against a fate that
had placed him in such a desperate situation. If there were a just power who controlled the
affairs of men, how could it let such things happen to one who had always tried to live up
upright life? It seemed for that instant as if all the unfairness and injustice of his own
hard life had culminated in that one moment when he would have to do or not do and bear the
consequences.

Then suddenly out from the barracks close at hand with brisk step and noble bearing came Captain
La Rue, swinging down the walk into the road straight between the two men and stopped short
in front of Cameron with a light of real welcome in his eyes, as he lifted his hand to answer
the salute which the relieved Cameron instantly flashed at him.

In that second Lieutenant Wainwright flung past them with a curt salute to the higher officer
and a glare at the corporal which the latter seemed not to see. It was so simultaneous with
Cameron's salute of La Rue that nobody on earth could say that the salute had not included
the lieutenant, yet both the lieutenant and the corporal knew that it had not; and Wainwright's
brow was dark with intention as he turned sharply up the walk to the barracks which the captain
had just left.

"I was just coming in search of you, Cameron," said the captain with a twinkle in his eyes,
and his voice was clearly distinct to Wainwright as he loitered in the barracks doorway to
listen, "I went down to Washington yesterday and put in the strongest plea I knew how for your
transfer. I hope it will go through all right. There is no one else out for the job and you
are just the man for the place. It will be a great comfort to have you with me."

A few more words and the busy man moved on eluding Cameron's earnest thanks and leaving him
to pursue his course to the Y.M.C.A. hut with a sense of soothing and comfort. It never occurred
to either of them that their brief conversation had been overheard, and would not have disturbed
them if it had.

Lieutenant Wainwright lingered on the steps of the barracks with a growing curiosity and satisfaction.
The enemy were playing right into his hands: both the enemy--for he hated Captain La Rue as
sin always hates the light.

He lounged about the barracks in deep thought for a few minutes and then made a careful toilet
and went out.

He knew exactly where to go and how to use his influence, which was not small, although not
personal. It was characteristic of the man that it made no difference to him that the power
he was wielding was a borrowed power whose owner would have been the last man to have done
what he was about to do with it. He had never in his life hesitated about getting whatever
he wanted by whatever means presented itself. He was often aware that people gave him what
he wanted merely to get rid of him, but this did not alloy his pleasure in his achievement.

He was something of a privileged character in the high place to which he betook himself, on
account of the supreme regard which was held for the uncle, a mighty automobile king, through
whose influence he had obtained his commission. So far he had not availed himself of his privileges
too often and had therefore not as yet outworn his welcome, for he was a true diplomat. He
entered this evening with just the right shade of delicate assurance and humble affrontery
to assure him a cordial welcome, and gracefully settled himself into the friendliness that
was readily extended to him. He was versed in all the ways of the world and when he chose could
put up a good appearance. He knew that for the sake of his father's family and more especially
because of his uncle's high standing, this great official whom he was calling upon was bound
to be nice to him for a time. So he bided his time till a few other officials had left and
his turn came.

The talk was all personal, a few words about his relatives and then questions about himself,
his commission, how he liked it, and how things were going with him. Mere form and courtesy,
but he knew how to use the conversation for his own ends:

"Oh, I'm getting along fine and dandy!" he declared effusively, "I'm just crazy about camp!
I like the life! But I'll tell you what makes me tired. It's these little common guys running
around fussing about their jobs and trying to get a lot of pull to get into some other place.
Now there's an instance of that in our company, a man from my home town, no account whatever
and never was, but he's got it in his head that he's a square peg in a round hole and he wants
to be transferred. He shouts about it from morning till night trying to get everybody to help
him, and at last I understand he's hoodwinked one captain into thinking he's the salt of the
earth, and they are plotting together to get him transferred. I happened to overhear them talking
about it just now, how they are going to this one and that one in Washington to get things
fixed to suit them. They think they've got the right dope on things all right and it's going
through for him to get his transfer. It makes me sick. He's no more fit for a commission than
my dog, not as fit, for he could at least obey orders. This fellow never did anything but what
he pleased. I've known him since we were kids and never liked him. But he has a way with him
that gets people till they understand him. It's too bad when the country needs real men to
do their duty that a fellow like that can get a commission when he is utterly inefficient besides
being a regular breeder of trouble. But, of course, I can't tell anybody what I know about him."

"I guess you needn't worry, Wainwright. They can't make any transfers without sending them
up to me, and you may be good and sure I'm not transferring anybody just now without a good
reason, no matter who is asking it. He's in your company, is he? And where does he ask to be
transferred? Just give me his name. I'll make a note of it. If it ever comes up I'll know how
to finish him pretty suddenly. Though I doubt if it does. People are not pulling wires just
now. This is war and everything means business. However, if I find there has been wire-pulling
I shall know how to deal with it summarily. It's a court-martial offense, you know."

They passed on to other topics, and Wainwright with his little eyes gleaming triumphantly soon
took himself out into the starlight knowing that he had done fifteen minutes' good work and
not wishing to outdo it. He strolled contentedly back to officers' quarters wearing a more
complacent look on his heavy features. He would teach John Cameron to ignore him!

Meantime John Cameron with his head among the stars walked the dusty camp streets and forgot
the existence of Lieutenant Wainwright. A glow of gratitude had flooded his soul at sight of
his beloved captain, whom he hoped soon to be able to call his captain. Unconsciously he walked
with more self-respect as the words of confidence and trust rang over again in his ears. Unconsciously
the little matters of personal enmity became smaller, of less importance, beside the greater
things of life in which he hoped soon to have a real part. If he got this transfer it meant
a chance to work with a great man in a great way that would not only help the war but would
be of great value to him in this world after the war was over. It was good to have the friendship
of a man like that, fine, clean, strong, intellectual, kind, just, human, gentle as a woman,
yet stern against all who deviated from the path of right.

The dusk was settling into evening and twinkling lights gloomed out amid the misty, dust-laden
air. Snatches of wild song chorused out from open windows:

                    She's my lady, my baby,
                      She's cock-eyed, she's crazy.

The twang of a banjo trailed in above the voices, with a sound of scuffling. Loud laughter
broke the thread of the song leaving "Mary Ann!" to soar out alone. Then the chorus took it
up once more:

          All her teeth are false
            From eating Rochelle salts--
          She's my freckled-faced, consumptive MARY ANN-N-N!

Cameron turned in at the quiet haven of the Y.M.C.A. hut, glad to leave the babel sounds outside.
Somehow they did not fit his mood to-night, although there were times when he could roar the
outlandish gibberish with the best of them. But to-night he was on such a wonderful sacred
errand bent, that it seemed as though he wanted to keep his soul from contact with rougher
things lest somehow it might get out of tune and so unfit him for the task before him.

And then when he had seated himself before the simple desk he looked at the paper with discontent.
True, it was all that was provided and it was good enough for ordinary letters, but this letter
to her was different. He wished he had something better. To think he was really writing to
her! And now that he was here with the paper before him what was he to say? Words seemed to
have deserted him. How should he address her?

It was not until he had edged over to the end of the bench away from everybody else and taken
out the precious letter that he gained confidence and took up his pen:

"My dear friend:----" Why, he would call her his friend, of course, that was what she had called
him. And as he wrote he seemed to see her again as she sat in her car by the station the day
he started on his long, long trail and their eyes had met. Looking so into her eyes again,
he wrote straight from his soul:

MY DEAR FRIEND:

Your letter has just reached me after travelling about for weeks. I am not going to try to
tell you how wonderful it is to me to have it. In fact, the wonder began that morning I left
home when you smiled at me and waved a friendly farewell. It was a great surprise to me. I
had not supposed until that moment that you remembered my existence. Why should you? And it
has never been from lack of desire to do so that I failed to greet you when we passed in the
street. I did not think that I, a mere little hoodlum from your infant days, had a right to
intrude upon your grown-up acquaintance without a hint from you that such recognition would
be agreeable. I never blamed you for not speaking of course. Perhaps I didn't give you the
chance. I simply thought I had grown out of your memory as was altogether natural. It was indeed
a pleasant experience to see that light of friendliness in your eyes at the station that day,
and to know it was a real personal recognition and not just a patriotic gush of enthusiasm
for the whole shabby lot of us draftees starting out to an unknown future. I thanked you in
my heart for that little bit of personal friendliness but I never expected to have an opportunity
to thank you in words, nor to have the friendliness last after I had gone away. When your letter
came this morning it sure was some pleasant surprise. I know you have a great many friends,
and plenty of people to write letters to, but somehow there was a real note of comradeship
in the one you wrote me, not as if you just felt sorry for me because I had to go off to war
and fight and maybe get killed. It was as if the conditions of the times had suddenly swept
away a lot of foolish conventions of the world, which may all have their good use perhaps at
times, but at a time like this are superfluous, and you had just gravely and sweetly offered
me an old friend's sympathy and good will. As such I have taken it and am rejoicing in it.

Don't make any mistake about this, however. I never have forgotten you or the rose! I stole
it from the Wainwright's yard after I got done licking Chuck, and I had a fight with Hal Wainwright
over it which almost finished the rose, and nearly got me expelled from school before I got
through with it. Hal told his mother and she took it to the school board. I was a pretty tough
little rascal in those days I guess and no doubt needed some lickings myself occasionally.
But I remember I almost lost my nerve when I got back to school that day and came within an
ace of stuffing the rose in my pocket instead of throwing it on your desk. I never dreamed
the rose would be anything to you. It was only my way of paying tribute to you. You seemed
to me something like a rose yourself, just dropped down out of heaven you know, you were so
little and pink and gold with such great blue eyes. Pardon me. I don't mean to be too personal.
You don't mind a big hobbledehoy's admiration, do you? You were only a baby; but I would have
licked any boy in town that lifted a word or a finger against you. And to think you really
needed my help! It certainly would have lifted me above the clouds to have known it then!

And now about this war business. Of course it is a rough job, and somebody had to do it for
the world. I was glad and willing to do my part; but it makes a different thing out of it to
be called a knight, and I guess I'll look at it a little more respectfully now. If a life like
mine can protect a life like yours from some of the things those Germans are putting over I'll
gladly give it. I've sized it up that a man couldn't do a bigger thing for the world anyhow
he planned it than to make the world safe for a life like yours; so me for what they call "the
supreme sacrifice," and it won't be any sacrifice at all if it helps you!

No, I haven't got a sweater or those other things that go with those that you talk about. Mother
hasn't time to knit and I never was much of a lady's man, I guess you know if you know me at
all. Or perhaps you don't. But anyhow I'd be wonderfully pleased to wear a sweater that you
knit, although it seems a pretty big thing for you to do for me. However, if knitting is your
job in this war, and I wouldn't be robbing any other better fellow, I certainly would just
love to have it.

If you could see this big dusty monotonous olive-drab camp you would know what a bright spot
your letter and the thought of a real friend has made in it. I suppose you have been thinking
all this time that I was neglectful because I didn't answer, but it was all the fault of someone
who gave you the wrong address. I am hoping you will forgive me for the delay and that some
day you will have time to write to me again.

                                                  Sincerely and proudly,

                                                            Your knight,

                                                           JOHN CAMERON.

As he walked back to his barracks in the starlight his heart was filled with a great peace.
What a thing it was to have been able to speak to her on paper and let her know his thoughts
of her. It was as if after all these years he had been able to pluck another trifling rose
and lay it at her lovely feet. Her knight! It was the fulfillment of all his boyish dreams!

He had entrusted his letter to the Y.M.C.A. man to mail as he was going out of camp that night
and would mail it in Baltimore, ensuring it an immediate start. Now he began to speculate whether
it would reach its destination by morning and be delivered with the morning mail. He felt as
excited and impatient as a child over it.

Suddenly a voice above him in a barracks window rang out with a familiar guffaw, and the words:

"Why, man, I can't! Didn't I tell you I'm going to marry Ruth Macdonald before I go! There
wouldn't be time for that and the other, too!"

Something in his heart grew cold with pain and horror, and something in his motive power stopped
suddenly and halted his feet on the sidewalk in the grade cut below the officers' barracks.

"Aw! A week more won't make any difference," drawled another familiar voice, "I say, Hal, she's
just crazy about you and you could get no end of information out of her if you tried. All she
asks is that you tell what you know about a few little things that don't matter anyway."

"But I tell you I can't, man. If Ruth found out about the girl the mischief would be to pay.
She wouldn't stand for another girl--not that kind of a girl, you know, and there wouldn't
be time for me to explain and smooth things over before I go across the Pond. I tell you I've
made up my mind about this."

The barracks door slammed shut on the voices and Corporal Cameron's heart gave a great jump
upwards in his breast and went on. Slowly, dizzily he came to his senses and moved on automatically
toward his own quarters.

VII

He had passed the quarters of the signal corps before the thought of the letter he had just
written came to his mind. 

It became more frequent, however, a scripture on his writing so much that they all mountains matched,
in which the saint disappeared completely. You could see by his physicality, the most Time no
more. Not even the very tips of his long donkey ears stuck out on the papery mountains beyond.
And not even the posterior ascending it could Krawatitis with all their malice, to climb the
towering peaks.

Only the halo Sancti Bürokrazii shone a mild light and from this papery mountains out. It was as if his
light transfigured out of sheer gorges papery would rise.

As much as sniffed around the snout nose joyful work of the Holy Mountain in the papery furrowed
papery and the canyons, it never wanted to be less immeasurable blessing. The saint had suffered
very serious in writer's cramp, and the fingers of his right hand
themselves wanted to start a new variety of corn, which the Holy no
gentle shudder caused.

As the blessing of bacon came into his life.

The Holy enjoyed mostly in the mornings to a half a lunch erklöckliches Trumm bacon and drank
to his building up a liquor shot glasses to drink two or three spirit
glasses, what we, the fair truth be decisive, hereby do not want to
conceal.

The bacon tasted always fürtrefflich him, though he only in its rudimentary
form and did unfortunately not yet in a refined and glorified form
of the globus Tirolensis.

Because the Holy One of its simplicity of tablecloths and Servietteln had no idea He wiped the
greasy claws usually lead to the seat of his intellect, and devoted
is then always keen to turn his work.

By chance, he grabbed nunmehro in one morning, even before he made said wiping had, after a particularly
deleterious scriptura. When he put away again, he saw with holy astonishment that his holy bacon greasy
thumb's image on the scriptura abgedrucket had.

For a long time he found this heavenly wonder whether the language again. He considered the scriptura
and looked Pollice suum, his serfs thumb. It could not be denied the thumb had with all his
inscription in crooked lines and curves and wonderful Drawings in
a beautiful clarity transferred to the scriptura.

It was a painting of exquisite Beauty and accuracy.

After the Saints had erholet somewhat from his astonishment, he pressed a other scripture powerfully
his nose.

Also there is a clear entstund miraculously Impression, seeing the holy snout nose many fatty
substances contained if it also not to say that they like the bacon for the preparation of the
globus Tirolensis would have suited.

This latest success encouraged the holy Bürokrazius it now with his by the to try corns liberated
toes.

Even with these limbs of his holy body He achieved significant impressions, since he has been more
than a year no more foot bath had taken.

The highest enlightenment came the Saints, as it refers to a good end of one of the most secret
scriptures to the seat of his mind was squatting. Allda entstund such a wonderful Impression that
his majesty royal Sigillum none could be compared.

Full fervent devotion gazed at the holy Bürokrazius the same visual Epitaphia his Thumb and
his toes, his nose and trunk of his mind temple. Then he pushed the jubilant cry of "Eureka! I've found
it! "

It was the holy Bürokrazius clear like ten thousand tallow candles that he was for all time not
as badly needed to chastise them with the paperwork.

Henceforth he postponed the signing less-piece scriptures on the morning's Speck time. The nose
at all hours worked. The foot baths, he swore his life from. And for the most secret scriptures "by signing
the impression of his sacred Intellectual center was also forever memorable enough pressure capability
available.

When St. Bürokrazius his colleagues, the holy Stultissimus, his latest heavenly inspiration,
opened the Holy Office of the groom broke the mold are exactly preserved and certified by
the Holy Bürokrazius with its biggest Sigillum enthusiastic words of: "O you heavenly Roßknödel! So what
can only be such a Rindviech come as you are one! "

When St. Bürokrazius the Fürtrefflichkeit his invention even the slightest Doubt would have geheget
so would be the same by the above-cited candid and formal recognition his Mitheiligen been thoroughly
dispersed.

Now you have but, oh gracious reader, the importance of the invention of the holy Bürokrazius erfasset
apparently not yet complete. I want your dahero nachhatschenden comprehension merciful help to
the front and rear legs. For I must indeed help on four legs.

You understand me, as is gemeinet, and are you about your position in the Zoologia clear.

The fat of the sacred has Bürokrazius broughtest the thumb print of the saint and is thus the
archetype of Stampiglie become.

By St. thumb of St. Bürokrazius I say dahero you, gentle reader quadrupedal that the original form
of the glorious starting point Stampiglie for the invention of Stampiglien has become general.

And
now remember, O my nachdenksames highly revered quadrupedal audience where we were, when the
Holy Bürokrazius by his bacon halbmittäglichen not invent the Stampiglien would have. He and
his disciples would be through the efforts of their paperwork long way all earthly things went.
For since the mind of the Holy Bürokrazius always sitting, dahero by a downward pressing movement
documented what was natural, as the disposal of the saints, it may
also be the mind of his disciples, his legacy competed show in an
oppressive downward movement!

    And what would this purpose instrumentum appropriate and appointed
as a Stampiglie?

By the supreme legacy of St. Bürokrazius move the circle of his thoughts Especially in younger
Stampiglien. Thus they need the precious vessels of their ability
to think not always straining while, but can special strain of the
mind rely on the ability of the pressure Stampiglien.

It ails us only those Stampiglie which the Sigillum maximum of St. Bürokrazius would comply. Stampiglie
The same would be the people in front of the facilities of St. Bürokrazius bow respectfully to impose
particularly solemn. You they would impose anselbsten their mortal body. It would be them in memoriam
Sancti Bürokrazii impose on that portion of their humani corporis,
allwo even St. Sitting Bürokrazius mind had.

And this Stampiglie, this maximum Sigillum Sancti Bürokrazii would have to bear in formal letters,
only the single word: "Rindviech"

As St. Bürokrazius taught his disciples.

After the holy Bürokrazius such form for the welfare of the people of incessant Toil had gesorget,
was his eager desire to attract quite a number of disciples, which should receive his inheritance
undiminished manage and, if the sky one day would like him to graciously appointed from this earthly
vale of tears to the eternal glory.

His holy colleague and groom, the red tape crap Experts Saint Stultissimus the holy Bürokrazius
for the duration of his earthly pilgrimage was not enough, seeing St. Stultissimus more and more
moved to his special subject, the culture of Roßmistes and the other world-wide actionibus Sancti
Bürokrazii not always sufficient understanding gives to.

So it would not have been properly be assumed that this roßmistsachverständige Saints would ever come
up with the revolutionary invention of Stampiglien.

It would also be unfair to such immortal merits of the blessed by
the Holy to demand.

For it is the holy Saint Stultissimus due to that the red tape in non-extinct Gloria and iron
health and lives and thrives, and that his manure in elevated quantities multiplied, what have
the Dekoktum respectful Ergebenheitstränkleins is of immeasurable value.

The writer of this legend has it dahero deemed necessary, the holy Stultissimus to weave in
hoc loco egregio, this place is a great Ehrenkränzel, before turning to the description of
the other saints from the circle of St. Bürokrazius the closer einlasset.

After all said and done, the holy Stultissimus the first saint, which St. Bürokrazio begotten.
The devout reader will have the wonderful meeting recall between the two Saints and St. Stultissimum
already from this description of her have closed deep in his heart.

As well as writer of this legend with his intimate Love and remember his image in the further
course of this legend to be opened Galleria want to hang around the holy saints of Bürokrazius
primo loco.

But before scriptor vitae sanctorum of this month and pitched up big reader as a favorable arty
and conducted a conscientious supervisor in the Picture Gallery,
the largest allwo holy disciples hang Sancti Bürokrazii abkonterfeiet,
he must tell you a better understanding of those Picture first place
to announce yet, as Saint Bürokrazius has be taught his disciples.

Then said the holy Bürokrazius to his disciples, as he gathered them around had this ... Hocket
you to your seats as I am sitting on mine, and erfasset my words
in my mind and in my sacred way of thinking!

Bear in mind, first, what is the dear public? The dear public is nothing but a stupid Sheep without
a mind and mental abilities. Otherwise it would have long since beaten
you.

But if you have ever heard that a herd of cattle beaten their pastors? That you have never heard.
So the dear public stands on the positions of the love and cattle in some Things on a much deeper positions.
For since, however, any cattle that we keep in our houses, must be
a livestock activity, including the dear public is for your sake than
cattle on earth and not her love of the audience's sake.

It is you that you and Hu Hott call upon, and the dear public was I taught it to obey your call.

Your
dürfet your power and violence can not be out of the hands. 're So dear to the Publico as rough
as you did but always vermöget. Coarse silk satin bag, vomit gross! The saugröber you are, the more
respect you will give her love in the audience. Considering the dear public as your obedient
servant, and boots as you by your eternal predestination of certain Stiefelabstreifer. Deaf to
you day and night, that you may be properly and anschnauzet beflegelt
auslasset and any ill-temper on him.

But above müsset learn it the snouts. Schnauzet love the audience
at every Opportunity or inconvenience.

Schnauzet it at that before you quivers and trembles. Then It also never come to the dangerous
discovery of how stupid you are. For if there's your stupidity uncovered, then your roles have
ausgespielet on earth.

But there is no better way to hide your rubbish and it with the veneer of to bekleistern highest
wisdom, as justament the dressing-down. Who understands the snouts, brauchet the evidence.
Vielmehro he bögelt his opponent down so thoroughly that however,
the heaviest iron is only a gentle Loecke.

Let you grow mustaches hanging to show your dignity. So as long mustaches Braids. Then ye have three
braids hanging. A pigtail braids back and two ahead of your unwashed
Foot plant.

  All good things come in threes.

    

Ye must sekkieren harass the audience love and torment. Because human
flesh must be gepeiniget.

Ye erwerbet by immortal merits for heaven.

Hinwiederum but you love the Publico verhelfet to heavenly bliss. For it may learn in your treatment here
below on earth so many torments of purgatory know that there is a large Part of his sins and
abbüßet from the Purgatorio of your torture from the mouth into the sky fahret.

Let the audience will never love to think, because as soon as it thinks it slay you. If it dahero
with the slaying earlier as a skilled swordsman his opponents. Slay time in him the ability
to think, that you may not kill anselbsten.

Let the audience do not come to rest from sheer new regulations. Because nothing eats dear and
faithful man, as described and printed paper, then make, if it has
a Stampiglie. Dahero I told you invented the Stampiglien. Let So the
dear audience, according to new regulations and additional regulations
and Stampiglien Regulations relating to the additions of the additives
are no longer to reason. This ye must love the audience in a perpetual
rotation Illness. For I warn you yet once: when it comes to its senses,
it's all up to you.

It will never come to reason, if you befolget
my lessons on time. Snouts and prescribe and prescribe again and again
snouts. In it, people are your highest Behold wisdom, and everyone
will look up to you how to exalted creatures, and no one will ever
notice what kind of cattle you are all together. Amen.

[Decoration]

Picture
Gallery of the disciples of St. Bürokrazius.

After the above speech
is sacred Bürokrazius accurately recorded, we want to the promised
walk through the Galleria undertake its largest chosen disciples.

Occurs
beloved audience, look and marvel! Allhiero they all hang.

wollet
But not misunderstand me, seeing the word quite a ticklish connotation
hang added. Your dürfet etwan not believe that the Galleria, which
you should be Expound, has the master Knüpfauf hanged, seeing sotane
necks deserve no other collar, spendieret than that of Seiler.

Writer
of this legend, it will be well aware that sacrilegious occurring
to any of you readers as are to do the nachhero bename and described
disciples of St. Bürokrazius that they want to hang like the poor
wretches and sinners on the gallows.

This insidious Gaudium you will
be too salty but thoroughly, her wicked mockery birds especially since
the disciples of St. Bürokrazius arrived here to just hang in effigy,
their allwo ye can see it for Maennig edification.

Some quick sense must have warned Ruth, for she gathered her mail up and slipped it unobtrusively
into the pocket of her skirt before it could be noticed. Dottie Wetherill had come home with
her for lunch and the bright red Y.M.C.A. triangle on the envelope was so conspicuous. Dottie
was crazy over soldiers and all things military. She would be sure to exclaim and ask questions.
She was one of those people who always found out everything about you that you did not keep
under absolute lock and key.

Every day since she had written her letter to Cameron Ruth had watched for an answer, her cheeks
glowing sometimes with the least bit of mortification that she should have written at all to
have received this rebuff. Had he, after all, misunderstood her? Or had the letter gone astray,
or the man gone to the front? She had almost given up expecting an answer now after so many
weeks, and the nice warm olive-drab sweater and neatly knitted socks with extra long legs and
bright lines of color at the top, with the wristlets and muffler lay wrapped in tissue paper
at the very bottom of a drawer in the chiffonier where she would seldom see it and where no
one else would ever find it and question her. Probably by and by when the colored draftees
were sent away she would get them out and carry them down to the headquarters to be given to
some needy man. She felt humiliated and was beginning to tell herself that it was all her own
fault and a good lesson for her. She had even decided not to go and see John Cameron's mother
again lest that, too, might be misunderstood. It seemed that the frank true instincts of her
own heart had been wrong, and she was getting what she justly deserved for departing from Aunt
Rhoda's strictly conventional code.

Nevertheless, the letter in her pocket which she had not been able to look at carefully enough
to be sure if she knew the writing, crackled and rustled and set her heart beating excitedly,
and her mind to wondering what it might be. She answered Dottie Wetherill's chatter with distraught
monosyllables and absent smiles, hoping that Dottie would feel it necessary to go home soon
after lunch.

But it presently became plain that Dottie had no intention of going home soon; that she had
come for a purpose and that she was plying all her arts to accomplish it. Ruth presently roused
from her reverie to realize this and set herself to give Dottie as little satisfaction as possible
out of her task. It was evident that she had been sent to discover the exact standing and relation
in which Ruth held Lieutenant Harry Wainwright. Ruth strongly suspected that Dottie's brother
Bob had been the instigator of the mission, and she had no intention of giving him the information.

So Ruth's smiles came out and the inscrutable twinkle grew in her lovely eyes. Dottie chattered
on sentence after sentence, paragraph after paragraph, theme after theme, always rounding up
at the end with some perfectly obvious leading question. Ruth answered in all apparent innocence
and sincerity, yet with an utterly different turn of the conversation from what had been expected,
and with an indifference that was hopelessly baffling unless the young ambassador asked a point
blank question, which she hardly dared to do of Ruth Macdonald without more encouragement.
And so at last a long two hours dragged thus away, and finally Dottie Wetherill at the end
of her small string, and at a loss for more themes on which to trot around again to the main
idea, reluctantly accepted her defeat and took herself away, leaving Ruth to her long delayed
letter.

VIII

Ruth sat looking into space with starry eyes and glowing cheeks after she had read the letter.
It seemed to her a wonderful letter, quite the most wonderful she had ever received. Perhaps
it was because it fitted so perfectly with her ideal of the writer, who from her little girlhood
had always been a picture of what a hero must be. She used to dream big things about him when
she was a child. He had been the best baseball player in school when he was ten, and the handsomest
little rowdy in town, as well as the boldest, bravest champion of the little girls.

As she grew older and met him occasionally she had always been glad that he kept his old hero
look though often appearing in rough garb. She had known they were poor. There had been some
story about a loss of money and a long expensive sickness of the father's following an accident
which made all the circumstances most trying, but she had never heard the details. She only
knew that most of the girls in her set looked on him as a nobody and would no more have companied
with him than with their father's chauffeur. After he grew older and began to go to college
some of the girls began to think he was good looking, and to say it was quite commendable in
him to try to get an education. Some even unearthed the fact that his had been a fine old family
in former days and that there had been wealth and servants once. But the story died down as
John Cameron walked his quiet way apart, keeping to his old friends, and not responding to
the feeble advances of the girls. Ruth had been away at school in these days and had seldom
seen him. When she had there had always been that lingering admiration for him from the old
days. She had told herself that of course he could not be worth much or people would know him.
He was probably ignorant and uncultured, and a closer acquaintance would show him far from
what her young ideas had pictured her hero. But somehow that day at the station, the look in
his face had revealed fine feeling, and she was glad now to have her intuition concerning him
verified by his letter.

And what a letter it was! Why, no young man of her acquaintance could have written with such
poetic delicacy. That paragraph about the rose was beautiful, and not a bit too presuming,
either, in one who had been a perfect stranger all these years. She liked his simple frankness
and the easy way he went back twelve years and began just where they left off. There was none
of the bold forwardness that might have been expected in one who had not moved in cultured
society. There was no unpleasant assumption of familiarity which might have emphasized her
fear that she had overstepped the bounds of convention in writing to him in the first place.
On the contrary, her humiliation at his long delayed answer was all forgotten now. He had understood
her perfectly and accepted her letter in exactly the way she had meant it without the least
bit of foolishness or unpleasantness. In short, he had written the sort of a letter that the
kind of man she had always thought--hoped--he was would be likely to write, and it gave her
a surprisingly pleasant feeling of satisfaction. It was as if she had discovered a friend all
of her own not made for her by her family, nor one to whom she fell heir because of her wealth
and position; but just one she had found, out in the great world of souls.

If he had been going to remain at home there might have been a number of questions, social
and conventional, which would have arisen to bar the way to this free feeling of a friendship,
and which she would have had to meet and reason with before her mind would have shaken itself
unhampered; but because he was going away and on such an errand, perhaps never to return, the
matter of what her friends might think or what the world would say, simply did not enter into
the question at all. The war had lifted them both above such ephemeral barriers into the place
of vision where a soul was a soul no matter what he possessed or who he was. So, as she sat
in her big white room with all its dainty accessories to a luxurious life, fit setting for
a girl so lovely, she smiled unhindered at this bit of beautiful friendship that had suddenly
drifted down at her feet out of a great outside unknown world. She touched the letter thoughtfully
with caressing fingers, and the kind of a high look in her eyes that a lady of old must have
worn when she thought of her knight. It came to her to wonder that she had not felt so about
any other of her men friends who had gone into the service. Why should this special one soldier
boy represent the whole war, as it were, in this way to her. However, it was but a passing
thought, and with a smile still upon her lips she went to the drawer and brought out the finely
knitted garments she had made, wrapping them up with care and sending them at once upon their
way. It somehow gave her pleasure to set aside a small engagement she had for that afternoon
until she had posted the package herself.

Even then, when she took her belated way to a little gathering in honor of one of her girl
friends who was going to be married the next week to a young aviator, she kept the smile on
her lips and the dreamy look in her eyes, and now and then brought herself back from the chatter
around her to remember that something pleasant had happened. Not that there was any foolishness
in her thoughts. There was too much dignity and simplicity about the girl, young as she was,
to allow her to deal even with her own thoughts in any but a maidenly way, and it was not in
the ordinary way of a maid with a man that she thought of this young soldier. He was so far
removed from her life in every way, and all the well-drilled formalities, that it never occurred
to her to think of him in the same way she thought of her other men friends.

A friend who understood her, and whom she could understand. That was what she had always wanted
and what she had never quite had with any of her young associates. One or two had approached
to that, but always there had been a point at which they had fallen short. That she should
make this man her friend whose letter crackled in her pocket, in that intimate sense of the
word, did not occur to her even now. He was somehow set apart for service in her mind; and
as such she had chosen him to be her special knight, she to be the lady to whom he might look
for encouragement--whose honor he was going forth to defend. It was a misty dreamy ideal of
a thought. Somehow she would not have picked out any other of her boy friends to be a knight
for her. They were too flippant, too careless and light hearted. The very way in which they
lighted their multitudinous cigarettes and flipped the match away gave impression that they
were going to have the time of their lives in this war. They might have patriotism down at
the bottom of all this froth and boasting, doubtless they had; but there was so little seriousness
about them that one would never think of them as knights, defenders of some great cause of
righteousness. Perhaps she was all wrong. Perhaps it was only her old baby fancy for the little
boy who could always "lick" the other boys and save the girls from trouble that prejudiced
her in his favor, but at least it was pleasant and a great relief to know that her impulsive
letter had not been misunderstood.

The girls prattled of this one and that who were "going over" soon, told of engagements and
marriages soon to occur; criticized the brides and grooms to be; declared their undying opinions
about what was fitting for a war bride to wear; and whether they would like to marry a man
who had to go right into war and might return minus an arm or an eye. They discoursed about
the U-boats with a frothy cheerfulness that made Ruth shudder; and in the same breath told
what nice eyes a young captain had who had recently visited the town, and what perfectly lovely
uniforms he wore. They argued with serious zeal whether a girl should wear an olive-drab suit
this year if she wanted to look really smart.

They were the girls among whom she had been brought up, and Ruth was used to their froth, but
somehow to-day it bored her beyond expression. She was glad to make an excuse to get away and
she drove her little car around by the way of John Cameron's home hoping perhaps to get a glimpse
of his mother again. But the house had a shut up look behind the vine that he had trained,
as if it were lonely and lying back in a long wait till he should come--or not come! A pang
went through her heart. For the first time she thought what it meant for a young life like
that to be silenced by cold steel. The home empty! The mother alone! His ambitions and hopes
unfulfilled! 

What is the rare man had also owned his halo. Which made him even from the outset appear as a trustworthy
person, the one left to give his further fate could.

It was the holy Bürokrazius in a relatively short time, the people of the Correctness and pleasing
to God to convince his mission.

He was everywhere. There was not even the most hidden corners, in his trunk-like nose not snooping
into his pocket.

And there was not even the hidden secret of his long Donkey ears overheard.

As a result, he won a nearly divine authority.

Because people started to understand that they were at the mercy of his power without resistance,
after having fun with it had resigned, leaving him thinking.

And Saint Bürokrazius thought and thought. He thought constantly in his way. The fruits could
be revealed so soon and in the whole world.

All his great ideas could the Holy enforce during his earthly pilgrimage, for human stupidity and his
own idiocy to him were the most powerful allies.

If the writer of this legend with the following lines to the largest and immeasurable Indeed,
the Holy Bürokrazius anticipate and thus prejudice the presentation of events, it can still
fail in his clear enthusiasm for the largest and most stupid not
saints, to report even at this sacred place of the most revolutionary
idea of ​​the holy Bürokrazius, to all his big ideas with which he
delighted the world, the crown put on.

Which rare sharpness of the holy Bürokrazius thought to point out
was already several opportunities.

And it is this very special nature of thought, by it before the rest of humanity for a significant
and should not be underestimated projection had given him the big action for regulating the
human metabolism is entered.

  His care was, in holy zeal nimmermüdem on those quiet and idyllic
places which are in healthy physical condition of the man at regular
Intervals behufs seek enrichment cultivates agriculture.

    
    

The Holy Bürokrazius led own passports for entering the top places implied one, the note every time
an entry permit and a residence permit had mentioned on the sites
of said agricultural employment.

Course was and the residence time precisely controlled.

[Decoration]

As St. Bürokrazius found the red tape and be made on horseback.

Even in the first period of his earthly pilgrimage it turned out that St. Bürokrazius his power
to huge exacted. He went into his holy zeal everywhere on foot.

This sacred principle of walking on foot apostolorum should soon avenge bitter; for he gave the
Saints the unpleasant appearance of painful corns on which must be read in a later major pieces still
miraculous.

Here we want only modestly with the reports that the corns of the
Holy Bürokrazius at least an immediate cause for the discovery of
the mold by the Holy Office were.

The terrible ordeal of the corn
grew into, the clearer and more distinct came the martyred saint to
believe that he is desperate in this case only by a heavenly inspiration
could be helped. He remembered dahero of well-meaning Council, which
had granted him the archangel Michael ... he may, if he new heavenly
Inspirations for the exercise of his sacred profession needed, squat
down on the seat of his mind and think deeply.

It did so the holy
Bürokrazius. He sat down for ten days and ten nights and thought eagerly,
while awaiting the heavenly inspiration.
Then there was some doubt about his getting a pass anyway, and so between the two anxieties
he was kept busy up to the last minute. But Friday evening he got his pass, and in the last
mail came a special delivery from Ruth, just a brief note saying she had been away from home
when his letter arrived, but she would be delighted to see him on Sunday afternoon as he had
suggested.

He felt like a boy let loose from school as he brushed up his uniform and polished his big
army shoes while his less fortunate companions kidded him about the girl he was going to see.
He denied their thrusts joyously, in his heart repudiating any such personalities, yet somehow
it was pleasant. He had never realized how pleasant it would be to have a girl and be going
to see her--such a girl! Of course, she was not for him--not with that possessiveness. But
she was a friend, a real friend, and he would not let anything spoil the pleasure of that!

He had not thought anything in his army experience could be so exciting as that first ride
back home again. Somehow the deference paid to his uniform got into his blood and made him
feel that people all along the line really did care for what the boys were doing for them.
It made camp life and hardships seem less dreary.

It was great to get back to his little mother and put his big arms around her again. She seemed
so small. Had she shrunken since he left her or was he grown so much huskier with the out of
door life? Both, perhaps, and he looked at her sorrowfully. She was so little and quiet and
brave to bear life all alone. If he only could get back and get to succeeding in life so that
he might make some brightness for her. She had borne so much, and she ought not to have looked
so old and worn at her age! For a brief instant again his heart was almost bitter, and he wondered
what God meant by giving his good little mother so much trouble. Was there a God when such
things could be? He resolved to do something about finding out this very day.

It was pleasant to help his mother about the kitchen, saving her as she had not been saved
since he left, telling her about the camp, and listening to her tearful admiration of him.
She could scarcely take her eyes from him, he seemed so tall and big and handsome in his uniform;
he appeared so much older and more manly that her heart yearned for her boy who seemed to be
slipping away from her. It was so heavenly blessed to sit down beside him and sew on a button
and mend a torn spot in his flannel shirt and have him pat her shoulder now and then contentedly.

Then with pride she sent him down to the store for something nice for dinner, and watched him
through the window with a smile, the tears running down her cheeks. How tall and straight he
walked! How like his father when she first knew him! She hoped the neighbors all were looking
out and would see him. Her boy! Her soldier boy! And he must go away from her, perhaps to die!

But--he was here to-day! She would not think of the rest. She would rejoice now in his presence.

He walked briskly down the street past the houses that had been familiar all his life, meeting
people who had never been wont to notice him before; and they smiled upon him from afar now;
greeted him with enthusiasm, and turned to look after him as he passed on. It gave him a curious
feeling to have so much attention from people who had never known him before. It made him feel
strangely small, yet filled with a great pride and patriotism for the country that was his,
and the government which he now represented to them all. He was something more to them now
than just one of the boys about town who had grown up among them. He was a soldier of the United
States. He had given his life for the cause of righteousness. The bitterness he might have
felt at their former ignoring of him, was all swallowed up in their genuine and hearty friendliness.

He met the white-haired minister, kindly and dignified, who paused to ask him how he liked
camp life and to commend him as a soldier; and looking in his strong gentle face John Cameron
remembered his resolve.

He flashed a keen look at the gracious countenance and made up his mind to speak:

"I'd like to ask you a question, Doctor Thurlow. It's been bothering me quite a little ever
since this matter of going away to fight has been in my mind. Is there any way that a man--that
I can find God? That is, if there is a God. I've never thought much about it before, but life
down there in camp makes a lot of things seem different, and I've been wondering. I'm not sure
what I believe. Is there anyway I can find out?"

A pleasant gleam of surprise and delight thrilled into the deep blue eyes of the minister.
It was startling. It almost embarrassed him for a moment, it was so unexpected to have a soldier
ask a question about God. It was almost mortifying that he had never thought it worth while
to take the initiative on that question with the young man.

"Why, certainly!" he said heartily. "Of course, of course. I'm very glad to know you are interested
in those things. Couldn't you come in to my study and talk with me. I think I could help you.
I'm sure I could."

"I haven't much time," said Cameron shyly, half ashamed now that he had opened his heart to
an almost stranger. He was not even his mother's minister, and he was a comparative newcomer
in the town. How had he come to speak to him so impulsively?

"I understand, exactly, of course," said the minister with growing eagerness. "Could you come
in now for five or ten minutes? I'll turn back with you and you can stop on your way, or we
can talk as we go. Were you thinking of uniting with the church? We have our communion the
first Sunday of next month. I should be very glad if you could arrange. We have a number of
young people coming in now. I'd like to see you come with them. The church is a good safe place
to be. It was established by God. It is a school in which to learn of Him. It is----"

"But I'm not what you would call a Christian!" protested Cameron. "I don't even know that I
believe in the Bible. I don't know what your church believes. I don't have a very definite
idea what any church believes. I would be a hypocrite to stand up and join a church when I
wasn't sure there was a God."

"My dear young fellow!" said the minister affectionately. "Not at all! Not at all! The church
is the place for young people to come when they have doubts. It is a shelter, and a growing
place. Just trust yourself to God and come in among His people and your doubts will vanish.
Don't worry about doubts. Many people have doubts. Just let them alone and put yourself in
the right way and you will forget them. I should be glad to talk with you further. I would
like to see you come into communion with God's people. If you want to find God you should come
where He has promised to be. It is a great thing to have a fine young fellow like you, and
a soldier, array himself on the side of God. I would like to see you stand up on the right
side before you go out to meet danger and perhaps death."

John Cameron stood watching him as he talked.

"He's a good old guy," he thought gravely, "but he doesn't get my point. He evidently believes
what he says, but I don't just see going blindfolded into a church. However, there's something
to what he says about going where God is if I want to find him."

Out loud he merely said:

"I'll think about it, Doctor, and perhaps come in to see you the next time I'm home." Then
he excused himself and went on to the store.

As he walked away he said to himself:

"I wonder what Ruth Macdonald would say if I asked her the same question? I wonder if she has
thought anything about it? I wonder if I'd ever have the nerve to ask her?"

The next morning he suggested to his mother that they go to Doctor Thurlow's church together.
She would have very much preferred going to her own church with him, but she knew that he did
not care for the minister and had never been very friendly with the people, so she put aside
her secret wish and went with him. To tell the truth she was very proud to go anywhere with
her handsome soldier son, and one thing that made her the more willing was that she remembered
that the Macdonalds always went to the Presbyterian church, and perhaps they would be there
to-day and Ruth would see them. But she said not a word of this to her boy.

John spent most of the time with his mother. He went up to college for an hour or so Saturday
evening, dropping in on his fraternity for a few minutes and realizing what true friends he
had among the fellows who were left, though most of them were gone. He walked about the familiar
rooms, looking at the new pictures, photographs of his friends in uniform. This one was a lieutenant
in Officers' Training Camp. That one had gone with the Ambulance Corps. Tom was with the Engineers,
and Jimmie and Sam had joined the Tank Service. Two of the fellows were in France in the front
ranks, another had enlisted in the Marines, it seemed that hardly any were left, and of those
three had been turned down for some slight physical defect, and were working in munition factories
and the ship-yard. Everything was changed. The old playmates had become men with earnest purposes.
He did not stay long. There was a restlessness about it all that pulled the strings of his
heart, and made him realize how different everything was.

Sunday morning as he walked to church with his mother he wondered why he had never gone more
with her when he was at home. 

The heavenly messengers were unnoticed on silent feet and kicked unheard in the room and the man
looked over his shoulder.

Because they discovered that the strange saint led for years, of all book about what was going
on around him and in him.

All he had registered, tabulated lists, filed reached deposited.

In mighty tome on the nose and sniffing snout blissfully puffing moving, everything was black
and white to find ... if anywhere near a cow mooing or a sheep bleated, when a dog barked,
or a hen cackled. Yes, even the noise his own ego had brought the man carefully and files to
standard paper ... if he coughed, sneezed, cleared his throat and spat when he belched or blew,
or if else happened to him, something human. The Krawatitis was all on ascending and descending
Phases and stages festgeleget filed reached. Each and every cow patty Roßknödel whose case could
see the man from the limited horizon of his single window, found Date of protocol is an important
contribution to agriculture. And each firm Fuhrmann curse that flew occasionally come in the dull
hole of the remarkable saints was verewiget as a document of the
declining public morality.

Scribbled incessantly and sniffed the saintly man He still had the
invaders not noticed.

Then they heard the archangel Michael enthusiastic: "Hallelujah! That's the bloody stupid Guy,
we could find! "

The holy man had just slipped out before another sound he carefully
in the latest immortalized his own I devoted tomes.

Then he went on to write a hurry continues: "secretary sounds just bloody stupid as the guy could
find one to call. Provenance of this statement is still unknown. Appropriate investigations
will be initiated immediately. "

He turned in his chair and was attending his sight.

With this sudden Movement he got his greasy Krawattel in unfathomable
evil back to the Edge of the bald head up.

With a desperate jerk, he brought it back to its natural Destination
back.

Then he barked at the intruders: "Can not you read what standing
outside the door?

Entry is permitted only after the third call waiting! "

"Shut up!" The Archangel Raphael said with a certain kindness.

"What's that sound! They make the insult a sacred person guilty! "

"Ah, go!" To the Archangel Gabriel said kindly.

"I am a sacred person," said the saintly man said, great.

"You look so well," confirmed the Archangel Michael.

The rüsselnasige and long-eared hedgehog had risen in all its dignity and stood his ground in fear,
trembling with indignation and trousers in his shabby black greenish
iridescent gown, trembling with indignation against his unwelcome
visitors.

"What are you doing here? Look, out of here, "he cried.

"Do not you just go up rain," the Michael said, smiling.

"Above all, I will not have the" tu "shouted the odd saint.

"You can say to us, if it pleases you," Gabriel said of yielding. "We have but at a cattle never
told you. "

The saintly porcupine snorted with rage: "Now I have it but had enough! Would the Men's legitimate!
Who are you? "

Since the Gabriel replied extremely gently, "We are a heavenly message: Archangel Michael, Archangel
Gabriel and Archangel Raphael. "

"That could tell everyone!" It came from the lips of the animal's snout sniffing, which has a
ongoing silent battle with the hideous perpetual motion led his tie.

"It is so! And you have to believe! Got it! "The Michael said with
great certainty.

"ID!" Snapped the eselohrige porcupine. "Where you have your passport?"

"We have no passport," replied Gabriel.

"We do not need a passport," said Raphael.

"Waaaaaaas?" The tie went to the animal's trunk in front of holy indignation
up to his ears.

"They have no passport? And you dare ... No passport? There you are an ordinary Rabble! Every decent
man has his passport! "

"Fixed star! Laudon! Element! and every two helpers, "cried the Archangel Michael, the ran out of
patience. "I'll give you had your passport and the riffraff!

I want you teach how to talk with a heavenly mission, you godforsaken clown you are! "

Spoke, and the singular haute saints a celestial hammer and of extraordinary
Solidity down.

The Gabriel and the 0Raphael did not want to stand back and thoughtful therefore, the animal's
trunk also, each with a juicy murder slaps.

To the surprise of the three archangels but had this very thoroughly supposed cure no other
Effect as that of the so slapped with a kind of stumpfsinnigem mechanism
for its this procedure very serious concern shifted tie brought back
in order.

The three archangels were about the effect of their actions decided
puzzled.

"It seems to me ..." Michael finally said "... g'spürt has the hammer
and did nit.

"

"In the End 'he has no brain in the skull," the premise of the Gabriel.

"So what I also have never" thought of Raphael.

Since the deliberating whether the inexplicable failure of their heavenly
hammer and seriously stunned three archangels, where the saint really
strange with him and his mind his other mental faculties had been
sitting.

They caught him not dahero with tender angel hands but with very sensible and strong claws on earth
and turned the defensive end in despair, snarling, cursing, protesting and threatening rüsselnasige
porcupine in all directions of its venerable corporeality. Right and left, up and down, forwards
and backwards.

When they finally arrived at the tour behind the front, they placed
the wriggling Holy unceremoniously on the table, across the folios
and Papierwülste.

The Gabriel and Raphael held him that he could no longer move. The Archangel Michael, however,
the most power and the desire to strike decisively at the heavenly message possessed, took a steel
ruler that dangled on one side of the table on the wall.

He was first whistle a few times through the air, as if he try his fiery sword wanted. He then
lined with painful conscientiousness, carefully counting each blow, the screaming animal with a trunk the
proper and usual twenty-five on his very ass.

He accompanied each verse building up with string, like: "Here you
have your Pass!

... I will paint you have the rabble! ... You know now what is decency, you erzinfamer you lout!
"

Under similar delicate attentions, which accompanied the work of the
archangel, flowed They blithely continue.

began early in the first
strike of the Holy strange to roar, as if on a spit would stick.

"Aha! Because he feels that, "Gabriel said triumphantly.

"Spank him just neat!" Cheered on the Michael Raphael.

"I protest against the aggressions insult and violation of my most precious part," roared because
the Saints beat in impotent rage.

"I think we have caught him in the right place," said Michael.

"He's obviously in his mind staying power," said Gabriel.

"And all other intellectual properties too," added the Raphael.

"Listen up! I ask you for all the saints, stop "whining now Pachyderm in the melancholy cry.

"Fifteen, sixteen, seventeen," the Archangel Michael was one in cold blood. "Just be patient!
It is same over! "

"I stand it any longer!

I have to raise most obedient protest. You destroy me yes my whole mind! How should I meet there on
my sacred duties, "groaned the beat animal with a trunk, while the Archangel in its educational
activities are not could make misleading.

"Help! I give my spirit! Help! Help! "Pleaded the remarkable saint.

"Really!

Thinks with his buttocks, "the Raphael said in its final realization.

  "Then we found the right one," said Gabriel.

    
    

"Twenty-three, twenty-four, twenty-five" was one of Michael.

So they let go of the strange saints.

The hastily slipped off the table, held with both hands, his backside, humbly bowed again and
again, made a Scrape after another and said in a sour-sweet air:
"obedient servant!

Do the Gentlemen do not take place? What can I do for these gentlemen? "

The heavenly message sat down on three chairs provided. And Michael said to the suddenly humble
saint: "After this prosperous strengthen your comprehension I agree
with you that you are destined to a lofty mission.

Thou shalt people happy with your boundless stupidity. You shall be the dumbest saint who ever
a calendar has been. "

"Obedient servant! Obedient servant, "katzenbuckelte the new saint.

"This would have the Gentlemen can say yes immediately. "

"Above all, we kunde your noble name!"

Said the Archangel Michael.

"Obedient servants, gentlemen! They call me the Bürokrazius. "

"Excellent," said the Archangel Michael, and rose. "A beautiful, impressive and uncommonly holy
name. Us the last straw. Above it, the whole sky and all the cattle on earth happy. O St.
Bürokrazius consider, so you diligently with the Twenty-five listed
beaten the Saints!

The necessary external attribute your new If I am going to give away. "

Thus, the Archangel reached into his robe and pulled it into a brand-new
and freshly cleaned Halo and put it out the Bürokrazius who still
those aching Part of his holy body rubbed with which he thought the
mighty bald.

The long donkey Ears was still a piece of the halo out, and suddenly the Krawattel so curious that
up to the edge of the note rose ... but that was the luminosity Holy ticket no entry.

"And now, holy Saint Bürokrazius," the archangel Michael said solemnly, "know that you will
rule the earth. You will be more powerful and respected than all the saints Heaven together.
You will therefore be the master of human stupidity, because you
still 're dumber than the dumbest among men.

Dahero is the stupidity of your holy People to worship him as supernatural wisdom. Keep your mind even
in the seat of meat! For in every other body part would you bring serious damage. Keep your
holy Would always undiminished! Crawl up and comes down! You have your test today in this direction
were excellent. For know, every inflated dignity creeps when she
is beaten up properly and is their Lord and Master. But if you new
heavenly Inspirations for the exercise of your sacred profession needs,
then sit down firmly on that part of your holy body, where you have
the mind. Set up long after, and stamina to sit and think with all
his holy extent! And it is you get the enlightenment! "

Long, the
two other archangels in this solemn speech had risen from their seats.
Arose because of the Archangel Michael's hands and broke into singing
and praising the words in which the archangel Gabriel and Raphael
in the heavenly celebration coincided with ... "Habemus novum sanctum
... Sanctum Bürokrazium ... Stultissimum omnium sanctorum ... Bovem
maximum totius orbis ... Asinum electum et egregium ... Jubilate coeli
et terra! "

With this song the Archangel disappeared before the eyes
of the new saints.

The Holy Bürokrazius bowed deeply and repeatedly
grabbed at the still terrible painful seat of his mind.

The posterior
ascending Krawatitis arrived in insidious malice in his halo.

"Obedient
servant," said St. Bürokrazius, Dying away in sheer subservience.

[Decoration]

As
St. Bürokrazius moved out to the world to bless.

After the holy Bürokrazius
the heavenly message to the preceding piece in the main described
solemnity had received, he spent seven days and seven nights in his
home.

This time he needed needed to happen to him all the supernatural
graces in detail to bring on record.

He worked almost continuously
day and night, and made significant savings in this the lighting.
For while he had to spend before erkleckliche spending on candles
lighted him jetzo his halo completely free. And that was such a gentle
light that St. secretary involuntarily many saw in a different light.

While
he was initially inclined to different details of the visit of a heavenly
to submit to sharp criticism and be accompanied by strongly worded
protests, he was in the Light of the halos bekehret quickly to a different
view and saw all that he encountered was in a glorified light.

There
is extensive dahero of the three slaps and in the twenty-five of the
strike Records of St. Bürokrazius to find anything. We read only of
heavenly Wave, and inspirations that he had become.

However, he,
however, the seven days and seven nights with untiring assiduity wrote,
was However, he hints at the consequences of that heavenly even in
quite often reminded of earthly way. He had to think of writing as
well. And to think he needed the organ needed, where he'd sit my mind.

Said
Organum was, however, in memoriam of the heavenly signs all over with
large bumps, Bruises and calluses and are covered and it hurt him
terribly. Derohalben was his protocol work is no small effort. For
thinking caused him incredible pain.

When he in such form for three
days and three nights with the greatest perseverance in spite of the
horrible Pain which had branded him not only a saint, a martyr but
also continuously, thought and had worked, the Holy Bürokrazius came
to a saving idea.

He filled a great creators with water and placed
next to the same table at which he wrote. If the agony of thinking
was almost unbearable and the performance of his understanding to
wane in the footsteps of the lesson and heavenly favors threatened,
then sat the saint with that part of his holy body, wearing his understanding,
in water professionals, and sought cool there. The effect was wonderful.
Was regularly he bestowed the blessing of the cool way of thinking.

So,
among the effects of the holy work, and under the mild light of the
halos that amazing report of the mission of the Holy Bürokrazius,
which the writer reflect this legend, unfortunately can not because
he alone would have a hundred times the size, verstattet as the legendary
writer's room.

The sadness of the answering voice struck her even in her haste. Her own tone was eager, intimate,
as she hastened to convey her message.

"Mrs. Cameron, this is Ruth Macdonald. Has your son left yet? I was wondering if he would care
to be taken to the train in our car?"

"Oh! he has just gone!" came a pitiful little gasp that had a sob at the end of it. "He went
in somebody's car and they were late coming. I'm afraid he is going to miss his train and he
has got to get it or he will be in trouble! That is the last train that connects with Wilmington."

Ruth's heart leaped to her opportunity.

"Suppose we try to catch him then," proposed Ruth gleefully. "My car can go pretty fast, and
if he has missed the train perhaps we can carry him on to Wilmington. Would you like to try?"

"Oh, could we?" the voice throbbed with eagerness.

"Hurry up then. My car is all ready. I'll be down there in three minutes. We've no time to
waste. Put on something warm!"

She hung up the receiver without waiting for further reply, and hurried softly out of the room
and down the back stairs.

Thomas was well trained. The cars were always in order. He was used to Ruth's hurry calls,
and when she reached the garage she found the car standing in the back street waiting for her.
In a moment more she was rushing on her way toward the village without having aroused the suspicion
of the two men who so impatiently awaited her return. Mrs. Cameron was ready, eager as a child,
standing on the sidewalk with a great blanket shawl over her arm and looking up the street for her.

It was not until they had swept through the village, over the bridge, and were out on the broad
highway toward Chester that Ruth began to realize what a wild goose chase she had undertaken.
Just where did she expect to find them, anyway? It was now three minutes to five by the little
clock in the car and it was a full fifteen minutes' drive to Chester. The plan had been to
delay him on the way to the train, and there had been mention of a short cut. Could that be
the rough stony road that turned down sharply just beyond the stone quarry? It seemed hardly
possible that anybody would attempt to run a car over that road. Surely John Cameron knew the
roads about here well enough to advise against it. Still, Ruth knew the locality like a book
and that was the only short cut thereabout. If they had gone down there they might emerge at
the other end just in time to miss the train, and then start on toward Wilmington. Or they
might turn back and take the longer way if they found the short road utterly impassable. Which
should she take? Should she dare that rocky way? If only there might be some tracks to guide
her. But the road was hard and dusty and told no tales of recent travelers. They skimmed down
the grade past the stone quarry, and the short cut flashed into view, rough and hilly, turning
sharply away behind a group of spruce trees. It was thick woods beyond. If she went that way
and got into any trouble with her machine the chances were few that anyone would some along
to help. She had but a moment to decide, and something told her that the long way was the safe
one and shorter in the end. She swept on, her engine throbbing with that pleasant purr of expensive
well-groomed machinery, the car leaping forward as if it delighted in the high speed. The little
woman by her side sat breathless and eager, with shining eyes, looking ahead for her boy.

They passed car after car, and Ruth scanned the occupants keenly. Some were filled with soldiers,
but John Cameron was not among them. She began to be afraid that perhaps she ought after all
to have gone down that hilly way and made sure they were not there. She was not quite sure
where that short road came out. If she knew she might run up a little way from this further end.

The two women sat almost silent, straining their eyes ahead. They had said hardly a word since
the first greeting. Each seemed to understand the thought of the other without words. For the
present they had but one common object, to find John Cameron.

Suddenly, as far ahead as they could see, a car darted out of the wooded roadside, swung into
their road and plunged ahead at a tremendous rate. They had a glimpse of khaki uniforms, but
it was much too far away to distinguish faces or forms. Nevertheless, both women fastened their
eyes upon it with but one thought. Ruth put on more speed and forged ahead, thankful that she
was not within city lines yet, and that there was no one about to remind her of the speed limit.
Something told her that the man she was seeking was in that car ahead.

It was a thrilling race. Ruth said no word, but she knew that her companion was aware that
she was chasing that car. Mrs. Cameron sat straight and tense as if it had been a race of life
and death, her cheeks glowing and her eyes shining. Ruth was grateful that she did not talk.
Some women would have talked incessantly.

The other car did not go in to Chester proper at all, but veered away into a branch road and
Ruth followed, leaping over the road as if it had been a gray velvet ribbon. She did not seem
to be gaining on the car; but it was encouraging that they could keep it still in sight. Then
there came a sharp turn of the road and it was gone. They were pulsing along now at a tremendous
rate. The girl had cast caution to the winds. She was hearing the complacent sneer of Harry
Wainwright as he boasted how they would get John Cameron into trouble, and all the force of
her strong young will was enlisted to frustrate his plans.

It was growing dusk, and lights leaped out on the munition factories all about them. Along
the river other lights flashed and flickered in the white mist that rose like a wreath. But
Ruth saw nothing of it all. She was straining her eyes for the little black speck of a car
which she had been following and which now seemed to be swallowed up by the evening. She had
not relaxed her speed, and the miles were whirling by, and she had a growing consciousness
that she might be passing the object of her chase at any minute without knowing it. Presently
they came to a junction of three roads, and she paused. On ahead the road was broad and empty
save for a car coming towards them. Off to the right was a desolate way leading to a little
cemetery. Down to the left a smooth wooded road wound into the darkness. There were sign boards
up. Ruth leaned out and flashed a pocket torch on the board. "TO PINE TREE INN, 7 Miles" it
read. Did she fancy it or was it really true that she could hear the distant sound of a car
among the pines?

"I'm going down this way!" she said decidedly to her companion, as if her action needed an
explanation, and she turned her car into the new road.

"But it's too late now," said Mrs. Cameron wistfully. "The train will be gone, of course, even
from Wilmington. And you ought to be going home. I'm very wrong to have let you come so far;
and it's getting dark. Your folks will be worrying about you. That man will likely do his best
to get him to camp in time."

"No," said Ruth decidedly, "there's no one at home to worry just now, and I often go about
alone rather late. Besides, aren't we having a good time? We're going a little further anyway
before we give up."

She began to wonder in her heart if she ought not to have told somebody else and taken Thomas
along to help. It was rather a questionable thing for her to do, in the dusk of the evening--to
women all alone. But then, she had Mrs. Cameron along and that made it perfectly respectable.
But if she failed now, what else could she do? Her blood boiled hotly at the thought of letting
Harry Wainwright succeed in his miserable plot. Oh, for cousin La Rue! He would have thought
a way out of this. If everything else failed she would tell the whole story to Captain La Rue
and beg him to exonerate John Cameron. But that, of course, she knew would be hard to do, there
was so much red tape in the army, and there were so many unwritten laws that could not be set
aside just for private individuals. Still, there must be a way if she had to go herself to
someone and tell what she had overheard. She set her pretty lips firmly and rode on at a brisk
pace down the dark road, switching on her head lights to seem the way here in the woods. And
then suddenly, just in time she jerked on the brake and came to a jarring stop, for ahead of
her a big car was sprawled across the road, and there, rising hurriedly from a kneeling posture
before the engine, in the full blaze of her headlights, blinking and frowning with anxiety,
stood John Cameron!

X

The end of her chase came so unexpectedly that her wits were completely scattered. Now that
she was face to face with the tall soldier she had nothing to say for her presence there. What
would he think of her? How could she explain her coming? She had undertaken the whole thing
in such haste that she had not planned ahead. Now she knew that from the start she had understood
that she must not explain how she came to be possessed of any information concerning him. She
felt a kind of responsible shame for her old playmate Harry Wainright, and a certain loyalty
toward her own social set that prevented her from that, the only possible explanation that
could make her coming justifiable. So, now in the brief interval before he had recognized them
she must stage the next act, and she found herself unable to speak, her throat dry, her lips
for the instant paralyzed. It was the jubilant little mother that stepped into the crisis and
did the most natural thing in the world:

"John! Oh John! It's really you! We've caught you!" she cried, and the troubled young soldier
peering into the dusk to discover if here was a vehicle he might presume to commandeer to help
him out of his predicament lifted startled eyes to the two faces in the car and strode forward,
abandoning with a clang the wrench with which he had been working on the car.

"Mother!" he said, a shade of deep anxiety in his voice. "What is the matter? How came you
to be here?"

"Why, I came after you," she said laughing like a girl. "We're going to see that you get to
camp in time. We've made pretty good time so far. Jump in quick and we'll tell you the rest
on the way. We mustn't waste time."

Cameron's startled gaze turned on Ruth now, and a great wonder and delight sprang up in his
eyes. It was like the day when he went away on the train, only more so, and it brought a rich
flush into Ruth's cheeks. As she felt the hot waves she was glad that she was sitting behind
the light.

"What! You?" he breathed wonderingly. "But this is too much! And after the way I treated you!"

His mother looked wonderingly from one to the other:

"Get in, John, quick. We mustn't lose a minute. Something might delay us later." It was plain
she was deeply impressed with the necessity for the soldier not to be found wanting.

"Yes, please get in quickly, and let us start. Then we can talk!" said Ruth, casting an anxious
glance toward the other car.

His hand went out to the door to open it, the wonder still shining in his face, when a low
murmur like a growl went up behind him.

Ruth looked up, and there in the full glare of the lights stood two burly civilians and a big
soldier:

"Oh, I say!" drawled the soldier in no very pleasant tone, "you're not going to desert us that
way! Not after Pass came out of his way for us! I didn't think you had a yellow streak!"

Cameron paused and a troubled look came into his face. He glanced at the empty back seat with
a repression of his disappointment in the necessity.

"There's another fellow here that has to get back at the same time I do," he said looking at
Ruth hesitatingly.

"Certainly. Ask him, of course." Ruth's voice was hearty and put the whole car at his disposal.

"There's room for you, too, Chalmers," he said with relief. "And Passmore will be glad to get
rid of us I suspect. He'll be able to get home soon. There isn't much the matter with that
engine. If you do what I told you to that carburetor you'll find it will go all right. Come
on, Chalmers. We ought to hurry!"

"No thanks! I stick to my friends!" said the soldier shortly.

"As you please!" said Cameron stepping on the running board.

"Not as you please!" said a gruff voice, "I'm running this party and we all go together? See?"
A heavy hand came down upon Cameron's shoulder with a mighty grip.

Cameron landed a smashing blow under the man's chin which sent him reeling and sprang inside
as Ruth threw in the clutch and sent her car leaping forward. The two men in front were taken
by surprise and barely got out of the way in time, but instantly recovered their senses and
sprang after the car, the one nearest her reaching for the wheel. Cameron, leaning forward,
sent him rolling down the gully, and Ruth turned the car sharply to avoid the other car which
was occupying as much of the road as possible, and left the third man scrambling to his knees
behind her. It was taking a big chance to dash past that car in the narrow space over rough
ground, but Ruth was not conscious of anything but the necessity of getting away. In an instant
they were back in the road and flashing along through the dark.

"Mother, you better let me help you back here," said her son leaning forward and almost lifting
his mother into the back seat, then stepping over to take her place beside Ruth.

"Better turn out your back lights!" he said in a quiet, steady voice. "They might follow, you
know. They're in an ugly mood. They've been drinking."

"Then the car isn't really out of commission?"

"Not seriously."

"We're not on the right road, did you know? This road goes to The Pine Tree Inn and Singleton!"

Cameron gave a low exclamation:

"Then they're headed for more liquor. I thought something was up."

"Is there a cross road back to the Pike?"

"I'm not sure. Probably. I know there is about three miles farther on, almost to the Inn. This
is an awful mess to have got you into! I'd rather have been in the guard house than have this
happen to you!"

"Please don't!" said Ruth earnestly. "It's an adventure! I'm enjoying it. I'm not a doll to
be kept in cotton wool!"

"I should say not!" said Cameron with deep admiration in his tone. "You haven't shown yourself
much of a doll to-night. Some doll, to run a car the way you did in the face of all that. I'll
tell you better what I think when we get out of this!"

"They are coming, I believe!" said Ruth glancing back. "Don't you see a light? Look!"

Mrs. Cameron was looking, too, through the little back window. Now she spoke quietly:

"Wouldn't it be better to get out and slip up in the woods till they have gone by?"

"No, mother!" said Cameron quickly, "just you sit quiet where you are and trust us."

"Something awful might happen, John!"

"No, mother! Don't you worry!" he said in his gentle, manly tone. Then to Ruth: "There's a
big barn ahead there on your left. Keep your eye out for a road around behind it. If we could
disappear it's too dark for them to know where we are. Would you care to turn out all the lights
and let me run the car? I don't want to boast but there isn't much of anything I can't do with
a car when I have to."

Instantly Ruth switched out every light and with a relieved "Please!" gave up the wheel to
him. They made the change swiftly and silently, and Ruth took the post of lookout.

"Yes, I can see two lights. It might be someone else, mightn't it?"

"Not likely, on this road. But we're not taking any chances," and with that the car bumped
down across a gully and lurched up to a grassy approach to a big stone barn that loomed above
them, then slid down another bank and passed close to a great haystack, whose clutching straw
fingers reached out to brush their faces, and so swept softly around to the rear of the barn
and stopped. Cameron shut off the engine instantly and they sat in utter silence listening
to the oncoming car.

"It's they, all right!" whispered Cameron softly. "That's Passmore's voice. He converses almost
wholly in choice profanity."

His mother's hand stole out to touch his shoulder and he reached around and held it close.

"Don't tremble, mother, we're all safe!" he whispered in a tone so tender that Ruth felt a
shiver of pleasure pass over her for the mother who had such a son. Also there was the instant
thought that a man could not be wholly "rotten" when he could speak to his mother in that tone.

There was a breathless space when the car paused on the road not far away and their pursuers
stood up and looked around, shouting to one another. There was no mistaking their identity
now. Ruth shivered visibly. One of them got out of the car and came toward the barn. They could
hear him stepping over the stony roadside. Cameron laid a quiet hand of reassuring protection
on her arm that steadied her and made her feel wonderfully safe once more, and strange to say
she found herself lifting up another queer little kind of a prayer. It had never been her habit
to pray much except in form. Her heart had seldom needed anything that money could not supply.

The man had stumbled across the gully and up toward the barn. They could hear him swearing
at the unevenness of the ground, and Ruth held her breath and prayed again. A moment more and
he was fumbling about for the barn door and calling for a flash light. Then, like the distant
sound of a mighty angel of deliverance came the rumble of a car in the distance. The men heard
it and took it for their quarry on ahead. They climbed into their car again and were gone like
a flash.

John Cameron did not wait for them to get far away. He set the car in motion as soon as they
were out of sight, and its expensive mechanism obeyed his direction almost silently as he guided
it around the barn, behind the haystack and back again into the road over which they had just come.

"Now!" he said as he put the car to its best speed and switched on its headlights again. "Now
we can beat them to it, I guess, if they come back this way, which I don't think they will."

The car dashed over the ground and the three sat silent while they passed into the woods and
over the place where they had first met Cameron. Ruth felt herself trembling again, and her
teeth beginning to chatter from the strain. Cameron seemed to realize her feeling and turned
toward her:

"You've been wonderful!" he said flashing a warm look at her, "and you, too, mother!" lifting
his voice a little and turning his head toward the back seat. "I don't believe any other two
women in Bryne Haven could have gone through a scene like that and kept absolutely still. You
were great!" There was that in his voice that lifted Ruth's heart more than any praise she
had ever received for anything. She wanted to make some acknowledgment, but she found to her
surprise that tears were choking her throat so that she could not speak. It was the excitement,
of course, she told herself, and struggled to get control of her emotion.

They emerged from the woods and in sight of the Pike at last, and Cameron drew a long breath
of relief.

"There, I guess we can hold our own with anyone, now," he said settling back in his seat, but
relaxing none of his vigilance toward the car which sped along the highway like a winged thing.
"But it's time I heard how you came to be here. I haven't been able to explain it, during the
intervals when I've had any chance at all to think about it."

"Oh, I just called up your mother to know if it would help you any to be taken to your train,"
said Ruth quickly, "and she mentioned that she was worried lest you would miss it; so I suggested
that we try to catch you and take you on to Wilmington or Baltimore or wherever you have to
go. I do hope this delay hasn't spoiled it all. How long does it take to go from Baltimore
to camp. I've taken the Baltimore trip myself in five hours. It's only quarter past six yet,
do you think we can make it?"

"But you can't go all the way to Baltimore!" he exclaimed. "What would you and mother do at
that time of night alone after I go to camp? You see, it isn't as if I could stay and come
back with you."

"Oh, we'll just go to a hotel in Baltimore, won't we, Mrs. Cameron? We'll be all right if we
only get you safe to camp. Do you think we can do it?"

"Oh, yes, we can do it all right with this car. But I'm quite sure I ought not to let you do
it just for me. What will your people think?"

"I've left word that I've gone to a friend in trouble," twinkled Ruth. "I'll call them up when
I get to Baltimore, and make it all right with Auntie. She will trust me."

Cameron turned and looked at her wonderingly, reverently.

"It's wonderful that you should do this for me," he said in a low tone, quite low, so that
the watching wistful mother could not even guess what he was saying.

"It's not in the least wonderful," said Ruth brightly. "Remember the hedge and Chuck Woodcock!"
She was beginning to get her self possession again.

"You are paying that old score back in compound interest," said Cameron.

That was a wonderful ride rushing along beneath the stars, going back to childhood's days and
getting acquainted again where they left off. Ruth forgot all about the cause of her wild chase,
and the two young men she had left disconsolate in her library at home; forgot her own world
in this new beautiful one, wherein her spirit really communed with another spirit; forgot utterly
what Wainwright had said about Cameron as more and more through their talk she came to see
the fineness of his character.

They flashed on from one little village to another, leaving one clustering glimmer of lights
in the distance only to pass to other clustering groups. It was in their favor that there were
not many other travellers to dispute their way, and they were hindered very little. Cameron
had made the trip many times and knew the roads well. They did not have to hesitate and enquire
the way. They made good time. The clocks were striking ten when they reached the outskirts
of Baltimore.

"Now," said Ruth in a sweetly imperious tone, consulting her timepiece to be sure she had counted
the clock strokes correctly, "do you know what you are going to do, Mr. Corporal? You are going
to land your mother and me at the nearest hotel, and take the car with you back to camp. You
said one of the fellows had his car down there, so I'm sure you'll be able to find a place
to put it over night. If you find a way to send the car back to us in the morning, well and
good. If not your mother and I will go home by train and the chauffeur can come down to-morrow
and bring back the car; or, better still, you can drive yourself up the next time you get leave
off."

There was much argument about the matter within a brief space of time, but in the end (which
came in five minutes) Ruth had her way, and the young soldier departed for his camp in the
gray car with ample time to make the short trip, leaving his mother and Ruth at a Baltimore
hotel; after having promised to call up in the morning and let them know what he could do about
the car.

Ruth selected a large double room and went at once to the telephone to call up her aunt. She
found to her relief that that good lady had not yet returned from her day with a friend in
the city, so that no explanations would be necessary that night. She left word with the servant
that she was in Baltimore with a friend and would probably be at home the next day sometime.
Then she turned to find to her dismay that her companion was sitting in a low-armed chair with
tears running down her cheeks.

"Oh, my dear!" she exclaimed rushing over to her, "you are all worn out!"

"Not a bit of it!" sobbed the mother with a smile like sunshine through her tears. "I was so
happy I couldn't keep from crying. Don't you ever get that way? I've just been watching you
and thinking what a dear beautiful child you are and how wonderful God has been to send you
to help my boy. Oh, it was so dreadful to me to think of him going down to camp with those
men! My dear, I smelt liquor on their breath when they came for him, and I was just crying
and praying about it when you called me up. Of course, I knew my boy wouldn't drink, but so
many accidents can happen with automobiles when the driver is drunk! My dear, I never can thank
you enough!"

They were both too excited to sleep soon, but long after the mother was asleep Ruth lay awake
going over the whole day and wondering. There were so many things about the incident of the
afternoon and evening, now that they were over, that were utterly out of accord with her whole
life heretofore. She felt intuitively that her aunt would never understand if she were to explain
the whole proceeding. There were so many laws of her little world of conventionalities that
she had transgressed, and so many qualms of a belated conscience about whether she ought to
have done it at all. What would Cameron think of her, anyway? Her cheeks burned hot in the
dark over that question. Strange she had not thought of it at all either beforehand or while
she sat beside him during that wonderful ride! And now the thing that Wainwright had said shouted
itself out to her ears: "Rotten! Rotten! Rotten!" like a dirge. Suppose he were? It couldn't
be true. It just couldn't, but suppose he were? Well, suppose he were! How was she hurt by
doing a kind act? Having taken that stand against all her former ideas Ruth had instant peace
and drifted into dreams of what she had been enjoying, the way suddenly lit by a sleepy remembrance
of Wetherill's declaration: "He won't drink! You can't make him! It's been tried again and
again!" There was evidence in his favor. Why hadn't she remembered that before? And his mother!
She had been so sure of him!

The telephone bell wakened her with a message from camp. His voice greeted her pleasantly with
the word that it was all right, he had reached camp in plenty of time, found a good place for
the car, and it would be at the hotel at nine o'clock. Ruth turned from the phone with a vague
disappointment. He had not said a word of thanks or good-bye or anything, only that he must
hurry. Not even a word to his mother. But then, of course, men did not think of those little
things, perhaps, as women did, and maybe it was just as well for him to take it all as a matter
of course. It made it less embarrassing for her.

But when they went down to the car, behold he was in it!

"I got leave off for the morning," he explained smiling. "I told my captain all about how you
got me back in time when I'd missed the train and he told me to see you as far as Wilmington
and catch the noon train back from there. He's a peach of a captain. If my lieutenant had been
there I wouldn't have got a chance to ask him. I was afraid of that last night. But for good
luck the lieutenant has a two days' leave this time. He's a mess!"

Ruth looked at him musingly. Was Harry Wainwright the lieutenant?

They had a golden morning together, and talked of many things that welded a friendship already
well begun.

"Weren't you at all frightened last night?" asked Cameron once, looking at the delicate beauty
of the face beside him and noting the strength and sweetness of it.

Mrs. Cameron was dozing in the back seat and they felt quite alone and free. Ruth looked up
at him frankly:

"Why, yes, I think I was for a minute or two while we were behind that barn, but----Did you
ever pray when you were in a trying situation?"

He looked down earnestly into her face, half startled at her words:

"Why, I don't know that I ever did. I'm not quite sure if it was praying."

"Well, I don't know that I ever did before," she went on thoughtfully, "but last night when
those men got out of their car in front of the barn so near us again, I found myself praying."
She dropped her eyes half embarrassed: "Just as if I were a frightened little child I found
myself saying: 'God help us! God help us!' And right away we heard that other car coming and
the men went away. It somehow seemed--well, strange! I wondered if anybody else ever had an
experience like that."

"I've heard of them," said Cameron gravely. "I've wondered sometimes myself. Do you believe
in God?"

"Oh, yes!" said Ruth quite firmly. "Of course. What use would there be in anything if there
wasn't a God?"

"But do you believe we humans can ever really--well, find Him? On this earth, I mean."

"Why, I don't know that I ever thought about it," she answered bewildered. "Find Him? In what
way do you mean?"

"Why, get in touch with Him? Get to know Him, perhaps. Be on such terms with Him that one could
call out in a time like last night, you know; or--well, say in a battle! I've been thinking
a lot about that lately--naturally."

"Oh!" gasped Ruth softly, "of course. I hadn't thought about that much, either. We've been
so thoughtless--and--and sort of happy you know, just like butterflies, we girls! I haven't
realized that men were going out to face Death!"

"It isn't that I'm afraid to die," said Cameron proudly lifting his chin as if dying were a
small matter, "not just the dying part. I reckon I've been through worse than that a dozen
times. That wouldn't last long. It's--the other part. I have a feeling there'll be a little
something more expected of me than just to have tried to get the most fun out of life. I've
been thinking if there is a God He'd expect us to find it out and make things straight between
us somehow. I suppose I don't make myself very plain. I don't believe I know myself just what
I mean."

"I think I understand just a little," said Ruth, "I have never thought about it before, but
I'm going to now. It's something we ought to think about, I guess. In a sense it's something
that each one of us has to think, whether we are going into battle or not, isn't it?"

"I suppose it is, only we never realize it when things are going along all right," said Cameron.
"It seems queer that everybody that's ever lived on this earth has had this question to face
sooner or later and most of them haven't done much about it. The few people who profess to
have found a way to meet it we call cranks, or else pick flaws in the way they live; although
it does seem to me that if I really found God so I was sure He was there and cared about me,
I'd manage to live a little decenter life than some do."

They drifted into other topics and all too soon they reached Wilmington and had to say good-bye.
But the thought stayed with Ruth more or less during the days that followed, and crept into
her letters when she wrote to Corporal Cameron, as she did quite often in these days; and still
no solution had come to the great question which was so like the one of old, "What shall I
do to be saved?" It came and went during the days that followed, and now and again the fact
that it had originated in a talk with Cameron clashed badly in her mind with that word "Rotten"
that Wainwright had used about him. So that at last she resolved to talk to her cousin, Captain
La Rue, the next time he came up.

"Cousin Captain," she said, "do you know a boy at your camp from Bryne Haven named John Cameron?"

"Indeed I do!" said the captain.

"What kind of a man is he?"

"The best young man I know in every way," answered the captain promptly. "If the world were
made up of men like him it would be a pretty good place in which to live. Do you know him?"

"A little," said Ruth evasively, with a satisfied smile on her lips. "His mother is in our
Red Cross now. She thinks he's about right, of course, but mothers usually do, I guess. I'll
have to tell her what you said. It will please her. He used to be in school with me years ago.
I haven't seen much of him since."

"Well, all I have to say is, improve your acquaintance if you get the chance. He's worth ten
to one of your society youths that loll around here almost every time I come."

"Now, Cousin Captain!" chided Ruth. But she went off smiling and she kept all his words in
her heart.

XII

Corporal Cameron did not soon return to his native town. An epidemic of measles broke out in
camp just before Thanksgiving and pursued its tantalizing course through his special barracks
with strenuous vigor. Quarantine was put on for three weeks, and was but lifted for a few hours
when a new batch of cases came down. Seven weeks more of isolation followed, when the men were
not allowed away from the barracks except for long lonely walks, or gallops across camp. Even
the mild excitements of the Y.M.C.A. huts were not for them in these days. They were much shut
up to themselves, and latent tendencies broke loose and ran riot. Shooting crap became a passion.
They gambled as long as they had a dollar left or could get credit on the next month's pay
day. Then they gambled for their shirts and their bayonets. All day long whenever they were
in the barracks, you could hear the rattle of the dice, and the familiar call of "Phoebe,"
"Big Dick," "Big Nick," and "Little Joe." When they were not on drill the men would infest
the barracks for hours at a time, gathered in crouching groups about the dice, the air thick
and blue with cigarette smoke; while others had nothing better to do than to sprawl on their
cots and talk; and from their talk Cameron often turned away nauseated. The low ideals, the
open boasting of shame, the matter-of-course conviction that all men and most women were as
bad as themselves, filled him with a deep boiling rage, and he would close his book or throw
down the paper with which he was trying to while the hour, and fling forth into the cold air
for a solitary ride or walk.

He was sitting thus a cold cheerless December day with a French book he had recently sent for,
trying to study a little and prepare himself for the new country to which he was soon going.

The door of the barracks opened letting in a rush of cold air, and closed again quickly. A
tall man in uniform with the red triangle on his arm stood pulling off his woolen gloves and
looking about him. Nobody paid any attention to him. Cameron was deep in his book and did not
even notice him. Off at his left a new crap game was just starting. The phraseology beat upon
his accustomed ears like the buzz of bees or mosquitos.

"I'll shoot a buck!"

"You're faded!"

"Come on now there, dice! Remember the baby's shoes!"

Cameron had ceased to hear the voices. He was struggling with a difficult French idiom.

The stranger took his bearings deliberately and walked over to Cameron, sitting down with a
friendly air on the nearest cot.

"Would you be interested in having one of my little books?" he asked, and his voice had a clear
ring that brought Cameron's thoughts back to the barracks again. He looked up for a curt refusal.
He did not wish to be bothered now, but something in the young man's earnest face held him.
Y.M.C.A. men in general were well enough, but Cameron wasn't crazy about them, especially when
they were young. But this one had a look about him that proclaimed him neither a slacker nor
a sissy. Cameron hesitated:

"What kind of a book?" he asked in a somewhat curt manner.

The boy, for he was only a boy though he was tall as a man, did not hedge but went straight
to the point, looking eagerly at the soldier:

"A pocket Testament," he said earnestly, and laid in Cameron's hand a little book with limp
leather covers. Cameron took it up half curiously, and then looked into the other's face almost
coldly.

"You selling them?" There was a covert sneer in his tone.

"No, no!" said the other quickly, "I'm giving them away for a promise. You see, I had an accident
and one of my eyes was put out a while ago. Of course, they wouldn't take me for a soldier,
and the next best thing was to be all the help I could to the fellows that are going to fight.
I figure that book is the best thing I can bring you."

The manly simplicity of the boy held Cameron's gaze firmly fixed.

"H'm! In what way?" Cameron was turning the leaves curiously, enjoying the silky fineness and
the clear-cut print and soft leather binding. Life in the barracks was so much in the rough
that any bit of refinement was doubly appreciated. He liked the feel of the little book and
had a curious longing to be its possessor.

"Why, it gives you a pretty straight line on where we're all going, what is expected of us,
and how we're to be looked out for. It shows one how to know God and be ready to meet death
if we have to."

"What makes you think anyone can know God on this earth?" asked Cameron sharply.

"Because I have," said the astonishing young man quite as if he were saying he were related
to the President or something like that.

"You have! How did you get to know Him?"

"Through that little book and by following its teachings."

Cameron turned over the pages again, catching familiar phrases here and there as he had heard
them sometimes in Sunday school years ago.

"You said something about a promise. What was it?"

"That you'll carry the book with you always, and read at least a verse in it every day."

"Well, that doesn't sound hard," mused Cameron. "I guess I could stand for that."

"The book is yours, then. Would you like to put your name to that acceptance card in the front
of the book?"

"What's that?" asked Cameron sharply as if he had discovered the fly in the ointment for which
he had all along been suspicious.

"Well, I call it the first step in knowing God. It's your act of acceptance of the way God
has planned for you to be forgiven and saved from sin. If you sign that you say you will accept
Christ as your Saviour."

"But suppose you don't believe in Christ? I can't commit myself to anything like that till
I know about it?"

"Well, you see, that's the first move in getting to know God," said the stranger with a smile.
"God says he wants you to believe in his Son. He asks that much of you if you want to get to
know Him."

Cameron looked at him with bewildered interest. Was here a possible answer to the questions
of his heart. Why did this curious boy have a light in his face that never came from earth
or air? What was there about his simple earnestness that was so convincing?

Another crap game had started up on the other side of them. A musically inclined private was
playing ragtime on the piano, and another was trying to accompany him on the banjo. The air
was hazier than ever. It seemed strange to be talking of such things in these surroundings:

"Let's get out of here and walk!" said Cameron, "I'd like to understand what you mean."

For two hours they tramped across the frozen ground and talked, arguing this way and that,
much drawn toward one another. At last in the solemn background of a wall of whispering pines
that shut them away from the stark gray rows of barracks, Cameron took out his fountain pen
and with his foot on a prone log, opened the little book on his knee and wrote his name and
the date. Then he put it in his breast pocket with the solemn feeling that he had taken some
kind of a great step toward what his soul had been longing to find. They knelt on the frozen
ground beside that log and the stranger prayed simply as if he were talking to a friend. Thereafter
that spot was hallowed ground to Cameron, to which he came often to think and to read his little
book.

That night he wrote to Ruth, telling in a shy way of his meeting with the Testament man and
about the little book. After he had mailed the letter he walked back again to the spot among
the pines and standing there looked up to the stars and somehow committed himself again to
the covenant he had signed in the little book. Yes, I will still be modest. Have you perhaps one
that can even ten cattle from a rule Rindviech? No, you've never heard.

Did you ever but astonished that not only ten, hundred and thousand, rule but hundreds of thousands
and millions of people from a single Rindviech can? This has not put you in the slightest surprise,
you have it of course, even for very found.

So the man is the greatest Rindviech or not? Yes, man is the greatest Rindviech.

So, my beloved devotional cattle, it was what I wanted to prove to you. Remaineth therefore continue
the way you're always been. Seek and you continue to deliberately largest oxen, to whom you
trust and respect with aufblicket, for a Rindviech the other is worthy. To help you is yes
but not because you're just cattle. Amen.

  

    [Decoration]
    

As Father Hilarius walked in, the legend of the Holy Bürokrazius to write.

The memorable Lenten sermon brought the Reverend Father Hilary huge honor. One of the strangest
episodes but it was decided that the Reverend Father Honorary Member countless animal protection
groups has been appointed, which he accepted with due gratitude.

He was with the various more or less artistically executed diplomas do not only the walls of
his cell, but also all the transitions of the cloister and the refectory decorated.

It yielded the most pleasant consequences Fast sermon, however, for the monastery itself, the audience
were shaken by the realization of more than viechischen stupidity so that it is the Monastery
with gifts piled up.

From early morning to late evening was the bell of the porter. As varied on back carriers All
Panzelen wine start. Since there was food in abundance, sacks of flour and Potatoes and finer
fleshly pleasures.

Most, however, drew the sweet femininity of in donations. For she had often the handle is turned
over and the comments of the Lenten sermon to only the male part of the Audience-related.
And it was the little woman a special treat for the ears, her marriage Men to see made yet about
the love of cattle.

So then young and old smock wearers hatschten therefore baskets full of eggs and butter and
lard, poultry of all kinds, chickens and ducks and geese, with whole sides of bacon and Smoked up
with ham and sausages with delicious pastries, croissant from brittle to bulbous ring cake and
tarts occurring to any circular, almost as big as millstones. There were enough with the femininity
that her tender devotion with huge Bischkotenherzen expressed.

It understands, of course, that these positive ingredients for earthly well-being of the Standing
of the Reverend Father Hilarius in his spiritual brothers increased
significantly.

For whoever it was capable of violence simply by the word content of the stables and fields with
to direct the religious convent gate like a never-ending stream that probably had the Heaven be
blessed just fine.

This recognition also spoke to the reverend Prior to his worthy brother excited from. In his
opinion, the Father Hilary was a rough bone, but none the less have He hit the right tone,
go to the hearts of the people and all noble and useful Instincts of the human cattle in a really
astonishing way of initiating.

The while the reverend Prior spiritual writings was very well read, he made the Father Hilary
on a saying of his famous ancestor, the priest Abraham a Santa Clara attention. This was done in causal
connection with the action of the Father Hilarii Fast Sermon on the delicate female gender. 

The
Rev. Mr. Prior said that Father Abraham is not the case in the present rather have retained. For he
had once said: "The women seynd otherwise genaturt as the herb named
Basil: when to streichet this chamber, and gently, so there is a very
sweet smell of itself, but because it reibet strong smell, it does
wild.

The priest however Hilary had his devout listeners, including the
female not only strongly grated, but brushed and groomed according
to the rules.

And still have after that just after the female smelt lovely bacon and ham, Bundt cake, donuts
and almond sheets of punch and cake Bischkotenherzen. As pointed, however, the Reverend Father
Hilary his spiritual superiors in the way of explanation, which I with you, big cost Readers
and highly inclined reader, am already a bit further up.

The prior was to give the right Father Hilary. He called him a great judge of character and also
make a great connoisseur of the fair sex, that is not on Schlieben can see the reason this purpose
and use was also one klafterlangen perspective.

It urged the Prior to his spiritual brother, he might be the stupidity of the people to choose
his very proper study, investigate it right, mainly their Causes
and try to fathom the deepest foundations.

Because the said program could for the whole monastery only to be prosperous immensely. This
was already the beginning of the work of the Father Hilary sufficiently proved.

The Father Hilary promised his religious superiors that he wanted
with all due diligence the human barn devote his full attention even
further.

Retired to his Cell back days and weeks and was not visible.

At the behest of the prior, and probably also of his own accord he served his spiritual brethren
diligently with all kinds of etching and wine, that he in his strenuous
study the stupidity of the people and the physical strengthening non
lacked.

However, Father Hilary was at his difficult research entirely logical
to work.

He thought to himself: Every thing on earth must have his patron saint. So too is the human Stupidity.
If we manage to find their saints, then the thing your heavenly declaration
and can be easily understood.

Thus, by researching the life of all Holy Father Hilary, that he lay hands could. No one was so
kind that he had responsibility for human stupidity can be made. The Rev. Father studied the
legends from the front and rear and yet still reach any results.

At last he undertook to arrange all the saints in alphabetical order,
so to him so no escape could.

When even this does not help, he organized them by their first initial syllables and then to
their final syllables.

He came to the Saints with the suffix 'azius "on the holy Ignatius,
Boniface, Servazius, Pankrazius Aziusse and others.

I must interrupt my learned representation of something and in honor of the Tyrolean bacon dumplings , Just
add that to the wonderful day when the Holy Father Hilary on "azius"
in rank and file did march, the priest almost phenomenal cook bacon
dumplings had prepared, of which half a dozen with a bowl of steaming
sauerkraut the Father Hilary were brought to his cell.

These dumplings tasted the Reverend Father Sun fürtrefflich that he the second course, the Veal
was baked in Resch, friendly and rejected for a second edition Dumplings
demanded.

His desire was, of course, immediately complied with due reverence.

For it was the entire monastery has become clear soon so that his most famous member today
by the spirit Research and fulfilled dahero of that food to a greater extent is in need which
leadeth known for direct stimulation of brain functions.

To make this all possible feed spirituality, was the father's butler
reverend colleague at the same time an immense jar that had never
been geaicht, bring to his cell.

It should be a fabulous Father of the monastery for four or five centuries geleeret in three moves
and it should have a blessed death, his faded.

Sotaner mug was only in very special festive occasions to a solemn round drunkenness hervorgeholet.
The pitcher had the Father Butler with the best and oldest wine Filled for Klosters, from
which you claimed that a black cat at midnight on the barrel squat.

All this was mentioned I also, therefore, about the merits of the Fathers chef and butler the following
world-shaking discoveries of the Reverend Father Hilarius in the right to provide light.

Having now had the reverend Father Hilary made an end of the second vehicle dumplings and was
already quite deep submerged to the bottom of the legendary pitcher, he took again the list of
holy Aziusse before. He went through a long, and he was thoroughly by pondering in his mind and
soul well, whether it is somehow sacred name of carrier had forgotten
to "azius.

He opened suddenly in his cell a caper raised his, by the age and tradition Consecrated pitcher
to his lips, took a strong double Kuhschluck it, put it back on the table and burst into the enthusiastic
words: "But now I've got you in Krawattel, you treacherous closed
Azius holy!

Ignatius, Servazius, Boniface and Pankrazius! Your list will be full! O holy Saint Bürokrazius!
Now I've got you caught! And thou shalt make do me no more! "

Reif Lichen further reflection brought the Father Hilarius to believe that he in the St. Bürokrazius
actually found the right patron saint of human stupidity had.

Not only the patron saint of human stupidity but also of those saints, whose existence could be
explained at all, only by human stupidity, from the was conceived and born of human stupidity.

The
Father Hilary was there at the progressive digestion of bacon dumplings, their number This
time does not matter, and in the final exploration of the saintly pitcher ever more clear as day
that the holy Saint Bürokrazius the most powerful and influential saint was on earth.

What else other saints such omnipotence had won?

Before which other saints otherwise everything was so hard on the knees, even before he crawled
on his belly? Such a resounding Success was not a single other saints
praise.

No saint had so many disciples as St. Bürokrazius. No orders had so many followers and was with
his immense Thousands of members spread so much as just like the Order of St. Bürokrazius.

Upon further investigation discovered the reverend Father Hilarius in his new-found Saints, the St. Bürokrazius,
even divine properties.

Although he could not in it to find the omniscience nor the gracious and merciful, but to a
certain degree of omnipotence. However, he found a divine quality in the holy Bürokrazius embodies
perfectly. That was the omnipresence.

This study is the ubiquity of the Holy Bürokrazius had the reverend
Father, by the following questions presented, admit and confess themselves:
Are you a door on who stands out?

The Holy Bürokrazius. Do you have a window on who glotzet in? The Holy Bürokrazius. About
banning you on a box or a chest, who Hocket inside? The Holy Bürokrazius. Are you reaching into
the bag trousers, whom thou goest the Ohrwaschel herfür? The holy Bürokrazius. Who stretched
forth everywhere, from the hidden corners and most secret Örtlein his neck out? The Holy Bürokrazius.

Derohalb
was for the Father Hilary on the ubiquity of this largest and most
powerful Saint, the patron saint of human stupidity, not the slightest
doubt.

The more powerful but it surprised the Reverend Father, that he was not a legend of the Holy Bürokrazius
could find. Humanity had either in their stupidity or their irresponsible ingratitude of the
earthly life of that silenced saints, in the they lived and moved,
in which it rose, the monitored their most secret tasks, controlled
and registered.

The Father Hilary was unheard of. He decided, therefore, the legend of St. write Bürokrazius to
mankind a life mirror of that patron saint of To worship where they looked up in awe, before they shook in
their infinite stupidity and trembled like a aspen leaf, and like the shaking of a blood young
pigs Flein Lamb.

As the Reverend Father Hilary but at the discretion of his own prior's a rough Bone was, he found
a third compared to the earthquake of human stupidity the holy Bürokrazius.

And he said to himself, trembling against this bloody stupid Saints the sillier still Rindviechgeschlecht
human just like a Swiss partners in the Sulz Plate.

After the Father Hilarius this final comparison was found, he told
the Prior with his decision that he write the legend of St. Bürokrazius
and thus a as much as incomprehensible gap in the history of celestial
rulers fill may.

The Rev. Mr. Prior gave his revered spiritual brother unlimited Holidays for this highly important
work.

As the Father Hilary has loosed his task that may prove the following. It was the work of a giant.
For it was from long-buried sources, from the dust of the archives
and libraries of countless files and fascicles, browse and Traktätlein
from the Moder the past, the history of the most powerful patron dig
up the human stupidity.

  And last but not least was the genius of the Reverend Father reserved
for all the many fill yawning gaps that resulted in the often conflicting
traditions.

    
    

That it was still a rounded picture, we thank properties in addition to the tremendous intellectual
Father of Hilary of course, the Tyrolean bacon dumplings, which he expanded on his Expeditions, together
with a good wine to gain always knew.

Thus a work is created that seek to generosity of his peers, yet to
Subtlety of detail work with that piece of art Mirmecides can be compared
of ivory, including a cart horse and driver that is chopped and artificially
is that we all below the wing is a small bow tie to hide it.

A statue in bronze or marble, while the tiny filigree ivory must be the work of Father Hilary are
compared.

But what shines forth from each of the same train, that's the ardent love and admiration for
his saints, which he a devout dargestellet humanity has for the first
time.

Let nunmehro the Reverend Father Hilario anselbsten the word.

[Decoration]

Like the saints in heaven to God a Please strange recited.

The Legend of the Holy Bürokrazius beginnet in heaven, which is not only right and cheap. For
what place would be suitable to represent the origin of the following events, just as the sky.
We are so übersättiget of the theater with all his earthly Pity that the gentle reader certainly
like to relax once a heavenly walk .

Make

There had been some time among the saints of heaven, a certain resentment and a arge peevishness
space used. The Heavenly Humor threatened violence to go to pieces.

This was because the Saints were far too clever. And since they were all the same clever, could
not be cleverer than the other.

Dergestalter verdrießet symmetry but with time not only people but also the sweetest and most pious
saint.

Even the most brilliant qualities can only come into play when from Background of the opposition stand,
as it otherwise, in all its glory no more attention . See What would be the sun when it did not
follow the night, and what can blossom and Grow on earth if we are
not the frosts of winter, with the consuming desire for the meet warm
and mild Lüftelein of spring would.

So also was the happiness of the saints in heaven not perfect, was
this Prophet equally clever as that church father, and this venerable
patriarch was that holy Theologians of all times till the fat.

And those hermits of the desert had been during had their earthly pilgrimage in their world seclusion
as much time to waste in order to all the major issues to consider that, with the storage of their
cleverness for all ages auslangten.

So no meant for each other something new and have not been done before. And if a opened to the
deepest abyss of wisdom the mouth so he could be sure that she and the other already knew. But there
is nothing more annoying than when you can never say a main clause, without the others immediately
ergänzet the subordinate clause. This can be the most patient, over time, Desperation.

So it was in the sky come gradually, that most holy nothing at all said, but is enveloped in impenetrable
silence. So it was with the heavenly Entertainment bestellet worse and worse.

Because one day the miraculous happened, that a saint suddenly expressed a thought, had from the
other had not the faintest idea.

Which saint was to explore the is the greatest effort and care unfortunately failed.

But it was a saint, which broke out quite abruptly in the final cry
of "Heaven, Lord God, Sacrament, and all the saints!

If only we finally had a stupid saints among us! But already have such a bloody stupid, stupid
straw and erzblöden saints! That would be great fun! "

Roaring cheers arose is whether these words. They looked like a deliverance from great distress.

Immediately, was seconded, a solemn message to the dear God, the spokesman of course that was
holy and the divine invasion had had.

The good Lord was currently
in the sky meadow walk, when his message of the Holy approached in
all respect. "Yes, what is today's' go?" And God asked his kindest
Smile. "You could look out all yes's than if you take the hens the
food. Fits what you might not up here in heaven? "

Since the spokesman
said: "Keep Your Grace, Your Divine Majesty is wanting, something
we really yet our heavenly bliss. We all know each other much too
clever and dahero no more right to start another. And so we want to
humbly asked have, that your Divine Majesty deign graciously, our
holy council once incorporate a stupid saint. The stupider the better.
At least as stupid as your Divine Majesty is omnipotent. The biggest
idiot and Tepper, the worst camel, the most identified Donkey, the
hugest and most exquisite Rindviech that can be found. On this bright
Film contrast will then take off our cleverness so overwhelming that
they are no more than an everyday appeareth. And the heavenly humor,
to acidify very threatens, then will drive new and unexpected flowers!
"

Then God laughed in his Bountiful so great as it thundered and
the only way that before the sound of laughter a few dozen angels
from the twigs of the trees on the Himmelswiese tumbled to the grass
and rolled merrily mitlachten from their young throats.

The good
Lord said, "If you only perfect for your heavenly bliss lacking, then
I hope to meet you your wish. Because I think it my Omnipotence is
managed by the billions of my creatures somewhere such a stupid lightning
creating guy who can make you satisfied. It is now just a matter of
great and to find illustrious Rindviech. So then you, Ye must wait
only until Said cattle his earthly days has been completed and your
exquisite beigesellet corona are in heaven can.
Perhaps, oh perhaps he might be able to persuade her and his mother to stay over Sunday! He
hardly dared to hope, however, for Ruth Macdonald might think it presumptuous in him to suggest
it, and again she might wish to go home to meet Wainwright. And, too, where could they sleep
if they did stay. It was hopeless, of course. They would have to go back to Baltimore or to
Washington for the night and that would be a hard jaunt.

However, Ruth Macdonald had thought of such a possibility herself, and when she and Mrs. Cameron
stepped down from the Philadelphia train at the small country station that had suddenly become
an important point because of the great camp that had sprung up within a stone's throw of it,
she looked around enquiringly at the little cottage homes in sight and said to her companion:

"Would it be very dreadful in us to discover if there is some place here where we could stay
over night in case John's company does not go just yet and we find we would be allowed to see
him again on Sunday?"

She knew by the sudden lighting of the mother's wistful face that she had read aright the sighs
half stifled that she had heard on the train when the mother had thought she was not noticing.

"Oh, do you suppose we could stay?" The voice was full of yearning.

"Well, we can find out, at least. Anyhow, I'm going in here to see whether they would take
us in case we could. It looks like a nice neat place."

Ruth pulled open the gate, ran up the steps of the pleasant porch shaded with climbing roses,
and knocked timidly at the open door.

A broad, somewhat frowsy woman appeared and surveyed her coolly with that apprising glance
that a native often gives to a stranger; took in the elegant simplicity of her quiet expensive
gown and hat, lingering with a jealous glance on the exquisite hand bag she carried, then replied
apathetically to Ruth's question:

"No, we're all full. We ain't got any room. You might try down to the Salvation Army Hut. They
got a few rooms down there. It's just been built. They might take you in. It's down the road
a piece, that green building to the right. You can't miss it. You'll see the sign."

Ruth caught her breath, thanked her and hastened back to her companion. Salvation Army! That
was eccentric, queer, but it would be perfectly respectable! Or would it? Would Aunt Rhoda
disapprove very much? Somehow the Salvation Army was associated in her mind with slums and
drunkards. But, at least, they might be able to direct her to a respectable place.

Mrs. Cameron, too, looked dubious. This having a society girl to chaperone was new business
for her. She had never thought much about it, but somehow she would hardly have associated
the Salvation Army with the Macdonald family in any way. She paused and looked doubtfully at
the unpretentious little one-story building that stretched away capaciously and unostentatiously
from the grassy roadside.

"SALVATION ARMY" arose in bold inviting letters from the roof, and "Ice Cold Lemonade" beckoned
from a sign on the neat screen door. Ruth was a bit excited.

"I'm going in!" she declared and stepped within the door, Mrs. Cameron following half fearfully.

The room which they entered was long and clean and pleasant. Simple white curtains draped the
windows, many rush-bottomed big rocking chairs were scattered about, a long desk or table ran
along one side of the room with writing materials, a piano stood open with music on its rack,
and shelves of books and magazines filled the front wall.

Beyond the piano were half a dozen little tables, white topped and ready for a hungry guest.
At the back a counter ran the width of the room, with sandwiches and pies under glass covers,
and a bright coffee urn steaming suggestively at one end. Behind it through an open door was
a view of the kitchen, neat, handy, crude, but all quite clean, and through this door stepped
a sweet-faced woman, wiping her hands on her gingham apron and coming toward them with a smile
of welcome as if they were expected guests. It was all so primitive, and yet there was something
about it that bore the dignity of refinement, and puzzled this girl from her sheltered home.
She was almost embarrassed to make her enquiry, but the hearty response put her quite at her
ease, as if she had asked a great favor of another lady in a time of stress:

"I'm so sorry, but our rooms are all taken," the woman waved a slender hand toward the long
side of the room and Ruth noticed for the first time that a low partition ran the length of
the room at one side with doors. Mechanically she counted them, eight of them, neat, gray-painted
doors. Could these be rooms? How interesting! She had a wild desire to see inside them. Rooms!
They were more like little stalls, for the partitions did not reach all the way to the ceiling.
A vision of her own spacious apartment at home came floating in vague contrast. Then one of
the doors opposite her opened as its occupant, a quiet little elderly woman, came out, and
she had a brief glimpse of the white curtained window, the white draped comfortable looking
bed, a row of calico curtained hooks on the wall, and a speck of a wash stand with tin pitcher
and basin in the corner, all as clean and new as the rest of the place. She swiftly decided
to stay here if there was any chance. Another look at the sweet face of the presiding woman
who was trying to make them understand how crowded everything was, and how many mothers there
were with sons who were going that night or the next, and who wanted to be near them, determined
her. She was saying there was just a chance in case a certain mother from Boston who had written
her did not arrive at five o'clock:

"But we ought not to take a chance," said Cameron's mother, looking at the eager faced girl
with a cautious wistfulness. "What could we do if night came and we had no place to stay?"

Ruth cast her eyes about.

"Couldn't we sit in a couple of those rocking chairs all night?" she asked eagerly.

The Salvation Army woman laughed affectionately as if she had found a kindred spirit:

"Why, dearie, I could give you a couple of cots out here in the dining room if you didn't mind.
I wouldn't have pillows, but I think I could get you some blankets."

"Then we'll stay," said Ruth triumphantly before Mrs. Cameron could protest, and went away
feeling that she had a new friend in the wise sweet Salvation Army woman. In five minutes more
they were seated in the trolley on their way into the camp.

"I'm afraid your people would not like you to stay in such a place," began Mrs. Cameron dubiously,
though her eyes shone with a light that belied her words.

"Nonsense!" said Ruth with a bewildering smile, "it is as clean as a pin and I'm very much
excited about staying there. It will be an adventure. I've never known much about the Salvation
Army before, except that they are supposed to be very good people."

"There might be some rough characters----"

"Well, I guess they can't hurt us with that good woman around, and anyhow, you're going to
stay till your son goes!" laughingly declared Ruth.

"Well, we'll see what John says," said his mother with a sigh, "I can't let you do anything--questionable."

"Please, Mrs. Cameron," pleaded Ruth, "let us forget things like that this trip and just have
a happy time."

The mother smiled, sadly, wistfully, through a mist of tears. She could not help thinking how
wonderful it would have been if there had been no war and her dear boy could have had this
sweet wholesome girl for a friend.

XIV

The sun was shining gloriously when the two stepped from the trolley at the little camp station
and looked bewildered about them at the swarms of uniforms and boyish faces, searching for
their one. They walked through the long lane lined with soldiers, held back by the great rope
and guarded by Military Police. Each crowding eager soldier had an air of expectancy upon him,
a silence upon him that showed the realization of the parting that was soon to be. In many
faces deep disappointment was growing as the expected ones did not arrive. Ruth's throat was
filled with oppression and tears as she looked about and suddenly felt the grip of war, and
realized that all these thousands were bearing this bitterness of parting, perhaps forever.
Death stalking up and down a battlefield, waiting to take his pick of them! This was the picture
that flashed before her shrinking eyes.

It was almost like a solemn ceremony, this walking down the lane of silent waiting soldiers,
to be claimed by their one. It seemed to bring the two young people nearer in heart than they
had ever been before, when at the end of the line Cameron met them with a salute, kissed his
mother, and then turned to Ruth and took her hand with an earnest grave look of deep pleasure
in his eyes.

He led them up under the big trees in front of the Hostess' House while all around were hushed
voices, and teary eyes. That first moment of meeting was the saddest and the quietest of the
day with everybody, except the last parting hour when mute grief sat unchecked upon every face,
and no one stopped to notice if any man were watching, but just lived out his real heart self,
and showed his mother or his sister or his sweetheart how much he loved and suffered.

That was a day which all the little painted butterflies of temptation should have been made
to witness. There were no painted ladies coming through the gates that day. This was no time
for friendships like that. Death was calling, and the deep realities of life stood out and
demanded attention.

The whole thing was unlike anything Ruth had ever witnessed before. It was a new world. It
was as if the old conventions which had heretofore hedged her life were dropped like a garment
revealing life as it really was, and every one walked unashamed, because the great sorrow and
need of all had obliterated the little petty rules of life, and small passions were laid aside,
while hearts throbbed in a common cause.

He waited on them like a prince, seeming to anticipate every need, and smooth every annoyance.
He led them away from the throng to the quiet hillside above the camp where spring had set
her dainty foot-print. He spread down his thick army blanket for them to sit upon and they
held sweet converse for an hour or two. He told them of camp life and what was expected to
be when they started over, and when they reached the other side.

His mother was brave and sensible. Sometimes the tears would brim over at some suggestion of
what her boy was soon to bear or do, but she wore a smile as courageous and sweet as any saint
could wear. The boy saw and grew tender over it. A bird came and sang over their heads, and
the moment was sweet with springing things and quiet with the brooding tenderness of parting
that hung over the busy camp. Ruth had one awful moment of adjustment when she tried to think
how her aunt Rhoda would look if she could see her now; then she threw the whole thing to the
winds and resolved to enjoy the day. She saw that while the conventions by which she had been
reared were a good thing in general, perhaps, they certainly were not meant to hamper or hinder
the true and natural life of the heart, or, if they were, they were not good things; and she
entered into the moment with her full sympathy. Perhaps Aunt Rhoda would not understand, but
the girl she had brought up knew that it was good to be here. Her aunt was away from home with
an invalid friend on a short trip so there had been no one to question Ruth's movements when
she decided to run down to Washington with a "friend from the Red Cross" and incidentally visit
the camp a little while.

He had them over the camp by and by, to the trenches and dummies, and all the paraphernalia
of war preparation. Then they went back to the Hostess' House and fell into line to get dinner.
As Cameron stood looking down at Ruth in the crowded line in the democratic way which was the
only way there was, it came over them both how strange and wonderful it was that they two who
had seen each other so little in their lives and who had come from such widely separated social
circles should be there together in that beautiful intimacy. It came to them both at once and
flashed its thought from one pair of eyes to the other and back again. Cameron looked deep
into her thoughts then for a moment to find out if there was a shadow of mortification or dismay
in her face; but though she flushed consciously her sweet true eyes gave back only the pleasure
she was feeling, and her real enjoyment of the day. Then instantly each of them felt that another
crisis had been passed in their friendship, another something unseen and beautiful had happened
that made this moment most precious--one never to be forgotten no matter what happened in the
future, something they would not have missed for any other experience.

It was Ruth who announced suddenly, late in the afternoon, during a silence in which each one
was thinking how fast the day was going:

"Did you know that we were going to stay over Sunday?"

Cameron's face blazed with joyful light:

"Wonderful!" he said softly, "do you mean it? I've been trying to get courage all day to suggest
it, only I don't know of any place this side of Washington or Baltimore where you can be comfortable,
and I hate to think of you hunting around a strange city late at night for accommodations.
If I could only get out to go with you----!"

"It isn't necessary," said Ruth quickly, "we have our accommodations all arranged for. Your
mother and I planned it all out before we came. But are you sure we can get into camp to-morrow?"

"Yes, I'm almost certain we can get you passes by going up to officers' headquarters and applying.
A fellow in our company told me this morning he had permission for his mother and sister to
come in to-morrow. And we are not likely to leave before Monday now, for this morning our lieutenant
went away and I heard him say he had a three days' leave. They wouldn't have given him that
if they expected to send us before he got back, at least not unless they recalled him--they
might do that."

"Is that the lieutenant that you called a 'mess' the other day?" asked Ruth with twinkling eyes.

"Yes," said Cameron turning a keen, startled glance at her, and wondering what she would say
if she knew it was Wainwright he meant.

But she answered demurely:

"So he's away, is he? I'm glad. I was hoping he would be."

"Why?" asked Cameron.

"Oh, I thought he might be in the way," she smiled, and changed the subject, calling attention
to the meadow lark who was trilling out his little ecstasy in the tall tree over their head.

Cameron gave one glance at the bird and then brought his gaze back to the sweet upturned face
beside him, his soul thrilling with the wonder of it that she should be there with him!

"But you haven't told me where you have arranged to stay. Is it Baltimore or Washington? I
must look up your trains. I hope you will be able to stay as late as possible. They're not
putting people out of camp until eight o'clock to-night."

"Lovely!" said Ruth with the eagerness of a child. "Then we'll stay till the very last trolley.
We're not going to either Baltimore or Washington. We're staying right near the camp entrance
in that little town at the station where we landed, I don't remember what you call it. We got
accommodations this morning before we came into camp."

"But where?" asked Cameron anxiously. "Are you sure it's respectable? I'm afraid there isn't
any place there that would do at all."

"Oh, yes there is," said Ruth. "It's the Salvation Army 'Hut,' they called it, but it looks
more like a barracks, and there's the dearest little woman in charge!"

"John, I'm afraid it isn't the right thing to let her do it!" put in his mother anxiously.
"I'm afraid her aunt wouldn't like it at all, and I'm sure she won't be comfortable."

"I shall love it!" said Ruth happily, "and my aunt will never know anything about it. As for
comfort, I'll be as comfortable as you are, my dear lady, and I'm sure you wouldn't let comfort
stand in the way of being with your boy." She smiled her sweet little triumph that brought
tears to the eyes of the mother; and Cameron gave her a blinding look of gratitude and adoration.
So she carried her way.

Cameron protested no more, but quietly enquired at the Hostess' House if the place was all
right, and when he put them on the car at eight o'clock he gave Ruth's hand a lingering pressure,
and said in a low tone that only she could hear, with a look that carried its meaning to her heart:

"I shall never forget that you did this for my mother--and me!"

The two felt almost light-hearted in comparison to their fellow travellers, because they had
a short reprieve before they would have to say good-bye. But Ruth sat looking about her, at
the sad-eyed girls and women who had just parted from their husbands and sons and sweethearts,
and who were most of them weeping, and felt anew the great burden of the universal sorrow upon
her. She wondered how God could stand it. The old human question that wonders how God can stand
the great agonies of life that have to come to cure the world of its sin, and never wonders
how God can stand the sin! She felt as if she must somehow find God and plead with Him not
to do it, and again there came that longing to her soul, if she only knew God intimately! Cameron's
question recurred to her thoughts, "Could anyone on this earth know God? Had anyone ever known
Him? Would the Bible say anything about it?" She resolved to read it through and find out.

The brief ride brought them suddenly into a new and to Ruth somewhat startling environment.

As they followed the grassy path from the station to their abiding place two little boys in
full military uniform appeared out of the tall grass of the meadows, one as a private, the
other as an officer. The small private saluted the officer with precision and marched on, turning
after a few steps to call back, "Mother said we might sleep in the tent to-night! The rooms
are all full." The older boy gave a whoop of delight and bounded back toward the building with
a most unofficer-like walk, and both disappeared inside the door. A tiny khaki dog-tent was
set up in the grass by the back door, and in a moment more the two young soldiers emerged from
the back door with blankets and disappeared under the brown roof with a zest that showed it
was no hardship to them to camp out for the night.

There were lights in the long pleasant room, and people. Two soldiers with their girls were
eating ice cream at the little tables, and around the piano a group of officers and their wives
was gathered singing ragtime. Ruth's quick glance told her they were not the kind she cared
for, and--how could people who were about to part, perhaps forever, stand there and sing such
abominable nonsense! Yet--perhaps it was their way of being brave to the last. But she wished
they would go.

The sweet-faced woman of the morning was busy behind the counter and presently she saw them
and came forward:

"I'm sorry! I hoped there would be a room, but that woman from Boston came. I can only give
you cots out here, if you don't mind."

Mrs. Cameron looked around in a half-frightened manner, but Ruth smiled airily and said that
would be all right.

They settled down in the corner between the writing table and book case and began to read,
for it was obvious that they could not retire at present.

The little boys came running through and the officers corralled them and clamored for them
to sing. Without any coaxing they stood up together and sang, and their voices were sweet as
birds as they piped out the words of a popular song, one singing alto, the little one taking
the high soprano. Ruth put down her book and listened, wondering at the lovely expressions
on the two small faces. They made her think of the baby-seraphs in Michael Angelo's pictures.
Presently they burst into a religious song with as much gusto as they had sung the ragtime.
They were utterly without self-consciousness, and sang with the fervor of a preacher. Yet they
were regular boys, for presently when they were released they went to turning hand springs
and had a rough and tumble scuffle in the corner till their mother called them to order.

In a few minutes more the noisy officers and their wives parted, the men striding off into
the night with a last word about the possibility of unexpected orders coming, and a promise
to wink a flash light out of the car window as the troop train went by in case they went out
that night. The wives went into one of the little stall-rooms and compared notes about their
own feelings and the probability of the ----Nth Division leaving before Monday.

Then the head of the house appeared with a Bible under his arm humming a hymn. He cast a keen
pleasant glance at the two strangers in the corner, and gave a cheery word to his wife in answer
to her question:

"Yes, we had a great meeting to-night. A hundred and twenty men raised their hands as wanting
to decide for Christ, and two came forward to be prayed for. It was a blessed time. I wish
the boys had been over there to sing. The meeting was in the big Y.M.C.A. auditorium. Has Captain
Hawley gone yet?"

"Not yet." His wife's voice was lowered. She motioned toward one of the eight gray doors, and
her husband nodded sadly.

"He goes at midnight, you know. Poor little woman!"

Just then the door opened and a young soldier came out, followed by his wife, looking little
and pathetic with great dark hollows under her eyes, and a forced smile on her trembling lips.

The soldier came over and took the hand of the Salvation Army woman:

"Well, I'm going out to-night, Mother. I want to thank you for all you've done for my little
girl"--looking toward his wife--"and I won't forget all the good things you've done for me,
and the sermons you've preached; and when I get over there I'm going to try to live right and
keep all my promises. I want you to pray for me that I may be true. I shall never cease to
thank the Lord that I knew you two."

The Salvationists shook hands earnestly with him, and promised to pray for him, and then he
turned to the children:

"Good-bye, Dicky, I shan't forget the songs you've sung. I'll hear them sometimes when I get
over there in battle, and they'll help to keep me true."

But Dicky, not content with a hand shake swarmed up the leg and back of his tall friend as
if he had been a tree, and whispered in a loud confidential child-whisper:

"I'm a goin' to pray fer you, too, Cap'n Hawley. God bless you!"

The grown-up phrases on the childish lips amused Ruth. She watched the little boy as he lifted
his beautiful serious face to the responsive look of the stranger, and marvelled. Here was
no parrot-like repetition of word she had heard oft repeated by his elders; the boy was talking
a native tongue, and speaking of things that were real to him. There was no assumption of godliness
nor conceit, no holier-than-thou smirk about the child. It was all sincere, as a boy would
promise to speak to his own father about a friend's need. It touched Ruth and tears sprang
to her eyes.

All the doubts she had had about the respectability of the place had vanished long ago. There
might be all kinds of people coming and going, but there was a holy influence here which made
it a refuge for anyone, and she felt quite safe about sleeping in the great barn-like room
so open. It was as if they had happened on some saint's abode and been made welcome in their
extremity.

Presently, one by one the inmates of the rooms came in and retired. Then the cots were brought
out and set up, little simple affairs of canvas and steel rods, put together in a twinkling,
and very inviting to the two weary women after the long day. The cheery proprietor called out,
"Mrs. Brown, haven't you an extra blanket in your room?" and a pleasant voice responded promptly,
"Yes, do you want it?"

"Throw it over then, please. A couple of ladies hadn't any place to go. Anybody else got one?"

A great gray blanket came flying over the top of the partition, and down the line another voice
called: "I have one I don't need!" and a white blanket with pink stripes followed, both caught
by the Salvationist, and spread upon the little cots. Then the lights were turned out one by
one and there in the shelter of the tall piano, curtained by the darkness the two lay down.

Ruth was so interested in it all and so filled with the humor and the strangeness of her situation
that tired as she was she could not sleep for a long time.

The house settled slowly to quiet. The proprietor and his wife talked comfortably about the
duties of the next day, called some directions to the two boys in the puppy tent, soothed their
mosquito bites with a lotion and got them another blanket. The woman who helped in the kitchen
complained about not having enough supplies for morning, and that contingency was arranged
for, all in a patient, earnest way and in the same tone in which they talked about the meetings.
They discussed their own boy, evidently the brother of the small boys, who had apparently just
sailed for France as a soldier a few days before, and whom the wife had gone to New York to
see off, and they commended him to their Christ in little low sentences of reassurance to each
other. Ruth could not help but hear much that was said, for the rooms were all open to sounds,
and these good people apparently had nothing to hide. They spoke as if all their household
were one great family, equally interested in one another, equally suffering and patient in
the necessities of this awful war.

In another tiny room the Y.M.C.A. man who had been the last to come in talked in low tones
with his wife, telling her in tender, loving tones what to do about a number of things after
he was gone.

In a room quite near there were soft sounds as of suppressed weeping. Something made Ruth sure
it was the mother who had been spoken of earlier in the evening as having come all the way
from Texas and arrived too late to bid her boy good-bye.

Now and again the sound of a troop train stirred her heart to untold depths. There is something
so weird and sorrowful about its going, as if the very engine sympathized, screaming its sorrow
through the night. Ruth felt she never would forget that sound. Out there in the dark Cameron
might be even then slipping past them out into the great future. She wished she could dare
ask that sweet faced woman, or that dear little boy to pray for him. Maybe she would next day.

The two officer's wives seemed to sit up in bed and watch the train. They had discovered a
flash light, and were counting the signals, and quite excited. Ruth's heart ached for them.
It was a peculiarity of this trip that she found her heart going out to others so much more
than it had ever gone before. She was not thinking of her own pain, although she knew it was
there, but of the pain of the world.

Her body lying on the strange hard cot ached with weariness in unaccustomed places, yet she
stretched and nestled upon the tan canvas with satisfaction. She was sharing to a certain extent
the hardships of the soldiers--the hardship of one soldier whose privations hurt her deeply.
It was good to have to suffer--with him. Where was God? Did He care? Was He in this queer little
hostel? Might she ask Him now to set a guard over Cameron and let him find the help he needed
wherewith to go to meet Death, if Death he must meet?

She laid her hands together as a little child might do and with wide-open eyes staring into
the dark of the high ceiling she whispered from her heart: "Oh God, help--us--to find you!"
and unconsciously she, too, set her soul on the search that night.

As she closed her eyes a great peace and sense of safety came over her.

Outside on the road a company of late soldiers, coming home from leave noised by. Some of them
were drunk, and wrangling or singing, and a sense of their pitiful need of God came over her
as she sank into a deep sleep.

XV

She was awakened by the rattling of the pots and pans in the tiny kitchen. She sat up startled
and looked about her. It was very early. The first sunlight was streaming redly through the
window screens, and the freshness of the morning was everywhere, for all the windows were wide
open. The stillness of the country, broken only by the joyous chorus of the birds, struck her
as a wonderful thing. She lay down again and closed her eyes to listen. Music with the scent
of clover! The cheery little home noises in the kitchen seemed a pleasant background for the
peace of the Sabbath morning. It was so new and strange. Then came the thought of camp and
the anticipation of the day, with the sharp pang at the memory that perhaps even now Cameron
was gone. Orders were so uncertain. In the army a man must be ready to move at a moment's notice.
What if while she slept he had passed by on one of those terrible troop trains!

She sat up again and began to put her hair into order and make herself presentable. He had
promised that if such a thing as a sudden move should occur he would throw out an old envelope
with his name written on it as they passed by the hut, and she meant to go out to that railroad
track and make a thorough search before the general public were up.

Mrs. Cameron was still sleeping soundly, one work-worn hand partly shading her face. Ruth knew
instinctively that she must have been weeping in the night. In the early morning dawn she drooped
on the hard little cot in a crumpled heap, and the girl's heart ached for her sorrow.

Ruth stole into the kitchen to ask for water to wash her face:

"I'm sorry," said the pleasant-faced woman who was making coffee and frying bacon, "but the
wash basins are all gone; we've had so many folks come in. But you can have this pail. I just
got this water for myself and I'll let you have it and I'll get some more. You see, the water
pipes aren't put in the building yet and we have to go down the road quite a piece to get any.
This is all there was left last night."

She handed Ruth a two-gallon galvanized tin bucket containing a couple of inches of water,
obviously clean, and added a brief towel to the toilet arrangements.

Ruth beat a hasty retreat back to the shelter of the piano with her collection, fearing lest
mirth would get the better of her. She could not help thinking how her aunt would look if she
could see her washing her face in this pittance of water in the bottom of the great big bucket.

But Ruth Macdonald was adaptable in spite of her upbringing. She managed to make a most pleasing
toilet in spite of the paucity of water, and then went back to the kitchen with the bucket.

"If you will show me where you get the water I'll go for some more," she offered, anxious for
an excuse to get out and explore the track.

The woman in the kitchen was not abashed at the offer. She accepted the suggestion as a matter
of course, taking for granted the same helpful spirit that seemed to pervade all the people
around the place. It did not seem to strike her as anything strange that this young woman should
be willing to go for water. She was not giving attention to details like clothes and handbags,
and neither wealth nor social station belonged to her scheme of life. So she smilingly gave
the directions to the pump and went on breaking nice brown eggs into a big yellow bowl. Ruth
wished she could stay and watch, it looked so interesting.

She took the pail and slipped out the back door, but before she went in search of water she
hurried down to the railroad track and scanned it for several rods either way, carefully examining
each bit of paper, her breath held in suspense as she turned over an envelope or scrap of paper,
lest it might bear his name. At last with a glad look backward to be sure she had missed nothing,
she hurried up the bank and took her way down the grassy path toward the pump, satisfied that
Cameron had not yet left the camp.

It was a lovely summer morning, and the quietness of the country struck her as never before.
The wild roses shimmered along the roadside in the early sun, and bees and butterflies were
busy about their own affairs. It seemed such a lovely world if it only had not been for war.
How could God bear it! She lifted her eyes to the deep blue of the sky, where little clouds
floated lazily, like lovely aviators out for pleasure. Was God up there? If she might only
find Him. What did it all mean, anyway? Did He really care for individuals?

It was all such a new experience, the village pump, and the few early stragglers watching her
curiously from the station platform. A couple of grave soldiers hurried by, and the pang of
what was to come shot through her heart. The thought of the day was full of mingled joy and sorrow.

They ate a simple little breakfast, good coffee, toast and fried eggs. Ruth wondered why it
tasted so good amid such primitive surroundings; yet everything was so clean and tidy, though
coarse and plain. When they went to pay their bill the proprietor said their beds would be
only twenty-five cents apiece because they had had no pillow. If they had had a pillow he would
have had to charge them fifty cents. The food was fabulously cheap. They looked around and
wondered how it could be done. It was obvious that no tips would be received, and that money
was no consideration. In fact, the man told them his orders were merely to pay expenses. He
gave them a parting word of good cheer, and promised to try and make them more comfortable
if they wanted to return that night, and so they started out for camp. Ruth was silent and
thoughtful. She was wishing she had had the boldness to ask this quaint Christian man some
of the questions that troubled her. He looked as if he knew God, and she felt as if he might
be able to make some things plain to her. But her life had been so hedged about by conventionalities
that it seemed an impossible thing to her to open her lips on the subject to any living being--unless
it might be to John Cameron. It was queer how they two had grown together in the last few months.
Why could they not have known one another before?

Then there came a vision of what her aunt might have thought, and possible objections that
might have come up if they had been intimate friends earlier. In fact, that, too, seemed practically
to have been an impossibility. How had the war torn away the veil from foolish laws of social
rank and station! Never again could she submit to much of the system that had been the foundation
of her life so far. Somehow she must find a way to tear her spirit free from things that were
not real. The thought of the social activities that would face her at home under the guise
of patriotism turned her soul sick with loathing. When she went back home after he was gone
she would find a way to do something real in the world that would make for righteousness and
peace somehow. Knitting and dancing with lonesome soldiers did not satisfy her.

That was a wonderful day and they made the most of every hour, realizing that it would probably
be the last day they had together for many a long month or year.

In the morning they stepped into the great auditorium and attended a Y.M.C.A. service for an
hour, but their hearts were so full, and they all felt so keenly that this day was to be the
real farewell, and they could not spare a moment of it, that presently they slipped away to
the quiet of the woods once more, for it was hard to listen to the music and keep the tears
back. Mrs. Cameron especially found it impossible to keep her composure.

Sunday afternoon she went into the Hostess' House to lie down in the rest room for a few minutes,
and sent the two young people off for a walk by themselves.

Cameron took Ruth to the log in the woods and showed her his little Testament and the covenant
he had signed. Then they opened their hearts together about the eternal things of life; shyly,
at first, and then with the assurance that sympathy brings. Cameron told her that he was trying
to find God, and Ruth told him about their experiences the night before. She also shyly promised
that she would pray for him, although she had seldom until lately done very much real praying
for herself.

It was a beautiful hour wherein they travelled miles in their friendship; an hour in which
their souls came close while they sat on the log under the trees with long silences in the
intervals of their talk.

It was whispered at the barracks that evening at five when Cameron went back for "Retreat"
that this was the last night. They would move in the morning surely, perhaps before. He hurried
back to the Hostess' House where he had left his guests to order the supper for all, feeling
that he must make the most of every minute.

Passing the officers' headquarters he heard the raucous laugh of Wainwright, and caught a glimpse
of his fat head and neck through a window. His heart sank! Wainwright was back! Then he had
been sent for, and they must be going that night!

He fled to the Hostess' House and was silent and distraught as he ate his supper. Suppose Wainwright
should come in while they were there and see Ruth and spoil those last few minutes together?
The thought was unbearable.

Nobody wanted much supper and they wandered outside in the soft evening air. There was a hushed
sorrow over everything. Even the roughest soldiers were not ashamed of tears. Little faded
mothers clung to big burly sons, and their sons smoothed their gray hair awkwardly and were
not ashamed. A pair of lovers sat at the foot of a tree hand in hand and no one looked at them,
except in sympathy. There were partings everywhere. A few wives with little children in their
arms were writing down hurried directions and receiving a bit of money; but most desolate of
all was the row of lads lined up near the station whose friends were gone, or had not come
at all, and who had to stand and endure the woe of others.

"Couldn't we walk out of camp?" asked Ruth suddenly. "Must we go on that awful trolley? Last
night everybody was weeping. I wanted to weep, too. It is only a few steps from the end of
camp to our quarters. Or is it too far for you, Mrs. Cameron?"

"Nothing is too far to-night so I may be with my boy one hour longer."

"Then we must start at once," said Cameron, "there is barely time to reach the outskirts before
the hour when all visitors must be out of camp. It is over three miles, mother."

"I can walk it if Ruth can," said the mother smiling bravely.

He drew an arm of each within his own and started off, glad to be out of Wainwright's neighborhood,
gladder still to have a little longer with those he loved.

Out through the deserted streets they passed, where empty barracks were being prepared for
the next draft men; past the Tank Headquarters and the colored barracks, the storehouses and
more barracks just emptied that afternoon into troop trains; out beyond the great laundry and
on up the cinder road to the top of the hill and the end of the way.

There at last, in sight of the Military Police, pacing back and forth at the entrance to camp,
with the twinkling lights of the village beyond, and the long wooded road winding back to camp,
they paused to say good-bye. The cinder path and the woods at its edge made a blot of greenish
black against a brilliant stormy sky. The sun was setting like a ball of fire behind the trees,
and some strange freak of its rays formed a golden cross resting back against the clouds, its
base buried among the woods, its cross bar rising brilliant against the black of a thunder cloud.

"Look!" said Ruth, "it is an omen!" They looked and a great wonder and awe came upon them.
The Cross!

Cameron looked back and then down at her and smiled.

"It will lead you safely home," she said softly and laid her hand in his. He held her fingers
close for an instant and his eyes dared some of the things his lips would never have spoken
now even if they two had been alone.

The Military Police stepped up:

"You don't have to stay out here to say good-bye. You can come into the station right here
and sit down. Or if your friends are going to the village you may go with them, Comrade. I
can trust you to come back right away."

"I thank you!" Cameron said. "That is the kindest thing that has happened to me at this camp.
I wish I could avail myself of it, but I have barely time to get back to the barracks within
the hour given me. Perhaps--" and he glanced anxiously across the road toward the village.
"Could you just keep an eye out that my ladies reach the Salvation Army Hut all right?"

"Sure!" said the big soldier heartily, "I'll go myself. I'm just going off duty and I'll see
them safe to the door."

He stepped a little away and gave an order to his men, and so they said good-bye and watched
Cameron go down the road into the sunset with the golden cross blazing above him as he walked
lower and lower down the hill into the shadow of the dark woods and the thunder cloud. But
brightly the cross shone above him as long as they could see, and just before he stepped into
the darkness where the road turned he paused, waved his hat, and so passed on out of their sight.

XVI

The first night on the water was one of unspeakable horror to Cameron. They had scarcely begun
to feel the roll of the waves before Captain Wurtz manifested his true nature. At six o'clock
and broad daylight, he ordered the men below, had them locked in, and all the port holes closed!

The place was packed, the heat was unbearable, the motion increasing all the time, and the
air soon became intolerable. In vain the men protested, and begged for air. Their requests
were all denied. The captain trusted no man. He treated them as if they were hounds. Wainwright
stood by the captain's side, smoking the inevitable cigarette, his eyes narrowly watching Cameron,
when the order was given; but no onlooker could have told from Cameron's well trained face
whether he had heard or not. Well he knew where those orders had originated, and instantly
he saw a series of like torments. Wainwright had things in his own hands for this voyage. Wurtz
was his devoted slave. For Wainwright had money, and used it freely with his captain, and Wainwright
well knew how to think up tortures. It was really the only thing in which he was clever. And
here again was an instance of practice making perfect, for Wainwright had done little else
since his kindergarten days than to think up trials for those who would not bow to his peevish
will. He seemed to be gifted in finding out exactly what would be the finest kind of torture
for any given soul who happened to be his victim. He had the mind of Nero and the spirit of
a mean little beast. The wonder, the great miracle was, that he had not in some way discovered
that Ruth had been visiting the camp, and taken his revenge before she left. This was the first
thought that came to Cameron when he found himself shut into the murky atmosphere. The next
thought was that perhaps he had discovered it and this was the result. He felt himself the
Jonah for the company, and as the dreadful hours went by would fain have cast himself into
the sea if there had been a possible way of escape.

It was not an American transport on which they were sailing, and the captain was not responsible
for the food, but he might have refused to allow such meals to be served to his men if he had
cared. He did not care, that was the whole trouble. He ate and drank, principally drank, and
did whatever Wainwright suggested. When a protest came up to him he turned it down with a laugh,
and said: "Oh, that's good enough for a buck private," and went on with his dirty jokes.

The supper that first night was abominable, some unpleasant kind of meat cooked with cabbage,
and though they tried to eat it, many of them could not keep it down. The ship rolled and the
men grew sick. The atmosphere became fetid. Each moment seemed more impossible than the last.
There was no room to move, neither could one get out and away. After supper the men lay down
in the only place there was to lie, two men on the tables, two men on the benches each side,
two men on the floor between, and so on all over the cabin, packed like eggs in a box.

They sent a message to their captain begging for air, but he only laughed, and sent word back
they would have air enough before they got through with this war.

The night wore on and Cameron lay on his scant piece of floor--he had given his bench to a
sicker man than himself--and tried to sleep. But sleep did not visit his eyelids. He was thinking,
thinking. "I'm going to find God! I'm going to search for Him with all my heart, and somehow
I'm going to find Him before I'm done. I may never come home, but I'll find God, anyhow! It's
the only thing that makes life bearable!"

Then would come a wave of hate for his enemy and wipe out all other thoughts, and he would
wrestle in his heart with the desire to kill Wainwright--yes, and the captain, too. As some
poor wretch near him would writhe and groan in agony his rage would boil up anew, his fists
would clench, and he would half rise to go to the door and overpower that guard! If only he
could get up to where the officers were enjoying themselves! Oh, to bring them down here and
bind them in this loathsome atmosphere, feed them with this food, stifle them in the dark with
closed port holes! His brain was fertile with thoughts of revenge. Then suddenly across his
memory would flash the words: "If with all your heart ye seek Him," and he would reach out
in longing: Oh, if he could find God, surely God would stop a thing like this! Did God have
no power in His own earth?

Slowly, painfully, the days dragged by, each worse than the last. In the mornings the men must
go on deck whether they were sick or not, and must stay there all day, no matter what the weather.
If they were wet they must dry out by the heat of their bodies. There was no possibility of
getting at their kit bags, it was so crowded. No man was allowed to open one. All they had
was the little they carried in their packs. How they lived through it was a wonder, but live
they did. Perhaps the worst torture of all was the great round cork life preserver in the form
of a cushioned ring which they were obliged to wear night and day. A man could never lie down
comfortably with it on, and if from sheer exhaustion he fell asleep he awoke with his back
aching tortures. The meat and cabbage was varied twice by steamed fish served in its scales,
tails, fins, heads, and entrails complete. All that they got which was really eatable was a
small bun served in the morning, and boiled potatoes occasionally.

Nevertheless, these hardships would have been as nothing to Cameron if they had not represented
to him hate, pure and simple. He felt, and perhaps justly, that if Wainwright had not wished
to make him suffer, these things would surely have been mitigated.

The day came at last when they stood on the deck and watched the strange foreign shore draw
nearer. Cameron, stern and silent, stood apart from the rest. For the moment his anger toward
Wainwright was forgotten, though he could hear the swaggering tones from the deck above, and
the noisome laughter of Wurtz in response. Cameron was looking into the face of the future,
wondering what it would mean for him. Out there was the strange country. What did it hold for
him? Was God there? How he wanted God to go with him and help him face the future!

There was much delay in landing, and getting ready to move. The men were weak from sickness
and long fasting. They tottered as they stood, but they had to stand--unless they dropped.
They turned wan faces toward one another and tried to smile. Their fine American pep was gone,
hopelessly, yet they grinned feebly now and then and got off a weak little joke or two. For
the most part they glared when the officers came by--especially two--those two. The wrath toward
them had been brewing long and deep as each man lay weltering through those unbearable nights.
Hardship they could bear, and pain, and sickness--but tyranny never!

Someone had written a letter. It was not the first. There had been others on ship board protesting
against their treatment. But this letter was a warning to that captain and lieutenant. If they
ever led these men into battle they would be killed before the battle began. It was signed
by the company. It had been a unanimous vote. Now as they stood staring leadenly at the strange
sights about them, listening to the new jargon of the shore, noting the quaint headdresses
and wooden sabots of the people with a fine scorn of indifference, they thought of that letter
in hard phrases of rage. And bitterest of all were the thoughts of John Cameron as he stood
in his place awaiting orders.

They were hungry, these men, and unfit, when at last the order came to march, and they had
to hike it straight up a hill with a great pack on their backs. It was not that they minded
the packs or the hike or the hunger. It was the injustice of their treatment that weighed upon
them like a burden that human nature could not bear. They had come to lift such a burden from
the backs of another nation, and they had been treated like dogs all the way over! Like the
low rumbling of oncoming thunder was the blackness of their countenances as they marched up,
up, and up into Brest. The sun grew hot, and their knees wobbled under them from sheer weakness;
strong men when they started, who were fine and fit, now faint like babies, yet with spirits
unbroken, and great vengeance in their hearts. They would fight, oh they would fight, yes,
but they would see that captain out of the way first! Here and there by the way some fell--the
wonder is they all did not--and had to be picked up by the ambulances; and at last they had
to be ordered to stop and rest! They! Who had come over here to flaunt their young strength
in the face of the enemy! They to fall before the fight was begun. This, too, they laid up
against their tyrant.

But there was welcome for them, nevertheless. Flowers and wreaths and bands of music met them
as they went through the town, and women and little children flung them kisses and threw blossoms
in their way. This revived somewhat the drooping spirits with which they had gone forth, and
when they reached camp and got a decent meal they felt better, and more reasonable. Still the
bitterness was there, against those two who had used their power unworthily. That night, lying
on a hard little cot in camp Cameron tried to pray, his heart full of longing for God, yet
found the heavens as brass, and could not find words to cry out, except in bitterness. Somehow
he did not feel he was getting on at all in his search, and from sheer weariness and discouragement
he fell asleep at last.

Three days and nights of rest they had and then were packed into tiny freight cars with a space
so small that they had to take turns sitting down. Men had to sleep sitting or standing, or
wherever they could find space to lie down. So they started across France, three days and awful
nights they went, weary and sore and bitter still. But they had air and they were better fed.
Now and then they could stand up and look out through a crack. Once in a while a fellow could
get space to stretch out for a few minutes. Cameron awoke once and found feet all over him,
feet even in his face. Yet these things were what he had expected. He did not whine. He was
toughened for such experiences, so were the men about him. The hardness merely brought out
their courage. They were getting their spirits back now as they neared the real scene of action.
The old excitement and call to action were creeping back into their blood. Now and then a song
would pipe out, or a much abused banjo or mandolin would twang and bring forth their voices.
It was only when an officer walked by or mention would be made of the captain or lieutenant
that their looks grew black again and they fell silent. Injustice and tyranny, the things they
had come out to fight, that they would not forgive nor forget. Their spirits were reviving
but their hate was there.

At last they detrained and marched into a little town.

This was France!

Cameron looked about him in dismay. A scramble of houses and barns, sort of two-in-one affairs.
Where was the beauty of France about which he had read so often? Mud was everywhere. The streets
were deep with it, the ground was sodden, rain-soaked. It was raining even then. Sunny France!

It was in a barnyard deep in manure where Cameron's tent was set up. Little brown tents set
close together, their flies dovetailing so that more could be put in a given space.

Dog weary he strode over the stakes that held them, and looked upon the place where he was
to sleep. Its floor was almost a foot deep in water! Rank, ill smelling water! Pah! Was this
intention that he should have been billeted here? Some of the men had dry places. Of course,
it might have just happened, but--well, what was the use. Here he must sleep for he could not
stand up any longer or he would fall over. So he heaped up a pillow of the muck, spread his
blanket out and lay down. At least his head would be high enough out of the water so that he
would not drown in his sleep, and with his feet in water, and the cold ooze creeping slowly
through his heavy garments, he dropped immediately into oblivion. There were no prayers that
night. His heart was full of hate. The barnyard was in front of an old stone farm house, and
in that farm house were billeted the captain and his favorite first lieutenant. Cameron could
hear his raucous laugh and the clinking of the wine glasses, almost the gurgle of the wine.
The thought of Wainwright was his last conscious one before he slept. Was it of intention that
he should have been put here close by, where Wainwright could watch his every move?

As the days went by and real training began, with French officers working them hard until they
were ready to drop at night, gradually Cameron grew stolid. It seemed sometimes as if he had
always been here, splashing along in the mud, soaked with rain, sleeping in muck at night,
never quite dry, never free from cold and discomfort, never quite clean, always training, the
boom of the battle afar, but never getting there. Where was the front? Why didn't they get
there and fight and get done with it all?

The rain poured down, day after day. Ammunition trains rolled by. More men marched in, more
marched on, still they trained. It seemed eons since he had bade Ruth and his mother good-bye
that night at the camp. No mail had come. Oh, if he could just hear a word from home! If he
only had her picture! They had taken some together at camp and she had promised to have them
developed and send them, but they would probably never reach him. And it were better if they
did not. Wainwright was censor. If he recognized the writing nothing would ever reach him he
was sure. Still, Wainwright had nothing to do with the incoming mail, only the outgoing. Well,
Wainwright should never censor his letters. He would find a way to get letters out that Wainwright
had never censored, or he would never send any.

But the days dragged by in rain and mud and discouragement, and no letters came. Once or twice
he attempted to write a respectable letter to his mother, but he felt so hampered with the
thought of Wainwright having to see it that he kept it securely in his pocket, and contented
himself with gay-pictured postcards which he had purchased in Brest, on which he inscribed
a few non-committal sentences, always reminding them of the censor, and his inability to say
what he would, and always ending, "Remember me to my friend, and tell her I have forgotten
nothing but cannot write at present for reasons which I cannot explain."

At night he lay on his watery couch and composed long letters to Ruth which he dared not put
on paper lest somehow they should come into the hands of Wainwright. He took great satisfaction
in the fact that he had succeeded in slipping through a post card addressed to herself from
Brest, through the kindness and understanding of a small boy who agreed to mail it in exchange
for a package of chewing gum. Here at the camp there was no such opportunity, but he would
wait and watch for another chance. Meantime the long separation of miles, and the creeping
days, gave him a feeling of desolation such as he had never experienced before. He began to
grow introspective. He fancied that perhaps he had overestimated Ruth's friendship for him.
The dear memories he had cherished during the voyage were brought out in the nightwatches and
ruthlessly reviewed, until his own shy hope that the light in her eyes had been for him began
to fade, and in its place there grew a conviction that happiness of earth was never for him.
For, he reasoned, if she cared, why did she not write? At least a post card? Other fellows
were getting letters now and then. Day after day he waited when the mail was distributed, but
nothing ever came. His mother seemed to have forgotten, too. Surely, all these weeks, some
word would have come through. It was not in reason that his mail should be delayed beyond others.
Could it be that there was false play somehow? Was Wainwright at the bottom of this? Or had
something happened to his mother, and had Ruth forgotten?

XVII

The weeks rolled by. The drilling went on. At last word came that the company was to move up
farther toward the front. They prepared for a long hike almost eagerly, not knowing yet what
was before them. Anything was better than this intolerable waiting.

Solemnly under a leaden sky they gathered; sullenly went through their inspection; stolidly,
dully, they marched away through the rain and mud and desolation. The nights were cold and
their clothes seemed thin and inadequate. They had not been paid since they came over, so there
was no chance to buy any little comfort, even if it had been for sale. A longing for sweets
and home puddings and pies haunted their waking hours as they trudged wearily hour after hour,
kilometer after kilometer, coming ever nearer, nearer.

For two days they hiked, and then entrained for a long uncomfortable night, and all the time
Cameron's soul was crying out within him for the living God. In these days he read much in
the little Testament whenever there was a rest by the wayside, and he could draw apart from
the others. Ever his soul grew hungrier as he neared the front, and knew his time now was short.
There were days when he had the feeling that he must stop tramping and do something about this
great matter that hung over him, and then Wainwright would pass by and cast a sharp direction
at him with a sneer in the curl of his moustache, and all the fury of his being would rise
up, until he would clench his fists in helpless wrath, as Wainwright swaggered on. To think
how easily he could drag him in the dust if it only came to a fair fight between them! But
Wainwright had all the advantage now, with such a captain on his side!

That night ride was a terrible experience. Cameron, with his thoughts surging and pounding
through his brain, was in no condition to come out of hardships fresh and fit. He was overcome
with weariness when he climbed into the box car with thirty-nine other fellows just as weary,
just as discouraged, just as homesick.

There was only room for about twenty to travel comfortably in that car, but they cheerfully
huddled together and took their turns sitting down, and somewhere along in the night it came
Cameron's turn to slide down on the floor and stretch out for a while; or perhaps his utter
weariness made him drop there involuntarily, because he could no longer keep awake. For a few
minutes the delicious ache of lying flat enveloped him and carried him away into unconsciousness
with a lulling ecstasy. Then
stretched forth out of the shaggy brutes skull St., as if from an open Stable door, and roars
and schnauzet you in your face distorted by fear, to fear the quavery available in all limbs.

Nunmehro we turn from the holy brute to the next Saints in the Galleria. This is the holy idiot.
Freeze up in awe of him, dear viewer, for his Holy stupidity grenzet of the superhuman and
incomprehensible. Dahero, the sacred Imbecile with the Holy Bürokrazius also the most similarity
in all its Physiognomia. They could be twins. For this amazing nature games you see, devout Spectator,
as well auszuprägen spiritual kinship in itself cultivates physical traits. The holy Saint idiot,
who it is who thinks most thoroughly in the spirit of Stampiglien, for which there is no salvation
outside it. What would St. idiot without Stampiglien! A child without a mother or breast Lullbüchsen,
the lame without crutches, a chair without legs.

Follow in the holy Saint Schlamprian. He is dargestellet visually with a long and seemingly
in the infinity-reaching bank on which he cultivates to push everything. Impatient people which unfortunately
still exists, should sometimes be tempted, St. Schlamprianum to lay him down on his bench and attach
a proper thrashing. But to arrived here obviously have not done, the while the Holy Schlamprian
happy and enjoyable weiterlebet.

Reihet at the holy Saint Schnüfflian. The most extensive in this sacred organum Images is, as
you, devout spectator perceive same will, the olfactory organ. Please find the nasal proboscis
of St. Bürokrazius developed to the highest Potentia. St. Schnüffliani extinguisher is as long
as flexible and presseth dahero everywhere. It is befähiget to sniff you from head to your
toes. There you creepeth everywhere inside of your smallest Kastel up to your smallest Leibeltaschel.
St. Schnüffliani could nose riechet everything, even what is not there seeing that, it maybe
be there. It may even be hair-line that they presseth in closed letters and your deepest Searcheth
secrets. For since they only nose and brain, it has also frequently blamieret been horrible.
You schnupfet the dust of the scriptures and considered Toback this as the most delicious refreshment.
It has yet nobody dares to Saint St. Schnüfflian to give a fillip to his face corresponding projection
so that The summit to grow longer and longer and finally to embrace the patient threatens populus
like the tentacles of sea polyps.

Secundum ordinem building up to a decision of the holy Saint anjetzo
Corruptius.

He is the coziest and friendliest of all the saints of this Galleria, seeing that he's has brains
in their pockets and you can communicate with him dahero up most easily. He will meet you in proportion
to his understanding, when you give him line his pockets. All his activity is found in the
ausgedrücket amiable question: "How much?" His Left never know what will their rights. It can only
be offended if you gave him a empty handshakes administer.

The holy Saint Corruptius is the reconciling Elementum under his holy
colleagues.

He does so many things well, which have corrupted St. bully, idiot or Schlamprian. He is often
the only way out, the saving Hintertürl in all imaginable and unimaginable hardships and leaves
out his secret pockets to fulfill purchase of so many wishes as a beneficial Nothelfer acting
as mischievous smile and understanding ally of those who to know how to pray with the proper
reprints for his help. For more notes the prayer book of devotional souls bestehet, the thicker
and physical strength it is, the eager to turn its leaves in fervent prayer, the more gracious,
gracious and merciful their concerns will lean towards the holy Saint Corruptius.

How true to your supervisor schließet the door of the Galleria and
you turn entlasset.

    

From the title and religious addiction.

It remains to nunmehro further reported that among the disciples of St. Bürokrazius So soon began
to spread the titles and religious addiction. This is an even wicked addiction. Much worse than
the foot-and-mouth disease under the Rindviech love.

However, since the Holy Bürokrazius and his disciples love Rindviech surpass why they should not also
yet been heimgesuchet epidemics of anger than the love Rindviech?

The title, however, addiction grew out of such a disease, that they compared with the tapeworm
could be. After all, no title was the award for sotaner aspirant
be long enough.

The longer the title, the more he was erstrebet. Yes, it is given such a long title have that the
title hunters and champions before the end of a blissful died before they have managed to pronounce
the title hunted all over.

Occurring to any ersticket are also in the middle of the debate title
or by sudden mental illness insonderheit been attacked by megalomania.
writer of this legend has it from tender Care for himself and for
his pious readers refrain from him a list of these to put title, seeing
that he is concerned to get more than the worm in the brain Bandel
or suo lectori to bring a similar disease.

Equally dangerous addiction, such as the title has the disease of addiction among the disciples
of the Order of St. Bürokrazius begun to spread.

While in love Rindviech foot and mouth disease and the Freßwerkzeuge Gehwerkzeuge love of the
cattle affizieret, has the religious addiction to all button holes of the disciples of St.
Bürokrazius thrown.

But remember, gentle reader, how many button holes does have a grown man image. What must it
be for a grayish state when all these button holes from the top Kragenknöpfel
to the lowest Hosenknöpfel those afflicted with this disease, yawn
ever like hungry mouths and dripping in greed and unsatisfied longing.

And when you stop and set a Bändlein, little stars or little cross, it will always be enough
button holes are left clamoring for saturation.

Never had the Order of hunger has been very befriediget. For you have it, oh great cost Reader,
ever experienced that even the lowest allerinsgeheimsten button holes,
so a fellow been calleth his own, with medals awarded decorations?

So there is still Buttonholes, languishing miserably in their abandonment and neglect.

But wants to appear to the writer of this legend, as if the disease still does not remedy would,
if these lower, till now still not considered buttonholes would distinguish graciously.

It would thus be feared that the adult man picture suddenly new buttonholes would get that one
has to invent not yet arrived here.

And it is a showpiece, a never before seen spectaculum could show that the Exterior of a grown man image
and disciple of St. Bürokrazius at all only would consist of button holes.

  As an unheard-of neglect but it must denounce writer of this legend
that It even occurred to anyone that sublime temple of the sacred
garments of the mind be provided with ample Bürokrazius button holes,
as we did with so many puerulis, id est small tiny little boy are
dwelt found.

    Sotane propagating through said the decoration very decent buttonholes
might be a particularly salutary balm against the nagging Pain, the
Order has become epidemic.

[Decoration]

As St. Bürokrazius erlustierte itself.

But we do nunmehro us turn to a more friendly image.

The Holy Bürokrazius cultivated among his disciples, the higher social life, on the day that,
after exhaustive Work, the higher fidelity that Fidelitas major atque elatior than raise and
care of the Spirit would suffer no major demolition.

Regularly gathered his disciples and the holy Bürokrazius fun evenings. Munter flowed since
the talks, intertwined gracefully from the memories of the busy Day. Also, the song came into
its own.

  
  In adequation due to the high intellectual
  abilities of the saint and his disciples
  this sublime song always
  moving and not only the classical areas did little further sharpening
of the mind of the social parties on those evenings when.

  
  
  One of those wonderful songs you might even
  be cheaper vorgesetzet
  big reader, because it rare in fine form, the highest ideals of the
national economy in a lofty enthusiasm dithyramb embodies classic.

  There are verses that are worth in gold letters
  be carved marble panels on. Listen,
  dear reader! ...
  
  D'sow d'Sau, Sau d'added to pig's head, And, and, and four knuckle
has aa's, When, when, when it's betracht't exactly Hat's on Schwoaf
aa.

  Yes, yes,'s has to Schwoaf aa.
  
  When, when, when ma took a knife ' And, and, and,
  fitting the Schwoaf a,
  Aft, aft, aft is wor'n's ag'stutzte Sau And the Schwoaf a. Yes, yes,
and the Schwoaf a.

When, when, when a ma took Petschierwachs' And,
and, and pecks at the Schwoaf, Aft, aft, aft is wor'n's a pecking
Sau And the Schwoaf it.

Yes, yes, and the Schwoaf it.

Takes, takes, takes the ma d'Schwoaf in hand And, and, and a turn ziacht wen'g, Aft, aft, aft ma has the
Schwoaf in hand, And d'Sau runs away. Yes, yes, d'Sau runs away.

Challenge yourself nunmehro, O beloved reader that the writer of this legend, which you then your
company, true to the mind and spirit of the holy Bürokrazius platform
and his disciples, and put yourself entirely in the spirit of this
song.

He will irresistibly Take to drive into you and fill you completely.

Sing this song over and over again tirelessly! And you will see that you know his text loskriegen
no longer can. He will follow you day and night.

The fate of the sow petschierten will be your own destiny. It is the dedication song are your days
and the song of your dreams.

Try dahero, O gentle reader well. You will certainly avoid disappointment.

It is also good for your nerves when you set your whole spiritual life on this song. You will certainly
get this chronic Gehirntatterich.

On the one hand, but this is a charitable status, on the other hand, you then view, the disciples
of St. Bürokrazius taken to be.

Writer of this legend, would you, gentle reader, with the above proposed experiments the song from
the sow petschierten molestie certainly not if he knew you to believe
was possible that magical power is in this song.

    
    

So you can be your own experience to all detractors of the holy Bürokrazius
and his disciples in the armor of protest to oppose.

For there are those detractors, who maintain that the social life of St. Bürokrazius and his disciples
may more dull than her other life.

The Song of the petschierten sow, which has a peak point of the social pleasures of the Holy
Bürokrazius darstellet and his disciples, but will deliver resounding rebuttal, as memorable
and deep the cozy nature of the saints and beyond its other activities
was as full of strange thoughts focus and imagination, as well as
reassuring for the strained nerves of the human race.

As the bitter revolutionary Kare good King the devil to flight.

It came to pass that a man aufstund so revolutionary Kare was told.

It was a gruesome guy, but even so gruesome guy that he never even
Terrible could be.

At this wild individual was all red. The guy had red hair and a red beard weiland after credible
traditions and descriptions Judas Iscariot. To this end he also contributed still a red cap on his
head and a red shirt on his accursed body. Yes even a bright red Krawattel had the bitter Kare
revolutionary, not even at the Krawatitis suffered posterior ascendens,
but he flew out to both sides as two red flags.

He ate only red brawn and of course sausage. And he would of course even more red wine drinking,
if he had had it. drank in the absence of the same his fresh Kellermaß only a bright red beer
mug that had a red Biermerkerl, him on the list the only waitress
in red pencil destroyed them quantities of the noble barley juice
was allowed.

This guy was fiery red desert at every opportunity with rage and rant then blasphemous. Satan said
red meat was so saugrob, but already so pfundsaugrob, however, that the Holy could be regarded
as a very fine St. boor polished Hofmann.

The holy Saint boor railed at least not about the good king, but he the good king live up regularly,
if he had done enough in alcoholicis. When six measures brought the holy Saint boor almost
always cheers for the good king and said that everything boomed: "Long live the king high! He
long live! high! Up!

"This loyal Rally every hair stood on end in the long mustache of St. boor from genuine enthusiasm
dynastic.

Of these, however, the good king probably knew nothing, as proposed by various other Things,
knew nothing. Therefore, he was yet a good king. And the bitter pfundsaugrobe Kare revolutionaries would
not take so bitching about the good king, he the while the good king
had even done anything.

That was the revolutionary Kare but blood sausage. Dahero arose at him during the sixth degree
the opposite of the dynastic enthusiasm.

It argued, however, the same as for Homer seven cities for the honor
of the birth of having been furious Kare revolutionaries.

Schreiber vermeinet this legend that the herstammet weitbeschreite
Kare revolutionaries of Ithaca and then somewhere in the neighborhood
and that he has one of the Trojan hero to his ancestors, seeing selbige
heroes already so fürtrefflich might understand the abuse as the revolutionary
Kare.

This desert guy should get the hell Schürmeister quintelweis in his frying pans, Hellion said
that on only very slowly and burn in the tiniest little piece, complained not only on the good king,
but he drove one day the good King even the devil, although he had
done the good king never something that has continued up fair degree
has been vermerket.

How this could happen but that the good King Kare revolutionaries chased the devil, but where the
good King sat on his throne and Kare revolutionary than a greasy Beer Bank with its rear front
complained?

That came dahero, the while the Kare revolutionary and a great orator to render a very dangerous.
He called again and again public meetings and then swore in front of the congregation again
and again about the good king who had done him nothing.

Before the good king was hunting the devil, he kept in a large public
meeting a great Speech, which he then print and post on every street
corner had.

Dahero us with the Speech is still preserved today and also the reader of this legend after
her mitgeteilet full content.

  Then said the Kare revolutionary in that speech ...

What to do because
of Kini ma? I need koan Kini.

    Or maybe who woaß to what ma need to Kini? The heck
    to say only that woaß out to what ma need to Kini. The
    heck just saying.

The hau 'i but such is already in a' pussies. But even such a. Even a such. So who woaß to
what ma need to Kini? Koa Man woaß to what ma need to Kini. So do ma koan Kini. And because
ma koan Kini need, I need 'ma koan Kini.

What's the matter at all a Kini? Gar nix is ​​a Kini.

A rubbish is a Kini. And because a Kini a nonsense is, I need 'ma koan Kini, because ma koan need!
Or consumption 'ma perhaps Kini?

And because ma koan Kini need, let us ma aa koan Kini pleased them more. Why should we ma
aa at Kini So pleased, can find ma koan need! We have nothing at all pleased them more. So
let So pleased us aa ma koan Kini more because ma koan need Kini. Or perhaps need ma Kini?

Mir san mir!

Or maybe who wants to deny that my san me? And because I san I can I govern ourselves and need
you ma koan Kini, who does rule out us and where we pay need to do. I can pay us for yourself's
governance, because I san me. And because I koan Kini longer need to find out I need to do
to pay for koan's governance and because ma ever Kini longer need
it because my san me, me Kini hunt the devil!

Koan Kini need 'ma So the ma Kini hunt the devil! ...

This speech made such a huge impression on the assembled masses that the Kare was really furious revolutionaries
to blow up the good king to the devil.

Founded on the bitter Kare a bright red communist revolutionaries Free State without Kini.

[Decoration]

As said the holy hell roast Bürokrazius was killed and from that glorious widerleget was.

Thus, the good that he Kini, who had never done what he had sent packing, it was Hell, this roast
but not sufficient for a long time. His whole red hatred directed under present against the Holy
Bürokrazius. It was long a thorn in the eye. He called dahero a new National Assembly one, which
was all red, seeing all the congregation nunmehro the costume of the furious Kare revolutionaries
wore.

From a red-lined the Tribuna Kare revolutionaries said to follow nunmehro the holy Bürokrazius
...

What to do because the Holy Bürokrazi ma, the pacification? What to do ma the pacification, the St.
Bürokrazi? I need holy Bürokrazi koan, koan because ma need! Or woaß who may, to what we need
the Holy Bürokrazi? The bull 'but i have such a was in 'eat! But
even such a! A such!

So koa man woaß to what the holy ma Bürokrazi need.

Mir san mir. And because I san I let myself aa So pleased nothing more but certainly nixn nit,
nit aa Bürokrazi the sacred, the pacification!

What do ma later with Saint Bürokrazi, because it ma nit need the pacification? Tuan ma Bürokrazi
the slain, the pacification, because it ma nit need the Bürokrazi!

Because I san me and because I have pleased them to us and because I can nit nixn slain Who
do we want!

Drum's skin Oane some Bürokrazi the holy, the pacification EAHM, and beat's EAHM Zähnd abi in the
throat, that's EAHM 'march in double rows except where he mind has! Mir san mir! ...

In this speech of the revolutionary Kare is a terrible howling arose
in the Assembly.

  The Holy Bürokrazius was present, and there was great danger exists
that it lacks the collar was.

    He sat down on the defensive, however, and succeeded,
    the furious revolutionaries Kare to refute glorious.

Then said the holy Bürokrazius after he had procured with difficulty hearing, these memorable
words ...

My beloved devout listeners! It is a great wickedness of my dear Mr speakers that he wants to kill
me. I had him not zugetrauet. Bear in mind, what do you then beginnet when ye have killed the holy
Bürokrazius. Who will you still certified on earth, who are you? Those who will register you
and numbered? Without the Holy Bürokrazius're ever cease to be available.

I readily admit that among my disciples and followers of many donkeys.

But Reflect furthermore, that God, the Lord has done this so much despised cattle a great honor
when he is ridden with him to Jerusalem. Ye must dahero also under my ass Disciples appreciate
and care for you.

And ye yourselves also holy anger sometimes feels tempted me or my Mitesel to kill, let's not mislead
you, but remember the words of Holy Scripture: The righteous mercy to his cattle. Dixi et animam
meam salvavi! ...

In the words of the holy Saint Bürokrazius a roaring cheers arose in the Assembly.

Once it was the holy Bürokrazius succeeded by his speech, the audience love again due to its original
position, he had the bitter struggle against evil Kare revolutionaries won and widerleget this fiery red
devil roast glorious.

Although there was this wild fellow geglücket to chase the good king
to the devil, he never had anything done, it glückete him not alike,
the holy Bürokrazius to slay.

The dear public could also be under the influence of furious revolutionaries
Kare never, never be separated from the holy Bürokrazius.

That you may, O great gracious reader, not surprising bad. It is easier, a king to hunt for the
devil if he has done you nothing but to put an end to a saint, and
especially the most powerful saint who has ever arisen on earth, the
holy Bürokrazius.

[Decoration]

As St. Bürokrazius ascended into
heaven and his contribute heavenly influence on the revolutionary
left Kare.

After the holy Bürokrazius was now reaches to the conclusion
that even in the bright red Free State of the communist revolutionaries
Kare unbehelliget continue his holy life would, he invited his disciples
and followers to a feast evenings on which the consecration of the
song petschierten sow was sung with special fervor.

The bitter Kare
revolutionary grinned but angry at the windows of the local assembly
of those start. He dared not, however, more to shout: "To what need
the Holy Bürokrazi ma, The pacification "- because he feared that
he might be derohalben belanget. If he also good King had chased the
devil, who had never done him what he saw but that it he would never
succeed to blow up the holy Bürokrazius the hell, let alone him to
slay.

The Holy Bürokrazius but which was now reaches to the realization
that he nunmehro his sacred mission was completely fulfilled on earth
and the fruits of his mission that he's Disciples could leave, took
her leave on that festive evening especially solemn of his disciples.
He said to them: "Hocket you on the seat of your mind, my dearly
beloved and faithful! Today I will divorce you and go to heaven, seeing
that it has long been craving me, to hold in the area to see if everything
registrieret also up there, and numerieret been entered correctly.
Me wants it bedünken completely that I was in heaven Gloria will have
to meet more daunting tasks. I can already hear the voices of the
saints and patriarchs of me which call in nostalgia for me seeing
that, they love the God edification of the society saudümmsten Holy
promised that to be me know, have the heavenly glory. I leave the
people to their consolation you, the holy Stultissimus, you, the holy
brute, and you, the holy idiot, and you, the holy Schlamprian, and
you, the holy Schnüfflian, and last but not least you, the dear, good,
comfortable and sacred of all earthly tribulations Corruptius understanding.
"

Soon after the holy Bürokrazius had spoken this, he arose and went
to heaven. Coincidentally, the same song again struck up consecration
of the Round Table concluded with the uplifting Words, "D'Sau runs
away!"

His disciples stared at the saint after a long time and saw
the seat of his mind right a luminous stars, the clouds disappear.

Lurking
in the dark street, but still the bitter Kare revolutionaries. He
also stared the holy Bürokrazius of how he ascended to heaven. "I never played hymns much, but I could try."

"Oh! Would you?" A flood of relief went over the woman's face, and Ruth was instantly glad
she had offered. She took Mrs. Beck down to the settlement in her little runabout, and the
afternoon's experience opened a new world to her. It was the first time she had ever come in
contact with the really poor and lowly of the earth, and she proved herself a true child of
God in that she did not shrink from them because many of them were dirty and poorly clad. Before
the first afternoon was over she had one baby in her arms and three others hanging about her
chair with adoring glances. They could not talk in her language, but they stared into her beautiful
face with their great dark eyes, and spoke queer unintelligible words to one another about
her. The whole little company were delighted with the new "pretty lady" who had come among
them. They openly examined her simple lovely frock and hat and touched with shy furtive fingers
the blue ribbon that floated over the bench from her girdle. Mrs. Beck was in the seventh heaven
and begged her to come again, and Ruth, equally charmed, promised to go every Sunday. For it
appeared that the wayward pianist was very irregular and had to be constantly coaxed.

Ruth entered into the work with zest. She took the children's class which formerly had been
with the older ones, and gathering them about her told them Bible stories till their young
eyes bulged with wonder and their little hearts almost burst with love of her. Love God? Of
course they would. Try to please Jesus? Certainly, if "Mrs. Ruth," as they called her, said
they should. They adored her.

She fell into the habit of going down during the week and slipping into their homes with a
big basket of bright flowers from her home garden which she distributed to young and old. Even
the men, when they happened to be home from work, wanted the flowers, and touched them with
eager reverence. Somehow the little community of people so different from herself filled her
thoughts more and more. She began to be troubled that some of the men drank and beat their
wives and little children in consequence. She set herself to devise ways to keep them from
it. She scraped acquaintance with one or two of the older boys in her own church and enlisted
them to help her, and bought a moving picture machine which she took to the settlement. She
spent hours attending moving picture shows that she might find the right films for their use.
Fortunately she had money enough for all her schemes, and no one to hinder her good work, although
Aunt Rhoda did object strenuously at first on the ground that she might "catch something."
But Ruth only smiled and said: "That's just what I'm out for, Auntie, dear! I want to catch
them all, and try to make them live better lives. Other people are going to France. I haven't
got a chance to go yet, but while I stay here I must do something. I can't be an idler."

Aunt Rhoda looked at her quizzically. She wondered if Ruth was worried about one of her men
friends--and which one?

"If you'd only take up some nice work for the Government, dear, such as the other girls are
doing!" she sighed, "work that would bring you into contact with nice people! You always have
to do something queer. I'm sure I don't know where you got your low tendencies!"

But Ruth would be off before more could be said. This was an old topic of Aunt Rhoda's and
had been most fully discussed during the young years of Ruth's life, so that she did not care
to enter into it further.

But Ruth was not fully satisfied with just helping her Italians. The very week she came back
from camp she had gone to their old family physician who held a high and responsible position
in the medical world, and made her plea:

"Daddy-Doctor," she said, using her old childish name for him, "you've got to find a way for
me to go over there and help the war. I know I don't know much about nursing, but I'm sure
I could learn. I've taken care of Grandpa and Auntie a great many times and watched the trained
nurses, and I'm sure if Lalla Farrington and Bernice Brooks could get into the Red Cross and
go over in such a short time I'm as bright as they."

"Brighter!" said the old doctor eyeing her approvingly. "But what will your people say?"

"They'll have to let me, Daddy-Doctor. Besides, everybody else is doing it, and you know that
has great weight with Aunt Rhoda."

"It's a hard life, child! You never saw much of pain and suffering and horror."

"Well, it's time, then."

"But those men over there you would have to care for will not be like your grandfather and
aunt. They will be dirty and bloody, and covered with filth and vermin."

"Well, what of that!"

"Could you stand it?"

"So you think I'm a butterfly, too, do you, Daddy-Doctor? Well, I want to prove to you that
I'm not. I've been doing my best to get used to dirt and distress. I washed a little sick Italian
baby yesterday and helped it's mother scrub her floor and make the house clean."

"The dickens you did!" beamed the doctor proudly. "I always knew you had a lot of grit. I guess
you've got the right stuff in you. But say, if I help you you've got to tell me the real reason
why you want to go, or else--nothing doing! Understand? I know you aren't like the rest, just
wanting to get into the excitement and meet a lot of officers and have a good time so you can
say afterward you were there. You aren't that kind of a girl. What's the real reason you want
to go? Have you got somebody over there you're interested in?"

He looked at her keenly, with loving, anxious eyes as her father's friend who had known her
from birth might look.

Ruth's face grew rosy, and her eyes dropped, but lifted again undaunted:

"And if I have, Daddy-Doctor, is there anything wrong about that?"

The doctor frowned:

"It isn't that fat chump of a Wainwright, is it? Because if it is I shan't lift my finger to
help you go."

But Ruth's laugh rang out clear and free.

"Never! dear friend, never! Set your mind at rest about him," she finished, sobering down.
"And if I care for someone, Daddy-Doctor, can't you trust me I'd pick out someone who was all
right?"

"I suppose so!" grumbled the doctor only half satisfied, "but girls are so dreadfully blind."

"I think you'd like him," she hazarded, her cheeks growing pinker, "that is, you would if there
is anybody," she corrected herself laughing. "But you see, it's a secret yet and maybe always
will be. I'm not sure that he knows, and I'm not quite sure I know myself----"

"Oh, I see!" said the doctor watching her sweet face with a tender jealousy in his eyes. "Well,
I suppose I'll help you to go, but I'll shoot him, remember, if he doesn't turn out to be all
right. It would take a mighty superior person to be good enough for you, little girl."

"That's just what he is," said Ruth sweetly, and then rising and stooping over him she dropped
a kiss on the wavy silver lock of hair that hung over the doctor's forehead.

"Thank you, Daddy-Doctor! I knew you would," she said happily. "And please don't be too long
about it. I'm in a great hurry."

The doctor promised, of course. No one could resist Ruth when she was like that, and in due
time certain forces were set in operation to the end that she might have her desire.

Meanwhile, as she waited, Ruth filled her days with thoughts of others, not forgetting Cameron's
mother for whom she was always preparing some little surprise, a dainty gift, some fruit or
flowers, a book that she thought might comfort and while away her loneliness, a restful ride
at the early evening, all the little things that a thoughtful daughter might do for a mother.
And Cameron's mother wrote him long letters about it all which would have delighted his heart
during those dreary days if they could only have reached him then.

Ruth's letters to Cameron were full of the things she was doing, full of her sweet wise thoughts
that seemed to be growing wiser every day. She had taken pictures of her Italian friends and
introduced him to them one by one. She had filled every page with little word pictures of her
daily life. It seemed a pity that he could not have had them just when he needed them most.
It would have filled her with dismay if she could have known the long wandering journey that
was before those letters before they would finally reach him; she might have been discouraged
from writing them.

Little Mrs. Beck was suddenly sent for one Sunday morning to attend her sister who was very
ill, and she hastily called Ruth over the telephone and begged her to take her place at the
Sunday school. Ruth promised to secure some one to teach the lesson, but found to her dismay
that no one was willing to go at such short notice. And so, with trembling heart she knelt
for a hasty petition that God would guide her and show her how to lead these simple people
in the worship of the day.

As she stood before them trying to make plain in the broken, mixed Italian and English, the
story of the blind man, which was the lesson for the day, there came over her a sense of her
great responsibility. She knew that these people trusted her and that what she told them they
would believe, and her heart lifted itself in a sharp cry for help, for light, to give to them.
She felt an appalling lack of knowledge and experience herself. Where had she been all these
young years of her life, and what had she been doing that she had not learned the way of life
so that she might put it before them?

Before her sat a woman bowed with years, her face seamed with sorrow and hard work, and grimed
with lack of care, a woman whose husband frequently beat her for attending Sunday school. There
were four men on the back seat, hard workers, listening with eager eyes, assenting vigorously
when she spoke of the sorrow on the earth. They, too, had seen trouble. They sat there patient,
sad-eyed, wistful; what could she show them out of the Book of God to bring a light of joy
to their faces? There were little children whose future looked so full of hard knocks and toil
that it seemed a wonder they were willing to grow up knowing what was before them. The money
that had smoothed her way thus far through life was not for them. The comfortable home and
food and raiment and light and luxury that had made her life so full of ease were almost unknown
to them. Had she anything better to offer them than mere earthly comforts which probably could
never be theirs, no matter how hard they might strive? But, after all, money and ease could
in no way soothe the pain of the heart, and she had come close enough already to these people
to know they had each one his own heart's pain and sorrow to bear. There was one man who had
lost five little children by death. That death had come in consequence of dirt and ignorance
made it no easier to bear. The dirt and ignorance had not all been his fault. People who were
wiser and had not cared to help were to blame. What was the remedy for the world's sorrow,
the world's need?

Ruth knew in a general way that Jesus Christ was the Saviour of the world, that His name should
be the remedy for evil; but how to put it to them in simple form, ah! that was it. It was Cameron's
search for God, and it seemed that all the world was on the same search. But now to-day she
had suddenly come on some of the footprints of the Man of Sorrow as He toiled over the mountains
of earth searching for lost humanity, and her own heart echoed His love and sorrow for the
world. She cried out in her helplessness for something to give to these wistful people.

Somehow the prayer must have been answered, for the little congregation hung upon her words,
and one old man with deep creases in his forehead and kindly wrinkles around his eyes spoke
out in meeting and said:

"I like God. I like Him good. I like Him all e time wi' mee! All e time. Ev'e where! Him live
in my house!"

The tears sprang to her eyes with answering sympathy. Here in her little mission she had found
a brother soul, seeking after God. She had another swift vision then of what the kinship of
the whole world meant, and how Christ could love everybody.

After Sunday school was out little Sanda came stealing up to her:

"Mine brudder die," she said sorrowfully.

"What? Tony? The pretty fat baby? Oh, I'm so sorry!" said Ruth putting her arm tenderly around
the little girl. "Where is your mother? I must go and see her."

Down the winding unkept road they walked, the delicately reared girl and the little Italian
drudge, to the hovel where the family were housed, a tumbled-down affair of ancient stone,
tawdrily washed over in some season past with scaling pink whitewash. The noisy abode of the
family pig was in front of the house in the midst of a trim little garden of cabbage, lettuce,
garlic, and tomatoes. But the dirty swarming little house usually so full of noise and good
cheer was tidy to-day, and no guests hovered on the brief front stoop sipping from a friendly
bottle, or playing the accordion. There was not an accordion heard in the community, for there
had been a funeral that morning and every one was trying to be quiet out of respect for the
bereaved parents.

And there in the open doorway, in his shirt sleeves, crouched low upon the step, sat the head
of the house, his swarthy face bowed upon his knees, a picture of utter despair, and just beyond
the mother's head was bowed upon her folded arms on the window seat, and thus they mourned
in public silence before their little world.

Ruth's heart went out to the two poor ignorant creatures in their grief as she remembered the
little dark child with the brown curls and glorious eyes who had resembled one of Raphael's
cherubs, and thought how empty the mother's arms would be without him.

"Oh, Sanda, tell your mother how sorry I am!" she said to the little girl, for the mother could
not speak or understand English. "Tell her not to mourn so terribly, dear. Tell her that the
dear baby is safe and happy with Jesus! Tell her she will go to Him some day."

And as the little girl interpreted her words, suddenly Ruth knew that what she was speaking
was truth, truth she might have heard before but never recognized or realized till now.

The mother lifted her sorrowful face all tear swollen and tried a pitiful smile, nodded to
say she understood, then dropped sobbing again upon the window sill. The father lifted a sad
face, not too sober, but blear-eyed and pitiful, too, in his hopelessness, and nodded as if
he accepted the fact she had told but it gave him no comfort, and then went back to his own
despair.

Ruth turned away with aching heart, praying: "Oh, God, they need you! Come and comfort them.
I don't know how!" But somehow, on her homeward way she seemed to have met and been greeted
by her Saviour.

It was so she received her baptism for the work that she was to do.

The next day permission came for her to go to France, and she entered upon her brief training.

"Don't you dread to have her go?" asked a neighbor of Aunt Rhoda.

"Oh, yes," sighed the good lady comfortably, "but then she is going in good company, and it
isn't as if all the best people weren't doing it. Of course, it will be great experience for
her, and I wouldn't want to keep her out of it. She'll meet a great many nice people over there
that she might not have met if she had stayed at home. Everybody, they tell me, is at work
over there. She'll be likely to meet the nobility. It isn't as if we didn't have friends there,
too, who will be sure to invite her over week ends. If she gets tired she can go to them, you
know. And really, I was glad to have something come up to take her away from that miserable
little country slum she has been so crazy about. I was dreadfully afraid she would catch something
there or else they would rob us and murder us and kidnap her some day."

And that was the way things presented themselves to Aunt Rhoda!

XIX

All day the shells had been flying thick and fast. When night settled down the fire was so
continuous that one could trace the battle front by the reflection in the sky.

Cameron stood at his post under the stars and cried out in his soul for God. For days now Death
had stalked them very close. His comrades had fallen all about him. There seemed to be no chance
for safety. And where was God? Had He no part in all this Hell on earth? Did He not care? Would
He not be found? All his seeking and praying and reading of the little book seemed to have
brought God no nearer. He was going out pretty soon, in the natural order of the battle if
things kept on, out into the other life, without having found the God who had promised that
if he would believe, and if he would seek with all his heart he would surely find Him.

Once in a Y.M.C.A. hut on a Sunday night a great tenor came to entertain them, and sang almost
the very words that the stranger back in the States had written in his little book:

  "If with, all your hearts ye truly seek Him ye shall ever surely
  find him. Thus saith your God!"

And ever since that song had rung its wonderful melody down deep in his heart he had been seeking,
seeking in all the ways he knew, with a longing that would not be satisfied. And yet he seemed
to have found nothing.

So now as he walked silently beneath the stars, looking up, his soul was crying out with the
longing of despair to find a Saviour, the Christ of his soul. Amid all the shudderings of the
battle-rent earth, the concussions of the bursting shells, could even God hear a soul's low cry?

Suddenly out in the darkness in front of him there flickered a tiny light, only a speck of
a glint it was, the spark of a cigarette, but it was where it had no business to be, and it
was Cameron's business to see that it was not there. They had been given strict orders that
there must be no lights and no sounds to give away their position. Even though his thoughts
were with the stars in his search for God, his senses were keen and on the alert. He sprang
instantly and silently, appearing before the delinquent like a miracle.

"Halt!" he said under his breath. "Can that cigarette!"

"I guess you don't know who I am!" swaggered a voice thick and unnatural that yet had a familiar
sound.

"It makes no difference who you are, you can't smoke on this post while I'm on duty. Those
are my orders!" and with a quick motion he caught the cigarette from the loose lips and extinguished
it, grinding it into the ground with his heel.

"I'll--have you--c-c-co-marshalled fer this!" stuttered the angry officer, stepping back unsteadily
and raising his fist.

In disgust Cameron turned his back and walked away. How had Wainwright managed to bring liquor
with him to the front? Something powerful and condensed, no doubt, to steady his nerves in
battle. Wainwright had ever been noted for his cowardice. His breath was heavy with it. How
could a man want to meet death in such a way? He turned to look again, and Wainwright was walking
unsteadily away across the line where they had been forbidden to go, out into the open where
the shells were flying. Cameron watched him for an instant with mingled feelings. To think
he called himself a man, and dared to boast of marrying such a woman as Ruth Macdonald. Well,
what if he did go into danger and get killed! The world was better off without him! Cameron's
heart was burning hot within him. His enemy was at last within his power. No one but himself
had seen Wainwright move off in that direction where was certain death within a few minutes.
It was no part of his duty to stop him. He was not supposed to know he had been drinking.

The whistle of a shell went ricocheting through the air and Cameron dropped as he had been
taught to do, but lifted his eyes in time to see Wainwright throw up his arms, drop on the
edge of the hill, and disappear. The shell plowed its way in a furrow a few feet away and Cameron
rose to his feet. Sharply, distinctly, in a brief lull of the din about him he heard his name
called. It sounded from down the hill, a cry of distress, but it did not sound like Wainwright's
voice:

"Cameron! Come! Help!"

He obeyed instantly, although, strange to say, he had no thought of its being Wainwright. He
crept cautiously out to the edge of the hill and looked over. The blare of the heavens made
objects below quite visible. He could see Wainwright huddled as he had fallen. While he looked
the injured man lifted his head, struggled to crawl feebly, but fell back again. He felt a
sense of relief that at last his enemy was where he could do no more harm. Then, through the
dim darkness he saw a figure coming toward the prostrate form, and stooping over to touch him.
It showed white against the darkness and it paid no heed to the shell that suddenly whistled
overhead. It half lifted the head of the fallen officer, and then straightened up and looked
toward Cameron; and again, although there was no sound audible now in the din that the battle
was making, he felt himself called.

A strange thrill of awe possessed him. Was that the Christ out there whom he had been seeking?
And what did he expect of him? To come out there to his enemy? To the man who had been in many
ways the curse of his young life?

Was this, then, what was required of him? Had his hate toward Wainwright been what had hindered
him from finding God?

There was no time now to argue that this man was not his brother. The man would be killed certainly
if he lay there many minutes. The opportunity would pass as quickly as it had come. The Christ
he sought was out there expecting him to come, and he must lose no time in going to Him. How
gladly would he have faced death to go to Him! But Wainwright! That was different! Could it
be this that was required of him? Then back in his soul there echoed the words: "If with all
your heart ye truly seek." Slowly he crept forward over the brow of the hill, and into the
light, going toward that white figure above the huddled dark one; creeping painfully, with
bullets ripping up the earth about him. He was going to the Christ, with all his heart--yes,
all his heart! Even if it meant putting by his enmity forever!

Somewhere on the way he understood.

When he reached the fallen man there was no white figure there, but he was not surprised nor
disappointed. The Christ was not there because he had entered into his heart. He had found
Him at last!

                    *       *       *       *       *

Back at the base hospital they told Wainwright one day how Cameron had crawled with him on
his back, out from under the searchlights amid the shells, and into safety. It was the only
thing that saved his life, for if he had lain long with the wound he had got, there would have
been no chance for him. Wainwright, when he heard it, lay thoughtful for a long time, a puzzled,
half-sullen look on his face. He saw that everybody considered Cameron a hero. There was no
getting away from that the rest of his life. One could not in decency be an enemy of a man
who had saved one's life. Cameron had won out in a final round. It would not be good policy
not to recognize it. It would be entirely too unpopular. He must make friends with him. It
would be better to patronize him than to be patronized by him. Perhaps also, down in the depths
of his fat selfish heart there was a little bit of gratitude mixed with it all. For he did
love life, and he was a mortal coward.

So he sent for Cameron one day, and Cameron came. He did not want to come. He dreaded the interview
worse than anything he had ever had to face before. But he came. He came with the same spirit
he had gone out into the shell-fire after Wainwright. Because he felt that the Christ asked
it of him.

He stood stern and grave at the foot of the little hospital cot and listened while Wainwright
pompously thanked him, and told him graciously that now that he had saved his life he was going
to put aside all the old quarrels and be his friend. Cameron smiled sadly. There was no bitterness
in his smile. Perhaps just the least fringe of amusement, but no hardness. He even took the
bandaged hand that was offered as a token that peace had come between them who had so long
been at war. All the time were ringing in his heart the words: "With all your heart! With all
your heart!" He had the Christ, what else mattered?

Somehow Wainwright felt that he had not quite made the impression on this strong man that he
had hoped, and in an impulse to be more than gracious he reached his good hand under his pillow
and brought forth an envelope.

When Corporal Cameron saw the writing on that envelop he went white under the tan of the battlefield,
but he stood still and showed no other sign:

"When I get back home I'm going to be married," said the complacent voice, "and my wife and
I will want you to come and take dinner with us some day. I guess you know who the girl is.
She lives in Bryne Haven up on the hill. Her name is Ruth Macdonald. I've just had a letter
from her. I'll have to write her how you saved my life. She'll want to thank you, too."

How could Cameron possibly know that that envelope addressed in Ruth Macdonald's precious handwriting
contained nothing but the briefest word of thanks for an elaborate souvenir that Wainwright
had sent her from France?

"What's the matter with Cammie?" his comrades asked one another when he came back to his company.
"He looks as though he had lost his last friend. Did he care so much for that Wainwright guy
that he saved? I'm sure I don't see what he sees in him. I wouldn't have taken the trouble
to go out after him, would you?"

Cameron's influence had been felt quietly among his company. In his presence the men refrained
from certain styles of conversation, when he sat apart and read his Testament they hushed their
boisterous talk, and lately some had come to read with him. He was generally conceded to be
the bravest man in their company, and when a fellow had to die suddenly he liked Cameron to
hold him in his arms.

So far Cameron had not had a scratch, and the men had come to think he had a charmed life.
More than he knew he was beloved of them all. More than they knew their respect for him was
deepening into a kind of awe. They felt he had a power with him that they understood not. He
was still the silent corporal. He talked not at all of his new-found experience, yet it shone
in his face in a mysterious light. Even after he came from Wainwright with that stricken look,
there was above it all a glory behind his eyes that not even that could change. For three days
he went into the thick of the battle, moving from one hairbreadth escape to another with the
calmness of an angel who knows his life is not of earth, and on the fourth day there came the
awful battle, the struggle for a position that had been held by the enemy for four years, and
that had been declared impregnable from the side of the Allies.

The boys all fought bravely and many fell, but foremost of them all passing unscathed from
height to height, Corporal Cameron on the lead in fearlessness and spirit; and when the tide
at last was turned and they stood triumphant among the dead, and saw the enemy retiring in
disorder, it was Cameron who was still in the forefront, his white face and tattered uniform
catching the last rays of the setting sun.

Later when the survivors had all come together one came to the captain with a white face and
anxious eyes:

"Captain, where's Cammie? We can't find him anywhere."

"He came a half hour ago and volunteered to slip through the enemy's lines to-night and send
us back a message," he said in husky tones.

"But, captain, he was wounded!"

"He was?" The captain looked up startled. "He said nothing about it!"

"He wouldn't, of course," said the soldier. "He's that way. But he was wounded in the arm.
I helped him bind it up."

"How bad?"

"I don't know. He wouldn't let me look. He said he would attend to it when he got back."

"Well, he's taken a wireless in his pocket and crept across No Man's Land to find out what
the enemy is going to do. He's wearing a dead Jerry's uniform----!"

The captain turned and brushed the back of his hand across his eyes and a low sound between
a sob and a whispered cheer went up from the gathered remnant as they rendered homage to their
comrade.

                    *       *       *       *       *

For three days the messages came floating in, telling vital secrets that were of vast strategic
value. Then the messages ceased, and the anxious officers and comrades looked in vain for word.
Two more days passed--three--and still no sign that showed that he was alive, and the word
went forth "Missing!" and "Missing" he was proclaimed in the newspapers at home.

That night there was a lull in the sector where Cameron's company was located. No one could
guess what was going on across the wide dark space called No Man's Land. The captain sent anxious
messages to other officers, and the men at the listening posts had no clue to give. It was
raining and a chill bias sleet that cut like knives was driving from the northeast. Water trickled
into the dugouts, and sopped through the trenches, and the men shuddered their way along dark
passages and waited. Only scattered artillery fire lit up the heavens here and there. It was
a night when all hell seemed let loose to have its way with earth. The watch paced back and
forth and prayed or cursed, and counted the minutes till his watch would be up. Across the
blackness of No Man's Land pock-marked with great shell craters, there raged a tempest, and
even a Hun would turn his back and look the other way in such a storm.

Slowly, oh so slow that not even the earth would know it was moving, there crept a dark creature
forth from the enemy line. A thing all of spirit could not have gone more invisibly. Lying
like a stone as motionless for spaces uncountable, stirring every muscle with a controlled
movement that could stop at any breath, lying under the very nose of the guard without being
seen for long minutes, and gone when next he passed that way; slowly, painfully gaining ground,
with a track of blood where the stones were cruel, and a holding of breath when the fitful
flare lights lit up the way; covered at times by mud from nearby bursting shells; faint and
sick, but continuing to creep; chilled and sore and stiff, blinded and bleeding and torn, shell
holes and stones and miring mud, slippery and sharp and never ending, the long, long trail----!

"Halt!" came a sharp, clear voice through the night.

"Pat! Come here! What is that?" whispered the guard. "Now watch! I'm sure I saw it move----There!
I'm going to it!"

"Better look out!" But he was off and back with something in his arms. Something in a ragged
blood-soaked German uniform.

They turned a shaded flash light into the face and looked:

"Pat, it's Cammie!" The guard was sobbing.

At sound of the dear old name the inert mass roused to action.

"Tell Cap--they're planning to slip away at five in the morning. Tell him if he wants to catch
them he must do it now! Don't mind me! Go quick!"

The voice died away and the head dropped back.

With a last wistful look Pat was off to the captain, but the guard gathered Cameron up in his
arms tenderly and nursed him like a baby, crooning over him in the sleet and dark, till Pat
came back with a stretcher and some men who bore him to the dressing station lying inert between
them.

While men worked over his silent form his message was flashing to headquarters and back over
the lines to all the posts along that front. The time had come for the big drive. In a short
time a great company of dark forms stole forth across No Man's Land till they seemed like a
wide dark sea creeping on to engulf the enemy.

Next morning the newspapers of the world set forth in monstrous type the glorious victory and
how the Americans had stolen upon the enemy and cut them off from the rest of their army, wiping
out a whole salient.

But while the world was rejoicing, John Cameron lay on his little hard stretcher in the tent
and barely breathed. He had not opened his eyes nor spoken again.

XX

A nurse stepped up to the doctor's desk:

"A new girl is here ready for duty. Is there any special place you want her put?" she asked
in a low tone.

The doctor looked up with a frown:

"One of those half-trained Americans, I suppose?" he growled. "Well, every little helps. I'd
give a good deal for half a dozen fully trained nurses just now. Suppose you send her to relieve
Miss Jennings. She can't do any harm to number twenty-nine."

"Isn't there any hope for him?" the nurse asked, a shade of sadness in her eyes.

"I'm afraid not!" said the doctor shortly. "He won't take any interest in living, that's the
trouble. He isn't dying of his wounds. Something is troubling him. But it's no use trying to
find out what. He shuts up like a clam."

The new nurse flushed outside the door as she heard herself discussed and shut her firm little
lips in a determined way as she followed the head nurse down the long rows of cots to an alcove
at the end where a screen shut the patient from view.

Miss Jennings, a plain girl with tired eyes, gave a few directions and she was left with her
patient. She turned toward the cot and stopped with a soft gasp of recognition, her face growing
white and set as she took in the dear familiar outline of the fine young face before her. 

You probably expect from the writer of this legend, that he may the saints in his exalted Beritt
abschildert nature on horseback in long digressions. He does not. It can be deliberately not
induce the heavenly sight of the holy Bürokrazius on his Schimmel imagine and describe. And derohalb
because he was a conscientious Skribent and with the rabble of the poets and painters Lotter
alias do not have to brush washer wants.
 Perhaps even now behind that quiet face the spirit
had departed beyond her grasp.

There was no flutter of the eyelids even. She could not see that he still breathed, although
his hand was not cold, and his face when she touched it still seemed human. She drew closer
in an agony of fear, and laid her lips against his cheek, and then her face softly, with one
hand about his other cheek. Her lips were close to his ear now.

"John!" she whispered softly, "John! My dear knight!"

There was a quiver of the eyelids now, a faint hesitating sigh. She touched her lips to his
and spoke his name again. A faint smile flickered over his features as if he were seeing other
worlds of beauty that had no connection here. But still she continued to press her face against
his cheek and whisper his name.

At last he opened his eyes, with a bewildered, wondering gaze and saw her. The old dear smile
broke forth:

"Ruth! You here? Is this--heaven?"

"Not yet," she whispered softly. "But it's earth, and the war is over! I've come to help you
get well and take you home! It's really you and you're not 'Missing' any more."

Then without any excuse at all she laid her lips on his forehead and kissed him. She had read
her permit in his eyes. 

"What? Passport? Nix passport, "replied the guy.

"What? You have no passport?

"Snorted the Holy One of righteous indignation.

"Hühühühü," the red tape all indignant and began to sniff the guy.

"Ha," said the guy.

"They have no passport," said the saint, raising
his voice. "Then you're just an ordinary Tramp! "

"Ha," said the
guy.

"An ordinary tramp you are! A vagabond! "Cried the saint from
his Schimmel down.

"What? The most wonderful girl in the world!"

When the doctor and nurse pushed back the screen and entered the little alcove the new nurse
sat demurely at the foot of the cot, but a little while later the voice of the patient rang
out joyously:

"Doctor, how soon can I get out of this. I think I've stayed here about long enough."

The wondering doctor touched his patient's forehead, looked at him keenly, felt his pulse with
practised finger, and replied:

"I've been thinking you'd get to this spot pretty soon. Some beef tea, nurse, and make it good
and strong. We've got to get this fellow on his feet pretty quick for I can see he's about
done lying in bed."

Then the wounds came in for attention, and Ruth stood bravely and watched, quivering in her
heart over the sight, yet never flinching in her outward calm.

When the dressing of the wounds was over the doctor stood back and surveyed his patient:

"Well, you're in pretty good shape now, and if you keep on you can leave here in about a week. And now Edgar felt terribly small before him as he entered, really nervous
and apparently in anger.

"What's just happened to you guy run away? How can you scare your mother like that? "

His voice was angry and in the hands of a wild motion. Behind him was with a quiet step now entered
the room the mother. Her face was shaded.

Edgar did not answer.
He had the feeling of having to justify himself, however, how should
He told the that he had been deceived and beaten?

Cameron twinkled with his old Irish grin:

"Always," he said solemnly, "but, you see, she hasn't always been here."

"I see," said the doctor again looking quizzically into the sweet face of the girl, and doing
reverence to her pure beauty with his gaze. "I congratulate you, corporal," he said, and then
turning to Ruth he said earnestly: "And you, too, Madame. He is a man if there ever was one."

In the quiet evening when the wards were put to sleep and Ruth sat beside his cot with her
hand softly in his, Cameron opened his eyes from the nap he was supposed to be taking and looked
at her with his bright smile.

"I haven't told you the news," he said softly. "I have found God. I found Him out on the battlefield
and He is great! It's all true! But you have to search for Him with all your heart, and not
let any little old hate or anything else hinder you, or it doesn't do any good."

Ruth, with her eyes shining, touched her lips softly to the back of his bandaged hand that
lay near her and whispered softly:

"I have found Him, too, dear. 

After they had sat a long time in contemplative silence next to each other, it began St. Bürokrazius
again: "Actually you should have a position yet!"

"Oh look! Position, "the holy Stultissimus was despicable.

Then the bandaged hand went out and folded her close, and Cameron uttered his assent in words
too sacred for other ears to hear.

