The country was very badly governed while the King was away; but it was certainly not dull.
Every person in the kingdom was occupied in making preparations for the royal wedding, and
it was going to be such a particularly grand royal wedding that the people were kept thoroughly
amused by looking forward to it alone.  When, however, the last touch had been put to the preparations,
and there was positively nothing left for any one to do, the people began to grumble.  It was
clear that there could not be a marriage if nobody was there to be married, and no tidings
had been received of King Grumbelo since he rode away to fetch his bride.  There is no doubt
that the discontent of the people would have ended in a revolution if the Professor of Practical
Jokes had not hit upon a happy idea.  "It is true that we cannot have a royal wedding," said
the Professor of Practical Jokes; "but we can pretend to have one."

The Comptroller of Whole Holidays was only too delighted to fall in with the idea, and at once
issued a proclamation to the effect that the country should take a whole holiday until further
notice.  After that, the people could not think of grumbling; they gave themselves up to general
rejoicing, and pretended, day after day, that the King was being married, until they almost
forgot that there was not even a king in the country.

Meanwhile, King Grumbelo was riding by night and by day in search of his beautiful, silent
Princess.  He rode for many months without discovering a trace of her; but instead of growing
tired of his search he only became the more anxious to find her.  One day, as he was riding
through a wood, he came upon a sweet-smelling hedge, all made of honeysuckle and sweet-briar,
so high that he could not climb it, and so thick that he could not see through it.

"Dear me!" thought King Grumbelo, "something charming must be hidden behind so pretty a hedge
as this!"  He rode along it with his mind full of curiosity until he came to two slender, pink-and-white
gates, made entirely of apple-blossom; and through these he could see a fresh-looking garden
with green lawns and gravel paths and bright flower-beds, and in the middle of it all a dainty
little house made of nothing but rose leaves.  The King was so impatient to know who was the
owner of such a delightful little dwelling that he knocked at once on the gates for admission;
and a dragon with a singularly mild and harmless expression appeared inside, and asked him
gently what he wanted.  The King looked at him in surprise; for, although he was decidedly
small for a dragon, he was certainly much too large and too clumsy to live in a house made
entirely of rose leaves.

"Can you tell me who lives here?" asked King Grumbelo, politely; for, as every one knows, it
is always wise to be polite to a dragon however small he may be.

"Oh, yes," answered the dragon, with a wave of his tail towards the house and the garden; "I
live here."

"Nonsense!" said the King, forgetting in his surprise to be polite. "You could not possibly
live in so small a house as that!"

"If you want to know who lives inside the house you should say so," answered the dragon, in
an injured tone.  "It is n't likely that a well-bred dragon would live inside anything.  You
should be more careful in the way you express yourself."

"Well, well," said the King, impatiently, "perhaps you can tell me to whom the house belongs?"

"No, I can't," answered the dragon, with a smile; "because it does n't belong to anybody, you
see.  It is here because it is wanted, and when it is n't wanted any longer it will cease to
be here."

"What a curious house!" exclaimed the King.

"Curious?  Not at all!" said the dragon, looking injured again.  "It would be much more curious
if it were to remain here when it was n't wanted.  You should n't make needless remarks."

If King Grumbelo had not been so anxious to find out who did live inside the house he would
certainly have ridden away, there and then; but the more he looked at the beautiful garden
and the charming little dwelling of rose leaves, the more he longed for an answer to his question.
So he kept his temper with difficulty, and turned once more to the aggravating dragon.

"Does anybody live inside the house?" he asked.

"Of course," answered the dragon.  "Do they build houses in your country to be looked at? 
I suppose you can't help it, but I have never been asked so many senseless questions before."

"Answer me one more and I will go away," said King Grumbelo.  "Does a beautiful Princess, the
most beautiful you have ever seen, live inside the house over there?"

"There is no Princess in the place, be assured of that," answered the dragon, emphatically.
"I should not be here if there were; it is a thankless task to keep guard over a Princess;
it means nothing but spells and fighting and unpleasantness, and in the end the Princess complains
that you have kept the right people away.  Oh, no, nothing would induce me to take another
place with a Princess.  We 've nothing of that kind here."

"Then I 'll bid you good-day," said King Grumbelo, for he did not mean to waste any more time.
Just as he was going to ride away, however, the door of the little house opened, and out of
it stepped the sweetest-looking little lady the world has ever contained.  She was so beautiful
that as she walked down the path the flowers stopped breathing and the trees stopped gossiping;
and she had such wonderful eyes that to look at them was to know everything she was thinking
about.  She glanced once at the King as he stood outside the gates of apple-blossom, and then
she turned aside without speaking a word and passed out of sight among the flower-beds.  Then
the King knew that his search was over; she was beautiful and silent enough to please him,
whether she were foolish or not; and he made up his mind on the spot not to search any more
for the disdainful Princess who had run away from him.

"Who is she?" he asked the dragon, eagerly.

"The Lady Whimsical, to be sure," answered the dragon.  "What a lot of questions you ask!"

"Then go and tell the Lady Whimsical that if she pleases I would like to speak with her," said
King Grumbelo.

The dragon did not move.

"The Lady Whimsical never speaks," he observed.  "It would really be much wiser if you were
to go away."

"I am not going away," shouted the King, growing angry.  "Go and ask her at once if she will
receive me, or I will put you out of the way for good and all!"

"Very well," said the dragon, sighing; "I suppose I must.  What name?"

"King Grumbelo," answered the King, proudly.

He fully expected that the dragon would fall flat on the ground at the mention of such an important
name as his; but the dragon did nothing of the kind.

"It is not a bit of use expecting to come in here with a name like that," he complained.  "The
Lady Whimsical cannot bear anything ugly, and she has a particular horror of ugly names.  I
have strict orders never to mention an ugly name in her presence.  You had really better go away."

"I am not going away," shouted the King once more.  "Go and tell the Lady Whimsical that a
great King, who has heard how charming and how gracious she is, would like to make himself
known to her."

The dragon consented unwillingly to take this message, and ambled clumsily away among the flower-beds.
When he came back, he found the King pacing restlessly up and down.

"Can't you keep still?" growled the dragon.  "Your ridiculous name is enough to make any one
giddy without--"

"What did the Lady Whimsical say?" interrupted King Grumbelo, impatiently.

"The Lady Whimsical never says," answered the dragon drowsily, as he curled himself up in the
sun and closed his eyes; "but she will allow you to look at her for five minutes every morning,
at two hours after sunrise."

Two hours after sunrise on the following morning, King Grumbelo was accordingly admitted into
the garden beyond the pink-and-white gates of apple-blossom.  There sat the Lady Whimsical
on the doorstep of her rose-leaf dwelling, and in front of her stood the King.

"You are the most charming person I have ever seen," declared the King.

The Lady Whimsical smiled.

"I never thought I should find any one so charming as you are," said the King.

The Lady Whimsical smiled again.

"Nor so silent," continued the King.

The Lady Whimsical smiled for the third time.

"Nor so--" began the King, and then he paused, for he thought she might possibly object to
being called foolish, though foolish she undoubtedly was if she did not wish him to stay longer
than five minutes.  As he hesitated, the Lady Whimsical burst out laughing and ran inside her
little house of rose leaves, and banged the door in his face.

"Time's up," said the dragon, and King Grumbelo went away puzzled.  He came back again, however,
at the same time on the following morning; and there sat Lady Whimsical on the doorstep of
her rose-leaf dwelling, just as though she were expecting him.

"I have thought only of you since yesterday morning," sighed King Grumbelo.

The Lady Whimsical smiled as before.

"I shall think only of you for the rest of my days," declared the King.

The Lady Whimsical smiled even more than before.

"Do you know why I have come all this way to find you?" demanded the King, growing bolder.

The Lady Whimsical shook her head at him, burst out laughing, and ran inside her rose-leaf
house as she had done the day before.

Two hours after sunrise on the following morning, the Lady Whimsical was once more seated on
her doorstep, and King Grumbelo was once more standing in front of her.

"You are so beautiful that I shall never tire of looking at you," said the King.

Again, the Lady Whimsical only smiled.

"You are so silent that you will always allow me to talk enough for both of us," continued
the King.

The Lady Whimsical smiled once more.

"And since you are so foolish as to send me away every morning," said the King, "you must surely
be foolish enough to be the Queen of so wise a King as myself."

The Lady Whimsical had never laughed so heartily at anything as she did at these words of King
Grumbelo; and even after she had banged the door in his face, he could still hear her laughter
as it floated out from the windows of the dainty little house of rose leaves.  Now, all this
was very amusing for the Lady Whimsical, who was quite happy as long as she had something to
make her smile; but King Grumbelo was not so well satisfied.

It was not amusing to carry on a conversation entirely alone, and he even began to wish secretly
that the Lady Whimsical would not answer all his questions by laughing at them.  However, the
Lady Whimsical showed no signs of answering them in any other way, and at last the King determined
that he would make her speak to him just once, and after that she might be as silent as she
pleased.  So, one morning, when the dragon opened the apple-blossom gates to him as usual,
he strode up to Lady Whimsical with a resolute air.

"Lady Whimsical, I want you to come away with me and be my Queen," he said.

She shook her head and smiled.

"Why not?" demanded King Grumbelo.

She smiled again.

"Why not?" shouted King Grumbelo at the very top of his voice.

When the Lady Whimsical shrugged her shoulders and merely smiled again, the King lost his patience
completely, which of course was an absurd thing to do, considering that he had come all this
way on purpose to find some one who knew how to be silent.

