THE MAGNIFICENT AMBERSONS

By Booth Tarkington

Chapter I

Major Amberson had "made a fortune" in 1873, when other people were losing fortunes, and the
magnificence of the Ambersons began then. Magnificence, like the size of a fortune, is always
comparative, as even Magnificent Lorenzo may now perceive, if he has happened to haunt New
York in 1916; and the Ambersons were magnificent in their day and place. Their splendour lasted
throughout all the years that saw their Midland town spread and darken into a city, but reached
its topmost during the period when every prosperous family with children kept a Newfoundland dog.

In that town, in those days, all the women who wore silk or velvet knew all the other women
who wore silk or velvet, and when there was a new purchase of sealskin, sick people were got
to windows to see it go by. Trotters were out, in the winter afternoons, racing light sleighs
on National Avenue and Tennessee Street; everybody recognized both the trotters and the drivers;
and again knew them as well on summer evenings, when slim buggies whizzed by in renewals of
the snow-time rivalry. For that matter, everybody knew everybody else's family horse-and-carriage,
could identify such a silhouette half a mile down the street, and thereby was sure who was
going to market, or to a reception, or coming home from office or store to noon dinner or evening
supper.

During the earlier years of this period, elegance of personal appearance was believed to rest
more upon the texture of garments than upon their shaping. A silk dress needed no remodelling
when it was a year or so old; it remained distinguished by merely remaining silk. Old men and
governors wore broadcloth; "full dress" was broadcloth with "doeskin" trousers; and there were
seen men of all ages to whom a hat meant only that rigid, tall silk thing known to impudence
as a "stove-pipe." In town and country these men would wear no other hat, and, without self-consciousness,
they went rowing in such hats.

Shifting fashions of shape replaced aristocracy of texture: dressmakers, shoemakers, hatmakers,
and tailors, increasing in cunning and in power, found means to make new clothes old. The long
contagion of the "Derby" hat arrived: one season the crown of this hat would be a bucket; the
next it would be a spoon. Every house still kept its bootjack, but high-topped boots gave way
to shoes and "congress gaiters"; and these were played through fashions that shaped them now
with toes like box-ends and now with toes like the prows of racing shells.

Trousers with a crease were considered plebeian; the crease proved that the garment had lain
upon a shelf, and hence was "ready-made"; these betraying trousers were called "hand-me-downs,"
in allusion to the shelf. In the early 'eighties, while bangs and bustles were having their
way with women, that variation of dandy known as the "dude" was invented: he wore trousers
as tight as stockings, dagger-pointed shoes, a spoon "Derby," a single-breasted coat called
a "Chesterfield," with short flaring skirts, a torturing cylindrical collar, laundered to a
polish and three inches high, while his other neckgear might be a heavy, puffed cravat or a
tiny bow fit for a doll's braids. With evening dress he wore a tan overcoat so short that his
black coat-tails hung visible, five inches below the over-coat; but after a season or two he
lengthened his overcoat till it touched his heels, and he passed out of his tight trousers
into trousers like great bags. Then, presently, he was seen no more, though the word that had
been coined for him remained in the vocabularies of the impertinent.

It was a hairier day than this. Beards were to the wearers' fancy, and things as strange as
the Kaiserliche boar-tusk moustache were commonplace. "Side-burns" found nourishment upon childlike
profiles; great Dundreary whiskers blew like tippets over young shoulders; moustaches were
trained as lambrequins over forgotten mouths; and it was possible for a Senator of the United
States to wear a mist of white whisker upon his throat only, not a newspaper in the land finding
the ornament distinguished enough to warrant a lampoon. Surely no more is needed to prove that
so short a time ago we were living in another age!

At the beginning of the Ambersons' great period most of the houses of the Midland town were
of a pleasant architecture. They lacked style, but also lacked pretentiousness, and whatever
does not pretend at all has style enough. They stood in commodious yards, well shaded by leftover
forest trees, elm and walnut and beech, with here and there a line of tall sycamores where
the land had been made by filling bayous from the creek. The house of a "prominent resident,"
facing Military Square, or National Avenue, or Tennessee Street, was built of brick upon a
stone foundation, or of wood upon a brick foundation. Usually it had a "front porch" and a
"back porch"; often a "side porch," too. There was a "front hall"; there was a "side hall";
and sometimes a "back hall." From the "front hall" opened three rooms, the "parlour," the "sitting
room," and the "library"; and the library could show warrant to its title--for some reason
these people bought books. Commonly, the family sat more in the library than in the "sitting
room," while callers, when they came formally, were kept to the "parlour," a place of formidable
polish and discomfort. The upholstery of the library furniture was a little shabby; but the
hostile chairs and sofa of the "parlour" always looked new. For all the wear and tear they
got they should have lasted a thousand years.

Upstairs were the bedrooms; "mother-and-father's room" the largest; a smaller room for one
or two sons another for one or two daughters; each of these rooms containing a double bed,
a "washstand," a "bureau," a wardrobe, a little table, a rocking-chair, and often a chair or
two that had been slightly damaged downstairs, but not enough to justify either the expense
of repair or decisive abandonment in the attic. And there was always a "spare-room," for visitors
(where the sewing-machine usually was kept), and during the 'seventies there developed an appreciation
of the necessity for a bathroom. Therefore the architects placed bathrooms in the new houses,
and the older houses tore out a cupboard or two, set up a boiler beside the kitchen stove,
and sought a new godliness, each with its own bathroom. The great American plumber joke, that
many-branched evergreen, was planted at this time.

At the rear of the house, upstairs was a bleak little chamber, called "the girl's room," and
in the stable there was another bedroom, adjoining the hayloft, and called "the hired man's
room." House and stable cost seven or eight thousand dollars to build, and people with that
much money to invest in such comforts were classified as the Rich. They paid the inhabitant
of "the girl's room" two dollars a week, and, in the latter part of this period, two dollars
and a half, and finally three dollars a week. She was Irish, ordinarily, or German or it might
be Scandinavian, but never native to the land unless she happened to be a person of colour.
The man or youth who lived in the stable had like wages, and sometimes he, too, was lately
a steerage voyager, but much oftener he was coloured.

After sunrise, on pleasant mornings, the alleys behind the stables were gay; laughter and shouting
went up and down their dusty lengths, with a lively accompaniment of curry-combs knocking against
back fences and stable walls, for the darkies loved to curry their horses in the alley. Darkies
always prefer to gossip in shouts instead of whispers; and they feel that profanity, unless
it be vociferous, is almost worthless. Horrible phrases were caught by early rising children
and carried to older people for definition, sometimes at inopportune moments; while less investigative
children would often merely repeat the phrases in some subsequent flurry of agitation, and
yet bring about consequences so emphatic as to be recalled with ease in middle life.

They have passed, those darky hired-men of the Midland town; and the introspective horses they
curried and brushed and whacked and amiably cursed--those good old horses switch their tails
at flies no more. For all their seeming permanence they might as well have been buffaloes--or
the buffalo laprobes that grew bald in patches and used to slide from the careless drivers'
knees and hang unconcerned, half way to the ground. The stables have been transformed into
other likenesses, or swept away, like the woodsheds where were kept the stove-wood and kindling
that the "girl" and the "hired-man" always quarrelled over: who should fetch it. Horse and
stable and woodshed, and the whole tribe of the "hired-man," all are gone. They went quickly,
yet so silently that we whom they served have not yet really noticed that they are vanished.

So with other vanishings. There were the little bunty street-cars on the long, single track
that went its troubled way among the cobblestones. At the rear door of the car there was no
platform, but a step where passengers clung in wet clumps when the weather was bad and the
car crowded. The patrons--if not too absent-minded--put their fares into a slot; and no conductor
paced the heaving floor, but the driver would rap remindingly with his elbow upon the glass
of the door to his little open platform if the nickels and the passengers did not appear to
coincide in number. A lone mule drew the car, and sometimes drew it off the track, when the
passengers would get out and push it on again. They really owed it courtesies like this, for
the car was genially accommodating: a lady could whistle to it from an upstairs window, and
the car would halt at once and wait for her while she shut the window, put on her hat and cloak,
went downstairs, found an umbrella, told the "girl" what to have for dinner, and came forth
from the house.

The previous passengers made little objection to such gallantry on the part of the car: they
were wont to expect as much for themselves on like occasion. In good weather the mule pulled
the car a mile in a little less than twenty minutes, unless the stops were too long; but when
the trolley-car came, doing its mile in five minutes and better, it would wait for nobody.
Nor could its passengers have endured such a thing, because the faster they were carried the
less time they had to spare! In the days before deathly contrivances hustled them through their
lives, and when they had no telephones--another ancient vacancy profoundly responsible for
leisure--they had time for everything: time to think, to talk, time to read, time to wait for
a lady!

They even had time to dance "square dances," quadrilles, and "lancers"; they also danced the
"racquette," and schottisches and polkas, and such whims as the "Portland Fancy." They pushed
back the sliding doors between the "parlour" and the "sitting room," tacked down crash over
the carpets, hired a few palms in green tubs, stationed three or four Italian musicians under
the stairway in the "front hall"--and had great nights!

But these people were gayest on New Year's Day; they made it a true festival--something no
longer known. The women gathered to "assist" the hostesses who kept "Open House"; and the carefree
men, dandified and perfumed, went about in sleighs, or in carriages and ponderous "hacks,"
going from Open House to Open House, leaving fantastic cards in fancy baskets as they entered
each doorway, and emerging a little later, more carefree than ever, if the punch had been to
their liking. It always was, and, as the afternoon wore on, pedestrians saw great gesturing
and waving of skin-tight lemon gloves, while ruinous fragments of song were dropped behind
as the carriages rolled up and down the streets.

"Keeping Open House" was a merry custom; it has gone, like the all-day picnic in the woods,
and like that prettiest of all vanished customs, the serenade. When a lively girl visited the
town she did not long go unserenaded, though a visitor was not indeed needed to excuse a serenade.
Of a summer night, young men would bring an orchestra under a pretty girl's window--or, it
might be, her father's, or that of an ailing maiden aunt--and flute, harp, fiddle, 'cello,
cornet, and bass viol would presently release to the dulcet stars such melodies as sing through
"You'll Remember Me," "I Dreamt That I Dwelt in Marble Halls," "Silver Threads Among the Gold,"
"Kathleen Mavourneen," or "The Soldier's Farewell."

They had other music to offer, too, for these were the happy days of "Olivette" and "The Macotte"
and "The Chimes of Normandy" and "Girofle-Girofla" and "Fra Diavola." Better than that, these
were the days of "Pinafore" and "The Pirates of Penzance" and of "Patience." This last was
needed in the Midland town, as elsewhere, for the "aesthetic movement" had reached thus far
from London, and terrible things were being done to honest old furniture. Maidens sawed what-nots
in two, and gilded the remains. They took the rockers from rocking-chairs and gilded the inadequate
legs; they gilded the easels that supported the crayon portraits of their deceased uncles.
In the new spirit of art they sold old clocks for new, and threw wax flowers and wax fruit,
and the protecting glass domes, out upon the trash-heap. They filled vases with peacock feathers,
or cattails, or sumac, or sunflowers, and set the vases upon mantelpieces and marble-topped
tables. They embroidered daisies (which they called "marguerites") and sunflowers and sumac
and cat-tails and owls and peacock feathers upon plush screens and upon heavy cushions, then
strewed these cushions upon floors where fathers fell over them in the dark. In the teeth of
sinful oratory, the daughters went on embroidering: they embroidered daisies and sunflowers
and sumac and cat-tails and owls and peacock feathers upon "throws" which they had the courage
to drape upon horsehair sofas; they painted owls and daisies and sunflowers and sumac and cat-tails
and peacock feathers upon tambourines. They hung Chinese umbrellas of paper to the chandeliers;
they nailed paper fans to the walls. They "studied" painting on china, these girls; they sang
Tosti's new songs; they sometimes still practiced the old, genteel habit of lady-fainting,
and were most charming of all when they drove forth, three or four in a basket phaeton, on
a spring morning.

Croquet and the mildest archery ever known were the sports of people still young and active
enough for so much exertion; middle-age played euchre. There was a theatre, next door to the
Amberson Hotel, and when Edwin Booth came for a night, everybody who could afford to buy a
ticket was there, and all the "hacks" in town were hired. "The Black Crook" also filled the
theatre, but the audience then was almost entirely of men who looked uneasy as they left for
home when the final curtain fell upon the shocking girls dressed as fairies. But the theatre
did not often do so well; the people of the town were still too thrifty.

They were thrifty because they were the sons or grandsons of the "early settlers," who had
opened the wilderness and had reached it from the East and the South with wagons and axes and
guns, but with no money at all. The pioneers were thrifty or they would have perished: they
had to store away food for the winter, or goods to trade for food, and they often feared they
had not stored enough--they left traces of that fear in their sons and grandsons. In the minds
of most of these, indeed, their thrift was next to their religion: to save, even for the sake
of saving, was their earliest lesson and discipline. No matter how prosperous they were, they
could not spend money either upon "art," or upon mere luxury and entertainment, without a sense
of sin.

Against so homespun a background the magnificence of the Ambersons was as conspicuous as a
brass band at a funeral. Major Amberson bought two hundred acres of land at the end of National
Avenue; and through this tract he built broad streets and cross-streets; paved them with cedar
block, and curbed them with stone. He set up fountains, here and there, where the streets intersected,
and at symmetrical intervals placed cast-iron statues, painted white, with their titles clear
upon the pedestals: Minerva, Mercury, Hercules, Venus, Gladiator, Emperor Augustus, Fisher
Boy, Stag-hound, Mastiff, Greyhound, Fawn, Antelope, Wounded Doe, and Wounded Lion. Most of
the forest trees had been left to flourish still, and, at some distance, or by moonlight, the
place was in truth beautiful; but the ardent citizen, loving to see his city grow, wanted neither
distance nor moonlight. He had not seen Versailles, but, standing before the Fountain of Neptune
in Amberson Addition, at bright noon, and quoting the favourite comparison of the local newspapers,
he declared Versailles outdone. All this Art showed a profit from the start, for the lots sold
well and there was something like a rush to build in the new Addition. Its main thoroughfare,
an oblique continuation of National Avenue, was called Amberson Boulevard, and here, at the
juncture of the new Boulevard and the Avenue, Major Amberson reserved four acres for himself,
and built his new house--the Amberson Mansion, of course.

This house was the pride of the town. Faced with stone as far back as the dining-room windows,
it was a house of arches and turrets and girdling stone porches: it had the first porte-cochere
seen in that town. There was a central "front hall" with a great black walnut stairway, and
open to a green glass skylight called the "dome," three stories above the ground floor. A ballroom
occupied most of the third story; and at one end of it was a carved walnut gallery for the
musicians. Citizens told strangers that the cost of all this black walnut and wood-carving
was sixty thousand dollars. "Sixty thousand dollars for the wood-work alone! Yes, sir, and
hardwood floors all over the house! Turkish rugs and no carpets at all, except a Brussels carpet
in the front parlour--I hear they call it the 'reception-room.' Hot and cold water upstairs
and down, and stationary washstands in every last bedroom in the place! Their sideboard's built
right into the house and goes all the way across one end of the dining room. It isn't walnut,
it's solid mahogany! Not veneering--solid mahogany! Well, sir, I presume the President of the
United States would be tickled to swap the White House for the new Amberson Mansion, if the
Major'd give him the chance--but by the Almighty Dollar, you bet your sweet life the Major
wouldn't!"

The visitor to the town was certain to receive further enlightenment, for there was one form
of entertainment never omitted: he was always patriotically taken for "a little drive around
our city," even if his host had to hire a hack, and the climax of the display was the Amberson
Mansion. "Look at that greenhouse they've put up there in the side yard," the escort would
continue. "And look at that brick stable! Most folks would think that stable plenty big enough
and good enough to live in; it's got running water and four rooms upstairs for two hired men
and one of 'em's family to live in. They keep one hired man loafin' in the house, and they
got a married hired man out in the stable, and his wife does the washing. They got box-stalls
for four horses, and they keep a coupay, and some new kinds of fancy rigs you never saw the
beat of! 'Carts' they call two of 'em--'way up in the air they are--too high for me! I guess
they got every new kind of fancy rig in there that's been invented. And harness--well, everybody
in town can tell when Ambersons are out driving after dark, by the jingle. This town never
did see so much style as Ambersons are putting on, these days; and I guess it's going to be
expensive, because a lot of other folks'll try to keep up with 'em. The Major's wife and the
daughter's been to Europe, and my wife tells me since they got back they make tea there every
afternoon about five o'clock, and drink it. Seems to me it would go against a person's stomach,
just before supper like that, and anyway tea isn't fit for much--not unless you're sick or
something. My wife says Ambersons don't make lettuce salad the way other people do; they don't
chop it up with sugar and vinegar at all. They pour olive oil on it with their vinegar, and
they have it separate--not along with the rest of the meal. And they eat these olives, too:
green things they are, something like a hard plum, but a friend of mine told me they tasted
a good deal like a bad hickory-nut. My wife says she's going to buy some; you got to eat nine
and then you get to like 'em, she says. Well, I wouldn't eat nine bad hickory-nuts to get to
like them, and I'm going to let these olives alone. Kind of a woman's dish, anyway, I suspect,
but most everybody'll be makin' a stagger to worm through nine of 'em, now Ambersons brought
'em to town. Yes, sir, the rest'll eat 'em, whether they get sick or not! Looks to me like
some people in this city'd be willing to go crazy if they thought that would help 'em to be
as high-toned as Ambersons. Old Aleck Minafer--he's about the closest old codger we got--he
come in my office the other day, and he pretty near had a stroke tellin' me about his daughter
Fanny. Seems Miss Isabel Amberson's got some kind of a dog--they call it a Saint Bernard--and
Fanny was bound to have one, too. Well, old Aleck told her he didn't like dogs except rat-terriers,
because a rat-terrier cleans up the mice, but she kept on at him, and finally he said all right
she could have one. Then, by George! she says Ambersons bought their dog, and you can't get
one without paying for it: they cost from fifty to a hundred dollars up! Old Aleck wanted to
know if I ever heard of anybody buyin' a dog before, because, of course, even a Newfoundland
or a setter you can usually get somebody to give you one. He says he saw some sense in payin'
a nigger a dime, or even a quarter, to drown a dog for you, but to pay out fifty dollars and
maybe more--well, sir, he like to choked himself to death, right there in my office! Of course
everybody realizes that Major Amberson is a fine business man, but what with throwin' money
around for dogs, and every which and what, some think all this style's bound to break him up,
if his family don't quit!"

One citizen, having thus discoursed to a visitor, came to a thoughtful pause, and then added,
"Does seem pretty much like squandering, yet when you see that dog out walking with this Miss
Isabel, he seems worth the money."

"What's she look like?"

"Well, sir," said the citizen, "she's not more than just about eighteen or maybe nineteen years
old, and I don't know as I know just how to put it--but she's kind of a delightful lookin'
young lady!"

Chapter II

Another citizen said an eloquent thing about Miss Isabel Amberson's looks. This was Mrs. Henry
Franklin Foster, the foremost literary authority and intellectual leader of the community---for
both the daily newspapers thus described Mrs. Foster when she founded the Women's Tennyson
Club; and her word upon art, letters, and the drama was accepted more as law than as opinion.
Naturally, when "Hazel Kirke" finally reached the town, after its long triumph in larger places,
many people waited to hear what Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster thought of it before they felt warranted
in expressing any estimate of the play. In fact, some of them waited in the lobby of the theatre,
as they came out, and formed an inquiring group about her.

"I didn't see the play," she informed them.

"What! Why, we saw you, right in the middle of the fourth row!"

"Yes," she said, smiling, "but I was sitting just behind Isabelle Amberson. I couldn't look
at anything except her wavy brown hair and the wonderful back of her neck."

The ineligible young men of the town (they were all ineligible) were unable to content themselves
with the view that had so charmed Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster: they spent their time struggling
to keep Miss Amberson's face turned toward them. She turned it most often, observers said,
toward two: one excelling in the general struggle by his sparkle, and the other by that winning
if not winsome old trait, persistence. The sparkling gentleman "led germans" with her, and
sent sonnets to her with his bouquets--sonnets lacking neither music nor wit. He was generous,
poor, well-dressed, and his amazing persuasiveness was one reason why he was always in debt.
No one doubted that he would be able to persuade Isabel, but he unfortunately joined too merry
a party one night, and, during a moonlight serenade upon the lawn before the Amberson Mansion,
was easily identified from the windows as the person who stepped through the bass viol and
had to be assisted to a waiting carriage. One of Miss Amberson's brothers was among the serenaders,
and, when the party had dispersed, remained propped against the front door in a state of helpless
liveliness; the Major going down in a dressing-gown and slippers to bring him in, and scolding
mildly, while imperfectly concealing strong impulses to laughter. Miss Amberson also laughed
at this brother, the next day, but for the suitor it was a different matter: she refused to
see him when he called to apologize. "You seem to care a great deal about bass viols!" he wrote
her. "I promise never to break another." She made no response to the note, unless it was an
answer, two weeks later, when her engagement was announced. She took the persistent one, Wilbur
Minafer, no breaker of bass viols or of hearts, no serenader at all.

A few people, who always foresaw everything, claimed that they were not surprised, because
though Wilbur Minafer "might not be an Apollo, as it were," he was "a steady young business
man, and a good church-goer," and Isabel Amberson was "pretty sensible--for such a showy girl."
But the engagement astounded the young people, and most of their fathers and mothers, too;
and as a topic it supplanted literature at the next meeting of the "Women's Tennyson Club."

"Wilbur Minafer!" a member cried, her inflection seeming to imply that Wilbur's crime was explained
by his surname. "Wilbur Minafer! It's the queerest thing I ever heard! To think of her taking
Wilbur Minafer, just because a man any woman would like a thousand times better was a little
wild one night at a serenade!"

"No," said Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster. "It isn't that. It isn't even because she's afraid he'd
be a dissipated husband and she wants to be safe. It isn't because she's religious or hates
wildness; it isn't even because she hates wildness in him."

"Well, but look how she's thrown him over for it."

"No, that wasn't her reason," said the wise Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster. "If men only knew it--and
it's a good thing they don't--a woman doesn't really care much about whether a man's wild or
not, if it doesn't affect herself, and Isabel Amberson doesn't care a thing!"

"Mrs. Foster!"

"No, she doesn't. What she minds is his making a clown of himself in her front yard! It made
her think he didn't care much about her. She's probably mistaken, but that's what she thinks,
and it's too late for her to think anything else now, because she's going to be married right
away--the invitations will be out next week. It'll be a big Amberson-style thing, raw oysters
floating in scooped-out blocks of ice and a band from out-of-town--champagne, showy presents;
a colossal present from the Major. Then Wilbur will take Isabel on the carefulest little wedding
trip he can manage, and she'll be a good wife to him, but they'll have the worst spoiled lot
of children this town will ever see."

"How on earth do you make that out, Mrs. Foster?"

"She couldn't love Wilbur, could she?" Mrs. Foster demanded, with no challengers. "Well, it
will all go to her children, and she'll ruin 'em!"

The prophetess proved to be mistaken in a single detail merely: except for that, her foresight
was accurate. The wedding was of Ambersonian magnificence, even to the floating oysters; and
the Major's colossal present was a set of architect's designs for a house almost as elaborate
and impressive as the Mansion, the house to be built in Amberson Addition by the Major. The
orchestra was certainly not that local one which had suffered the loss of a bass viol; the
musicians came, according to the prophecy and next morning's paper, from afar; and at midnight
the bride was still being toasted in champagne, though she had departed upon her wedding journey
at ten. Four days later the pair had returned to town, which promptness seemed fairly to demonstrate
that Wilbur had indeed taken Isabel upon the carefulest little trip he could manage. According
to every report, she was from the start "a good wife to him," but here in a final detail the
prophecy proved inaccurate. Wilbur and Isabel did not have children; they had only one.

"Only one," Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster admitted. "But I'd like to know if he isn't spoiled
enough for a whole carload!"

Again she found none to challenge her.

At the age of nine, George Amberson Minafer, the Major's one grandchild, was a princely terror,
dreaded not only in Amberson Addition but in many other quarters through which he galloped
on his white pony. "By golly, I guess you think you own this town!" an embittered labourer
complained, one day, as Georgie rode the pony straight through a pile of sand the man was sieving.
"I will when I grow up," the undisturbed child replied. "I guess my grandpa owns it now, you
bet!" And the baffled workman, having no means to controvert what seemed a mere exaggeration
of the facts could only mutter "Oh, pull down your vest!"

"Don't haf to! Doctor says it ain't healthy!" the boy returned promptly. "But I'll tell you
what I'll do: I'll pull down my vest if you'll wipe off your chin!"

This was stock and stencil: the accustomed argot of street badinage of the period; and in such
matters Georgie was an expert. He had no vest to pull down; the incongruous fact was that a
fringed sash girdled the juncture of his velvet blouse and breeches, for the Fauntleroy period
had set in, and Georgie's mother had so poor an eye for appropriate things, where Georgie was
concerned, that she dressed him according to the doctrine of that school in boy decoration.
Not only did he wear a silk sash, and silk stockings, and a broad lace collar, with his little
black velvet suit: he had long brown curls, and often came home with burrs in them.

Except upon the surface (which was not his own work, but his mother's) Georgie bore no vivid
resemblance to the fabulous little Cedric. The storied boy's famous "Lean on me, grandfather,"
would have been difficult to imagine upon the lips of Georgie. A month after his ninth birthday
anniversary, when the Major gave him his pony, he had already become acquainted with the toughest
boys in various distant parts of the town, and had convinced them that the toughness of a rich
little boy with long curls might be considered in many respects superior to their own. He fought
them, learning how to go berserk at a certain point in a fight, bursting into tears of anger,
reaching for rocks, uttering wailed threats of murder and attempting to fulfil them. Fights
often led to intimacies, and he acquired the art of saying things more exciting than "Don't
haf to!" and "Doctor says it ain't healthy!" Thus, on a summer afternoon, a strange boy, sitting
bored upon the gate-post of the Reverend Malloch Smith, beheld George Amberson Minafer rapidly
approaching on his white pony, and was impelled by bitterness to shout: "Shoot the ole jackass!
Look at the girly curls! Say, bub, where'd you steal your mother's ole sash!"

"Your sister stole it for me!" Georgie instantly replied, checking the pony. "She stole it
off our clo'es-line an' gave it to me."

"You go get your hair cut!" said the stranger hotly. "Yah! I haven't got any sister!"

"I know you haven't at home," Georgie responded. "I mean the one that's in jail."

"I dare you to get down off that pony!"

Georgie jumped to the ground, and the other boy descended from the Reverend Mr. Smith's gatepost--but
he descended inside the gate. "I dare you outside that gate," said Georgie.

"Yah! I dare you half way here. I dare you--"

But these were luckless challenges, for Georgie immediately vaulted the fence--and four minutes
later Mrs. Malloch Smith, hearing strange noises, looked forth from a window; then screamed,
and dashed for the pastor's study. Mr. Malloch Smith, that grim-bearded Methodist, came to
the front yard and found his visiting nephew being rapidly prepared by Master Minafer to serve
as a principal figure in a pageant of massacre. It was with great physical difficulty that
Mr. Smith managed to give his nephew a chance to escape into the house, for Georgie was hard
and quick, and, in such matters, remarkably intense; but the minister, after a grotesque tussle,
got him separated from his opponent, and shook him.

"You stop that, you!" Georgie cried fiercely; and wrenched himself away. "I guess you don't
know who I am!"

"Yes, I do know!" the angered Mr. Smith retorted. "I know who you are, and you're a disgrace
to your mother! Your mother ought to be ashamed of herself to allow--"

"Shut up about my mother bein' ashamed of herself!"

Mr. Smith, exasperated, was unable to close the dialogue with dignity. "She ought to be ashamed,"
he repeated. "A woman that lets a bad boy like you--"

But Georgie had reached his pony and mounted. Before setting off at his accustomed gallop,
he paused to interrupt the Reverend Malloch Smith again. "You pull down your vest, you ole
Billygoat, you!" he shouted, distinctly. "Pull down your vest, wipe off your chin--an' go to hell!"

Such precocity is less unusual, even in children of the Rich, than most grown people imagine.
However, it was a new experience for the Reverend Malloch Smith, and left him in a state of
excitement. He at once wrote a note to Georgie's mother, describing the crime according to
his nephew's testimony; and the note reached Mrs. Minafer before Georgie did. When he got home
she read it to him sorrowfully.

Dear Madam: Your son has caused a painful distress in my household. He made an unprovoked attack
upon a little nephew of mine who is visiting in my household, insulted him by calling him vicious
names and falsehoods, stating that ladies of his family were in jail. He then tried to make
his pony kick him, and when the child, who is only eleven years old, while your son is much
older and stronger, endeavoured to avoid his indignities and withdraw quietly, he pursued him
into the enclosure of my property and brutally assaulted him. When I appeared upon this scene
he deliberately called insulting words to me, concluding with profanity, such as "go to hell,"
which was heard not only by myself but by my wife and the lady who lives next door. I trust
such a state of undisciplined behaviour may be remedied for the sake of the reputation for
propriety, if nothing higher, of the family to which this unruly child belongs.

Georgie had muttered various interruptions, and as she concluded the reading he said: "He's
an ole liar!"

"Georgie, you mustn't say 'liar.' Isn't this letter the truth?"

"Well," said Georgie, "how old am I?"

"Ten."

"Well, look how he says I'm older than a boy eleven years old."

"That's true," said Isabel. "He does. But isn't some of it true, Georgie?"

Georgie felt himself to be in a difficulty here, and he was silent.

"Georgie, did you say what he says you did?"

"Which one?"

"Did you tell him to--to--Did you say, 'Go to hell?"

Georgie looked worried for a moment longer; then he brightened. "Listen here, mamma; grandpa
wouldn't wipe his shoe on that ole story-teller, would he?"

"Georgie, you mustn't--"

"I mean: none of the Ambersons wouldn't have anything to do with him, would they? He doesn't
even know you, does he, mamma?"

"That hasn't anything to do with it."

"Yes, it has! I mean: none of the Amberson family go to see him, and they never have him come
in their house; they wouldn't ask him to, and they prob'ly wouldn't even let him."

"That isn't what we're talking about."

"I bet," said Georgie emphatically, "I bet if he wanted to see any of 'em, he'd haf to go around
to the side door!"

"No, dear, they--"

"Yes, they would, mamma! So what does it matter if I did say somep'm' to him he didn't like?
That kind o' people, I don't see why you can't say anything you want to, to 'em!"

"No, Georgie. And you haven't answered me whether you said that dreadful thing he says you did."

"Well--" said Georgie. "Anyway, he said somep'm' to me that made me mad." And upon this point
he offered no further details; he would not explain to his mother that what had made him "mad"
was Mr. Smith's hasty condemnation of herself: "Your mother ought to be ashamed," and, "A woman
that lets a bad boy like you--" Georgie did not even consider excusing himself by quoting these
insolences.

Isabel stroked his head. "They were terrible words for you to use, dear. From his letter he
doesn't seem a very tactful person, but--"

"He's just riffraff," said Georgie.

"You mustn't say so," his mother gently agreed "Where did you learn those bad words he speaks
of? Where did you hear any one use them?"

"Well, I've heard 'em several places. I guess Uncle George Amberson was the first I ever heard
say 'em. Uncle George Amberson said 'em to papa once. Papa didn't like it, but Uncle George
was just laughin' at papa, an' then he said 'em while he was laughin'."

"That was wrong of him," she said, but almost instinctively he detected the lack of conviction
in her tone. It was Isabel's great failing that whatever an Amberson did seemed right to her,
especially if the Amberson was either her brother George, or her son George. She knew that
she should be more severe with the latter now, but severity with him was beyond her power;
and the Reverend Malloch Smith had succeeded only in rousing her resentment against himself.
Georgie's symmetrical face--altogether an Amberson face--had looked never more beautiful to
her. It always looked unusually beautiful when she tried to be severe with him. "You must promise
me," she said feebly, "never to use those bad words again."

"I promise not to," he said promptly--and he whispered an immediate codicil under his breath:
"Unless I get mad at somebody!" This satisfied a code according to which, in his own sincere
belief, he never told lies.

"That's a good boy," she said, and he ran out to the yard, his punishment over. Some admiring
friends were gathered there; they had heard of his adventure, knew of the note, and were waiting
to see what was going to "happen" to him. They hoped for an account of things, and also that
he would allow them to "take turns" riding his pony to the end of the alley and back.

They were really his henchmen: Georgie was a lord among boys. In fact, he was a personage among
certain sorts of grown people, and was often fawned upon; the alley negroes delighted in him,
chuckled over him, flattered him slavishly. For that matter, he often heard well-dressed people
speaking of him admiringly: a group of ladies once gathered about him on the pavement where
he was spinning a top. "I know this is Georgie!" one exclaimed, and turned to the others with
the impressiveness of a showman. "Major Amberson's only grandchild!" The others said, "It is?"
and made clicking sounds with their mouths; two of them loudly whispering, "So handsome!"

Georgie, annoyed because they kept standing upon the circle he had chalked for his top, looked
at them coldly and offered a suggestion:

"Oh, go hire a hall!"

As an Amberson, he was already a public character, and the story of his adventure in the Reverend
Malloch Smith's front yard became a town topic. Many people glanced at him with great distaste,
thereafter, when they chanced to encounter him, which meant nothing to Georgie, because he
innocently believed most grown people to be necessarily cross-looking as a normal phenomenon
resulting from the adult state; and he failed to comprehend that the distasteful glances had
any personal bearing upon himself. If he had perceived such a bearing, he would have been affected
only so far, probably, as to mutter, "Riffraff!" Possibly he would have shouted it; and, certainly,
most people believed a story that went round the town just after Mrs. Amberson's funeral, when
Georgie was eleven. Georgie was reported to have differed with the undertaker about the seating
of the family; his indignant voice had become audible: "Well, who is the most important person
at my own grandmother's funeral?" And later he had projected his head from the window of the
foremost mourners' carriage, as the undertaker happened to pass.

"Riffraff!"

There were people--grown people they were--who expressed themselves longingly: they did hope
to live to see the day, they said, when that boy would get his come-upance! (They used that
honest word, so much better than "deserts," and not until many years later to be more clumsily
rendered as "what is coming to him.") Something was bound to take him down, some day, and they
only wanted to be there! But Georgie heard nothing of this, and the yearners for his taking
down went unsatisfied, while their yearning grew the greater as the happy day of fulfilment
was longer and longer postponed. His grandeur was not diminished by the Malloch Smith story;
the rather it was increased, and among other children (especially among little girls) there
was added to the prestige of his gilded position that diabolical glamour which must inevitably
attend a boy who has told a minister to go to hell.

Chapter III

Until he reached the age of twelve, Georgie's education was a domestic process; tutors came
to the house; and those citizens who yearned for his taking down often said: "Just wait till
he has to go to public school; then he'll get it!" But at twelve Georgie was sent to a private
school in the town, and there came from this small and dependent institution no report, or
even rumour, of Georgie's getting anything that he was thought to deserve; therefore the yearning
still persisted, though growing gaunt with feeding upon itself. For, although Georgie's pomposities
and impudence in the little school were often almost unbearable, the teachers were fascinated
by him. They did not like him--he was too arrogant for that--but he kept them in such a state
of emotion that they thought more about him than they did about all of the other ten pupils.
The emotion he kept them in was usually one resulting from injured self-respect, but sometimes
it was dazzled admiration. So far as their conscientious observation went, he "studied" his
lessons sparingly; but sometimes, in class, he flashed an admirable answer, with a comprehension
not often shown by the pupils they taught; and he passed his examinations easily. In all, without
discernible effort, he acquired at this school some rudiments of a liberal education and learned
nothing whatever about himself.

The yearners were still yearning when Georgie, at sixteen, was sent away to a great "Prep School."
"Now," they said brightly, "he'll get it! He'll find himself among boys just as important in
their home towns as he is, and they'll knock the stuffing out of him when he puts on his airs
with them! Oh, but that would be worth something to see!" They were mistaken, it appeared,
for when Georgie returned, a few months later, he still seemed to have the same stuffing. He
had been deported by the authorities, the offense being stated as "insolence and profanity";
in fact, he had given the principal of the school instructions almost identical with those
formerly objected to by the Reverend Malloch Smith.

But he had not got his come-upance, and those who counted upon it were embittered by his appearance
upon the down-town streets driving a dog-cart at criminal speed, making pedestrians retreat
from the crossings, and behaving generally as if he "owned the earth." A disgusted hardware
dealer of middle age, one of those who hungered for Georgie's downfall, was thus driven back
upon the sidewalk to avoid being run over, and so far forgot himself as to make use of the
pet street insult of the year: "Got 'ny sense! See here, bub, does your mother know you're out?"

Georgie, without even seeming to look at him, flicked the long lash of his whip dexterously,
and a little spurt of dust came from the hardware man's trousers, not far below the waist.
He was not made of hardware: he raved, looking for a missile; then, finding none, commanded
himself sufficiently to shout after the rapid dog-cart: "Turn down your pants, you would-be
dude! Raining in dear ole Lunnon! Git off the earth!"

Georgie gave him no encouragement to think that he was heard. The dog-cart turned the next
corner, causing indignation there, likewise, and, having proceeded some distance farther, halted
in front of the "Amberson Block"--an old-fashioned four-story brick warren of lawyers offices,
insurance and realestate offices, with a "drygoods store" occupying the ground floor. Georgie
tied his lathered trotter to a telegraph pole, and stood for a moment looking at the building
critically: it seemed shabby, and he thought his grandfather ought to replace it with a fourteen-story
skyscraper, or even a higher one, such as he had lately seen in New York--when he stopped there
for a few days of recreation and rest on his way home from the bereaved school. About the entryway
to the stairs were various tin signs, announcing the occupation and location of upper-floor
tenants, and Georgie decided to take some of these with him if he should ever go to college.
However, he did not stop to collect them at this time, but climbed the worn stairs--there was
no elevator--to the fourth floor, went down a dark corridor, and rapped three times upon a
door. It was a mysterious door, its upper half, of opaque glass, bearing no sign to state the
business or profession of the occupants within; but overhead, upon the lintel, four letters
had been smearingly inscribed, partly with purple ink and partly with a soft lead pencil, "F.
O. T. A." and upon the plaster wall, above the lintel, there was a drawing dear to male adolescence:
a skull and crossbones.

Three raps, similar to Georgie's, sounded from within the room. Georgie then rapped four times
the rapper within the room rapped twice, and Georgie rapped seven times. This ended precautionary
measures; and a well-dressed boy of sixteen opened the door; whereupon Georgie entered quickly,
and the door was closed behind him. Seven boys of congenial age were seated in a semicircular
row of damaged office chairs, facing a platform whereon stood a solemn, red-haired young personage
with a table before him. At one end of the room there was a battered sideboard, and upon it
were some empty beer bottles, a tobacco can about two-thirds full, with a web of mold over
the surface of the tobacco, a dusty cabinet photograph (not inscribed) of Miss Lillian Russell,
several withered old pickles, a caseknife, and a half-petrified section of icing-cake on a
sooty plate. At the other end of the room were two rickety card-tables and a stand of bookshelves
where were displayed under dust four or five small volumes of M. Guy de Maupassant's stories,
"Robinson Crusoe," "Sappho," "Mr. Barnes of New York," a work by Giovanni Boccaccio, a Bible,
"The Arabian Nights' Entertainment," "Studies of the Human Form Divine," "The Little Minister,"
and a clutter of monthly magazines and illustrated weeklies of about that crispness one finds
in such articles upon a doctor's ante-room table. Upon the wall, above the sideboard, was an
old framed lithograph of Miss Della Fox in "Wang"; over the bookshelves there was another lithograph
purporting to represent Mr. John L. Sullivan in a boxing costume, and beside it a halftone
reproduction of "A Reading From Horner." The final decoration consisted of damaged papiermache--a
round shield with two battle-axes and two cross-hilted swords, upon the wall over the little
platform where stood the red-haired presiding officer. He addressed Georgie in a serious voice:

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Welcome, Friend of the Ace," Georgie responded, and all of the other boys repeated the words,
"Welcome, Friend of the Ace."

"Take your seat in the secret semicircle," said the presiding officer. "We will now proceed to--"

But Georgie was disposed to be informal. He interrupted, turning to the boy who had admitted
him: "Look here, Charlie Johnson, what's Fred Kinney doing in the president's chair? That's
my place, isn't it? What you men been up to here, anyhow? Didn't you all agree I was to be
president just the same, even if I was away at school?"

"Well--" said Charlie Johnson uneasily. "Listen! I didn't have much to do with it. Some of
the other members thought that long as you weren't in town or anything, and Fred gave the sideboard,
why--"

Mr. Kinney, presiding, held in his hand, in lieu of a gavel, and considered much more impressive,
a Civil War relic known as a "horse-pistol." He rapped loudly for order. "All Friends of the
Ace will take their seats!" he said sharply. "I'm president of the F. O. T. A. now, George
Minafer, and don't you forget it! You and Charlie Johnson sit down, because I was elected perfectly
fair, and we're goin' to hold a meeting here."

"Oh, you are, are you?" said George skeptically.

Charlie Johnson thought to mollify him. "Well, didn't we call this meeting just especially
because you told us to? You said yourself we ought to have a kind of celebration because you've
got back to town, George, and that's what we're here for now, and everything. What do you care
about being president? All it amounts to is just calling the roll and--"

The president de facto hammered the table. "This meeting will now proceed to--"

"No, it won't," said George, and he advanced to the desk, laughing contemptuously. "Get off
that platform."

"This meeting will come to order!" Mr. Kinney commanded fiercely.

"You put down that gavel," said George. "Whose is it, I'd like to know? It belongs to my grandfather,
and you quit hammering it that way or you'll break it, and I'll have to knock your head off."

"This meeting will come to order! I was legally elected here, and I'm not going to be bulldozed!"

"All right," said Georgie. "You're president. Now we'll hold another election."

"We will not!" Fred Kinney shouted. "We'll have our reg'lar meeting, and then we'll play euchre
& nickel a corner, what we're here for. This meeting will now come to ord--"

Georgie addressed the members. "I'd like to know who got up this thing in the first place,"
he said. "Who's the founder of the F.O.T.A., if you please? Who got this room rent free? Who
got the janitor to let us have most of this furniture? You suppose you could keep this clubroom
a minute if I told my grandfather I didn't want it for a literary club any more? I'd like to
say a word on how you members been acting, too! When I went away I said I didn't care if you
had a vice-president or something while I was gone, but here I hardly turned my back and you
had to go and elect Fred Kinney president! Well, if that's what you want, you can have it.
I was going to have a little celebration down here some night pretty soon, and bring some port
wine, like we drink at school in our crowd there, and I was going to get my grandfather to
give the club an extra room across the hall, and prob'ly I could get my Uncle George to give
us his old billiard table, because he's got a new one, and the club could put it in the other
room. Well, you got a new president now!" Here Georgie moved toward the door and his tone became
plaintive, though undeniably there was disdain beneath his sorrow. "I guess all I better do
is--resign!"

And he opened the door, apparently intending to withdraw.

"All in favour of having a new election," Charlie Johnson shouted hastily, "say, 'Aye'!"

"Aye" was said by everyone present except Mr. Kinney, who began a hot protest, but it was immediately
smothered.

"All in favour of me being president instead of Fred Kinney," shouted Georgie, "say 'Aye.'
The 'Ayes' have it!"

 "I resign," said the red-headed boy, gulping as he descended from the
platform. "I resign from the club!"

Hot-eyed, he found his hat and departed, jeers echoing after him as he plunged down the corridor.
Georgie stepped upon the platform, and took up the emblem of office.

"Ole red-head Fred'll be around next week," said the new chairman. "He'll be around boot-lickin'
to get us to take him back in again, but I guess we don't want him: that fellow always was
a trouble-maker. We will now proceed with our meeting. Well, fellows, I suppose you want to
hear from your president. I don't know that I have much to say, as I have already seen most
of you a few times since I got back. I had a good time at the old school, back East, but had
a little trouble with the faculty and came on home. My family stood by me as well as I could
ask, and I expect to stay right here in the old town until whenever I decide to enter college.
Now, I don't suppose there's any more business before the meeting. I guess we might as well
play cards. Anybody that's game for a little quarter-limit poker or any limit they say, why
I'd like to have 'em sit at the president's card-table."

When the diversions of the Friends of the Ace were concluded for that afternoon, Georgie invited
his chief supporter, Mr. Charlie Johnson, to drive home with him to dinner, and as they jingled
up National Avenue in the dog-cart, Charlie asked:

"What sort of men did you run up against at that school, George?"

"Best crowd there: finest set of men I ever met."

"How'd you get in with 'em?"

Georgie laughed. "I let them get in with me, Charlie," he said in a tone of gentle explanation.
"It's vulgar to do any other way. Did I tell you the nickname they gave me--'King'? That was
what they called me at that school, 'King Minafer."

"How'd they happen to do that?" his friend asked innocently.

"Oh, different things," George answered lightly. "Of course, any of 'em that came from anywhere
out in this part the country knew about the family and all that, and so I suppose it was a
good deal on account of--oh, on account of the family and the way I do things, most likely."

Chapter IV

When Mr. George Amberson Minafer came home for the holidays at Christmastide, in his sophomore
year, probably no great change had taken place inside him, but his exterior was visibly altered.

Cards were out for a ball in his honour, and this pageant of the tenantry was held in the ballroom
of the Amberson Mansion the night after his arrival. It was, as Mrs. Henry Franklin Foster
said of Isabel's wedding, "a big Amberson-style thing," though that wise Mrs. Henry Franklin
Foster had long ago gone the way of all wisdom, having stepped out of the Midland town, unquestionably
into heaven--a long step, but not beyond her powers. She had successors, but no successor;
the town having grown too large to confess that it was intellectually led and literarily authoritated
by one person; and some of these successors were not invited to the ball, for dimensions were
now so metropolitan that intellectual leaders and literary authorities loomed in outlying regions
unfamiliar to the Ambersons. However, all "old citizens" recognizable as gentry received cards,
and of course so did their dancing descendants.

The orchestra and the caterer were brought from away, in the Amberson manner, though this was
really a gesture--perhaps one more of habit than of ostentation--for servitors of gaiety as
proficient as these importations were nowadays to be found in the town. Even flowers and plants
and roped vines were brought from afar--not, however, until the stock of the local florists
proved insufficient to obliterate the interior structure of the big house, in the Amberson
way. It was the last of the great, long remembered dances that "everybody talked about"--there
were getting to be so many people in town that no later than the next year there were too many
for "everybody" to hear of even such a ball as the Ambersons'.

George, white-gloved, with a gardenia in his buttonhole, stood with his mother and the Major,
embowered in the big red and gold drawing room downstairs, to "receive" the guests; and, standing
thus together, the trio offered a picturesque example of good looks persistent through three
generations. The Major, his daughter, and his grandson were of a type all Amberson: tall, straight,
and regular, with dark eyes, short noses, good chins; and the grandfather's expression, no
less than the grandson's, was one of faintly amused condescension. There was a difference,
however. The grandson's unlined young face had nothing to offer except this condescension;
the grandfather's had other things to say. It was a handsome, worldly old face, conscious of
its importance, but persuasive rather than arrogant, and not without tokens of sufferings withstood.
The Major's short white hair was parted in the middle, like his grandson's, and in all he stood
as briskly equipped to the fashion as exquisite young George.

Isabel, standing between her father and her son caused a vague amazement in the mind of the
latter. Her age, just under forty, was for George a thought of something as remote as the moons
of Jupiter: he could not possibly have conceived such an age ever coming to be his own: five
years was the limit of his thinking in time. Five years ago he had been a child not yet fourteen;
and those five years were an abyss. Five years hence he would be almost twenty-four; what the
girls he knew called "one of the older men." He could imagine himself at twenty-four, but beyond
that, his powers staggered and refused the task. He saw little essential difference between
thirty-eight and eighty-eight, and his mother was to him not a woman but wholly a mother. He
had no perception of her other than as an adjunct to himself, his mother; nor could he imagine
her thinking or doing anything--falling in love, walking with a friend, or reading a book--as
a woman, and not as his mother. The woman, Isabel, was a stranger to her son; as completely
a stranger as if he had never in his life seen her or heard her voice. And it was to-night,
while he stood with her, "receiving," that he caught a disquieting glimpse of this stranger
whom he thus fleetingly encountered for the first time.

Youth cannot imagine romance apart from youth. That is why the roles of the heroes and heroines
of plays are given by the managers to the most youthful actors they can find among the competent.
Both middle-aged people and young people enjoy a play about young lovers; but only middle-aged
people will tolerate a play about middle-aged lovers; young people will not come to see such
a play, because, for them, middle-aged lovers are a joke--not a very funny one. Therefore,
to bring both the middle-aged people and the young people into his house, the manager makes
his romance as young as he can. Youth will indeed be served, and its profound instinct is to
be not only scornfully amused but vaguely angered by middle-age romance. So, standing beside
his mother, George was disturbed by a sudden impression, coming upon him out of nowhere, so
far as he could detect, that her eyes were brilliant, that she was graceful and youthful--in
a word, that she was romantically lovely.

He had one of those curious moments that seem to have neither a cause nor any connection with
actual things. While it lasted, he was disquieted not by thoughts--for he had no definite thoughts--but
by a slight emotion like that caused in a dream by the presence of something invisible soundless,
and yet fantastic. There was nothing different or new about his mother, except her new black
and silver dress: she was standing there beside him, bending her head a little in her greetings,
smiling the same smile she had worn for the half-hour that people had been passing the "receiving"
group. Her face was flushed, but the room was warm; and shaking hands with so many people easily
accounted for the pretty glow that was upon her. At any time she could have "passed" for twenty-five
or twenty-six--a man of fifty would have honestly guessed her to be about thirty but possibly
two or three years younger--and though extraordinary in this, she had been extraordinary in
it for years. There was nothing in either her looks or her manner to explain George's uncomfortable
feeling; and yet it increased, becoming suddenly a vague resentment, as if she had done something
unmotherly to him.

The fantastic moment passed; and even while it lasted, he was doing his duty, greeting two
pretty girls with whom he had grown up, as people say, and warmly assuring them that he remembered
them very well--an assurance which might have surprised them "in anybody but Georgie Minafer!"
It seemed unnecessary, since he had spent many hours with them no longer ago than the preceding
August, They had with them their parents and an uncle from out of town; and George negligently
gave the parents the same assurance he had given the daughters, but murmured another form of
greeting to the out-of-town uncle, whom he had never seen before. This person George absently
took note of as a "queer-looking duck." Undergraduates had not yet adopted "bird." It was a
period previous to that in which a sophomore would have thought of the Sharon girls' uncle
as a "queer-looking bird," or, perhaps a "funny-face bird." In George's time, every human male
was to be defined, at pleasure, as a "duck"; but "duck" was not spoken with admiring affection,
as in its former feminine use to signify a "dear"--on the contrary, "duck" implied the speaker's
personal detachment and humorous superiority. An indifferent amusement was what George felt
when his mother, with a gentle emphasis, interrupted his interchange of courtesies with the
nieces to present him to the queer-looking duck their uncle. This emphasis of Isabel's, though
slight, enabled George to perceive that she considered the queer-looking duck a person of some
importance; but it was far from enabling him to understand why. The duck parted his thick and
longish black hair on the side; his tie was a forgetful looking thing, and his coat, though
it fitted a good enough middle-aged figure, no product of this year, or of last year either.
One of his eyebrows was noticeably higher than the other; and there were whimsical lines between
them, which gave him an apprehensive expression; but his apprehensions were evidently more
humorous than profound, for his prevailing look was that of a genial man of affairs, not much
afraid of anything whatever Nevertheless, observing only his unfashionable hair, his eyebrows,
his preoccupied tie and his old coat, the olympic George set him down as a queer-looking duck,
and having thus completed his portrait, took no interest in him.

The Sharon girls passed on, taking the queer-looking duck with them, and George became pink
with mortification as his mother called his attention to a white-bearded guest waiting to shake
his hand. This was George's great-uncle, old John Minafer: it was old John's boast that in
spite of his connection by marriage with the Ambersons, he never had worn and never would wear
a swaller-tail coat. Members of his family had exerted their influence uselessly--at eighty-nine
conservative people seldom form radical new habits, and old John wore his "Sunday suit" of
black broadcloth to the Amberson ball. The coat was square, with skirts to the knees; old John
called it a "Prince Albert" and was well enough pleased with it, but his great-nephew considered
it the next thing to an insult. George's purpose had been to ignore the man, but he had to
take his hand for a moment; whereupon old John began to tell George that he was looking well,
though there had been a time, during his fourth month, when he was so puny that nobody thought
he would live. The great-nephew, in a fury of blushes, dropped old John's hand with some vigour,
and seized that of the next person in the line. "Member you v'ry well 'ndeed!" he said fiercely.

The large room had filled, and so had the broad hall and the rooms on the other side of the
hall, where there were tables for whist. The imported orchestra waited in the ballroom on the
third floor, but a local harp, 'cello, violin, and flute were playing airs from "The Fencing
Master" in the hall, and people were shouting over the music. Old John Minafer's voice was
louder and more penetrating than any other, because he had been troubled with deafness for
twenty-five years, heard his own voice but faintly, and liked to hear it. "Smell o' flowers
like this always puts me in mind o' funerals," he kept telling his niece, Fanny Minafer, who
was with him; and he seemed to get a great deal of satisfaction out of this reminder. His tremulous
yet strident voice cut through the voluminous sound that filled the room, and he was heard
everywhere: "Always got to think o' funerals when I smell so many flowers!" And, as the pressure
of people forced Fanny and himself against the white marble mantelpiece, he pursued this train
of cheery thought, shouting, "Right here's where the Major's wife was laid out at her funeral.
They had her in a good light from that big bow window." He paused to chuckle mournfully. "I
s'pose that's where they'll put the Major when his time comes."

Presently George's mortification was increased to hear this sawmill droning harshly from the
midst of the thickening crowd: "Ain't the dancin' broke out yet, Fanny? Hoopla! Le's push through
and go see the young women-folks crack their heels! Start the circus! Hoopse-daisy!" Miss Fanny
Minafer, in charge of the lively veteran, was almost as distressed as her nephew George, but
she did her duty and managed to get old John through the press and out to the broad stairway,
which numbers of young people were now ascending to the ballroom. And here the sawmill voice
still rose over all others: "Solid black walnut every inch of it, balustrades and all. Sixty
thousand dollars' worth o' carved woodwork in the house! Like water! Spent money like water!
Always did! Still do! Like water! God knows where it all comes from!"

He continued the ascent, barking and coughing among the gleaming young heads, white shoulders,
jewels, and chiffon, like an old dog slowly swimming up the rapids of a sparkling river; while
down below, in the drawing room, George began to recover from the degradation into which this
relic of early settler days had dragged him. What restored him completely was a dark-eyed little
beauty of nineteen, very knowing in lustrous blue and jet; at sight of this dashing advent
in the line of guests before him, George was fully an Amberson again.

"Remember you very well indeed!" he said, his graciousness more earnest than any he had heretofore
displayed. Isabel heard him and laughed.

"But you don't, George!" she said. "You don't remember her yet, though of course you will!
Miss Morgan is from out of town, and I'm afraid this is the first time you've ever seen her.
You might take her up to the dancing; I think you've pretty well done your duty here."

"Be d'lighted," George responded formally, and offered his arm, not with a flourish, certainly,
but with an impressiveness inspired partly by the appearance of the person to whom he offered
it, partly by his being the hero of this fete, and partly by his youthfulness--for when manners
are new they are apt to be elaborate. The little beauty entrusted her gloved fingers to his
coat-sleeve, and they moved away together.

Their progress was necessarily slow, and to George's mind it did not lack stateliness. How
could it? Musicians, hired especially for him, were sitting in a grove of palms in the hall
and now tenderly playing "Oh, Promise Me" for his pleasuring; dozens and scores of flowers
had been brought to life and tended to this hour that they might sweeten the air for him while
they died; and the evanescent power that music and floral scents hold over youth stirred his
appreciation of strange, beautiful qualities within his own bosom: he seemed to himself to
be mysteriously angelic, and about to do something which would overwhelm the beautiful young
stranger upon his arm.

Elderly people and middle-aged people moved away to let him pass with his honoured fair beside
him. Worthy middle-class creatures, they seemed, leading dull lives but appreciative of better
things when they saw them--and George's bosom was fleetingly touched with a pitying kindness.
And since the primordial day when caste or heritage first set one person, in his own esteem,
above his fellow-beings, it is to be doubted if anybody ever felt more illustrious, or more
negligently grand, than George Amberson Minafer felt at this party.

As he conducted Miss Morgan through the hall, toward the stairway, they passed the open double
doors of a card room, where some squadrons of older people were preparing for action, and,
leaning gracefully upon the mantelpiece of this room, a tall man, handsome, high-mannered,
and sparklingly point-device, held laughing converse with that queer-looking duck, the Sharon
girls' uncle. The tall gentleman waved a gracious salutation to George, and Miss Morgan's curiosity
was stirred. "Who is that?"

"I didn't catch his name when my mother presented him to me," said George. "You mean the queer-looking
duck."

"I mean the aristocratic duck."

"That's my Uncle George Honourable George Amberson. I thought everybody knew him."

"He looks as though everybody ought to know him," she said. "It seems to run in your family."

If she had any sly intention, it skipped over George harmlessly. "Well, of course, I suppose
most everybody does," he admitted--"out in this part of the country especially. Besides, Uncle
George is in Congress; the family like to have someone there."

"Why?"

"Well, it's sort of a good thing in one way. For instance, my Uncle Sydney Amberson and his
wife, Aunt Amelia, they haven't got much of anything to do with themselves--get bored to death
around here, of course. Well, probably Uncle George'll have Uncle Sydney appointed minister
or ambassador, or something like that, to Russia or Italy or somewhere, and that'll make it
pleasant when any of the rest of the family go travelling, or things like that. I expect to
do a good deal of travelling myself when I get out of college."

On the stairway he pointed out this prospective ambassadorial couple, Sydney and Amelia. They
were coming down, fronting the ascending tide, and as conspicuous over it as a king and queen
in a play. Moreover, as the clear-eyed Miss Morgan remarked, the very least they looked was
ambassadorial. Sydney was an Amberson exaggerated, more pompous than gracious; too portly,
flushed, starched to a shine, his stately jowl furnished with an Edward the Seventh beard.
Amelia, likewise full-bodied, showed glittering blond hair exuberantly dressed; a pink, fat
face cold under a white-hot tiara; a solid, cold bosom under a white-hot necklace; great, cold,
gloved arms, and the rest of her beautifully upholstered. Amelia was an Amberson born, herself,
Sydney's second-cousin: they had no children, and Sydney was without a business or a profession;
thus both found a great deal of time to think about the appropriateness of their becoming Excellencies.
And as George ascended the broad stairway, they were precisely the aunt and uncle he was most
pleased to point out, to a girl from out of town, as his appurtenances in the way of relatives.
At sight of them the grandeur of the Amberson family was instantly conspicuous as a permanent
thing: it was impossible to doubt that the Ambersons were entrenched, in their nobility and
riches, behind polished and glittering barriers which were as solid as they were brilliant,
and would last.

Chapter V

The hero of the fete, with the dark-eyed little beauty upon his arm, reached the top of the
second flight of stairs; and here, beyond a spacious landing, where two proud-like darkies
tended a crystalline punch bowl, four wide archways in a rose-vine lattice framed gliding silhouettes
of waltzers, already smoothly at it to the castanets of "La Paloma." Old John Minafer, evidently
surfeited, was in the act of leaving these delights. "D'want 'ny more o' that!" he barked.
"Just slidin' around! Call that dancin'? Rather see a jig any day in the world! They ain't
very modest, some of 'em. I don't mind that, though. Not me!"

Miss Fanny Minafer was no longer in charge of him: he emerged from the ballroom escorted by
a middle-aged man of commonplace appearance. The escort had a dry, lined face upon which, not
ornamentally but as a matter of course, there grew a business man's short moustache; and his
thin neck showed an Adam's apple, but not conspicuously, for there was nothing conspicuous
about him. Baldish, dim, quiet, he was an unnoticeable part of this festival, and although
there were a dozen or more middle-aged men present, not casually to be distinguished from him
in general aspect, he was probably the last person in the big house at whom a stranger would
have glanced twice. It did not enter George's mind to mention to Miss Morgan that this was
his father, or to say anything whatever about him.

Mr. Minafer shook his son's hand unobtrusively in passing.

"I'll take Uncle John home," he said, in a low voice. "Then I guess I'll go on home myself--I'm
not a great hand at parties, you know. Good-night, George."

George murmured a friendly enough good-night without pausing. Ordinarily he was not ashamed
of the Minafers; he seldom thought about them at all, for he belonged, as most American children
do, to the mother's family--but he was anxious not to linger with Miss Morgan in the vicinity
of old John, whom he felt to be a disgrace.

He pushed brusquely through the fringe of calculating youths who were gathered in the arches,
watching for chances to dance only with girls who would soon be taken off their hands, and
led his stranger lady out upon the floor. They caught the time instantly, and were away in
the waltz.

George danced well, and Miss Morgan seemed to float as part of the music, the very dove itself
of "La Paloma." They said nothing as they danced; her eyes were cast down all the while--the
prettiest gesture for a dancer--and there was left in the universe, for each, of them, only
their companionship in this waltz; while the faces of the other dancers, swimming by, denoted
not people but merely blurs of colour. George became conscious of strange feelings within him:
an exaltation of soul, tender, but indefinite, and seemingly located in the upper part of his
diaphragm.

The stopping of the music came upon him like the waking to an alarm clock; for instantly six
or seven of the calculating persons about the entry-ways bore down upon Miss Morgan to secure
dances. George had to do with one already established as a belle, it seemed.

"Give me the next and the one after that," he said hurriedly, recovering some presence of mind,
just as the nearest applicant reached them. "And give me every third one the rest of the evening."

She laughed. "Are you asking?"

"What do you mean, 'asking'?"

"It sounded as though you were just telling me to give you all those dances."

"Well, I want 'em!" George insisted.

"What about all the other girls it's your duty to dance with?"

"They'll have to go without," he said heartlessly; and then, with surprising vehemence: "Here!
I want to know: Are you going to give me those--"

"Good gracious!" she laughed. "Yes!"

The applicants flocked round her, urging contracts for what remained, but they did not dislodge
George from her side, though he made it evident that they succeeded in annoying him; and presently
he extricated her from an accumulating siege--she must have connived in the extrication--and
bore her off to sit beside him upon the stairway that led to the musicians' gallery, where
they were sufficiently retired, yet had a view of the room.

"How'd all those ducks get to know you so quick?" George inquired, with little enthusiasm.

"Oh, I've been here a week."

"Looks as if you'd been pretty busy!" he said. "Most of those ducks, I don't know what my mother
wanted to invite 'em here for."

"Oh, I used to see something of a few of 'em. I was president of a club we had here, and some
of 'em belonged to it, but I don't care much for that sort of thing any more. I really don't
see why my mother invited 'em."

"Perhaps it was on account of their parents," Miss Morgan suggested mildly. "Maybe she didn't
want to offend their fathers and mothers."

"Oh, hardly! I don't think my mother need worry much about offending anybody in this old town."

"It must be wonderful," said Miss Morgan. "It must be wonderful, Mr. Amberson--Mr. Minafer,
I mean."

"What must be wonderful?"

"To be so important as that!"

"That isn't 'important," George assured her. "Anybody that really is anybody ought to be able
to do about as they like in their own town, I should think!"

She looked at him critically from under her shading lashes--but her eyes grew gentler almost
at once. In truth, they became more appreciative than critical. George's imperious good looks
were altogether manly, yet approached actual beauty as closely as a boy's good looks should
dare; and dance-music and flowers have some effect upon nineteen-year-old girls as well as
upon eighteen-year-old boys. Miss Morgan turned her eyes slowly from George, and pressed her
face among the lilies-of-the-valley and violets of the pretty bouquet she carried, while, from
the gallery above, the music of the next dance carolled out merrily in a new two-step. The
musicians made the melody gay for the Christmastime with chimes of sleighbells, and the entrance
to the shadowed stairway framed the passing flushed and lively dancers, but neither George
nor Miss Morgan suggested moving to join the dance.

The stairway was draughty: the steps were narrow and uncomfortable; no older person would have
remained in such a place. Moreover, these two young people were strangers to each other; neither
had said anything in which the other had discovered the slightest intrinsic interest; there
had not arisen between them the beginnings of congeniality, or even of friendliness--but stairways
near ballrooms have more to answer for than have moonlit lakes and mountain sunsets. Some day
the laws of glamour must be discovered, because they are so important that the world would
be wiser now if Sir Isaac Newton had been hit on the head, not by an apple, but by a young lady.

Age, confused by its own long accumulation of follies, is everlastingly inquiring, "What does
she see in him?" as if young love came about through thinking--or through conduct. Age wants
to know: "What on earth can they talk about?" as if talking had anything to do with April rains!
At seventy, one gets up in the morning, finds the air sweet under a bright sun, feels lively;
thinks, "I am hearty, today," and plans to go for a drive. At eighteen, one goes to a dance,
sits with a stranger on a stairway, feels peculiar, thinks nothing, and becomes incapable of
any plan whatever. Miss Morgan and George stayed where they were.

They had agreed to this in silence and without knowing it; certainly without exchanging glances
of intelligence--they had exchanged no glances at all. Both sat staring vaguely out into the
ballroom, and, for a time, they did not speak. Over their heads the music reached a climax
of vivacity: drums, cymbals, triangle, and sleighbells, beating, clashing, tinkling. Here and
there were to be seen couples so carried away that, ceasing to move at the decorous, even glide,
considered most knowing, they pranced and whirled through the throng, from wall to wall, galloping
bounteously in abandon. George suffered a shock of vague surprise when he perceived that his
aunt, Fanny Minafer, was the lady-half of one of these wild couples.

Fanny Minafer, who rouged a little, was like fruit which in some climates dries with the bloom
on. Her features had remained prettily childlike; so had her figure, and there were times when
strangers, seeing her across the street, took her to be about twenty; they were other times
when at the same distance they took her to be about sixty, instead of forty, as she was. She
had old days and young days; old hours and young hours; old minutes and young minutes; for
the change might be that quick. An alteration in her expression, or a difference in the attitude
of her head, would cause astonishing indentations to appear--and behold, Fanny was an old lady!
But she had been never more childlike than she was tonight as she flew over the floor in the
capable arms of the queer-looking duck; for this person was her partner.

The queer-looking duck had been a real dancer in his day, it appeared; and evidently his day
was not yet over. In spite of the headlong, gay rapidity with which he bore Miss Fanny about
the big room, he danced authoritatively, avoiding without effort the lightest collision with
other couples, maintaining sufficient grace throughout his wildest moments, and all the while
laughing and talking with his partner. What was most remarkable to George, and a little irritating,
this stranger in the Amberson Mansion had no vestige of the air of deference proper to a stranger
in such a place: he seemed thoroughly at home. He seemed offensively so, indeed, when, passing
the entrance to the gallery stairway, he disengaged his hand from Miss Fanny's for an instant,
and not pausing in the dance, waved a laughing salutation more than cordial, then capered lightly
out of sight.

George gazed stonily at this manifestation, responding neither by word nor sign. "How's that
for a bit of freshness?" he murmured.

"What was?" Miss Morgan asked.

"That queer-looking duck waving his hand at me like that. Except he's the Sharon girls' uncle
I don't know him from Adam."

"You don't need to," she said. "He wasn't waving his hand to you: he meant me."

"Oh, he did?" George was not mollified by the explanation. "Everybody seems to mean you! You
certainly do seem to've been pretty busy this week you've been here!"

She pressed her bouquet to her face again, and laughed into it, not displeased. She made no
other comment, and for another period neither spoke. Meanwhile the music stopped; loud applause
insisted upon its renewal; an encore was danced; there was an interlude of voices; and the
changing of partners began.

"Well," said George finally, "I must say you don't seem to be much of a prattler. They say
it's a great way to get a reputation for being wise, never saying much. Don't you ever talk any?"

"When people can understand," she answered.

He had been looking moodily out at the ballroom but he turned to her quickly, at this, saw
that her eyes were sunny and content, over the top of her bouquet; and he consented to smile.

"Girls are usually pretty fresh!" he said. "They ought to go to a man's college about a year:
they'd get taught a few things about freshness! What you got to do after two o'clock to-morrow
afternoon?"

"A whole lot of things. Every minute filled up."

"All right," said George. "The snow's fine for sleighing: I'll come for you in a cutter at
ten minutes after two."

"I can't possibly go."

"If you don't," he said, "I'm going to sit in the cutter in front of the gate, wherever you're
visiting, all afternoon, and if you try to go out with anybody else he's got to whip me before
he gets you." And as she laughed--though she blushed a little, too--he continued, seriously:
"If you think I'm not in earnest you're at liberty to make quite a big experiment!"

She laughed again. "I don't think I've often had so large a compliment as that," she said,
"especially on such short notice--and yet, I don't think I'll go with you.

"You be ready at ten minutes after two."

"No, I won't."

"Yes, you will!"

"Yes," she said, "I will!" And her partner for the next dance arrived, breathless with searching.

"Don't forget I've got the third from now," George called after her.

"I won't."

"And every third one after that."

"I know!" she called, over her partner's shoulder, and her voice was amused--but meek.

When "the third from now" came, George presented himself before her without any greeting, like
a brother, or a mannerless old friend. Neither did she greet him, but moved away with him,
concluding, as she went, an exchange of badinage with the preceding partner: she had been talkative
enough with him, it appeared. In fact, both George and Miss Morgan talked much more to every
one else that evening, than to each other; and they said nothing at all at this time. Both
looked preoccupied, as they began to dance, and preserved a gravity, of expression to the end
of the number. And when "the third one after that" came, they did not dance, but went back
to the gallery stairway, seeming to have reached an understanding without any verbal consultation,
that this suburb was again the place for them.

"Well," said George, coolly, when they were seated, "what did you say your name was?"

"Morgan."

"Funny name!"

"Everybody else's name always is."

"I didn't mean it was really funny," George explained. "That's just one of my crowd's bits
of horsing at college. We always say 'funny name' no matter what it is. I guess we're pretty
fresh sometimes; but I knew your name was Morgan because my mother said so downstairs. I meant:
what's the rest of it?"

"Lucy."

He was silent.

"Is 'Lucy' a funny name, too?" she inquired.

"No. Lucy's very much all right!" he said, and he went so far as to smile. Even his Aunt Fanny
admitted that when George smiled "in a certain way" he was charming.

"Thanks about letting my name be Lucy," she said.

"How old are you?" George asked.

"I don't really know, myself."

"What do you mean: you don't really know yourself?"

"I mean I only know what they tell me. I believe them, of course, but believing isn't really
knowing. You believe some certain day is your birthday--at least, I suppose you do--but you
don't really know it is because you can't remember."

"Look here!" said George. "Do you always talk like this?"

Miss Lucy Morgan laughed forgivingly, put her young head on one side, like a bird, and responded
cheerfully: "I'm willing to learn wisdom. What are you studying in school?"

"College!"

"At the university! Yes. What are you studying there?"

George laughed. "Lot o' useless guff!"

"Then why don't you study some useful guff?"

"What do you mean: 'useful'?"

"Something you'd use later, in your business or profession?"

George waved his hand impatiently. "I don't expect to go into any 'business or profession."

"No?"

"Certainly not!" George was emphatic, being sincerely annoyed by a suggestion which showed
how utterly she failed to comprehend the kind of person he was.

"Why not?" she asked mildly.

"Just look at 'em!" he said, almost with bitterness, and he made a gesture presumably intended
to indicate the business and professional men now dancing within range of vision. "That's a
fine career for a man, isn't it! Lawyers, bankers, politicians! What do they get out of life,
I'd like to know! What do they ever know about real things? Where do they ever get?"

He was so earnest that she was surprised and impressed. Evidently he had deep-seated ambitions,
for he seemed to speak with actual emotion of these despised things which were so far beneath
his planning for the future. She had a vague, momentary vision of Pitt, at twenty-one, prime
minister of England; and she spoke, involuntarily in a lowered voice, with deference:

"What do you want to be?" she asked.

George answered promptly.

"A yachtsman," he said.

Chapter VI

Having thus, in a word, revealed his ambition for a career above courts, marts, and polling
booths, George breathed more deeply than usual, and, turning his face from the lovely companion
whom he had just made his confidant, gazed out at the dancers with an expression in which there
was both sternness and a contempt for the squalid lives of the unyachted Midlanders before
him. However, among them, he marked his mother; and his sombre grandeur relaxed momentarily;
a more genial light came into his eyes.

Isabel was dancing with the queer-looking duck; and it was to be noted that the lively gentleman's
gait was more sedate than it had been with Miss Fanny Minafer, but not less dexterous and authoritative.
He was talking to Isabel as gaily as he had talked to Miss Fanny, though with less laughter,
and Isabel listened and answered eagerly: her colour was high and her eyes had a look of delight.
She saw George and the beautiful Lucy on the stairway, and nodded to them. George waved his
hand vaguely: he had a momentary return of that inexplicable uneasiness and resentment which
had troubled him downstairs.

"How lovely your mother is!" Lucy said

"I think she is," he agreed gently.

"She's the gracefulest woman in that ballroom. She dances like a girl of sixteen."

"Most girls of sixteen," said George, "are bum dancers. Anyhow, I wouldn't dance with one unless
I had to."

"Well, you'd better dance with your mother! I never saw anybody lovelier. How wonderfully they
dance together!"

"Who?"

"Your mother and--and the queer-looking duck," said Lucy. "I'm going to dance with him pretty
soon."

"I don't care--so long as you don't give him one of the numbers that belong to me."

"I'll try to remember," she said, and thoughtfully lifted to her face the bouquet of violets
and lilies, a gesture which George noted without approval.

"Look here! Who sent you those flowers you keep makin' such a fuss over?"

"He did."

"Who's 'he'?"

"The queer-looking duck."

George feared no such rival; he laughed loudly. "I s'pose he's some old widower!" he said,
the object thus described seeming ignominious enough to a person of eighteen, without additional
characterization. "Some old widower!"

Lucy became serious at once. "Yes, he is a widower," she said. "I ought to have told you before;
he's my father."

George stopped laughing abruptly. "Well, that's a horse on me. If I'd known he was your father,
of course I wouldn't have made fun of him. I'm sorry."

"Nobody could make fun of him," she said quietly.

"Why couldn't they?"

"It wouldn't make him funny: it would only make themselves silly."

Upon this, George had a gleam of intelligence. "Well, I'm not going to make myself silly any
more, then; I don't want to take chances like that with you. But I thought he was the Sharon
girls' uncle. He came with them--"

"Yes," she said, "I'm always late to everything: I wouldn't let them wait for me. We're visiting
the Sharons."

"About time I knew that! You forget my being so fresh about your father, will you? Of course
he's a distinguished looking man, in a way."

Lucy was still serious. "In a way?'" she repeated. "You mean, not in your way, don't you?"

George was perplexed. "How do you mean: not in my way?"

"People pretty often say 'in a way' and 'rather distinguished looking,' or 'rather' so-and-so,
or 'rather' anything, to show that they're superior don't they? In New York last month I overheard
a climber sort of woman speaking of me as 'little Miss Morgan,' but she didn't mean my height;
she meant that she was important. Her husband spoke of a friend of mine as 'little Mr. Pembroke'
and 'little Mr. Pembroke' is six-feet-three. This husband and wife were really so terribly
unimportant that the only way they knew to pretend to be important was calling people 'little'
Miss or Mister so-and-so. It's a kind of snob slang, I think. Of course people don't always
say 'rather' or 'in a way' to be superior."

"I should say not! I use both of 'em a great deal myself," said George. "One thing I don't
see though: What's the use of a man being six-feet-three? Men that size can't handle themselves
as well as a man about five-feet-eleven and a half can. Those long, gangling men, they're nearly
always too kind of wormy to be any good in athletics, and they're so awkward they keep falling
over chairs or--"

"Mr. Pembroke is in the army," said Lucy primly. "He's extraordinarily graceful."

"In the army? Oh, I suppose he's some old friend of your father's."

"They got on very well," she said, "after I introduced them."

George was a straightforward soul, at least. "See here!" he said. "Are you engaged to anybody?"

"No."

Not wholly mollified, he shrugged his shoulders. "You seem to know a good many people! Do you
live in New York?"

"No. We don't live anywhere."

"What you mean: you don't live anywhere?"

"We've lived all over," she answered. "Papa used to live here in this town, but that was before
I was born."

"What do you keep moving around so for? Is he a promoter?"

"No. He's an inventor."

"What's he invented?"

"Just lately," said Lucy, "he's been working on a new kind of horseless carriage."

"Well, I'm sorry for him," George said, in no unkindly spirit. "Those things are never going
to amount to anything. People aren't going to spend their lives lying on their backs in the
road and letting grease drip in their faces. Horseless carriages are pretty much a failure,
and your father better not waste his time on 'em."

"Papa'd be so grateful," she returned, "if he could have your advice."

Instantly George's face became flushed. "I don't know that I've done anything to be insulted
for!" he said. "I don't see that what I said was particularly fresh."

"No, indeed!"

"Then what do you--"

She laughed gaily. "I don't! And I don't mind your being such a lofty person at all. I think
it's ever so interesting--but papa's a great man!"

"Is he?" George decided to be good-natured "Well, let us hope so. I hope so, I'm sure."

Looking at him keenly, she saw that the magnificent youth was incredibly sincere in this bit
of graciousness. He spoke as a tolerant, elderly statesman might speak of a promising young
politician; and with her eyes still upon him, Lucy shook her head in gentle wonder. "I'm just
beginning to understand," she said.

"Understand what?"

"What it means to be a real Amberson in this town. Papa told me something about it before we
came, but I see he didn't say half enough!"

George superbly took this all for tribute. "Did your father say he knew the family before he
left here?"

"Yes. I believe he was particularly a friend of your Uncle George; and he didn't say so, but
I imagine he must have known your mother very well, too. He wasn't an inventor then; he was
a young lawyer. The town was smaller in those days, and I believe he was quite well known."

"I dare say. I've no doubt the family are all very glad to see him back, especially if they
used to have him at the house a good deal, as he told you."

"I don't think he meant to boast of it," she said: "He spoke of it quite calmly."

George stared at her for a moment in perplexity, then perceiving that her intention was satirical,
"Girls really ought to go to a man's college," he said--"just a month or two, anyhow; It'd
take some of the freshness out of 'em!"

"I can't believe it," she retorted, as her partner for the next dance arrived. "It would only
make them a little politer on the surface--they'd be really just as awful as ever, after you
got to know them a few minutes."

"What do you mean: 'after you got to know them a--'"

She was departing to the dance. "Janie and Mary Sharon told me all about what sort of a little
boy you were," she said, over her shoulder. "You must think it out!" She took wing away on
the breeze of the waltz, and George, having stared gloomily after her for a few moments, postponed
filling an engagement, and strolled round the fluctuating outskirts of the dance to where his
uncle, George Amberson, stood smilingly watching, under one of the rose-vine arches at the
entrance to the room.

"Hello, young namesake," said the uncle. "Why lingers the laggard heel of the dancer? Haven't
you got a partner?"

"She's sitting around waiting for me somewhere," said George. "See here: Who is this fellow
Morgan that Aunt Fanny Minafer was dancing with a while?"

Amberson laughed. "He's a man with a pretty daughter, Georgie. Meseemed you've been spending
the evening noticing something of that sort--or do I err?"

"Never mind! What sort is he?"

"I think we'll have to give him a character, Georgie. He's an old friend; used to practice
law here--perhaps he had more debts than cases, but he paid 'em all up before he left town.
Your question is purely mercenary, I take it: you want to know his true worth before proceeding
further with the daughter. I cannot inform you, though I notice signs of considerable prosperity
in that becoming dress of hers. However, you never can tell, it is an age when every sacrifice
is made for the young, and how your own poor mother managed to provide those genuine pearl
studs for you out of her allowance from father, I can't--"

"Oh, dry up!" said the nephew. "I understand this Morgan--"

"Mr. Eugene Morgan," his uncle suggested. "Politeness requires that the young should--"

"I guess the 'young' didn't know much about politeness in your day," George interrupted. "I
understand that Mr. Eugene Morgan used to be a great friend of the family."

"Oh, the Minafers?" the uncle inquired, with apparent innocence. "No, I seem to recall that
he and your father were not--"

"I mean the Ambersons," George said impatiently. "I understand he was a good deal around the
house here."

"What is your objection to that, George?"

"What do you mean: my objection?"

"You seemed to speak with a certain crossness."

"Well," said George, "I meant he seems to feel awfully at home here. The way he was dancing
with Aunt Fanny--"

Amberson laughed. "I'm afraid your Aunt Fanny's heart was stirred by ancient recollections,
Georgie."

"You mean she used to be silly about him?"

"She wasn't considered singular," said the uncle "He was--he was popular. Could you bear a
question?"

"What do you mean: could I bear--"

"I only wanted to ask: Do you take this same passionate interest in the parents of every girl
you dance with? Perhaps it's a new fashion we old bachelors ought to take up. Is it the thing
this year to--"

"Oh, go on!" said George, moving away. "I only wanted to know--" He left the sentence unfinished,
and crossed the room to where a girl sat waiting for his nobility to find time to fulfil his
contract with her for this dance.

"Pardon f' keep' wait," he muttered, as she rose brightly to meet him; and she seemed pleased
that he came at all--but George was used to girls' looking radiant when he danced with them,
and she had little effect upon him. He danced with her perfunctorily, thinking the while of
Mr. Eugene Morgan and his daughter. Strangely enough, his thoughts dwelt more upon the father
than the daughter, though George could not possibly have given a reason--even to himself--for
this disturbing preponderance.

By a coincidence, though not an odd one, the thoughts and conversation of Mr. Eugene Morgan
at this very time were concerned with George Amberson Minafer, rather casually, it is true.
Mr. Morgan had retired to a room set apart for smoking, on the second floor, and had found
a grizzled gentleman lounging in solitary possession.

"'Gene Morgan!" this person exclaimed, rising with great heartiness. "I'd heard you were in
town--I don't believe you know me!"

"Yes, I do, Fred Kinney!" Mr. Morgan returned with equal friendliness. "Your real face--the
one I used to know--it's just underneath the one you're masquerading in to-night. You ought
to have changed it more if you wanted a disguise."

"Twenty years!" said Mr. Kinney. "It makes some difference in faces, but more in behaviour!"

"It does so!" his friend agreed with explosive emphasis. "My own behaviour began to be different
about that long ago--quite suddenly."

"I remember," said Mr. Kinney sympathetically. "Well, life's odd enough as we look back."

"Probably it's going to be odder still--if we could look forward."

"Probably."

They sat and smoked.

"However," Mr. Morgan remarked presently, "I still dance like an Indian. Don't you?"

"No. I leave that to my boy Fred. He does the dancing for the family."

"I suppose he's upstairs hard at it?"

"No, he's not here." Mr. Kinney glanced toward the open door and lowered his voice. "He wouldn't
come. It seems that a couple of years or so ago he had a row with young Georgie Minafer. Fred
was president of a literary club they had, and he said this young Georgie got himself elected
instead, in an overbearing sort of way. Fred's red-headed, you know--I suppose you remember
his mother? You were at the wedding--"

"I remember the wedding," said Mr. Morgan. "And I remember your bachelor dinner--most of it,
that is."

"Well, my boy Fred's as red-headed now," Mr. Kinney went on, "as his mother was then, and he's
very bitter about his row with Georgie Minafer. He says he'd rather burn his foot off than
set it inside any Amberson house or any place else where young Georgie is. Fact is, the boy
seemed to have so much feeling over it I had my doubts about coming myself, but my wife said
it was all nonsense; we mustn't humour Fred in a grudge over such a little thing, and while
she despised that Georgie Minafer, herself, as much as any one else did, she wasn't going to
miss a big Amberson show just on account of a boys' rumpus, and so on and so on; and so we came."

"Do people dislike young Minafer generally?"

"I don't know about 'generally.' I guess he gets plenty of toadying; but there's certainly
a lot of people that are glad to express their opinions about him."

"What's the matter with him?"

"Too much Amberson, I suppose, for one thing. And for another, his mother just fell down and
worshipped him from the day he was born That's what beats me! I don't have to tell you what
Isabel Amberson is, Eugene Morgan. She's got a touch of the Amberson high stuff about her,
but you can't get anybody that ever knew her to deny that she's just about the finest woman
in the world."

"No," said Eugene Morgan. "You can't get anybody to deny that."

"Then I can't see how she doesn't see the truth about that boy. He thinks he's a little tin
god on wheels--and honestly, it makes some people weak and sick just to think about him! Yet
that high-spirited, intelligent woman, Isabel Amberson, actually sits and worships him! You
can hear it in her voice when she speaks to him or speaks of him. You can see it in her eyes
when she looks at him. My Lord! What does she see when she looks at him?"

Morgan's odd expression of genial apprehension deepened whimsically, though it denoted no actual
apprehension whatever, and cleared away from his face altogether when he smiled; he became
surprisingly winning and persuasive when he smiled. He smiled now, after a moment, at this
question of his old friend. "She sees something that we don't see," he said.

"What does she see?"

"An angel."

Kinney laughed aloud. "Well, if she sees an angel when she looks at Georgie Minafer, she's
a funnier woman than I thought she was!"

"Perhaps she is," said Morgan. "But that's what she sees."

"My Lord! It's easy to see you've only known him an hour or so. In that time have you looked
at Georgie and seen an angel?"

"No. All I saw was a remarkably good-looking fool-boy with the pride of Satan and a set of
nice new drawing-room manners that he probably couldn't use more than half an hour at a time
without busting."

"Then what--"

"Mothers are right," said Morgan. "Do you think this young George is the same sort of creature
when he's with his mother that he is when he's bulldozing your boy Fred? Mothers see the angel
in us because the angel is there. If it's shown to the mother, the son has got an angel to
show, hasn't he? When a son cuts somebody's throat the mother only sees it's possible for a
misguided angel to act like a devil--and she's entirely right about that!"

Kinney laughed, and put his hand on his friend's shoulder. "I remember what a fellow you always
were to argue," he said. "You mean Georgie Minafer is as much of an angel as any murderer is,
and that Georgie's mother is always right."

"I'm afraid she always has been," Morgan said lightly.

The friendly hand remained upon his shoulder. "She was wrong once, old fellow. At least, so
it seemed to me."

"No," said Morgan, a little awkwardly. "No--"

Kinney relieved the slight embarrassment that had come upon both of them: he laughed again.
"Wait till you know young Georgie a little better," he said. "Something tells me you're going
to change your mind about his having an angel to show, if you see anything of him!"

"You mean beauty's in the eye of the beholder, and the angel is all in the eye of the mother.
If you were a painter, Fred, you'd paint mothers with angels' eyes holding imps in their laps.
Me. I'll stick to the Old Masters and the cherubs."

Mr. Kinney looked at him musingly. "Somebody's eyes must have been pretty angelic," he said,
"if they've been persuading you that Georgie Minnafer is a cherub!"

"They are," said Morgan heartily. "They're more angelic than ever." And as a new flourish of
music sounded overhead he threw away his cigarette, and jumped up briskly. "Good-bye, I've
got this dance with her."

"With whom?"

"With Isabel!"

The grizzled Mr. Kinney affected to rub his eyes. "It startles me, your jumping up like that
to go and dance with Isabel Amberson! Twenty years seem to have passed--but have they? Tell
me, have you danced with poor old Fanny, too, this evening?"

"Twice!"

"My Lord!" Kinney groaned, half in earnest. "Old times starting all over again! My Lord!"

"Old times?" Morgan laughed gaily from the doorway. "Not a bit! There aren't any old times.
When times are gone they're not old, they're dead! There aren't any times but new times!"

And he vanished in such a manner that he seemed already to have begun dancing.

Chapter VII

The appearance of Miss Lucy Morgan the next day, as she sat in George's fast cutter, proved
so charming that her escort was stricken to soft words instantly, and failed to control a poetic
impulse. Her rich little hat was trimmed with black fur; her hair was almost as dark as the
fur; a great boa of black fur was about her shoulders; her hands were vanished into a black
muff; and George's laprobe was black. "You look like--" he said. "Your face looks like--it
looks like a snowflake on a lump of coal. I mean a--a snowflake that would be a rose-leaf, too!"

"Perhaps you'd better look at the reins," she returned. "We almost upset just then."

George declined to heed this advice. "Because there's too much pink in your cheeks for a snowflake,"
he continued. "What's that fairy story about snow-white and rose-red--"

"We're going pretty fast, Mr. Minafer!"

"Well, you see, I'm only here for two weeks."

"I mean the sleigh!" she explained. "We're not the only people on the street, you know."

"Oh, they'll keep out of the way."

"That's very patrician charioteering, but it seems to me a horse like this needs guidance.
I'm sure he's going almost twenty miles an hour."

"That's nothing," said George; but he consented to look forward again. "He can trot under three
minutes, all right." He laughed. "I suppose your father thinks he can build a horseless carriage
to go that fast!"

"They go that fast already, sometimes."

"Yes," said George; "they do--for about a hundred feet! Then they give a yell and burn up."

Evidently she decided not to defend her father's faith in horseless carriages, for she laughed,
and said nothing. The cold air was polka-dotted with snowflakes, and trembled to the loud,
continuous jingling of sleighbells. Boys and girls, all aglow and panting jets of vapour, darted
at the passing sleighs to ride on the runners, or sought to rope their sleds to any vehicle
whatever, but the fleetest no more than just touched the flying cutter, though a hundred soggy
mittens grasped for it, then reeled and whirled till sometimes the wearers of those daring
mittens plunged flat in the snow and lay a-sprawl, reflecting. For this was the holiday time,
and all the boys and girls in town were out, most of them on National Avenue.

But there came panting and chugging up that flat thoroughfare a thing which some day was to
spoil all their sleigh-time merriment--save for the rashest and most disobedient. It was vaguely
like a topless surry, but cumbrous with unwholesome excrescences fore and aft, while underneath
were spinning leather belts and something that whirred and howled and seemed to stagger. The
ride-stealers made no attempt to fasten their sleds to a contrivance so nonsensical and yet
so fearsome. Instead, they gave over their sport and concentrated all their energies in their
lungs, so that up and down the street the one cry shrilled increasingly: "Git a hoss! Git a
hoss! Git a hoss! Mister, why don't you git a hoss?" But the mahout in charge, sitting solitary
on the front seat, was unconcerned--he laughed, and now and then ducked a snowball without
losing any of his good-nature. It was Mr. Eugene Morgan who exhibited so cheerful a countenance
between the forward visor of a deer-stalker cap and the collar of a fuzzy gray ulster. "Git
a hoss!" the children shrieked, and gruffer voices joined them. "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git
a hoss!"

George Minafer was correct thus far: the twelve miles an hour of such a machine would never
over-take George's trotter. The cutter was already scurrying between the stone pillars at the
entrance to Amberson Addition.

"That's my grandfather's," said George, nodding toward the Amberson Mansion.

"I ought to know that!" Lucy exclaimed. "We stayed there late enough last night: papa and I
were almost the last to go. He and your mother and Miss Fanny Minafer got the musicians to
play another waltz when everybody else had gone downstairs and the fiddles were being put away
in their cases. Papa danced part of it with Miss Minafer and the rest with your mother. Miss
Minafer's your aunt, isn't she?"

"Yes; she lives with us. I tease her a good deal."

"What about?"

"Oh, anything handy--whatever's easy to tease an old maid about."

"Doesn't she mind?"

"She usually has sort of a grouch on me," laughed George. "Nothing much. That's our house just
beyond grandfather's." He waved a sealskin gauntlet to indicate the house Major Amberson had
built for Isabel as a wedding gift. "It's almost the same as grandfather's, only not as large
and hasn't got a regular ballroom. We gave the dance, last night, at grandfather's on account
of the ballroom, and because I'm the only grandchild, you know. Of course, some day that'll
be my house, though I expect my mother will most likely go on living where she does now, with
father and Aunt Fanny. I suppose I'll probably build a country house, too--somewhere East,
I guess." He stopped speaking, and frowned as they passed a closed carriage and pair. The body
of this comfortable vehicle sagged slightly to one side; the paint was old and seamed with
hundreds of minute cracks like little rivers on a black map; the coachman, a fat and elderly
darky, seemed to drowse upon the box; but the open window afforded the occupants of the cutter
a glimpse of a tired, fine old face, a silk hat, a pearl tie, and an astrachan collar, evidently
out to take the air.

"There's your grandfather now," said Lucy. "Isn't it?"

George's frown was not relaxed. "Yes, it is; and he ought to give that rat-trap away and sell
those old horses. They're a disgrace, all shaggy--not even clipped. I suppose he doesn't notice
it--people get awful funny when they get old; they seem to lose their self-respect, sort of."

"He seemed a real Brummell to me," she said.

"Oh, he keeps up about what he wears, well enough, but--well, look at that!" He pointed to
a statue of Minerva, one of the cast-iron sculptures Major Amberson had set up in opening the
Addition years before. Minerva was intact, but a blackish streak descended unpleasantly from
her forehead to the point of her straight nose, and a few other streaks were sketched in a
repellent dinge upon the folds of her drapery.

"That must be from soot," said Lucy. "There are so many houses around here."

"Anyhow, somebody ought to see that these statues are kept clean. My grandfather owns a good
many of these houses, I guess, for renting. Of course, he sold most of the lots--there aren't
any vacant ones, and there used to be heaps of 'em when I was a boy. Another thing I don't
think he ought to allow a good many of these people bought big lots and they built houses on
'em; then the price of the land kept getting higher, and they'd sell part of their yards and
let the people that bought it build houses on it to live in, till they haven't hardly any of
'em got big, open yards any more, and it's getting all too much built up. The way it used to
be, it was like a gentleman's country estate, and that's the way my grandfather ought to keep
it. He lets these people take too many liberties: they do anything they want to."

"But how could he stop them?" Lucy asked, surely with reason. "If he sold them the land, it's
theirs, isn't it?"

George remained serene in the face of this apparently difficult question. "He ought to have
all the trades-people boycott the families that sell part of their yards that way. All he'd
have to do would be to tell the trades-people they wouldn't get any more orders from the family
if they didn't do it."

"From 'the family'? What family?"

"Our family," said George, unperturbed. "The Ambersons."

"I see!" she murmured, and evidently she did see something that he did not, for, as she lifted
her muff to her face, he asked:

"What are you laughing at now?"

"Why?"

"You always seem to have some little secret of your own to get happy over!"

"Always!" she exclaimed. "What a big word when we only met last night!"

"That's another case of it," he said, with obvious sincerity. "One of the reasons I don't like
you--much!--is you've got that way of seeming quietly superior to everybody else."

"I!" she cried. "I have?"

"Oh, you think you keep it sort of confidential to yourself, but it's plain enough! I don't
believe in that kind of thing."

"You don't?"

"No," said George emphatically. "Not with me! I think the world's like this: there's a few
people that their birth and position, and so on, puts them at the top, and they ought to treat
each other entirely as equals." His voice betrayed a little emotion as he added, "I wouldn't
speak like this to everybody."

"You mean you're confiding your deepest creed--or code, whatever it is--to me?"

"Go on, make fun of it, then!" George said bitterly. "You do think you're terribly clever!
It makes me tired!"

"Well, as you don't like my seeming 'quietly superior,' after this I'll be noisily superior,"
she returned cheerfully. "We aim to please!"

"I had a notion before I came for you today that we were going to quarrel," he said.

"No, we won't; it takes two!" She laughed and waved her muff toward a new house, not quite
completed, standing in a field upon their right. They had passed beyond Amberson Addition,
and were leaving the northern fringes of the town for the open country. "Isn't that a beautiful
house!" she exclaimed. "Papa and I call it our Beautiful House."

George was not pleased. "Does it belong to you?"

"Of course not! Papa brought me out here the other day, driving in his machine, and we both
loved it. It's so spacious and dignified and plain."

"Yes, it's plain enough!" George grunted.

"Yet it's lovely; the gray-green roof and shutters give just enough colour, with the trees,
for the long white walls. It seems to me the finest house I've seen in this part of the country."

George was outraged by an enthusiasm so ignorant--not ten minutes ago they had passed the Amberson
Mansion. "Is that a sample of your taste in architecture?" he asked.

"Yes. Why?"

"Because it strikes me you better go somewhere and study the subject a little!"

Lucy looked puzzled. "What makes you have so much feeling about it? Have I offended you?"

"Offended' nothing!" George returned brusquely. "Girls usually think they know it all as soon
as they've learned to dance and dress and flirt a little. They never know anything about things
like architecture, for instance. That house is about as bum a house as any house I ever saw!"

"Why?"

"Why?" George repeated. "Did you ask me why?"

"Yes."

"Well, for one thing--" he paused--"for one thing--well, just look at it! I shouldn't think
you'd have to do any more than look at it if you'd ever given any attention to architecture."

"What is the matter with its architecture, Mr. Minafer?"

"Well, it's this way," said George. "It's like this. Well, for instance, that house--well,
it was built like a town house." He spoke of it in the past tense, because they had now left
it far behind them--a human habit of curious significance. "It was like a house meant for a
street in the city. What kind of a house was that for people of any taste to build out here
in the country?"

"But papa says it's built that way on purpose. There are a lot of other houses being built
in this direction, and papa says the city's coming out this way; and in a year or two that
house will be right in town."

"It was a bum house, anyhow," said George crossly. "I don't even know the people that are building
it. They say a lot of riffraff come to town every year nowadays and there's other riffraff
that have always lived here, and have made a little money, and act as if they owned the place.
Uncle Sydney was talking about it yesterday: he says he and some of his friends are organizing
a country club, and already some of these riffraff are worming into it--people he never heard
of at all! Anyhow, I guess it's pretty clear you don't know a great deal about architecture."

She demonstrated the completeness of her amiability by laughing. "I'll know something about
the North Pole before long," she said, "if we keep going much farther in this direction!"

At this he was remorseful. "All right, we'll turn, and drive south awhile till you get warmed
up again. I expect we have been going against the wind about long enough. Indeed, I'm sorry!"

He said, "Indeed, I'm sorry," in a nice way, and looked very strikingly handsome when he said
it, she thought. No doubt it is true that there is more rejoicing in heaven over one sinner
repented than over all the saints who consistently remain holy, and the rare, sudden gentlenesses
of arrogant people have infinitely more effect than the continual gentleness of gentle people.
Arrogance turned gentle melts the heart; and Lucy gave her companion a little sidelong, sunny
nod of acknowledgment. George was dazzled by the quick glow of her eyes, and found himself
at a loss for something to say.

Having turned about, he kept his horse to a walk, and at this gait the sleighbells tinkled
but intermittently. Gleaming wanly through the whitish vapour that kept rising from the trotter's
body and flanks, they were like tiny fog-bells, and made the only sounds in a great winter
silence. The white road ran between lonesome rail fences; and frozen barnyards beyond the fences
showed sometimes a harrow left to rust, with its iron seat half filled with stiffened snow,
and sometimes an old dead buggy, it's wheels forever set, it seemed, in the solid ice of deep
ruts. Chickens scratched the metallic earth with an air of protest, and a masterless ragged
colt looked up in sudden horror at the mild tinkle of the passing bells, then blew fierce clouds
of steam at the sleigh. The snow no longer fell, and far ahead, in a grayish cloud that lay
upon the land, was the town.

Lucy looked at this distant thickening reflection. "When we get this far out we can see there
must be quite a little smoke hanging over the town," she said. "I suppose that's because it's
growing. As it grows bigger it seems to get ashamed of itself, so it makes this cloud and hides
in it. Papa says it used to be a bit nicer when he lived here: he always speaks of it differently--he
always has a gentle look, a particular tone of voice, I've noticed. He must have been very
fond of it. It must have been a lovely place: everybody must have been so jolly. From the way
he talks, you'd think life here then was just one long midsummer serenade. He declares it was
always sunshine, that the air wasn't like the air anywhere else--that, as he remembers it,
there always seemed to be gold-dust in the air. I doubt it! I think it doesn't seem to be duller
air to him now just on account of having a little soot in it sometimes, but probably because
he was twenty years younger then. It seems to me the gold-dust he thinks was here is just his
being young that he remembers. I think it was just youth. It is pretty pleasant to be young,
isn't it?" She laughed absently, then appeared to become wistful. "I wonder if we really do
enjoy it as much as we'll look back and think we did! I don't suppose so. Anyhow, for my part
I feel as if I must be missing something about it, somehow, because I don't ever seem to be
thinking about what's happening at the present moment; I'm always looking forward to something--thinking
about things that will happen when I'm older."

"You're a funny girl," George said gently. "But your voice sounds pretty nice when you think
and talk along together like that!"

The horse shook himself all over, and the impatient sleighbells made his wish audible. Accordingly,
George tightened the reins, and the cutter was off again at a three-minute trot, no despicable
rate of speed. It was not long before they were again passing Lucy's Beautiful House, and here
George thought fit to put an appendix to his remark. "You're a funny girl, and you know a lot--but
I don't believe you know much about architecture!"

Coming toward them, black against the snowy road, was a strange silhouette. It approached moderately
and without visible means of progression, so the matter seemed from a distance; but as the
cutter shortened the distance, the silhouette was revealed to be Mr. Morgan's horseless carriage,
conveying four people atop: Mr. Morgan with George's mother beside him, and, in the rear seat,
Miss Fanny Minafer and the Honorable George Amberson. All four seemed to be in the liveliest
humour, like high-spirited people upon a new adventure; and Isabel waved her handkerchief dashingly
as the cutter flashed by them.

"For the Lord's sake!" George gasped.

"Your mother's a dear," said Lucy. "And she does wear the most bewitching things! She looked
like a Russian princess, though I doubt if they're that handsome."

George said nothing; he drove on till they had crossed Amberson Addition and reached the stone
pillars at the head of National Avenue. There he turned.

"Let's go back and take another look at that old sewing-machine," he said. "It certainly is
the weirdest, craziest--"

He left the sentence unfinished, and presently they were again in sight of the old sewing-machine.
George shouted mockingly.

Alas! three figures stood in the road, and a pair of legs, with the toes turned up, indicated
that a fourth figure lay upon its back in the snow, beneath a horseless carriage that had decided
to need a horse.

George became vociferous with laughter, and coming up at his trotter's best gait, snow spraying
from runners and every hoof, swerved to the side of the road and shot by, shouting, "Git a
hoss! Git a hoss! Git a hoss!"

Three hundred yards away he turned and came back, racing; leaning out as he passed, to wave
jeeringly at the group about the disabled machine: "Git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a--"

The trotter had broken into a gallop, and Lucy cried a warning: "Be careful!" she said. "Look
where you're driving! There's a ditch on that side. Look--"

George turned too late; the cutter's right runner went into the ditch and snapped off; the
little sleigh upset, and, after dragging its occupants some fifteen yards, left them lying
together in a bank of snow. Then the vigorous young horse kicked himself free of all annoyances,
and disappeared down the road, galloping cheerfully.

Chapter VIII

When George regained some measure of his presence of mind, Miss Lucy Morgan's cheek, snowy
and cold, was pressing his nose slightly to one side; his right arm was firmly about her neck;
and a monstrous amount of her fur boa seemed to mingle with an equally unplausible quantity
of snow in his mouth. He was confused, but conscious of no objection to any of these juxtapositions.
She was apparently uninjured, for she sat up, hatless, her hair down, and said mildly:

"Good heavens!"

Though her father had been under his machine when they passed, he was the first to reach them.
He threw himself on his knees beside his daughter, but found her already laughing, and was
reassured. "They're all right," he called to Isabel, who was running toward them, ahead of
her brother and Fanny Minafer. "This snowbank's a feather bed--nothing the matter with them
at all. Don't look so pale!"

"Georgie!" she gasped. "Georgie!"

Georgie was on his feet, snow all over him.

"Don't make a fuss, mother! Nothing's the matter. That darned silly horse--"

Sudden tears stood in Isabel's eyes. "To see you down underneath--dragging--oh--" Then with
shaking hands she began to brush the snow from him.

"Let me alone," he protested. "You'll ruin your gloves. You're getting snow all over you, and--"

"No, no!" she cried. "You'll catch cold; you mustn't catch cold!" And she continued to brush him.

Amberson had brought Lucy's hat; Miss Fanny acted as lady's-maid; and both victims of the accident
were presently restored to about their usual appearance and condition of apparel. In fact,
encouraged by the two older gentlemen, the entire party, with one exception, decided that the
episode was after all a merry one, and began to laugh about it. But George was glummer than
the December twilight now swiftly closing in.

"That darned horse!" he said.

"I wouldn't bother about Pendennis, Georgie," said his uncle. "You can send a man out for what's
left of the cutter tomorrow, and Pendennis will gallop straight home to his stable: he'll be
there a long while before we will, because all we've got to depend on to get us home is Gene
Morgan's broken-down chafing-dish yonder."

They were approaching the machine as he spoke, and his friend, again underneath it, heard him.
He emerged, smiling. "She'll go," he said.

"What!"

"All aboard!"

He offered his hand to Isabel. She was smiling but still pale, and her eyes, in spite of the
smile, kept upon George in a shocked anxiety. Miss Fanny had already mounted to the rear seat,
and George, after helping Lucy Morgan to climb up beside his aunt, was following. Isabel saw
that his shoes were light things of patent leather, and that snow was clinging to them. She
made a little rush toward him, and, as one of his feet rested on the iron step of the machine,
in mounting, she began to clean the snow from his shoe with her almost aerial lace handkerchief.
"You mustn't catch cold!" she cried.

"Stop that!" George shouted, and furiously withdrew his foot.

"Then stamp the snow off," she begged. "You mustn't ride with wet feet."

"They're not!" George roared, thoroughly outraged. "For heaven's sake get in! You're standing
in the snow yourself. Get in!"

Isabel consented, turning to Morgan, whose habitual expression of apprehensiveness was somewhat
accentuated. He climbed up after her, George Amberson having gone to the other side. "You're
the same Isabel I used to know!" he said in a low voice. "You're a divinely ridiculous woman."

"Am I, Eugene?" she said, not displeased. "'Divinely' and 'ridiculous' just counterbalance
each other, don't they? Plus one and minus one equal nothing; so you mean I'm nothing in particular?"

"No," he answered, tugging at a lever. "That doesn't seem to be precisely what I meant. There!"
This exclamation referred to the subterranean machinery, for dismaying sounds came from beneath
the floor, and the vehicle plunged, then rolled noisily forward.

"Behold!" George Amberson exclaimed. "She does move! It must be another accident."

"Accident?" Morgan shouted over the din. "No! She breathes, she stirs; she seems to feel a
thrill of life along her keel!" And he began to sing "The Star Spangled Banner."

Amberson joined him lustily, and sang on when Morgan stopped. The twilight sky cleared, discovering
a round moon already risen; and the musical congressman hailed this bright presence with the
complete text and melody of "The Danube River."

His nephew, behind, was gloomy. He had overheard his mother's conversation with the inventor:
it seemed curious to him that this Morgan, of whom he had never heard until last night, should
be using the name "Isabel" so easily; and George felt that it was not just the thing for his
mother to call Morgan "Eugene;" the resentment of the previous night came upon George again.
Meanwhile, his mother and Morgan continued their talk; but he could no longer hear what they
said; the noise of the car and his uncle's songful mood prevented. He marked how animated Isabel
seemed; it was not strange to see his mother so gay, but it was strange that a man not of the
family should be the cause of her gaiety. And George sat frowning.

Fanny Minafer had begun to talk to Lucy. "Your father wanted to prove that his horseless carriage
would run, even in the snow," she said. "It really does, too."

"Of course!"

"It's so interesting! He's been telling us how he's going to change it. He says he's going
to have wheels all made of rubber and blown up with air. I don't understand what he means at
all; I should think they'd explode--but Eugene seems to be very confident. He always was confident,
though. It seems so like old times to hear him talk!"

She became thoughtful, and Lucy turned to George. "You tried to swing underneath me and break
the fall for me when we went over," she said. "I knew you were doing that, and--it was nice
of you."

"Wasn't any fall to speak of," he returned brusquely. "Couldn't have hurt either of us."

"Still it was friendly of you--and awfully quick, too. I'll not--I'll not forget it!"

Her voice had a sound of genuineness, very pleasant; and George began to forget his annoyance
with her father. This annoyance of his had not been alleviated by the circumstance that neither
of the seats of the old sewing-machine was designed for three people, but when his neighbour
spoke thus gratefully, he no longer minded the crowding--in fact, it pleased him so much that
he began to wish the old sewing-machine would go even slower. And she had spoken no word of
blame for his letting that darned horse get the cutter into the ditch. George presently addressed
her hurriedly, almost tremulously, speaking close to her ear:

"I forgot to tell you something: you're pretty nice! I thought so the first second I saw you
last night. I'll come for you tonight and take you to the Assembly at the Amberson Hotel. You're
going, aren't you?"

"Yes, but I'm going with papa and the Sharons I'll see you there."

"Looks to me as if you were awfully conventional," George grumbled; and his disappointment
was deeper than he was willing to let her see--though she probably did see. "Well, we'll dance
the cotillion together, anyhow."

"I'm afraid not. I promised Mr. Kinney."

"What!" George's tone was shocked, as at incredible news. "Well, you could break that engagement,
I guess, if you wanted to! Girls always can get out of things when they want to. Won't you?"

"I don't think so."

"Why not?"

"Because I promised him. Several days ago."

George gulped, and lowered his pride, "I don't--oh, look here! I only want to go to that thing
tonight to get to see something of you; and if you don't dance the cotillion with me, how can
I? I'll only be here two weeks, and the others have got all the rest of your visit to see you.
Won't you do it, please?"

"I couldn't."

"See here!" said the stricken George. "If you're going to decline to dance that cotillion with
me simply because you've promised a--a--a miserable red-headed outsider like Fred Kinney, why
we might as well quit!"

"Quit what?"

"You know perfectly well what I mean," he said huskily.

"I don't."

"Well, you ought to!"

"But I don't at all!"

George, thoroughly hurt, and not a little embittered, expressed himself in a short outburst
of laughter: "Well, I ought to have seen it!"

"Seen what?"

"That you might turn out to be a girl who'd like a fellow of the red-headed Kinney sort. I
ought to have seen it from the first!"

Lucy bore her disgrace lightly. "Oh, dancing a cotillion with a person doesn't mean that you
like him--but I don't see anything in particular the matter with Mr. Kinney. What is?"

"If you don't see anything the matter with him for yourself," George responded, icily, "I don't
think pointing it out would help you. You probably wouldn't understand."

"You might try," she suggested. "Of course I'm a stranger here, and if people have done anything
wrong or have something unpleasant about them, I wouldn't have any way of knowing it, just
at first. If poor Mr. Kinney--"

"I prefer not to discuss it," said George curtly. "He's an enemy of mine."

"Why?"

"I prefer not to discuss it."

"Well, but--"

"I prefer not to discuss it!"

"Very well." She began to hum the air of the song which Mr. George Amberson was now discoursing,
"O moon of my delight that knows no wane"--and there was no further conversation on the back seat.

They had entered Amberson Addition, and the moon of Mr. Amberson's delight was overlaid by
a slender Gothic filagree; the branches that sprang from the shade trees lining the street.
Through the windows of many of the houses rosy lights were flickering; and silver tinsel and
evergreen wreaths and brilliant little glass globes of silver and wine colour could be seen,
and glimpses were caught of Christmas trees, with people decking them by firelight--reminders
that this was Christmas Eve. The ride-stealers had disappeared from the highway, though now
and then, over the gasping and howling of the horseless carriage, there came a shrill jeer
from some young passer-by upon the sidewalk:

"Mister, fer heaven's sake go an' git a hoss! Git a hoss! Git a hoss!"

The contrivance stopped with a heart-shaking jerk before Isabel's house. The gentlemen jumped
down, helping Isabel and Fanny to descend; there were friendly leavetakings--and one that was
not precisely friendly.

"It's 'au revoir,' till to-night, isn't it?" Lucy asked, laughing.

"Good afternoon!" said George, and he did not wait, as his relatives did, to see the old sewing
machine start briskly down the street, toward the Sharons'; its lighter load consisting now
of only Mr. Morgan and his daughter. George went into the house at once.

He found his father reading the evening paper in the library. "Where are your mother and your
Aunt Fanny?" Mr. Minafer inquired, not looking up.

"They're coming," said his son; and, casting himself heavily into a chair, stared at the fire.

His prediction was verified a few moments later; the two ladies came in cheerfully, unfastening
their fur cloaks. "It's all right, Georgie," said Isabel. "Your Uncle George called to us that
Pendennis got home safely. Put your shoes close to the fire, dear, or else go and change them."
She went to her husband and patted him lightly on the shoulder, an action which George watched
with sombre moodiness. "You might dress before long," she suggested. "We're all going to the
Assembly, after dinner, aren't we? Brother George said he'd go with us."

"Look here," said George abruptly. "How about this man Morgan and his old sewing-machine? Doesn't
he want to get grandfather to put money into it? Isn't he trying to work Uncle George for that?
Isn't that what he's up to?"

It was Miss Fanny who responded. "You little silly!" she cried, with surprising sharpness.
"What on earth are you talking about? Eugene Morgan's perfectly able to finance his own inventions
these days."

"I'll bet he borrows money of Uncle George," the nephew insisted.

Isabel looked at him in grave perplexity. "Why do you say such a thing, George?" she asked.

"He strikes me as that sort of man," he answered doggedly. "Isn't he, father?"

Minafer set down his paper for the moment. "He was a fairly wild young fellow twenty years
ago," he said, glancing at his wife absently. "He was like you in one thing, Georgie; he spent
too much money--only he didn't have any mother to get money out of a grandfather for him, so
he was usually in debt. But I believe I've heard he's done fairly well of late years. No, I
can't say I think he's a swindler, and I doubt if he needs anybody else's money to back his
horseless carriage."

"Well, what's he brought the old thing here for, then? People that own elephants don't take
them elephants around with 'em when they go visiting. What's he got it here for?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said Mr. Minafer, resuming his paper. "You might ask him."

Isabel laughed, and patted her husband's shoulder again. "Aren't you going to dress? Aren't
we all going to the dance?"

He groaned faintly. "Aren't your brother and Georgie escorts enough for you and Fanny?"

"Wouldn't you enjoy it at all?"

"You know I don't."

Isabel let her hand remain upon his shoulder a moment longer; she stood behind him, looking
into the fire, and George, watching her broodingly, thought there was more colour in her face
than the reflection of the flames accounted for. "Well, then," she said indulgently, "stay
at home and be happy. We won't urge you if you'd really rather not."

"I really wouldn't," he said contentedly.

Half an hour later, George was passing through the upper hall, in a bath-robe stage of preparation
for the evening's' gaieties, when he encountered his Aunt Fanny. He stopped her. "Look here!"
he said.

"What in the world is the matter with you?" she demanded, regarding him with little amiability.
"You look as if you were rehearsing for a villain in a play. Do change your expression!"

His expression gave no sign of yielding to the request; on the contrary, its somberness deepened.
"I suppose you don't know why father doesn't want to go tonight," he said solemnly. "You're
his only sister, and yet you don't know!"

"He never wants to go anywhere that I ever heard of," said Fanny. "What is the matter with you?"

"He doesn't want to go because he doesn't like this man Morgan."

"Good gracious!" Fanny cried impatiently. "Eugene Morgan isn't in your father's thoughts at
all, one way or the other. Why should he be?"

George hesitated. "Well--it strikes me--Look here, what makes you and--and everybody--so excited
over him?"

"Excited!" she jeered. "Can't people be glad to see an old friend without silly children like
you having to make a to-do about it? I've just been in your mother's room suggesting that she
might give a little dinner for them--"

"For who?"

"For whom, Georgie! For Mr. Morgan and his daughter."

"Look here!" George said quickly. "Don't do that! Mother mustn't do that. It wouldn't look well."

"Wouldn't look well!" Fanny mocked him; and her suppressed vehemence betrayed a surprising
acerbity. "See here, Georgie Minafer, I suggest that you just march straight on into your room
and finish your dressing! Sometimes you say things that show you have a pretty mean little mind!"

George was so astounded by this outburst that his indignation was delayed by his curiosity.
"Why, what upsets you this way?" he inquired.

"I know what you mean," she said, her voice still lowered, but not decreasing in sharpness.
"You're trying to insinuate that I'd get your mother to invite Eugene Morgan here on my account
because he's a widower!"

"I am?" George gasped, nonplussed. "I'm trying to insinuate that you're setting your cap at
him and getting mother to help you? Is that what you mean?"

Beyond a doubt that was what Miss Fanny meant. She gave him a white-hot look. "You attend to
your own affairs!" she whispered fiercely, and swept away.

George, dumfounded, returned to his room for meditation.

He had lived for years in the same house with his Aunt Fanny, and it now appeared that during
all those years he had been thus intimately associating with a total stranger. Never before
had he met the passionate lady with whom he had just held a conversation in the hall. So she
wanted to get married! And wanted George's mother to help her with this horseless-carriage widower!

"Well, I will be shot!" he muttered aloud. "I will--I certainly will be shot!" And he began'
to laugh. "Lord 'lmighty!"

But presently, at the thought of the horseless-carriage widower's daughter, his grimness returned,
and he resolved upon a line of conduct for the evening. He would nod to her carelessly when
he first saw her; and, after that, he would notice her no more: he would not dance with her;
he would not favour her in the cotillion--he would not go near her!

He descended to dinner upon the third urgent summons of a coloured butler, having spent two
hours dressing--and rehearsing.

Chapter IX

The Honourable George Amberson was a congressman who led cotillions--the sort of congressman
an Amberson would be. He did it negligently, tonight, yet with infallible dexterity, now and
then glancing humorously at the spectators, people of his own age. They were seated in a tropical
grove at one end of the room whither they had retired at the beginning of the cotillion, which
they surrendered entirely to the twenties and the late 'teens. And here, grouped with that
stately pair, Sydney and Amelia Amberson, sat Isabel with Fanny, while Eugene Morgan appeared
to bestow an amiable devotion impartially upon the three sisters-in-law. Fanny watched his
face eagerly, laughing at everything he said; Amelia smiled blandly, but rather because of
graciousness than because of interest; while Isabel, looking out at the dancers, rhythmically
moved a great fan of blue ostrich feathers, listened to Eugene thoughtfully, yet all the while
kept her shining eyes on Georgie.

Georgie had carried out his rehearsed projects with precision, he had given Miss Morgan a nod
studied into perfection during his lengthy toilet before dinner. "Oh, yes, I do seem to remember
that curious little outsider!" this nod seemed to say. Thereafter, all cognizance of her evaporated:
the curious little outsider was permitted no further existence worth the struggle. Nevertheless,
she flashed in the corner of his eye too often. He was aware of her dancing demurely, and of
her viciously flirtatious habit of never looking up at her partner, but keeping her eyes concealed
beneath downcast lashes; and he had over-sufficient consciousness of her between the dances,
though it was not possible to see her at these times, even if he had cared to look frankly
in her direction--she was invisible in a thicket of young dresscoats. The black thicket moved
as she moved and her location was hatefully apparent, even if he had not heard her voice laughing
from the thicket. It was annoying how her voice, though never loud, pursued him. No matter
how vociferous were other voices, all about, he seemed unable to prevent himself from constantly
recognizing hers. It had a quaver in it, not pathetic--rather humorous than pathetic--a quality
which annoyed him to the point of rage, because it was so difficult to get away from. She seemed
to be having a "wonderful time!"

An unbearable soreness accumulated in his chest: his dislike of the girl and her conduct increased
until he thought of leaving this sickening Assembly and going home to bed. That would show
her! But just then he heard her laughing, and decided that it wouldn't show her. So he remained.

When the young couples seated themselves in chairs against the walls, round three sides of
the room, for the cotillion, George joined a brazen-faced group clustering about the doorway--youths
with no partners, yet eligible to be "called out" and favoured. He marked that his uncle placed
the infernal Kinney and Miss Morgan, as the leading couple, in the first chairs at the head
of the line upon the leader's right; and this disloyalty on the part of Uncle George was inexcusable,
for in the family circle the nephew had often expressed his opinion of Fred Kinney. In his
bitterness, George uttered a significant monosyllable.

The music flourished; whereupon Mr. Kinney, Miss Morgan, and six of their neighbours rose and
waltzed knowingly. Mr. Amberson's whistle blew;' then the eight young people went to the favour-table
and were given toys and trinkets wherewith to delight the new partners it was now their privilege
to select. Around the walls, the seated non-participants in this ceremony looked rather conscious;
some chattered, endeavouring not to appear expectant; some tried not to look wistful; and others
were frankly solemn. It was a trying moment; and whoever secured a favour, this very first
shot, might consider the portents happy for a successful evening.

Holding their twinkling gewgaws in their hands, those about to bestow honour came toward the
seated lines, where expressions became feverish. Two of the approaching girls seemed to wander,
not finding a predetermined object in sight; and these two were Janie Sharon, and her cousin,
Lucy. At this, George Amberson Minafer, conceiving that he had little to anticipate from either,
turned a proud back upon the room and affected to converse with his friend, Mr. Charlie Johnson.

The next moment a quick little figure intervened between the two. It was Lucy, gaily offering
a silver sleighbell decked with white ribbon.

"I almost couldn't find you!" she cried.

George stared, took her hand, led her forth in silence, danced with her. She seemed content
not to talk; but as the whistle blew, signalling that this episode was concluded, and he conducted
her to her seat, she lifted the little bell toward him. "You haven't taken your favour. You're
supposed to pin it on your coat," she said. "Don't you want it?"

"If you insist!" said George stiffly. And he bowed her into her chair; then turned and walked
away, dropping the sleighbell haughtily into his trousers' pocket.

The figure proceeded to its conclusion, and George was given other sleighbells, which he easily
consented to wear upon his lapel; but, as the next figure 'began, he strolled with a bored
air to the tropical grove, where sat his elders, and seated himself beside his Uncle Sydney.
His mother leaned across Miss Fanny, raising her voice over the music to speak to him.

"Georgie, nobody will be able to see you here. You'll not be favoured. You ought to be where
you can dance."

"Don't care to," he returned. "Bore!"

"But you ought--" She stopped and laughed, waving her fan to direct his attention behind him.
"Look! Over your shoulder!"

He turned, and discovered Miss Lucy Morgan in the act of offering him a purple toy balloon.

"I found you!" she laughed.

George was startled. "Well--" he said.

"Would you rather 'sit it out?'" Lucy asked quickly, as he did not move. "I don't care to dance
if you--"

"No," he said, rising. "It would be better to dance." His tone was solemn, and solemnly he
departed with her from the grove. Solemnly he danced with her.

Four times, with not the slightest encouragement, she brought him a favour: 'four times in
succession. When the fourth came, "Look here!" said George huskily. "You going to keep this
up all night? What do you mean by it?"

For an instant she seemed confused. "That's what cotillions are for, aren't they?" she murmured.

"What do you mean: what they're for?"

"So that a girl can dance with a person she wants to?"

George's huskiness increased. "Well, do you mean you--you want to dance with me all the time--all
evening?"

"Well, this much of it--evidently!" she laughed.

"Is it because you thought I tried to keep you from getting hurt this afternoon when we upset?"

She shook her head.

"Was it because you want to even things up for making me angry--I mean, for hurting my feelings
on the way home?"

With her eyes averted--for girls of nineteen can be as shy as boys, sometimes--she said, "Well--you
only got angry because I couldn't dance the cotillion with you. I--I didn't feel terribly hurt
with you for getting angry about that!"

"Was there any other reason? Did my telling you I liked you have anything to do with it?"

She looked up gently, and, as George met her eyes, something exquisitely touching, yet queerly
delightful, gave him a catch in the throat. She looked instantly away, and, turning, ran out
from the palm grove, where they stood, to the dancing-floor.

"Come on!" she cried. "Let's dance!"

He followed her.

"See here--I--I--" he stammered. "You mean--Do you--"

"No, no!" she laughed. "Let's dance!"

He put his arm about her almost tremulously, and they began to waltz. It was a happy dance
for both of them.

Christmas day is the children's, but the holidays are youth's dancing-time. The holidays belong
to the early twenties and the 'teens, home from school and college. These years possess the
holidays for a little while, then possess them only in smiling, wistful memories of holly and
twinkling lights and dance-music, and charming faces all aglow. It is the liveliest time in
life, the happiest of the irresponsible times in life. Mothers echo its happiness--nothing
is like a mother who has a son home from college, except another mother with a son home from
college. Bloom does actually come upon these mothers; it is a visible thing; and they run like
girls, walk like athletes, laugh like sycophants. Yet they give up their sons to the daughters
of other mothers, and find it proud rapture enough to be allowed to sit and watch.

Thus Isabel watched George and Lucy dancing, as together they danced away the holidays of that
year into the past. He
tolerated all religious parties, only the Jesuits were repugnant to him, "The birds that the
want to give Satan room and multiply his kingdom. " As early as the beginning of his government
issued He issued an edict in which he ordered the Lutheran and Reformed religion relatives of all insults
to abstain and to communicate with each other peacefully. The most active part he took the fate
of the Salzburg exiles. He not only sent commissioners to the Salzburg Farmers to invite them
to settle in his states, but also spread to the to deter further persecution of Archbishop Firmian
to reprisals against Catholics in the diocese of Halberstadt, and threatened the income of the
monasteries to confiscate. Twenty thousand Salzburg took refuge in Prussia at that time, when the
first train arrived, he greeted the king even at the Leipzig gate and told the poor people welcome
as his country's love children; they were entertained by the Queen in Monbijou.

Around the year 1727 Friedrich Wilhelm fell into a deep religious melancholy. He talked incessantly the
fact that he wanted to resign the crown, and retire to the Hague, where he made the Inheritance
of William the Third, the Summer Palace Honslardik had fallen. It was August Hermann Franke, who
had won such an influence on the mind of the king. The Countess of Baireuth writes: "This priest
was the most innocent things a matter of conscience, he rejected all the pleasures as damnable,
and even the music and hunting, you should only depend speak words of God, everything else was
prohibited. "Grumbkow Seckendorf and laid the King always represent the obstacles, who opposed
his resignation, and he a Such a move would later regret. But the king sank even deeper into
his brooding, and one was allowed near him no longer laughing. Now that all words were in vain, fell
Grumbkow and Seckendorf to another agent. They persuaded the king, the Saxon Court to pay a visit,
who was then the most brilliant in Germany. Political reasons specific Friedrich Wilhelm,
to approve the proposal. As soon as he arrived in Dresden, he was carried away from festival to
festival, the pleasures of the table were not forgotten, the Hungarian wine not saved, and the
friendship of the two kings was the closest. One day, when you had feasted heartily, king
of Poland his host led to a domino Redute. Constantly chattering, they went from one room to
another, the courtiers and the Crown Prince Frederick followed. At last they arrived in a
nicely decorated room, Friedrich Wilhelm and while admiring the magnificent device, sank a
wallpapered wall and a strange spectacle offered to the gaze dar. A girl of perfect beauty
was negligent on a couch, naked as God created it, with a body like the Medici Venus. The Cabinet,
which she found herself in was lit by so many candles that they outshone the daylight. believed
King of Poland, both as Grumbkow that Frederick Wilhelm such a temptation would not be able
to resist, but it was different. In Friedrich Wilhelm took the first glance his hat, gave him
the crown prince to his face and ordered him to leave. He turned to the King of Poland, said dryly:
"She is quite beautiful," and walked away. At Seckendorf he wrote a few days later: "I'm going
to next Wednesday's home fatigieret of all good days and good living, is certainly nit Christian
living here, but God is my witness that I found no pleasure in it and 'm still as pure as I
come from home and will persevere with God's help until my The end. "

Even in winter 1735 the king had suffered from dropsy, and his life was in great Risk was. In
the severe winter of 1740 he fell ill again. He left the Lutheran pastor come Roloff, who was
to prepare him for death.

He forgave all his Enemies, including even his brother, the King of England, but of him, he said,
have done everything life wretched. He repented of his sins and counted them in the presence
many bystanders as much detail on that Roloff had to ask him not to do it. What Roloff was penetrated,
change of mind, but this was the Lord not to move for long. He led on that he always respected
the clergy, God's word is always busy and have his wife had always been unswervingly faithful,
he claimed, always acted legally and to have everything done to the glory of God. Roloff disagreed
and reminded him of the tightening of the the death sentences on the unjust executions, forced
to the building houses in Berlin, to the great oppression of his subjects, and the king's
responsibility before God as he wanted shall not be sufficient. Then the king said, "He does
not spare me. He speaks as a good spirit and an honest man with Me. I thank him for it and now realize
that I was a .'m Great sinner, "In April 1740 he was able to drive even after his beloved Potsdam,
he was Arrangements for his funeral, which should fire the body of the regiment. In the midst
of his Pain he was to sing the song: Why should I grieve me yet? As the body came: naked, and
I'll drag on, he interrupted the singer as saying: "No, is the lie, I want to be buried in the
outfit. "modesty introduced him to the chaplain, it up there were no soldiers there said the
king, "What? Zounds! How so? "And he seemed now very depressed.

On Died, 31 May, he took leave of his wife, his sons, all ministers, Officials and officers. He
had his back to the window, from where it overlooks the stables could, and ordered that it would
lead out the horses, for he wanted the prince of Dessau and General Haake give a horse. When his
personal physician on the question of how long he to live they have
said, about half an hour, he called for a mirror, looked in and said
with a smile: "I'm quite changed, I will be dying an ugly face make.

"He later repeated the question to the doctor. The physician in ordinary he felt the pulse, shrugged
his shoulders and said. "He is quiet," As the king raised his arm, shook the Fist and shouted:
"He will not stand still."

Friedrich Wilhelm died in the fifty-second year of his age and he died, as Friedrich the Great
wrote to Voltaire, with the curiosity of a naturalist who wants to watch what happens in the moment
of death comes and the heroism of a great man. He was buried in Potsdam. At the funeral, the
selected songs by himself sung during mourning meal and two of his specially drank some buckets
of old Rhine wine.

Joachim Nettelbeck

The son of a brewer and distiller Joachim Nettelbeck on 20 September 1738 born in Kolberg. His
mother was from the family of the skipper Blanken, his father Brother
was also a sailor.

His greatest joy was to children, jumping around on ships, and stammer
when he could, his mind was put to the Schifferei.

His tendency was so great that he made every chip, every piece of bark that fell into the hands
of small vessels whittled, they fitted out with sails of feathers or paper and so on and gutters
Ponds was busy or on the Persante. was no greater pleasure for him than if his Uncle's ship was in port,
so he had no rest at home and asked constantly, you want it , following their mouths.

He showed no less love for gardening. His grandfather was a great gardener, took him often in
his garden and gave him even a piece of countryside. As he put fruit pits, verpfropfte planted,
and inoculated.

He might be about six years old when a famine in the country. There were many poor People to
Kolberg to fetch corn, grain ships in the harbor because they expected. When at last a ship arrived
with rye in the roads, it collided with the pier and sank in the
Reason.

To get it back emporzuwinden two ships were used, that one of his uncle was performed, and the
boy was there constantly. The vehicle was lifted, but the grain was soaked, and soon all the roads
were covered with sheets and aprons, to which the grain was exposed to air and sun. At last
came a second seed ship, and it could Not to be controlled.

In the following year Frederick the Great of Prussia sent a truckload of potatoes by Kolberg. These
fruits were but then completely unknown, and the citizens discussed back and forth, what had
to do with it.

They threw to the dogs, which they sniffed and scorned. What we want these things? it said
they can not smell it does not taste, and not even the dogs eat like them. It was believed that
they were growing on trees and one she had to shake down like the apples. All this was in the market,
before his parents Door negotiations. Only when the king in the second year of a second shipment
from one country rider support, had the structure of the potato was knowledgeable, won the favor
of the new fruit Citizens.

The boy was also a great lover of pigeons, and he saved from his breakfast money as much as he
could buy a pair of pigeons.

His games kept him from learning and from the school down, and only the urgent exhortations of his
godfather aroused his ambition. In his eighth year of his godfather for Christmas gave a statement
to the art of navigation, and soon went his zeal for this cause so far that he was often in severe
cold in the winter of At night, when there was clear sky, secretly went to the wall with his instruments
and the Distance of the stars from the horizon or the zenith measured and then calculated the
latitude. Kam He froze in the morning back home, then surprised all declared him an above-studied
Fool, and his father beat him.

As a sailor had to understand well the art of climbing, he practiced
in community with the son of the bell-ringer in the timbers of the
great church in this skill.

They crawled around everywhere, and they often got lost in the huge subdivision of space such
that a from the other knew nothing, and when they came together again was the narrative no end,
where they had been and what they had seen. In the inward Timber Association, crawling also to
the top of the tower up until they do not move more in the cramped space could. This skill and
local knowledge came to him in good stead many years later, probably as a lightning had ignited
the fire in the tower and had to be deleted.

When he was eleven years old, his uncle took him as cabin on guard
with his ship, and his first trip was to Amsterdam.

There he saw the driver and felt a great India invincible Desire to serve on such a ship. Under
cover of darkness, he escaped on a dinghy, entered one of the ships, which he particularly contemplated,
and after many negotiations geheuert as a sailor boy. The ship was destined for the slave trade
to Guinea. Twenty-one Months later he returned to Amsterdam, wrote to his parents, happy surprise,
it to know even more alive, called him to Kolberg, where he stayed until his fourteenth Year. Longer
he could but his adventure and action engines not to resist: He fled again and hired himself
to a ship that was destined to Suriname. On driving home the mate fell overboard and drowned,
and Nettelbeck was to lower tax man made.

In 1756 he took service with his uncle, a shipment of wood from Rügenwalde to bring to Lisbon had.
His younger brother, a boy of fourteen, and the Uncle's young son
were also staff the ship.

They suffered from the Flemish Shipwreck Coast and were saved by Austrian soldiers. The uncle,
however, had an suffered fatal injuries and died in a monastery, where he was transported in
a hurry had. As a heretic and Prussia suspected and shunned, had to be the three young boys by
the enemy's country hit, and only after terrible hardships they came back by Kolberg. No sooner
had Nettelbeck recovered from the survived difficult times, it broke the war, and the advertisers
of the King came to town, for all young people as soldiers to press. It was a real hunt, the
nightmare for all parents of that time and for all young people who could carry a gun and did
not like.

The strong dislike of the citizen against the military profession had its justification in the
inhuman manner in which the young people were treated by the officers,
so Nettelbeck says himself, and he adds, under the windows of the
parents were of the rude people most terribly mistreated, and it was
a pitiful sight to see in such Performances the mothers in clusters
stood by, crying and shouting and rough by the Barbarians were removed.

Nettelbeck

took flight. At night, in storm and snow, he wandered into a Farmers, who had been referred
to him, and had to fight off a pack of timber wolves in the city. At last he reached the sanctuary,
holding twelve days hidden there, but he endured not to sit idly by and he went back to the
mouths. One night he awoke a knock on the shutters of the little room where he slept, and the
familiar voice of a faithful female person called to him: "Joachim, up! to get out of bed! The soldiers
are back the nde, "In the confusion, he grabbed a bunch of clothes,
stole a shirt on the street and noticed as he was dressed, that he
had taken women's clothes.

He threw a red flannel skirt over her shoulders, because he was disturbed by the soldiers,
he ran to the harbor, jumped into a boat and rowed out. Hereafter he went ashore, wandered as good
as naked in the bitter cold March night in front of several doors, each has been rejected and
finally took refuge in an old ship's hull, which was used in summer as a beer bar. He climbed
into the chimney hole and crouched against the cold together in a corner. On Morning, he sought
his abandoned boat and rowed back to the approach to a ship The skipper was a king Berger. The
man took him and held him long at the hidden. Two weeks later he took another ship to Danzig,
and there was He helmsman on a small yacht, a charge was to bring hemp to Western Scotland. The
navigation in the waters of the Hebrides was the rocks and strong currents due to very dangerous,
the ship wandered around a long time, came together in the channel with seven English capers,
and all these snap cocks, so she calls Nettelbeck, climbed aboard his ship and took with what
was not nailed down and, boilers and pans, rope and sail, map and compass. The excitement and
the constant misery Nettelbeck took ill. He had to remain in Metemblick and went to a Kompaßmacher
into teaching, what he learned from him, he was subsequently of great benefit.

Soon after, his father called him back to Kolberg, and he was not yet four weeks in the Home,
so began the siege of Kolberg by the Russians. By the determination of Militia remained hostile
efforts fruitless, and after the Russians a lot Powders had missed useless, they had to pull back.
Nettelbeck went to Amsterdam, where he met his old captain Blanken and drove with him recently to
Suriname; returned from there, it did it again not long before he took another ship to St. Eustaz.
When he was then returned to his native city, was the second time besieged by the Russians, but the
state of emergency lasted only three weeks. During the Seven Years War was the Prussian sailors if they
wanted to find employment, and little else to go left, than under the neutral flag of Gdansk.
In such manner was Nettelbeck from Gdansk to Kaliningrad and Königsberg
with a grain ship to Amsterdam.

It is not necessary for all the journeys and the future to follow in detail, which Encounters
with friend and foe, this back and forth in all areas of the world, these struggles with all the dangers
and all the elements. They form a life of constant restlessness and constant Activity. The merchants
in the foreign country are crafty and cunning, their guile to become master, not go against
their own advantage of the addiction to lose the benefit requires a lot of wisdom, indeed almost
infinite wisdom and self-denial. Again and again, storms, shipwreck again and again; is a miserable little
merit to safety, he goes through or risk disaster lost. During a trip in the North Sea, the
mad captain and take orders, bring about the downfall of the ship must. One morning he fell
from the control in the Lake and drowns.

Nettelbeck receives a list of his possessions, sealing the packed goods and throws in the eyes
of the sailors used the signet into this Sea. To his surprise, he is nowhere to funds and
ready money of the unfortunate Schiffers find the pocket, the silver shoe and knee buckles, the gold
and Haberdashery not silver, which he previously seen with him. When he and the ship in the Port
gets dipped, despite sworn to corroborate the suspicion that he was the good of the Schiffers
have embezzled. Slander and defamation attaches itself to his heels, and the grief, the he feels about
him robbing her courage. Only many years later became the property of the dead Schiffers accidentally
discovered in a shed of the cabin, the widow and the relatives contributed Nettelbeck apology, and
vilified him and accused had raised him to heaven, but one does not have to be Nettelbeck to
the purified grace of random sign of honor to be regarded with bitter feelings. He gradually
matured in the school of life for resignation approach, but to act his power to help his wonderful
power, this by no means waned. During the great fire in Konigsberg, he saved many people on
a boat before safe and horrible death. Some time later came on the Pregel a Dutch Ship on
fire. All people, so much at hand that were busy making holes to cut into the roof to pour water
from above into the burning room. This strengthened but the fire only so much the larger train
and Nettelbeck, of such a perverse process not could look left with shouted to them, they worked
their way to the accident yes, they would the ship to sink. But it was all mixed up confused, and
no one wanted him . Hear Then he grabbed a people jumped up from his room with him in the boat that
the burning Vessel belonged, and showed him a plank just above the water, where he has a hole
in the ship should cut down. That probably let him stay, was the reply of the man, as he could
bad have pay for it. Nettelbeck snatched the ax out of his hands, hit the hole himself, ran posthaste
to the deck, where hundreds of people huddled and shouted, "Shut from the ship, which will not drown,
fall in the minute it gets. "And the ship sank. The Dutch traders, but sued him at the Admiralty,
and asked him for the full Compensation for the damage. He was summoned before the college
and should answer for themselves.

His speech was: "A thousand eyes have seen this, as the ship was in clear flames. Would have only
lasted half a quarter of an hour, the flame was in such a rampant, that it could bear no one on
the ship and it will be disclosed, together with the charge had. And how should it be missing,
not that burnt the rope with which it at the Bulwark held: that the flaming mass drove downstream and
the many other ships and those involved in the ruin moved? Now is great and some bad luck with
so much less damage away, be well to recover again as the ship and cargo. I am therefore of
the good faith, that I in no way punishable act, but only my civic duty have met. "

The sentence was that the skipper Nettelbeck had acted perfectly right and praiseworthy and
the College reserved the right to him by his satisfaction and gratitude ceremony to witness a handshake.
The college director got up from his seat, shook him frankly the
hand, thanked him on behalf of all sailors and in the name of the
city and called it a brave Man merchants, sailors and lawyer looked
at each other embarrassed, then they came one after the other to him
and also gave him a hand.

The director asked him to conclude whether he does not like it last year with the widow of Bording
Rollof done, the sunken ship would try to lift from the water. And to Nettelbeck said. The uplift
was under great Difficulties, and he by Dutch merchants in addition to reimbursement of expenses
nothing would accept, they made him a present of a hundred florins a total of ten Prussian Pound
of coffee and twenty pounds of sugar. He in turn gave them twenty-five florins the poor so
that they also then to have a good day.


Isabel gave him a quick glance, all warm approval, and there was a murmur of friendliness round
the table.

George was not one of those who joined in this applause. He considered his grandfather's nonsense
indelicate, even for second childhood, and he thought that the sooner the subject was dropped
the better. However, he had only a slight recurrence of the resentment which had assailed him
during the winter at every sign of his mother's interest in Morgan; though he was still ashamed
of his aunt sometimes, when it seemed to him that Fanny was almost publicly throwing herself
at the widower's head. Fanny and he had one or two arguments in which her fierceness again
astonished and amused him.

"You drop your criticisms of your relatives," she bade him, hotly, one day, "and begin thinking
a little about your own behaviour! You say people will 'talk' about my--about my merely being
pleasant to an old friend! What do I care how they talk? I guess if people are talking about
anybody in this family they're talking about the impertinent little snippet that hasn't any
respect for anything, and doesn't even know enough to attend to his own affairs!"

"Snippet,' Aunt Fanny!" George laughed. "How elegant! And 'little snippet'--when I'm over five-feet-eleven?"

"I said it!" she snapped, departing. "I don't see how Lucy can stand you!"

"You'd make an amiable stepmother-in-law!" he called after her. "I'll be careful about proposing
to Lucy!"

These were but roughish spots in a summer that glided by evenly and quickly enough, for the
most part, and, at the end, seemed to fly. On the last night before George went back to be
a Junior, his mother asked him confidently if it had not been a happy summer.

He hadn't thought about it, he answered. "Oh,' I suppose so. Why?"

"I just thought it would be: nice to hear you say so," she said, smiling. "I mean, it's pleasant
for people of my age to know that people of your age realize that they're happy."

"People of your age!" he repeated. "You know you don't look precisely like an old woman, mother.
Not precisely!"

"No," she said. "And I suppose I feel about as young as you do, inside, but it won't be many
years before I must begin to look old. It does come!" She sighed, still smiling. "It's seemed
to me that, it must have been a happy summer for you--a real 'summer of roses and wine'--without
the wine, perhaps. 'Gather ye roses while ye may'--or was it primroses? Time does really fly,
or perhaps it's more like the sky--and smoke--"

George was puzzled. "What do you mean: time being like the sky and smoke?"

"I mean the things that we have and that we think are so solid--they're like smoke, and time
is like the sky that the smoke disappears into. You know how wreath of smoke goes up from a
chimney, and seems all thick and black and busy against the sky, as if it were going to do
such important things and last forever, and you see it getting thinner and thinner--and then,
in such a little while, it isn't there at all; nothing is left but the sky, and the sky keeps
on being just the same forever."

"It strikes me you're getting mixed up," said George cheerfully. "I don't see much resemblance
between time and the sky, or between things and smoke-wreaths; but I do see one reason you
like 'Lucy Morgan so much. She talks that same kind of wistful, moony way sometimes--I don't
mean to say I mind it in either of you, because I rather like to listen to it, and you've got
a very good voice, mother. It's nice to listen to, no matter how much smoke and sky, and so
on, you talk. So's Lucy's for that matter; and I see why you're congenial. She talks that way
to her father, too; and he's right there with the same kind of guff. Well, it's all right with
me!" He laughed, teasingly, and allowed her to retain his hand, which she had fondly seized.
"I've got plenty to think about when people drool along!"

She pressed his hand to her cheek, and a tear made a tiny warm streak across one of his knuckles.

"For heaven's sake!" he said. "What's the matter? Isn't everything all right?"

"You're going away!"

"Well, I'm coming back, don't you suppose? Is that all that worries you?"

She cheered up, and smiled again, but shook her head. "I never can bear to see you go--that's
the most of it. I'm a little bothered about your father, too."

"Why?"

"It seems to me he looks so badly. Everybody thinks so."

"What nonsense!" George laughed. "He's been looking that way all summer. He isn't much different
from the way he's looked all his life, that I can see. What's the matter with him?"

"He never talks much about his business to me but I think he's been worrying about some investments
he made last year. I think his worry has affected his health."

"What investments?" George demanded. "He hasn't gone into Mr. Morgan's automobile concern, has he?"

"No," Isabel smiled. "The 'automobile concern' is all Eugene's, and it's so small I understand
it's taken hardly anything. No; your father has always prided himself on making only the most
absolutely safe investments, but two or three years ago he and your Uncle George both put a
great deal--pretty much everything they could get together, I think--into the stock of rolling-mills
some friends of theirs owned, and I'm afraid the mills haven't been doing well."

"What of that? Father needn't worry. You and I could take care of him the rest of his life
on what grandfather--"

"Of course," she agreed. "But your father's always lived so for his business and taken such
pride in his sound investments; it's a passion with him. I--"

"Pshaw! He needn't worry! You tell him we'll look after him: we'll build him a little stone
bank in the backyard, if he busts up, and he can go and put his pennies in it every morning.
That'll keep him just as happy as he ever was!" He kissed her. "Good-night, I'm going to tell
Lucy good-bye. Don't sit up for me."

She walked to the front gate with him, still holding his hand, and he told her again not to
"sit up" for him.

"Yes, I will," she laughed. "You won't be very late."

"Well--it's my last night."

"But I know Lucy, and she knows I want to see you, too, your last night. You'll see: she'll
send you home promptly at eleven!"

But she was mistaken: Lucy sent him home promptly at ten.

Chapter XII

Isabel's uneasiness about her husbands health--sometimes reflected in her letters to George
during the winter that followed--had not been alleviated when the accredited Senior returned
for his next summer vacation, and she confided to him in his room, soon after his arrival,
that "something" the doctor had said to her lately had made her more uneasy than ever.

"Still worrying over his rolling-mills investments?" George asked, not seriously impressed.

"I'm afraid it's past that stage from what Dr Rainey says. His worries only aggravate his condition
now. Dr. Rainey says we ought to get him away."

"Well, let's do it, then."

"He won't go."

"He's a man awfully set in his ways; that's true," said George. "I don't think there's anything
much the matter with him, though, and he looks just the same to me. Have you seen Lucy lately?
How is she?"

"Hasn't she written you?"

"Oh, about once a month," he answered carelessly. "Never says much about herself. How's she look?"

"She looks--pretty!" said Isabel. "I suppose she wrote you they've moved?"

"Yes; I've got her address. She said they were building."

"They did. It's all finished, and they've been in it a month. Lucy is so capable; she keeps
house exquisitely. It's small, but oh, such a pretty little house!"

"Well, that's fortunate," George said. "One thing I've always felt they didn't know a great
deal about is architecture."

"Don't they?" asked Isabel, surprised. "Anyhow, their house is charming. It's way out beyond
the end of Amberson Boulevard; it's quite near that big white house with a gray-green roof
somebody built out there a year or so ago. There are any number of houses going up, out that
way; and the trolley-line runs within a block of them now, on the next street, and the traction
people are laying tracks more than three miles beyond. I suppose you'll be driving out to see
Lucy to-morrow."

"I thought--" George hesitated. "I thought perhaps I'd go after dinner this evening."

At this his mother laughed, not astonished. "It was only my feeble joke about 'to-morrow,'
Georgie! I was pretty sure you couldn't wait that long. Did Lucy write you about the factory?"

"No. What factory?"

"The automobile shops. They had rather a dubious time at first, I'm afraid, and some of Eugene's
experiments turned out badly, but this spring they've finished eight automobiles and sold them
all, and they've got twelve more almost finished, and they're sold already! Eugene's so gay
over it!"

"What do his old sewing-machines look like? Like that first one he had when they came here?"

"No, indeed! These have rubber tires blown up with air--pneumatic! And they aren't so high;
they're very easy to get into, and the engine's in front--Eugene thinks that's a great improvement.
They're very interesting to look at; behind the driver's seat there's a sort of box where four
people can sit, with a step and a little door in the rear, and--"

"I know all about it," said George. "I've seen any number like that, East. You can see all
you want of 'em, if you stand on Fifth Avenue half an hour, any afternoon. I've seen half-a-dozen
go by almost at the same time--within a few minutes, anyhow; and of course electric hansoms
are a common sight there any day. I hired one, myself, the last time I was there. How fast
do Mr. Morgan's machines go?"

"Much too fast! It's very exhilarating--but rather frightening; and they do make a fearful
uproar. He says, though, he thinks he sees a way to get around the noisiness in time."

"I don't mind the noise," said George. "Give me a horse, for mine, though, any day. I must
get up a race with one of these things: Pendennis'll leave it one mile behind in a two-mile
run. How's grandfather?"

"He looks well, but he complains sometimes of his heart: I suppose that's natural at his age--and
it's an Amberson trouble." Having mentioned this, she looked anxious instantly. "Did you ever
feel any weakness there, Georgie?"

"No!" he laughed.

"Are you sure, dear?"

"No!" And he laughed again. "Did you?"

"Oh, I think not--at least, the doctor told me he thought my heart was about all right. He
said I needn't be alarmed."

"I should think not! Women do seem to be always talking about health: I suppose they haven't
got enough else to think of!"

"That must be it," she said gayly. "We're an idle lot!"

George had taken off his coat. "I don't like to hint to a lady," he said, "but I do want to
dress before dinner."

"Don't be long; I've got to do a lot of looking at you, dear!" She kissed him and ran away singing.

But his Aunt Fanny was not so fond; and at the dinner-table there came a spark of liveliness
into her eye when George patronizingly asked her what was the news in her own "particular line
of sport."

"What do you mean, Georgie?" she asked quietly.

"Oh I mean: What's the news in the fast set generally? You been causing any divorces lately?"

"No," said Fanny, the spark in her eye getting brighter. "I haven't been causing anything."

"Well, what's the gossip? You usually hear pretty much everything that goes on around the nooks
and crannies in this town, I hear. What's the last from the gossips' corner, auntie?"

Fanny dropped her eyes, and the spark was concealed, but a movement of her lower lip betokened
a tendency to laugh, as she replied. "There hasn't been much gossip lately, except the report
that Lucy Morgan and Fred Kinney are engaged--and that's quite old, by this time."

Undeniably, this bit of mischief was entirely successful, for there was a clatter upon George's
plate. "What--what do you think you're talking about?" he gasped.

Miss Fanny looked up innocently. "About the report of Lucy Morgan's engagement to Fred Kinney."

George turned dumbly to his mother, and Isabel shook her head reassuringly. "People are always
starting rumours," she said. "I haven't paid any attention to this one."

"But you--you've heard it?" he stammered.

"Oh, one hears all sorts of nonsense, dear. I haven't the slightest idea that it's true."

"Then you have heard it!"

"I wouldn't let it take my appetite," his father suggested drily. "There are plenty of girls
in the world!"

George turned pale.

"Eat your dinner, Georgie," his aunt said sweetly. "Food will do you good. I didn't say I knew
this rumour was true. I only said I'd heard it."

"When? When did you hear it!"

"Oh, months ago!" And Fanny found any further postponement of laughter impossible.

"Fanny, you're a hard-hearted creature," Isabel said gently. "You really are. Don't pay any
attention to her, George. Fred Kinney's only a clerk in his uncle's hardware place: he couldn't
marry for ages--even if anybody would accept him!"

George breathed tumultuously. "I don't care anything about 'ages'! What's that got to do with
it?" he said, his thoughts appearing to be somewhat disconnected. "Ages,' don't mean anything!
I only want to know--I want to know--I want--" He stopped.

"What do you want?" his father asked crossly.

"Why don't you say it? Don't make such a fuss."

"I'm not--not at all," George declared, pushing his chair back from the table.

"You must finish your dinner, dear," his mother urged. "Don't--"

"I have finished. I've eaten all I want. I don't want any more than I wanted. I don't want--I--"
He rose, still incoherent. "I prefer--I want--Please excuse me!"

He left the room, and a moment later the screens outside the open front door were heard to slam:

"Fanny! You shouldn't--"

"Isabel, don't reproach me, he did have plenty of dinner, and I only told the truth: everybody
has been saying--"

"But there isn't any truth in it."

"We don't actually know there isn't," Miss Fanny insisted, giggling. "We've never asked Lucy."

"I wouldn't ask her anything so absurd!"

"George would," George's father remarked. "That's what he's gone to do."

Mr. Minafer was not mistaken: that was what his son had gone to do. Lucy and her father were
just rising from their dinner table when the stirred youth arrived at the front door of the
new house. It was a cottage, however, rather than a house; and Lucy had taken a free hand with
the architect, achieving results in white and green, outside, and white and blue, inside, to
such effect of youth and daintiness that her father complained of "too much spring-time!" The
whole place, including his own bedroom, was a young damsel's boudoir, he said, so that nowhere
could he smoke a cigar without feeling like a ruffian. However, he was smoking when George
arrived, and he encouraged George to join him in the pastime, but the caller, whose air was
both tense and preoccupied, declined with something like agitation.

"I never smoke--that is, I'm seldom--I mean, no thanks," he said. "I mean not at all. I'd rather
not."

"Aren't you well, George?" Eugene asked, looking at him in perplexity. "Have you been overworking
at college? You do look rather pa--"

"I don't work," said George. "I mean I don't work. I think, but I don't work. I only work at
the end of the term. There isn't much to do."

Eugene's perplexity was little decreased, and a tinkle of the door-bell afforded him obvious
relief. "It's my foreman," he said, looking at his watch. "I'll take him out in the yard to
talk. This is no place for a foreman." And he departed, leaving the "living room" to Lucy and
George. It was a pretty room, white panelled and blue curtained--and no place for a foreman,
as Eugene said. There was a grand piano, and Lucy stood leaning back against it, looking intently
at George, while her fingers, behind her, absently struck a chord or two. And her dress was
the dress for that room, being of blue and white, too; and the high colour in her cheeks was
far from interfering with the general harmony of things--George saw with dismay that she was
prettier than ever, and naturally he missed the reassurance he might have felt had he been
able to guess that Lucy, on her part, was finding him better looking than ever. For, however
unusual the scope of George's pride, vanity of beauty was not included; he did not think about
his looks.

"What's wrong, George?" she asked softly.

"What do you mean: 'What's wrong?"

"You're awfully upset about something. Didn't you get though your examination all right?"

"Certainly I did. What makes you think anything's 'wrong' with me?"

"You do look pale, as papa said, and it seemed to me that the way you talked sounded--well,
a little confused."

"Confused'! I said I didn't care to smoke. What in the world is confused about that?"

"Nothing. But--"

"See here!" George stepped close to her. "Are you glad to see me?"

"You needn't be so fierce about it!" Lucy protested, laughing at his dramatic intensity. "Of
course I am! How long have I been looking forward to it?"

"I don't know," he said sharply, abating nothing of his fierceness. "How long have you?"

"Why--ever since you went away!"

"Is that true? Lucy, is that true?"

"You are funny!" she said. "Of course it's true. Do tell me what's the matter with you, George!"

"I will!" he exclaimed. "I was a boy when I saw you last. I see that now, though I didn't then.
Well, I'm not a boy any longer. I'm a man, and a man has a right to demand a totally different
treatment."

"Why has he?"

"What?"

"I don't seem to be able to understand you at all, George. Why shouldn't a boy be treated just
as well as a man?"

George seemed to find himself at a loss. "Why shouldn't--Well, he shouldn't, because a man
has a right to certain explanations."

"What explanations?"

"Whether he's been made a toy of!" George almost shouted. "That's what I want to know!"

Lucy shook her head despairingly. "You are the queerest person! You say you're a man now, but
you talk more like a boy than ever. What does make you so excited?"

"'Excited!'" he stormed. "Do you dare to stand there and call me 'excited'? I tell you, I never
have been more calm or calmer in my life! I don't know that a person needs to be called 'excited'
because he demands explanations that are his simple due!"

"What in the world do you want me to explain?"

"Your conduct with Fred Kinney!" George shouted.

Lucy uttered a sudden cry of laughter; she was delighted. "It's been awful!" she said. "I don't
know that I ever heard of worse misbehaviour! Papa and I have been twice to dinner with his
family, and I've been three times to church with Fred--and once to the circus! I don't know
when they'll be here to arrest me!"

"Stop that!" George commanded fiercely. "I want to know just one thing, and I mean to know
it, too!"

"Whether I enjoyed the circus?"

"I want to know if you're engaged to him!"

"No!" she cried and lifting her face close to his for the shortest instant possible, she gave
him a look half merry, half defiant, but all fond. It was an adorable look.

"Lucy!" he said huskily.

But she turned quickly from him, and ran to the other end of the room. He followed awkwardly,
stammering:

"Lucy, I want--I want to ask you. Will you--will you--will you be engaged to me?"

She stood at a window, seeming to look out into the summer darkness, her back to him.

"Will you, Lucy?"

"No," she murmured, just audibly.

"Why not?"

"I'm older than you."

"Eight months!"

"You're too young."

"Is that--" he said, gulping--"is that the only reason you won't?"

She did not answer.

As she stood, persistently staring out of the window, with her back to him, she did not see
how humble his attitude had become; but his voice was low, and it shook so that she could have
no doubt of his emotion. "Lucy, please forgive me for making such a row," he said, thus gently.
"I've been--I've been terribly upset--terribly! You know how I feel about you, and always have
felt about you. I've shown it in every single thing I've done since the first time I met you,
and I know you know it. Don't you?"

Still she did not move or speak.

"Is the only reason you won't be engaged to me you think I'm too young, Lucy?"

"It's--it's reason enough," she said faintly.

At that he caught one of her hands, and she turned to him: there were tears in her eyes, tears
which he did not understand at all.

"Lucy, you little dear!" he cried. "I knew you--"

"No, no!" she said, and she pushed him away, withdrawing her hand. "George, let's not talk
of solemn things."

"Solemn things!' Like what?"

"Like--being engaged."

But George had become altogether jubilant, and he laughed triumphantly. "Good gracious, that
isn't solemn!"

"It is, too!" she said, wiping her eyes. "It's too solemn for us."

"No, it isn't! I--"

"Let's sit down and be sensible, dear," she said. "You sit over there--"

"I will if you'll call me, 'dear' again."

"No," she said. "I'll only call you that once again this summer--the night before you go away."

"That will have to do, then," he laughed, "so long as I know we're engaged."

"But we're not!" she protested. "And we never will be, if you don't promise not to speak of
it again until--until I tell you to!"

"I won't promise that," said the happy George. "I'll only promise not to speak of it till the
next time you call me 'dear'; and you've promised to call me that the night before I leave
for my senior year."

"Oh, but I didn't!" she said earnestly, then hesitated. "Did I?"

"Didn't you?"

"I don't think I meant it," she murmured, her wet lashes flickering above troubled eyes.

"I know one thing about you," he said gayly, his triumph increasing. "You never went back on
anything you said, yet, and I'm not afraid of this being the first time!"

"But we mustn't let--" she faltered; then went on tremulously, "George, we've got on so well
together, we won't let this make a difference between us, will we?" And she joined in his laughter.

"It will all depend on what you tell me the night before I go away. You agree we're going to
settle things then, don't you, Lucy?"

"I don't promise."

"Yes, you do! Don't you?"

"Well--"

Chapter XIII

Tonight George began a jubilant warfare upon his Aunt Fanny, opening the campaign upon his
return home at about eleven o'clock. Fanny had retired, and was presumably asleep, but George,
on the way to his own room, paused before her door, and serenaded her in a full baritone:

    "As I walk along the Boy de Balong
     With my independent air,
     The people all declare,
     'He must be a millionaire!'
     Oh, you hear them sigh, and wish to die,
     And see them wink the other eye.
     At the man that broke the bank at Monte Carlo!"

Isabel came from George's room, where she had been reading, waiting for him. "I'm afraid you'll
disturb your father, dear. I wish you'd sing more, though--in the daytime! You have a splendid
voice."

"Good-night, old lady!"

"I thought perhaps I--Didn't you want me to come in with you and talk a little?"

"Not to-night. You go to bed. Good-night, old lady!"

He kissed her hilariously, entered his room with a skip, closed his door noisily; and then
he could be heard tossing things about, loudly humming "The Man that Broke the Bank at Monte
Carlo."

Smiling, his mother knelt outside his door to pray; then, with her "Amen," pressed her lips
to the bronze door-knob; and went silently to her own apartment.

After breakfasting in bed, George spent the next morning at his grandfather's and did not encounter
his Aunt Fanny until lunch, when she seemed to be ready for him.

"Thank you so much for the serenade, George!" she said. "Your poor father tells me he'd just
got to sleep for the first time in two nights, but after your kind attentions he lay awake
the rest of last night."

"Perfectly true," Mr. Minafer said grimly.

"Of course, I didn't know, sir," George hastened to assure him. "I'm awfully sorry. But Aunt
Fanny was so gloomy and excited before I went out, last evening, I thought she needed cheering up."

"I!" Fanny jeered. "I was gloomy? I was excited? You mean about that engagement?"

"Yes. Weren't you? I thought I heard you worrying over somebody's being engaged. Didn't I hear
you say you'd heard Mr. Eugene Morgan was engaged to marry some pretty little seventeen-year-old
girl?"

Fanny was stung, but she made a brave effort. "Did you ask Lucy?" she said, her voice almost
refusing the teasing laugh she tried to make it utter. "Did you ask her when Fred Kinney and she--"

"Yes. That story wasn't true. But the other one--" Here he stared at Fanny, and then affected
dismay. "Why, what's the matter with your face, Aunt Fanny? It seems agitated!"

"Agitated!" Fanny said disdainfully, but her voice undeniably lacked steadiness. "Agitated!"

"Oh, come!" Mr. Minafer interposed. "Let's have a little peace!"

"I'm willing," said George. "I don't want to see poor Aunt Fanny all stirred up over a rumour
I just this minute invented myself. She's so excitable--about certain subjects--it's hard to
control her." He turned to his mother. "What's the matter with grandfather?"

"Didn't you see him this morning?" Isabel asked.

"Yes. He was glad to see me, and all that, but he seemed pretty fidgety. Has he been having
trouble with his heart again?"

"Not lately. No."

"Well, he's not himself. I tried to talk to him about the estate; it's disgraceful--it really
is--the way things are looking. He wouldn't listen, and he seemed upset. What's he upset over?"

Isabel looked serious; however, it was her husband who suggested gloomily, "I suppose the Major's
bothered about this Sydney and Amelia business, most likely."

"What Sydney and Amelia business?" George asked.

"Your mother can tell you, if she wants to," Minafer said. "It's not my side of the family,
so I keep off."

"It's rather disagreeable for all of us, Georgie," Isabel began. "You see, your Uncle Sydney
wanted a diplomatic position, and he thought brother George, being in Congress, could arrange
it. George did get him the offer of a South American ministry, but Sydney wanted a European
ambassadorship, and he got quite indignant with poor George for thinking he'd take anything
smaller--and he believes George didn't work hard enough for him. George had done his best,
of course, and now he's out of Congress, and won't run again--so there's Sydney's idea of a
big diplomatic position gone for good. Well, Sydney and your Aunt Amelia are terribly disappointed,
and they say they've been thinking for years that this town isn't really fit to live in--'for
a gentleman,' Sydney says--and it is getting rather big and dirty. So they've sold their house
and decided to go abroad to live permanently; there's a villa near Florence they've often talked
of buying. And they want father to let them have their share of the estate now, instead of
waiting for him to leave it to them in his will."

"Well, I suppose that's fair enough," George said. "That is, in case he intended to leave them
a certain amount in his will."

"Of course that's understood, Georgie. Father explained his will to us long ago; a third to
them, and a third to brother George, and a third to us."

Her son made a simple calculation in his mind. Uncle George was a bachelor, and probably would
never marry; Sydney and Amelia were childless. The Major's only grandchild appeared to remain
the eventual heir of the entire property, no matter if the Major did turn over to Sydney a
third of it now. And George had a fragmentary vision of himself, in mourning, arriving to take
possession of a historic Florentine villa--he saw himself walking up a cypress-bordered path,
with ancient carven stone balustrades in the distance, and servants in mourning livery greeting
the new signore. "Well, I suppose it's grandfather's own affair. He can do it or not, just
as he likes. I don't see why he'd mind much."

"He seemed rather confused and pained about it," Isabel said. "I think they oughtn't to urge
it. George says that the estate won't stand taking out the third that Sydney wants, and that
Sydney and Amelia are behaving like a couple of pigs." She laughed, continuing, "Of course
I don't know whether they are or not: I never have understood any more about business myself
than a little pig would! But I'm on George's side, whether he's right or wrong; I always was
from the time we were children: and Sydney and Amelia are hurt with me about it, I'm afraid.
They've stopped speaking to George entirely. Poor father Family rows at his time of life."

George became thoughtful. If Sydney and Amelia were behaving like pigs, things might not be
so simple as at first they seemed to be. Uncle Sydney and Aunt Amelia might live an awful long
while, he thought; and besides, people didn't always leave their fortunes to relatives. Sydney
might die first, leaving everything to his widow, and some curly-haired Italian adventurer
might get round her, over there in Florence; she might be fool enough to marry again--or even
adopt somebody!

He became more and more thoughtful, forgetting entirely a plan he had formed for the continued
teasing of his Aunt Fanny; and, an hour after lunch, he strolled over to his grandfather's,
intending to apply for further information, as a party rightfully interested.

He did not carry out this intention, however. Going into the big house by a side entrance,
he was informed that the Major was upstairs in his bedroom, that his sons Sydney and George
were both with him, and that a serious argument was in progress. "You kin stan' right in de
middle dat big, sta'y-way," said Old Sam, the ancient negro, who was his informant, "an' you
kin heah all you a-mind to wivout goin' on up no fudda. Mist' Sydney an' Mist' Jawge talkin'
louduh'n I evuh heah nobody ca'y on in nish heah house! Quollin', honey, big quollin'!"

"All right," said George shortly. "You go on back to your own part of the house, and don't
make any talk. Hear me?"

"Yessuh, yessuh," Sam chuckled, as he shuffled away. "Plenty talkin' wivout Sam! Yessuh!"

George went to the foot of the great stairway. He could hear angry voices overhead--those of
his two uncles--and a plaintive murmur, as if the Major tried to keep the peace. Such sounds
were far from encouraging to callers, and George decided not to go upstairs until this interview
was over. His decision was the result of no timidity, nor of a too sensitive delicacy. What
he felt was, that if he interrupted the scene in his grandfather's room, just at this time,
one of the three gentlemen engaging in it might speak to him in a peremptory manner (in the
heat of the moment) and George saw no reason for exposing his dignity to such mischances. Therefore
he turned from the stairway, and going quietly into the library, picked up a magazine--but
he did not open it, for his attention was instantly arrested by his Aunt Amelia's voice, speaking
in the next room. The door was open and George heard her distinctly.

"Isabel does? Isabel!" she exclaimed, her tone high and shrewish. "You needn't tell me anything
about Isabel Minafer, I guess, my dear old Frank Bronson! I know her a little better than you
do, don't you think?"

George heard the voice of Mr. Bronson replying--a voice familiar to him as that of his grandfather's
attorney-in-chief and chief intimate as well. He was a contemporary of the Major's, being over
seventy, and they had been through three years of the War in the same regiment. Amelia addressed
him now, with an effect of angry mockery, as "my dear old Frank Bronson"; but that (without
the mockery) was how the Amberson family almost always spoke of him: "dear old Frank Bronson."
He was a hale, thin old man, six feet three inches tall, and without a stoop.

"I doubt your knowing Isabel," he said stiffly. "You speak of her as you do because she sides
with her brother George, instead of with you and Sydney."

"Pooh!" Aunt Amelia was evidently in a passion. "You know what's been going on over there,
well enough, Frank Bronson!"

"I don't even know what you're talking about."

"Oh, you don't? You don't know that Isabel takes George's side simply because he's Eugene Morgan's
best friend?"

"It seems to me you're talking pure nonsense," said Bronson sharply. "Not impure nonsense, I hope!"

Amelia became shrill. "I thought you were a man of the world: don't tell me you're blind! For
nearly two years Isabel's been pretending to chaperone Fanny Minafer with Eugene, and all the
time she's been dragging that poor fool Fanny around to chaperone her and Eugene! Under the
circumstances, she knows people will get to thinking Fanny's a pretty slim kind of chaperone,
and Isabel wants to please George because she thinks there'll be less talk if she can keep
her own brother around, seeming to approve. 'Talk!' She'd better look out! The whole town will
be talking, the first thing she knows! She--"

Amelia stopped, and stared at the doorway in a panic, for her nephew stood there.

She kept her eyes upon his white face for a few strained moments, then, regaining her nerve,
looked away and shrugged her shoulders.

 "You weren't intended to hear what I've been saying, George," she
said quietly. "But since you seem to--"

"Yes, I did."

"So!" She shrugged her shoulders again. "After all, I don't know but it's just as well, in
the long run."

He walked up to where she sat. "You--you--" he said thickly. "It seems--it seems to me you're--you're
pretty common!"

Amelia tried to give the impression of an unconcerned person laughing with complete indifference,
but the sounds she produced were disjointed and uneasy. She fanned herself, looking out of
the open window near her. "Of course, if you want to make more trouble in the family than we've
already got, George, with your eavesdropping, you can go and repeat--"

Old Bronson had risen from his chair in great distress. "Your aunt was talking nonsense because
she's piqued over a business matter, George," he said. "She doesn't mean what she said, and
neither she nor any one else gives the slightest credit to such foolishness--no one in the world!"

George gulped, and wet lines shone suddenly along his lower eyelids. "They--they'd better not!"
he said, then stalked out of the room, and out of the house. He stamped fiercely across the
stone slabs of the front porch, descended the steps, and halted abruptly, blinking in the strong
sunshine.

In front of his own gate, beyond the Major's broad lawn, his mother was just getting into her
victoria, where sat already his Aunt Fanny and Lucy Morgan. It was a summer fashion-picture:
the three ladies charmingly dressed, delicate parasols aloft; the lines of the victoria graceful
as those of a violin; the trim pair of bays in glistening harness picked out with silver, and
the serious black driver whom Isabel, being an Amberson, dared even in that town to put into
a black livery coat, boots, white breeches, and cockaded hat. They jingled smartly away, and,
seeing George standing on the Major's lawn, Lucy waved, and Isabel threw him a kiss.

But George shuddered, pretending not to see them, and stooped as if searching for something
lost in the grass, protracting that posture until the victoria was out of hearing. And ten
minutes later, George Amberson, somewhat in the semblance of an angry person plunging out of
the Mansion, found a pale nephew waiting to accost him.

"I haven't time to talk, Georgie."

"Yes, you have. You'd better!"

"What's the matter, then?"

His namesake drew him away from the vicinity of the house. "I want to tell you something I
just heard Aunt Amelia say, in there."

"I don't want to hear it," said Amberson. "I've been hearing entirely too much of what 'Aunt
Amelia, says, lately."

"She says my mother's on your side about this division of the property because you're Eugene
Morgan's best friend."

"What in the name of heaven has that got to do with your mother's being on my side?"

"She said--" George paused to swallow. "She said--" He faltered.

"You look sick," said his uncle; and laughed shortly. "If it's because of anything Amelia's
been saying, I don't blame you! What else did she say?"

George swallowed again, as with nausea, but under his uncle's encouragement he was able to
be explicit. "She said my mother wanted you to be friendly to her about Eugene Morgan. She
said my mother had been using Aunt Fanny as a chaperone."

Amberson emitted a laugh of disgust. "It's wonderful what tommy-rot a woman in a state of spite
can think of! I suppose you don't doubt that Amelia Amberson created this specimen of tommy-rot
herself?"

"I know she did."

"Then what's the matter?"

"She said--" George faltered again. "She said--she implied people were--were talking about it."

"Of all the damn nonsense!" his uncle exclaimed. George looked at him haggardly. "You're sure
they're not?"

"Rubbish! Your mother's on my side about this division because she knows Sydney's a pig and
always has been a pig, and so has his spiteful wife. I'm trying to keep them from getting the
better of your mother as well as from getting the better of me, don't you suppose? Well, they're
in a rage because Sydney always could do what he liked with father unless your mother interfered,
and they know I got Isabel to ask him not to do what they wanted. They're keeping up the fight
and they're sore--and Amelia's a woman who always says any damn thing that comes into her head!
That's all there is to it."

"But she said," George persisted wretchedly; "she said there was talk. She said--"

"Look here, young fellow!" Amberson laughed good-naturedly. "There probably is some harmless
talk about the way your Aunt Fanny goes after poor Eugene, and I've no doubt I've abetted it
myself. People can't help being amused by a thing like that. Fanny was always languishing at
him, twenty-odd years ago, before he left here. Well, we can't blame the poor thing if she's
got her hopes up again, and I don't know that I blame her, myself, for using your mother the
way she does."

"How do you mean?"

Amberson put his hand on George's shoulder. "You like to tease Fanny," he said, "but I wouldn't
tease her about this, if I were you. Fanny hasn't got much in her life. You know, Georgie,
just being an aunt isn't really the great career it may sometimes appear to you! In fact, I
don't know of anything much that Fanny has got, except her feeling about Eugene. She's always
had it--and what's funny to us is pretty much life-and-death to her, I suspect. Now, I'll not
deny that Eugene Morgan is attracted to your mother. He is; and that's another case of 'always
was'; but I know him, and he's a knight, George--a crazy one, perhaps, if you've read 'Don
Quixote.' And I think your mother likes him better than she likes any man outside her own family,
and that he interests her more than anybody else--and 'always has.' And that's all there is
to it, except--"

"Except what?" George asked quickly, as he paused.

"Except that I suspect--" Amberson chuckled, and began over: "I'll tell you in confidence.
I think Fanny's a fairly tricky customer, for such an innocent old girl! There isn't any real
harm in her, but she's a great diplomatist--lots of cards up her lace sleeves, Georgie! By
the way, did you ever notice how proud she is of her arms? Always flashing 'em at poor Eugene!"
And he stopped to laugh again.

"I don't see anything confidential about that," George complained. "I thought--"

"Wait a minute! My idea is--don't forget it's a confidential one, but I'm devilish right about
it, young Georgie!--it's this: Fanny uses your mother for a decoy duck. She does everything
in the world she can to keep your mother's friendship with Eugene going, because she thinks
that's what keeps Eugene about the place, so to speak. Fanny's always with your mother, you
see; and whenever he sees Isabel he sees Fanny. Fanny thinks he'll get used to the idea of
her being around, and some day her chance may come! You see, she's probably afraid--perhaps
she even knows, poor thing!--that she wouldn't get to see much of Eugene if it weren't for
Isabel's being such a friend of his. There! D'you see?"

"Well--I suppose so." George's brow was still dark, however. "If you're sure whatever talk
there is, is about Aunt Fanny. If that's so--"

"Don't be an ass," his uncle advised him lightly, moving away. "I'm off for a week's fishing
to forget that woman in there, and her pig of a husband." (His gesture toward the Mansion indicated
Mr. and Mrs. Sydney Amberson.) "I recommend a like course to you, if you're silly enough to
pay any attention to such rubbishings! Good-bye!"

George was partially reassured, but still troubled: a word haunted him like the recollection
of a nightmare. "Talk!"

He stood looking at the houses across the street from the Mansion; and though the sunshine
was bright upon them, they seemed mysteriously threatening. He had always despised them, except
the largest of them, which was the home of his henchman, Charlie Johnson. The Johnsons had
originally owned a lot three hundred feet wide, but they had sold all of it except the meager
frontage before the house itself, and five houses were now crowded into the space where one
used to squire it so spaciously. Up and down the street, the same transformation had taken
place: every big, comfortable old brick house now had two or three smaller frame neighbours
crowding up to it on each side, cheap-looking neighbours, most of them needing paint and not
clean--and yet, though they were cheap looking, they had cost as much to build as the big brick
houses, whose former ample yards they occupied. But
what the 'word concerns, "it is because perhaps less than a redemption a cold junction and
eye-Ice Set of sensation? Seriously, it has an icy and outrageous relation with this arrogant and
superficial prompt completion of the feeling by the literary language. Is your heart too full,
you feel a sweet or sublime experience too much affected, nothing easier! Go to the writers,
and all will be regulated in a very short period of time. He will analyze your case and formulate,
Write to call by name, and bring to talk, you will do it all for all time and make indifferent and take
no thanks for that. However, they are easier, chilled and resolved to go home and wonder what in
the thing you really just yet could disturb with such sweet tumult. And for those cold and
vain charlatan you want seriously happen? What is pronounced, is his creed, is done. The whole
world is pronounced, it's done, redeemed, dismissed ... Very good! However, I'm not a nihilist
... "

You're not - "said Lizaveta ... She just kept her teaspoon of tea
in the vicinity of the Mouth, and froze in this position.

"Well ... well ... come to him, Lizaveta! I am not, I tell you, in respect to the lively feel.
You see, the writer does not understand the reason that life still may continue to live, that
we are not ashamed, but after it pronounced and > Done <is. But lo and behold, it constantly
in spite of all sins salvation through literature to go, because every action is a sin in the
eyes of the mind ...

I'm on target, Lizaveta. Listen to me. I love life - this is a confession. Take it and keep
it - I have not done it yet. It has been said to It has even written and printed, that I hate life
or fear or despise or loathe. I like this one, it flattered me, but that it is not less wrong.
I love life ... They smile, Lizaveta, and I know what. But I implore you, do not hold it in literature,
what I am saying! Do not think of Cesare Borgia or any drunken philosophy that elevates him to
the plate! It is nothing to me of Cesare Borgia, I do not think whatever on it, and I will never
understand and never, how the extraordinary and demonic may worship as an ideal. No, the "life" as it
faces as opposed to the eternal spirit and the art - not as a vision of bloody size and wild
beauty, not as it provides us with the unusual unusual to represent, but the normal, decent and
well-being lovable is the kingdom of our desire, is life in its seductive banality! The still
is not any artist, my Love, whose last and deepest passion is refined, eccentric and Satanic, the
desire not to know the innocent, and simple living, after a little Friendship, devotion, confidentiality
and human happiness, - the furtive and debilitating Longing, Lizaveta, after the joys of ordinariness!
...

A human friend! Do you think it would make me proud and happy to have
a friend with people?

 And,
unable to continue, she became inaudible in her handkerchief.

George felt remorseful, and his own troubles were lightened: all at once it became clear to
him that he had been worrying about nothing. He perceived that his Aunt Amelia was indeed an
old cat, and that to give her scandalous meanderings another thought would be the height of
folly. By no means unsusceptible to such pathos as that now exposed before him, he did not
lack pity for Fanny, whose almost spoken confession was lamentable; and he was granted the
vision to understand that his mother also pitied Fanny infinitely more than he did. This seemed
to explain everything.

He patted the unhappy lady awkwardly upon her shoulder. "There, there!" he said. "I didn't
mean anything. Of course the only thing to do about Aunt Amelia is to pay no attention to her.
It's all right, Aunt Fanny. Don't cry. I feel a lot better now, myself. Come on; I'll drive
back there with you. It's all over, and nothing's the matter. Can't you cheer up?"

Fanny cheered up; and presently the customarily hostile aunt and nephew were driving out Amberson
Boulevard amiably together in the hot sunshine.

Chapter XIV

"Almost" was Lucy's last word on the last night of George's vacation--that vital evening which
she had half consented to agree upon for "settling things" between them. "Almost engaged,"
she meant. And George, discontented with the "almost," but contented that she seemed glad to
wear a sapphire locket with a tiny photograph of George Amberson Minafer inside it, found himself
wonderful in a new world at the final instant of their parting. For, after declining to let
him kiss her "good-bye," as if his desire for such a ceremony were the most preposterous absurdity
in the world, she had leaned suddenly close to him and left upon his cheek the veriest feather
from a fairy's wing.

She wrote him a month later:

No. It must keep on being almost.

Isn't almost pretty pleasant? You know well enough that I care for you. I did from the first
minute I saw you, and I'm pretty sure you knew it--I'm afraid you did. I'm afraid you always
knew it. I'm not conventional and cautious about being engaged, as you say I am, dear. (I always
read over the "dears" in your letters a time or two, as you say you do in mine--only I read
all of your letters a time or two!) But it's such a solemn thing it scares me. It means a good
deal to a lot of people besides you and me, and that scares me, too. You write that I take
your feeling for me "too lightly" and that I "take the whole affair too lightly." Isn't that
odd! Because to myself I seem to take it as something so much more solemn than you do. I shouldn't
be a bit surprised to find myself an old lady, some day, still thinking of you--while you'd
be away and away with somebody else perhaps, and me forgotten ages ago! "Lucy Morgan," you'd
say, when you saw my obituary. "Lucy Morgan? Let me see: I seem to remember the name. Didn't
I know some Lucy Morgan or other, once upon a time?" Then you'd shake your big white head and
stroke your long white beard--you'd have such a distinguished long white beard! and you'd say,
'No. I don't seem to remember any Lucy Morgan; I wonder what made me think I did?' And poor
me! I'd be deep in the ground, wondering if you'd heard about it and what you were saying!
Good-bye for to-day. Don't work too hard--dear!

George immediately seized pen and paper, plaintively but vigorously requesting Lucy not to
imagine him with a beard, distinguished or otherwise, even in the extremities of age. Then,
after inscribing his protest in the matter of this visioned beard, he concluded his missive
in a tone mollified to tenderness, and proceeded to read a letter from his mother which had
reached him simultaneously with Lucy's. Isabel wrote from Asheville, where she had just arrived
with her husband.

I think your father looks better already, darling, though we've been here only a few hours
It may be we've found just the place to build him up. The doctors said they hoped it would
prove to be, and if it is, it would be worth the long struggle we had with him to get him to
give up and come. Poor dear man, he was so blue, not about his health but about giving up the
worries down at his office and forgetting them for a time--if he only will forget them! It
took the pressure of the family and all his best friends, to get him to come--but father and
brother George and Fanny and Eugene Morgan all kept at him so constantly that he just had to
give in. I'm afraid that in my anxiety to get him to do what the doctors wanted him to, I wasn't
able to back up brother George as I should in his difficulty with Sydney and Amelia. I'm so
sorry! George is more upset than I've ever seen him--they've got what they wanted, and they're
sailing before long, I hear, to live in Florence. Father said he couldn't stand the constant
persuading--I'm afraid the word he used was "nagging." I can't understand people behaving like
that. George says they may be Ambersons, but they're vulgar! I'm afraid I almost agree with
him. At least, I think they were inconsiderate. But I don't see why I'm unburdening myself
of all this to you, poor darling! We'll have forgotten all about it long before you come home
for the holidays, and it should mean little or nothing to you, anyway. Forget that I've been
so foolish!

Your father is waiting for me to take a walk with him--that's a splendid sign, because he hasn't
felt he could walk much, at home, lately. I mustn't keep him waiting. Be careful to wear your
mackintosh and rubbers in rainy weather, and, as soon as it begins to get colder, your ulster.
Wish you could see your father now. Looks so much better! We plan to stay six weeks if the
place agrees with him. It does really seem to already! He's just called in the door to say
he's waiting. Don't smoke too much, darling boy.

Devotedly, your mother Isabel.

But she did not keep her husband there for the six weeks she anticipated. She did not keep
him anywhere that long. Three weeks after writing this letter, she telegraphed suddenly to
George that they were leaving for home at once; and four days later, when he and a friend came
whistling into his study, from lunch at the club, he found another telegram upon his desk.

He read it twice before he comprehended its import.

Papa left us at ten this morning, dearest. Mother.

The friend saw the change in his face. "Not bad news?"

George lifted utterly dumfounded eyes from the yellow paper.

"My father," he said weakly. "She says--she says he's dead. I've got to go home."

His Uncle George and the Major met him at the station when he arrived--the first time the Major
had ever come to meet his grandson. The old gentleman sat in his closed carriage (which still
needed paint) at the entrance to the station, but he got out and advanced to grasp George's
hand tremulously, when the latter appeared. "Poor fellow!" he said, and patted him repeatedly
upon the shoulder. "Poor fellow! Poor Georgie!"

George had not yet come to a full realization of his loss: so far, his condition was merely
dazed; and as the Major continued to pat him, murmuring "Poor fellow!" over and over, George
was seized by an almost irresistible impulse to tell his grandfather that he was not a poodle.
But he said "Thanks," in a low voice, and got into the carriage, his two relatives following
with deferential sympathy. He noticed that the Major's tremulousness did not disappear, as
they drove up the street, and that he seemed much feebler than during the summer. Principally,
however, George was concerned with his own emotion, or rather, with his lack of emotion; and
the anxious sympathy of his grandfather and his uncle made him feel hypocritical. He was not
grief-stricken; but he felt that he ought to be, and, with a secret shame, concealed his callousness
beneath an affectation of solemnity.

But when he was taken into the room where lay what was left of Wilbur Minafer, George had no
longer to pretend; his grief was sufficient. It needed only the sight of that forever inert
semblance of the quiet man who had been always so quiet a part of his son's life--so quiet
a part that George had seldom been consciously aware that his father was indeed a part of his
life. As the figure lay there, its very quietness was what was most lifelike; and suddenly
it struck George hard. And in that unexpected, racking grief of his son, Wilbur Minafer became
more vividly George's father than he had ever been in life.

When George left the room, his arm was about his black-robed mother, his shoulders were still
shaken with sobs. He leaned upon his mother; she gently comforted him; and presently he recovered
his composure and became self-conscious enough to wonder if he had not been making an unmanly
display of himself. "I'm all right again, mother," he said awkwardly. "Don't worry about me:
you'd better go lie down, or something; you look pretty pale."

Isabel did look pretty pale, but not ghastly pale, as Fanny did. Fanny's grief was overwhelming;
she stayed in her room, and George did not see her until the next day, a few minutes before
the funeral, when her haggard face appalled him. But by this time he was quite himself again,
and during the short service in the cemetery his thoughts even wandered so far as to permit
him a feeling of regret not directly connected with his father. Beyond the open flower-walled
grave was a mound where new grass grew; and here lay his great-uncle, old John Minafer, who
had died the previous autumn; and beyond this were the graves of George's grandfather and grandmother
Minafer, and of his grandfather Minafer's second wife, and her three sons, George's half-uncles,
who had been drowned together in a canoe accident when George was a child--Fanny was the last
of the family. Next beyond was the Amberson family lot, where lay the Major's wife and their
sons Henry and Milton, uncles whom George dimly remembered; and beside them lay Isabel's older
sister, his Aunt Estelle, who had died, in her girlhood, long before George was born. The Minafer
monument was a granite block, with the name chiseled upon its one polished side, and the Amberson
monument was a white marble shaft taller than any other in that neighbourhood. But farther
on there was a newer section of the cemetery, an addition which had been thrown open to occupancy
only a few years before, after dexterous modern treatment by a landscape specialist. There
were some large new mausoleums here, and shafts taller than the Ambersons', as well as a number
of monuments of some sculptural pretentiousness; and altogether the new section appeared to
be a more fashionable and important quarter than that older one which contained the Amberson
and Minafer lots. This was what caused George's regret, during the moment or two when his mind
strayed from his father and the reading of the service.

On the train, going back to college, ten days later, this regret (though it was as much an
annoyance as a regret) recurred to his mind, and a feeling developed within him that the new
quarter of the cemetery was in bad taste--not architecturally or sculpturally perhaps, but
in presumption: it seemed to flaunt a kind of parvenu ignorance, as if it were actually pleased
to be unaware that all the aristocratic and really important families were buried in the old
section.

The annoyance gave way before a recollection of the sweet mournfulness of his mother's face,
as she had said good-bye to him at the station, and of how lovely she looked in her mourning.
He thought of Lucy, whom he had seen only twice, and he could not help feeling that in these
quiet interviews he had appeared to her as tinged with heroism--she had shown, rather than
said, how brave she thought him in his sorrow. But what came most vividly to George's mind,
during these retrospections, was the despairing face of his Aunt Fanny. Again and again he
thought of it; he could not avoid its haunting. And for days, after he got back to college,
the stricken likeness of Fanny would appear before him unexpectedly, and without a cause that
he could trace in his immediately previous thoughts. Her grief had been so silent, yet it had
so amazed him.

George felt more and more compassion for this ancient antagonist of his, and he wrote to his
mother about her:

I'm afraid poor Aunt Fanny might think now father's gone we won't want her to live with us
any longer and because I always teased her so much she might think I'd be for turning her out.
I don't know where on earth she'd go or what she could live on if we did do something like
this, and of course we never would do such a thing, but I'm pretty sure she had something of
the kind on her mind. She didn't say anything, but the way she looked is what makes me think
so. Honestly, to me she looked just scared sick. You tell her there isn't any danger in the
world of my treating her like that. Tell her everything is to go on just as it always has.
Tell her to cheer up!

Chapter XV

Isabel did more for Fanny than telling her to cheer up. Everything that Fanny inherited from
her father, old Aleck Minafer, had been invested in Wilbur's business; and Wilbur's business,
after a period of illness corresponding in dates to the illness of Wilbur's body, had died
just before Wilbur did. George Amberson and Fanny were both "wiped out to a miracle of precision,"
as Amberson said. They "owned not a penny and owed not a penny," he continued, explaining his
phrase. "It's like the moment just before drowning: you're not under water and you're not out
of it. All you know is that you're not dead yet."

He spoke philosophically, having his "prospects" from his father to fall back upon; but Fanny
had neither "prospects" nor philosophy. However, a legal survey of Wilbur's estate revealed
the fact that his life insurance was left clear of the wreck; and Isabel, with the cheerful
consent of her son, promptly turned this salvage over to her sister-in-law. Invested, it would
yield something better than nine hundred dollars a year, and thus she was assured of becoming
neither a pauper nor a dependent, but proved to be, as Amberson said, adding his efforts to
the cheering up of Fanny, "an heiress, after all, in spite of rolling mills and the devil."
She was unable to smile, and he continued his humane gayeties. "See what a wonderfully desirable
income nine hundred dollars is, Fanny: a bachelor, to be in your class, must have exactly forty-nine
thousand one hundred a year. Then, you see, all you need to do, in order to have fifty thousand
a year, is to be a little encouraging when some bachelor in your class begins to show by his
haberdashery what he wants you to think about him!"

She looked at him wanly, murmured a desolate response--she had "sewing to do"--and left the
room; while Amberson shook his head ruefully at his sister. "I've often thought that humor
was not my forte," he sighed. "Lord! She doesn't 'cheer up' much!"

The collegian did not return to his home for the holidays. Instead, Isabel joined him, and
they went South for the two weeks. The unit therefore expresses the very abstract sameness , and
is so much harder and more striking, the more the will of which she expressed, show absolute distinction.
For unit would therefore be far better just inseparability inseparability and said: but that the affirmative
of the relationship of the whole is not expressed.

So the whole, true result, which has been shown here, becoming, which
not only unilateral or abstract unity of being and nothing is.

Yet both of them felt constantly the difference between this Christmastime and other Christmas-times
of theirs--in all, it was a sorrowful holiday. But when Isabel came East for George's commencement,
in June, she brought Lucy with her--and things began to seem different, especially when George
Amberson arrived with Lucy's father on Class Day. Eugene had been in New York, on business;
Amberson easily persuaded him to this outing; and they made a cheerful party of it, with the
new graduate of course the hero and center of it all.

His uncle was a fellow alumnus. "Yonder was where I roomed when I was here," he said, pointing
out one of the university buildings to Eugene. "I don't know whether George would let my admirers
place a tablet to mark the spot, or not. He owns all these buildings now, you know."

"Didn't you, when you were here? Like uncle, like nephew."

"Don't tell George you think he's like me. Just at this time we should be careful of the young
gentleman's feelings."

"Yes," said Eugene. "If we weren't he mightn't let us exist at all."

"I'm sure I didn't have it so badly at his age," Amberson said reflectively, as they strolled
on through the commencement crowd. "For one thing, I had brothers and sisters, and my mother
didn't just sit at my feet as George's does; and I wasn't an only grandchild, either. Father's
always spoiled Georgie a lot more than he did any of his own' children."

Eugene laughed. "You need only three things to explain all that's good and bad about Georgie."

"Three?"

"He's Isabel's only child. He's an Amberson. He's a boy."

"Well, Mister Bones, of these three things which are the good ones and which are the bad ones?"

"All of them," said Eugene.

It happened that just then they came in sight of the subject of their discourse. George was
walking under the elms with Lucy, swinging a stick and pointing out to her various objects
and localities which had attained historical value during the last four years. The two older
men marked his gestures, careless and graceful; they observed his attitude, unconsciously noble,
his easy proprietorship of the ground beneath his feet and round about, of the branches overhead,
of the old buildings beyond, and of Lucy.

"I don't know," Eugene said, smiling whimsically. "I don't know. When I spoke of his being
a human being--I don't know. Perhaps it's more like deity."

"I wonder if I was like that!" 'Amberson groaned.' "You don't suppose every Amberson has had
to go through it, do you?"

"Don't worry! At least half of it is a combination of youth, good looks, and college; and even
the noblest Ambersons get over their nobility and come to be people in time. It takes more
than time, though."

"I should say it did take more than time!" his friend agreed, shaking a rueful head.

Then they walked over to join the loveliest Amberson, whom neither time nor trouble seemed
to have touched. She stood alone, thoughtful under the great trees, chaperoning George and
Lucy at a distance; but, seeing the two friends approaching, she came to meet them.

"It's charming, isn't it!" she said, moving her black-gloved hand to indicate the summery dressed
crowd strolling about them, or clustering in groups, each with its own hero. "They seem so
eager and so confident, all these boys--it's touching. But of course youth doesn't know it's
touching."

Amberson coughed. "No, it doesn't seem to take itself as pathetic, precisely! Eugene and I
were just speaking of something like that. Do you know what I think whenever I see these smooth,
triumphal young faces? I always think: 'Oh, how you're going to catch it'!"

"George!"

"Oh, yes," he said. "Life's most ingenious: it's got a special walloping for every mother's
son of 'em!"

"Maybe," said Isabel, troubled--"maybe some of the mothers can take the walloping for them."

"Not one!" her brother assured her, with emphasis. "Not any more than she can take on her own
face the lines that are bound to come on her son's. I suppose you know that all these young
faces have got to get lines on 'em?"

"Maybe they won't," she said, smiling wistfully. "Maybe times will change, and nobody will
have to wear lines."

"Times have changed like that for only one person that I know," Eugene said. And as Isabel
looked inquiring, he laughed, and she saw that she was the "only one person." His implication
was justified, moreover, and she knew it. She blushed charmingly.

"Which is it puts the lines on the faces?" Amberson asked. "Is it age or trouble? Of course
we can't decide that wisdom does it--we must be polite to Isabel."

"I'll tell you what puts the lines there," Eugene said. "Age puts some, and trouble puts some,
and work puts some, but the deepest are carved by lack of faith. The serenest brow is the one
that believes the most."

"In what?" Isabel asked gently.

"In everything!"

She looked at him inquiringly, and he laughed as he had a moment before, when she looked at
him that way. "Oh, yes, you do!" he said.

She continued to look at him inquiringly a moment or two longer, and there was an unconscious
earnestness in her glance, something trustful as well as inquiring, as if she knew that whatever
he meant it was all right. Then her eyes drooped thoughtfully, and she seemed to address some
inquiries to herself. She looked up suddenly. "Why, I believe," she said, in a tone of surprise,
"I believe I do!"

And at that both men laughed. "Isabel!" her brother exclaimed. "You're a foolish person! There
are times when you look exactly fourteen years old!"

But this reminded her of her real affair in that part of the world. "Good gracious!" she said.
"Where have the children got to? We must take Lucy pretty soon, so that George can go and sit
with the Class. We must catch up with them."

She took her brother's arm, and the three moved on, looking about them in the crowd.

"Curious," Amberson remarked, as they did not immediately discover the young people they sought.
"Even in such a concourse one would think we couldn't fail to see the proprietor."

"Several hundred proprietors today," Eugene suggested.

"No; they're only proprietors of the university," said George's uncle. "We're looking for the
proprietor of the universe."

"There he is!" cried Isabel fondly, not minding this satire at all. "And doesn't he look it!"

Her escorts were still laughing at her when they joined the proprietor of the universe and
his pretty friend, and though both Amberson and Eugene declined to explain the cause of their
mirth, even upon Lucy's urgent request, the portents of the day were amiable, and the five
made a happy party--that is to say, four of them made a happy audience for the fifth, and the
mood of this fifth was gracious and cheerful. I have Actus a
court before me, you were indeed in the content, our writing Wait, "and a smile he continued: "since
you're such a hurry, we would still win a chat more if you do today, this office again in the
service of our jurisdiction cringe-inducing wanted to! "

Richard laughed. "Have you no Protokollfuehrer?"

"No, darling, because I respect the dignity and also in my Salarium a Stadtsekretarius Association
of persons, I must also bear the burdens of this office, if not the random one more able and
complacent friend brings me to the house. "- sat a few minutes later both at the conference table
in the court room next door. "You will perhaps the yellow-haired theologian remember, "said the
mayor, while he is comfortable with Would slightly elevated in the Armchair President settled,
"we are probably not the time erroneously called the informers! We have him here for years at
the site, and the Magister runs a boarding house and is profitable for nobles and notables
in high esteem; He was about to entrust even with the service of
our country's prison here. "

"What about him?" said the improvised actuary, who has carved his
pen and the broken bow had placed before him. "I really only remember
his shabby Dress suit and his big red hands. " He could retain the information necessary for
such a feat just long enough to give a successful performance; then it would evaporate utterly
from his brain, and leave him undisturbed. George, like his "crowd," not only preferred "being
things" to "doing things," but had contented himself with four years of "being things" as a
preparation for going on "being things." And when Lucy rather shyly pressed him for his friend's
probable definition of the "things" it seemed so superior and beautiful to be, George raised
his eyebrows slightly, meaning that she should have understood without explanation; but he
did explain: "Oh, family and all that--being a gentleman, I suppose."

Lucy gave the horizon a long look, but offered no comment.

Chapter XVI

"Aunt Fanny doesn't look much better," George said to his mother, a few minutes after their
arrival, on the night they got home. He stood with a towel in her doorway, concluding some
sketchy ablutions before going downstairs to a supper which Fanny was hastily preparing for
them. Isabel had not telegraphed; Fanny was taken by surprise when they drove up in a station
cab at eleven o'clock; and George instantly demanded "a little decent food." (Some criticisms
of his had publicly disturbed the composure of the dining-car steward four hours previously.)
"I never saw anybody take things so hard as she seems to," he observed, his voice muffled by
the towel. "Doesn't she get over it at all? I thought she'd feel better when we turned over
the insurance to her--gave it to her absolutely, without any strings to it. She looks about
a thousand years old!"

"She looks quite girlish, sometimes, though," his mother said.

"Has she looked that way much since father--"

"Not so much," Isabel said thoughtfully. "But she will, as times goes on."

"Time'll have to hurry, then, it seems to me," George observed, returning to his own room.

When they went down to the dining room, he pronounced acceptable the salmon salad, cold beef,
cheese, and cake which Fanny made ready for them without disturbing the servants. The journey
had fatigued Isabel, she ate nothing, but sat to observe with tired pleasure the manifestations
of her son's appetite, meanwhile giving her sister-in-law a brief summary of the events of
commencement. But presently she kissed them both good-night--taking care to kiss George lightly
upon the side of his head, so as not to disturb his eating--and left aunt and nephew alone
together.

"It never was becoming to her to look pale," Fanny said absently, a few moments after Isabel's
departure.

"Wha'd you say, Aunt Fanny?"

"Nothing. I suppose your mother's been being pretty gay? Going a lot?"

"How could she?" George asked cheerfully. "In mourning, of course all she could do was just
sit around and look on. That's all Lucy could do either, for the matter of that."

"I suppose so," his aunt assented. "How did Lucy get home?"

George regarded her with astonishment. "Why, on the train with the rest of us, of course."

"I didn't mean that," Fanny explained. "I meant from the station. Did you drive out to their
house with her before you came here?"

"No. She drove home with her father, of course."

"Oh, I see. So Eugene came to the station to meet you."

"To meet us?" George echoed, renewing his attack upon the salmon salad. "How could he?"

"I don't know what you mean," Fanny said drearily, in the desolate voice that had become her
habit. "I haven't seen him while your mother's been away."

"Naturally," said George. "He's been East himself."

At this Fanny's drooping eyelids opened wide.

"Did you see him?"

"Well, naturally, since he made the trip home with us!"

"He did?" she said sharply. "He's been with you all the time?"

"No; only on the train and the last three days before we left. Uncle George got him to come."

Fanny's eyelids drooped again, and she sat silent until George pushed back his chair and lit
a cigarette, declaring his satisfaction with what she had provided. "You're a fine housekeeper,"
he said benevolently. "You know how to make things look dainty as well as taste the right way.
I don't believe you'd stay single very long if some of the bachelors and widowers around town
could just once see--"

She did not hear him. "It's a little odd," she said.

"What's odd?"

"Your mother's not mentioning that Mr. Morgan had been with you."

"Didn't think of it, I suppose," said George carelessly; and, his benevolent mood increasing,
he conceived the idea that a little harmless rallying might serve to elevate his aunt's drooping
spirits. "I'll tell you something, in confidence," he said solemnly.

She looked up, startled. "What?"

"Well, it struck me that Mr. Morgan was looking pretty absent-minded, most of the time; and
he certainly is dressing better than he used to. Uncle George told me he heard that the automobile
factory had been doing quite well--won a race, too! I shouldn't be a bit surprised if all the
young fellow had been waiting for was to know he had an assured income before he proposed."

"What 'young fellow'?"

"This young fellow Morgan," laughed George; "Honestly, Aunt Fanny, I shouldn't be a bit surprised
to have him request an interview with me any day, and declare that his intentions are honourable,
and ask my permission to pay his addresses to you. What had I better tell him?"

Fanny burst into tears.

"Good heavens!" George cried. "I was only teasing. I didn't mean--"

"Let me alone," she said lifelessly; and, continuing to weep, rose and began to clear away
the dishes.

"Please, Aunt Fanny--"

"Just let me alone."

George was distressed. "I didn't mean anything, Aunt Fanny! I didn't know you'd got so sensitive
as all that."

"You'd better go up to bed," she said desolately, going on with her work and her weeping.

"Anyhow," he insisted, "do let these things wait. Let the servants 'tend to the table in the
morning."

"No."

"But, why not?"

"Just let me alone."

"Oh, Lord!" George groaned, going to the door. There he turned. "See here, Aunt Fanny, there's
not a bit of use your bothering about those dishes tonight. What's the use of a butler and
three maids if--"

"Just let me alone."

He obeyed, and could still hear a pathetic sniffing from the dining room as he went up the stairs.

"By George!" he grunted, as he reached his own room; and his thought was that living with a
person so sensitive to kindly raillery might prove lugubrious. He whistled, long and low, then
went to the window and looked through the darkness to the great silhouette of his grandfather's
house. Lights were burning over there, upstairs; probably his newly arrived uncle was engaged
in talk with the Major.

George's glance lowered, resting casually upon the indistinct ground, and he beheld some vague
shapes, unfamiliar to him. Formless heaps, they seemed; but, without much curiosity, he supposed
that sewer connections or water pipes might be out of order, making necessary some excavations.
He hoped the work would not take long; he hated to see that sweep of lawn made unsightly by
trenches and lines of dirt, even temporarily. Not greatly disturbed, however, he pulled down
the shade, yawned, and began to, undress, leaving further investigation for the morning.

But in the morning he had forgotten all about it, and raised his shade, to let in the light,
without even glancing toward the ground. Not until he had finished dressing did he look forth
from his window, and then his glance was casual. The next instant his attitude became electric,
and he gave utterance to a bellow of dismay. He ran from his room, plunged down the stairs,
out of the front door, and, upon a nearer view of the destroyed lawn, began to release profanity
upon the breezeless summer air, which remained unaffected. Between his mother's house and his
grandfather's, excavations for the cellars of five new houses were in process, each within
a few feet of its neighbour. Foundations of brick were being laid; everywhere were piles of
brick and stacked lumber, and sand heaps and mortar' beds.

It was Sunday, and so the workmen implicated in these defacings were denied what unquestionably;
they would have considered a treat; but as the fanatic orator continued the monologue, a gentleman
in flannels emerged upward from one of the excavations, and regarded him contemplatively.

"Obtaining any relief, nephew?" he inquired with some interest. "You must have learned quite
a number of those expressions in childhood--it's so long since I'd heard them I fancied they
were obsolete."

"Who wouldn't swear?" George demanded hotly. "In the name of God, what does grandfather mean,
doing such things?"

"My private opinion is," said Amberson gravely, "he desires to increase his income by building
these houses to rent."

"Well, in the name of God, can't he increase his income any other way but this?"

"In the name of God, it would appear he couldn't."

"It's beastly! It's a damn degradation! It's a crime!"

"I don't know about its being a crime," said his uncle, stepping over some planks to join him.
"It might be a mistake, though. Your mother said not to tell you until we got home, so as not
to spoil commencement for you. She rather feared you'd be upset."

"Upset! Oh, my Lord, I should think I would be upset! He's in his second childhood. What did
you let him do it for, in the name of--"

"Make it in the name of heaven this time, George; it's Sunday. Well, I thought, myself, it
was a mistake."

"I should say so!"

"Yes," said Amberson. "I wanted him to put up an apartment building instead of these houses."

"An apartment building! Here?"

"Yes; that was my idea."

George struck his hands together despairingly. "An apartment house! Oh, my Lord!"

"Don't worry! Your grandfather wouldn't listen to me, but he'll wish he had, some day. He says
that people aren't going to live in miserable little flats when they can get a whole house
with some grass in front and plenty of backyard behind. He sticks it out that apartment houses
will never do in a town of this type, and when I pointed out to him that a dozen or so of 'em
already are doing, he claimed it was just the novelty, and that they'd all be empty as soon
as people got used to 'em. So he's putting up these houses."

"Is he getting miserly in his old age?"

"Hardly! Look what he gave Sydney and Amelia!"

"I don't mean he's a miser, of course," said George. "Heaven knows he's liberal enough with
mother and me; but why on earth didn't he sell something or other rather than do a thing like
this?"

"As a matter of fact," Amberson returned coolly, "I believe he has sold something or other,
from time to time."

"Well, in heaven's name," George cried, "what did he do it for?"

"To get money," his uncle mildly replied. "That's my deduction."

"I suppose you're joking--or trying to!"

"That's the best way to look at it," Amberson said amiably. "Take the whole thing as a joke--and
in the meantime, if you haven't had your breakfast--"

"I haven't!"

"Then if I were you I'd go in and gets some. And"--he paused, becoming serious--"and if I were
you I wouldn't say anything to your grandfather about this."

"I don't think I could trust myself to speak to him about it," said George. "I want to treat
him respectfully, because he is my grandfather, but I don't believe I could if I talked to
him about such a thing as this!"

And with a gesture of despair, plainly signifying that all too soon after leaving bright college
years behind him he had entered into the full tragedy of life, George turned bitterly upon
his heel and went into the house for his breakfast.

His uncle, with his head whimsically upon one side, gazed after him not altogether unsympathetically,
then descended again into the excavation whence he had lately emerged. Being a philosopher
he was not surprised, that afternoon, in the course of a drive he took in the old carriage
with the Major, when, George was encountered upon the highway, flashing along in his runabout
with Lucy beside him and Pendennis doing better than three minutes.

"He seems to have recovered," Amberson remarked: "Looks in the highest good spirits."

"I beg your pardon."

"Your grandson," Amberson explained. "He was inclined to melancholy this morning, but seemed
jolly enough just now when they passed us."

"What was he melancholy about? Not getting remorseful about all the money he's spent at college,
was he?" The Major chuckled feebly, but with sufficient grimness. "I wonder what he thinks
I'm made of," he concluded querulously.

"Gold," his son suggested, adding gently, "And he's right about part of you, father."

"What part?"

"Your heart."

The Major laughed ruefully. 

From the corridor, where it was located, could be on a side staircase to the side entrance the
hotel and from there, without touching a room, get into the sun room. This way he was, quietly
and stealthily, as if he was on forbidden paths, felt his way cautiously through the darkness,
drawn irresistibly by this silly and happy most music, the Sounds penetrated already clear to
him and without damping.

The porch was empty and unenlightened, but the glass door of the hall, where the two large, with
bright reflectors provided oil lamps shone brightly, stood open. There crept he quietly, and
the thieving pleasure, here in the dark and the unseen listen to be allowed, who danced in the
light, causing a tingling sensation in his skin.

Hastily and anxious, he sent forth his views after the two that he was looking for ...

The gaiety of the festival seemed quite freely deployed, although hardly in a half Hour was opened,
but we came here was already warm and excited, after spent the whole day together, carefree,
and happy together. In the music room, the could see Tonio Kröger, if he had ventured a little
further, several older men smoking and drinking combined at cards, but others were sitting
in their Wives in the foreground on the plush chairs and walls of
the hall and saw the Dancing too. He was
sure Pendennis could be trained to work as a leader; and all that one needed to buy at present,
he said, would be "comparatively inexpensive--a new trap, and the harness, of course, and a
good bay to match Pendennis." He did not care for a special groom; one of the stablemen would do.

At this point the Major decided to speak. "You say one of the stablemen would do?" he inquired,
his widened eyes remaining fixed upon his grandson. "That's lucky, because one's all there
is, just at present, George. Old fat Tom does it all. Didn't you notice, when you took Pendennis
out, yesterday?"

"Oh, that will be all right, sir. My mother can lend me her man."

"Can she?" The old gentleman smiled faintly. "I wonder--" He paused.

"What, sir?"

"Whether you mightn't care to go to law-school somewhere perhaps. I'd be glad to set aside
a sum that would see you through."

This senile divergence from the topic in hand surprised George painfully. "I have no interest
whatever in the law," he said. "I don't care for it, and the idea of being a professional man
has never appealed to me. None of the family has ever gone in for that sort of thing, to my
knowledge, and I don't care to be the first. I was speaking of driving a tandem--"

"I know you were," the Major said quietly.

George looked hurt. "I beg your pardon. Of course if the idea doesn't appeal to you--" And
he rose to go.

The Major ran a tremulous hand through his hair, sighing deeply. "I--I don't like to refuse
you anything, Georgie," he said. "I don't know that I often have refused you whatever you wanted--in
reason--"

"You've always been more than generous, sir," George interrupted quickly. "And if the idea
of a tandem doesn't appeal to you, why--of course--" And he waved his hand, heroically dismissing
the tandem.

The Major's distress became obvious. "Georgie, I'd like to, but--but I've an idea tandems are
dangerous to drive, and your mother might be anxious. She--"

"No, sir; I think not. She felt it would be rather a good thing--help to keep me out in the
open air. But if perhaps your finances--"

"Oh, it isn't that so much," the old gentleman said hurriedly. "I wasn't thinking of that altogether."
He laughed uncomfortably. "I guess we could still afford a new horse or two, if need be--"

 "I thought you said--"

The Major waved his hand airily. "Oh, a few retrenchments where things were useless; nothing
gained by a raft of idle darkies in the stable--nor by a lot of extra land that might as well
be put to work for us in rentals. And if you want this thing so very much--"

"It's not important enough to bother about, really, of course."

"Well, let's wait till autumn then," said the Major in a tone of relief. "We'll see about it
in the autumn, if you're still in the mind for it then. That will be a great deal better. You
remind me of it, along in September--or October. We'll see what can be done." He rubbed his
hands cheerfully. "We'll see what can be done about it then, Georgie. We'll see."

And George, in reporting this conversation to his mother, was ruefully humorous. "In fact,
the old boy cheered up so much," he told her, "you'd have thought he'd got a real load off
his mind. He seemed to think he'd fixed me up perfectly, and that I was just as good as driving
a tandem around his library right that minute! Of course I know he's anything but miserly;
still I can't help thinking he must be salting a lot of money away. I know prices are higher
than they used to be, but he doesn't spend within thousands of what he used to, and we certainly
can't be spending more than we always have spent. Where does it all go to? Uncle George told
me grandfather had sold some pieces of property, and it looks a little queer. If he's really
'property poor,' of course we ought to be more saving than we are, and help him out. I don't
mind giving up a tandem if it seems a little too expensive just now. I'm perfectly willing
to live quietly till he gets his bank balance where he wants it. But I have a faint suspicion,
not that he's getting miserly--not that at all--but that old age has begun to make him timid
about money. There's no doubt about it, he's getting a little queer: he can't keep his mind
on a subject long. Right in the middle of talking about one thing he'll wander off to something
else; and I shouldn't be surprised if he turned out to be a lot better off than any of us guess.
It's entirely possible that whatever he's sold just went into government bonds, or even his
safety deposit box. There was a friend of mine in college had an old uncle like that: made
the whole family think he was poor as dirt--and then left seven millions. People get terribly
queer as they get old, sometimes, and grandfather certainly doesn't act the way he used to.
He seems to be a totally different man. For instance, he said he thought tandem driving might
be dangerous--"

"Did he?" Isabel asked quickly. "Then I'm glad he doesn't want you to have one. I didn't dream--"

"But it's not. There isn't the slightest--"

Isabel had a bright idea. "Georgie! Instead of a tandem wouldn't it interest you to get one
of Eugene's automobiles?"

"I don't think so. They're fast enough, of course. In fact, running one of those things is
getting to be quite on the cards for sport, and people go all over the country in 'em. But
they're dirty things, and they keep getting out of order, so that you're always lying down
on your back in the mud, and--"

"Oh, no," she interrupted eagerly. "Haven't you noticed? You don't see nearly so many people
doing that nowadays as you did two or three years ago, and, when you do, Eugene says it's apt
to be one of the older patterns. The way they make them now, you can get at most of the machinery
from the top. I do think you'd be interested, dear."

George remained indifferent. "Possibly--but I hardly think so. I know a lot of good people
are really taking them up, but still--"

"But still' what?" she said as he paused.

"But still--well, I suppose I'm a little old-fashioned and fastidious, but I'm afraid being
a sort of engine driver never will appeal to me, mother. It's exciting, and I'd like that part
of it, but still it doesn't seem to me precisely the thing a gentleman ought to do. Too much
overalls and monkey-wrenches and grease!"

"But Eugene says people are hiring mechanics to do all that sort of thing for them. They're
beginning to have them just the way they have coachmen; and he says it's developing into quite
a profession."

"I know that, mother, of course; but I've seen some of these mechanics, and they're not very
satisfactory. For one thing, most of them only pretend to understand the machinery and they
let people break down a hundred miles from nowhere, so that about all these fellows are good
for is to hunt up a farmer and hire a horse to pull the automobile. And friends of mine at
college that've had a good deal of experience tell me the mechanics who do understand the engines
have no training at all as servants. They're awful! They say anything they like, and usually
speak to members of the family as 'Say!' No, I believe I'd rather wait for September and a
tandem, mother."

Nevertheless, George sometimes consented to sit in an automobile, while waiting for September,
and he frequently went driving in one of Eugene's cars with Lucy and her father. He even allowed
himself to be escorted with his mother and Fanny through the growing factory, which was now,
as the foreman of the paint shop informed the visitors, "turning out a car and a quarter a
day." George had seldom been more excessively bored, but his mother showed a lively interest
in everything, wishing to have all the machinery explained to her. It was Lucy who did most
of the explaining, while her father looked on and laughed at the mistakes she made, and Fanny
remained in the background with George, exhibiting a bleakness that overmatched his boredom.

From the factory Eugene took them to lunch at a new restaurant, just opened in the town, a
place which surprised Isabel with its metropolitan air, and, though George made fun of it to
her, in a whisper, she offered everything the tribute of pleased exclamations; and her gayety
helped Eugene's to make the little occasion almost a festive one.

George's ennui disappeared in spite of himself, and he laughed to see his mother in such spirits.
"I didn't know mineral waters could go to a person's head," he said. "Or perhaps it's this
place. It might pay to have a new restaurant opened somewhere in town every time you get the
blues."

Fanny turned to him with a wan smile. "Oh, she doesn't 'get the blues,' George!" Then she added,
as if fearing her remark might be thought unpleasantly significant, "I never knew a person
of a more even disposition. I wish I could be like that!" And though the tone of this afterthought
was not so enthusiastic as she tried to make it, she succeeded in producing a fairly amiable
effect.

"No," Isabel said, reverting to George's remark, and overlooking Fanny's. "What makes me laugh
so much at nothing is Eugene's factory. Wouldn't anybody be delighted to see an old friend
take an idea out of the air like that--an idea that most people laughed at him for--wouldn't
any old friend of his be happy to see how he'd made his idea into such a splendid, humming
thing as that factory--all shiny steel, clicking and buzzing away, and with all those workmen,
such muscled looking men and yet so intelligent looking?"

"Hear! Hear!" George applauded. "We seem to have a lady orator among us. I hope the waiters
won't mind."

Isabel laughed, not discouraged. "It's beautiful to see such a thing," she said. "It makes
us all happy, dear old Eugene!"

And with a brave gesture she stretched out her hand to him across the small table. He took
it quickly, giving her a look in which his laughter tried to remain, but vanished before a
gratitude threatening to become emotional in spite of him. Isabel, however, turned instantly
to Fanny. "Give him your hand, Fanny," she said gayly; and, as Fanny mechanically obeyed, "There!"
Isabel cried. "If brother George were here, Eugene would have his three oldest and best friends
congratulating him all at once. We know what brother George thinks about it, though. It's just
beautiful, Eugene!"

Probably if her brother George had been with them at the little table, he would have made known
what he thought about herself, for it must inevitably have struck him that she was in the midst
of one of those "times" when she looked "exactly fourteen years old." Lucy served as a proxy
for Amberson, perhaps, when she leaned toward George and whispered: "Did you ever see anything
so lovely?"

"As what?" George inquired, not because he misunderstood, but because he wished to prolong
the pleasant neighbourliness of whispering.

"As your mother! Think of her doing that! She's a darling! And papa"--here she imperfectly
repressed a tendency to laugh--"papa looks as if he were either going to explode or utter loud
sobs!"

Eugene commanded his features, however, and they resumed their customary apprehensiveness.
"I used to write verse," he said--"if you remember--"

"Yes," Isabel interrupted gently. "I remember."

"I don't recall that I've written any for twenty years or so," he continued. "But I'm almost
thinking I could do it again, to thank you for making a factory visit into such a kind celebration."

"Gracious!" Lucy whispered, giggling. "Aren't they sentimental"

"People that age always are," George returned. "They get sentimental over anything at all.
Factories or restaurants, it doesn't matter what!"

And both of them were seized with fits of laughter which they managed to cover under the general
movement of departure, as Isabel had risen to go.

Outside, upon the crowded street, George helped Lucy into his runabout, and drove off, waving
triumphantly, and laughing at Eugene who was struggling with the engine of his car, in the
tonneau of which Isabel and Fanny had established themselves. "Looks like a hand-organ man
grinding away for pennies," said George, as the runabout turned the corner and into National
Avenue. "I'll still take a horse, any day." But it is not initially in the form of opposition, Tues to do
both of the relationship, but about the abstract, direct negation, Nothing purely for himself,
and the unrelated negative - which is, if you will, by the mere: could not express.

The simple idea of ​​pure Being, the Eleatic first, especially as Parmenides the absolute and
the only truth, and the leftover fragments of it, with the pure excitement of thinking that
for the first time in its absolute abstraction recorded, pronounced only being is, and Nothingness
is not .-- In Oriental Systems, much is known in Buddaismus nothingness, the void, the absolute
principle .-- The profound Heraclitus raised against those simple and one-sided abstraction to higher
total Concept of becoming clear, and said: Being is as little as nothing, or everything flows,
that is, everything is becoming .-- The popular, especially Oriental Proverbs, that everything
that is, had the germ of his passing away in his home itself, the death of vice versa the
entrance into new life Sey, express essentially the same unification of being and nothingness.
But these expressions have a substrate on which the transition takes place, being and nothing
are in the time kept apart, as in her alternately presented, but not in their abstraction thought
and therefore not such that they are in for and the same.


Pendennis paid no attention; she meant nothing to him, and George laughed at her fondly. "You
are the prettiest thing in this world, Lucy!" he exclaimed. "When I see you in winter, in furs,
with your cheeks red, I think you're prettiest then, but when I see you in summer, in a straw
hat and a shirtwaist and a duck skirt and white gloves and those little silver buckled slippers,
and your rose-coloured parasol, and your cheeks not red but with a kind of pinky glow about
them, then I see I must have been wrong about the winter! When are you going to drop the 'almost'
and say we're really engaged?"

"Oh, not for years! So there's the answer, and Let's trot again."

But George was persistent; moreover, he had become serious during the last minute or two. "I
want to know," he said. "I really mean it."

"Let's don't be serious, George," she begged him hopefully. "Let's talk of something pleasant."

He was a little offended. "Then it isn't pleasant for you to know that I want to marry you?"

At this she became as serious as he could have asked; she looked down, and her lip quivered
like that of a child about to cry. Suddenly she put her hand upon one of his for just an instant,
and then withdrew it.

"Lucy!" he said huskily. "Dear, what's the matter? You look as if you were going to cry. You
always do that," he went on plaintively, "whenever I can get you to talk about marrying me."

"I know it," she murmured.

"Well, why do you?"

Her eyelids flickered, and then she looked up at him with a sad gravity, tears seeming just
at the poise. "One reason's because I have a feeling that it's never going to be."

"Why?"

"It's just a feeling."

"You haven't any reason or--"

"It's just a feeling."

"Well, if that's all," George said, reassured, and laughing confidently, "I guess I won't be
very much troubled!" But at once he became serious again, adopting the tone of argument. "Lucy,
how is anything ever going to get a chance to come of it, so long as you keep sticking to 'almost'?
Doesn't it strike you as unreasonable to have a 'feeling' that we'll never be married, when
what principally stands between us is the fact that you won't be really engaged to me? That
does seem pretty absurd! Don't you care enough about me to marry me?"

She looked down again, pathetically troubled. "Yes."

"Won't you always care that much about me?"

"I'm--yes--I'm afraid so, George. I never do change much about anything."

"Well, then, why in the world won't you drop the 'almost'?"

Her distress increased. "Everything is--everything--"

"What about 'everything'?"

"Everything is so--so unsettled."

And at that he uttered an exclamation of impatience. "If you aren't the queerest girl! What
is 'unsettled'?"

"Well, for one thing," she said, able to smile at his vehemence, "you haven't settled on anything
to do. At least, if you have you've never spoken of it."

As she spoke, she gave him the quickest possible side glance of hopeful scrutiny; then looked
away, not happily. Surprise and displeasure were intentionally visible upon the countenance
of her companion; and he permitted a significant period of silence to elapse before making
any response. "Lucy," he said, finally, with cold dignity, "I should like to ask you a few
questions."

"Yes?"

"The first is: Haven't you perfectly well understood that I don't mean to go into business
or adopt a profession?"

"I wasn't quite sure," she said gently. "I really didn't know--quite."

"Then of course it's time I did tell you. I never have been able to see any occasion for a
man's going into trade, or being a lawyer, or any of those things if his position and family
were such that he didn't need to. You know, yourself, there are a lot of people in the East--in
the South, too, for that matter--that don't think we've got any particular family or position
or culture in this part of the country. I've met plenty of that kind of provincial snobs myself,
and they're pretty galling. There were one or two men in my crowd at college, their families
had lived on their income for three generations, and they never dreamed there was anybody in
their class out here. I had to show them a thing or two, right at the start, and I guess they
won't forget it! Well, I think it's time all their sort found out that three generations can
mean just as much out here as anywhere else. That's the way I feel about it, and let me tell
you I feel it pretty deeply!"

"But what are you going to do, George?" she cried.

George's earnestness surpassed hers; he had become flushed and his breathing was emotional.
As he confessed, with simple genuineness, he did feel what he was saying "pretty deeply"; and
in truth his state approached the tremulous. "I expect to live an honourable life," he said.
"I expect to contribute my share to charities, and to take part in--in movements."

"What kind?"

"Whatever appeals to me," he said.

Lucy looked at him with grieved wonder. "But you really don't mean to have any regular business
or profession at all?"

"I certainly do not!" George returned promptly and emphatically.

"I was afraid so," she said in a low voice.

George continued to breathe deeply throughout another protracted interval of silence. Then
he said, "I should like to revert to the questions I was asking you, if you don't mind."

"No, George. I think we'd better--"

"Your father is a business man--"

"He's a mechanical genius," Lucy interrupted quickly. "Of course he's both. And he was a lawyer
once--he's done all sorts of things."

"Very well. I merely wished to ask if it's his influence that makes you think I ought to 'do'
something?"

Lucy frowned slightly. "Why, I suppose almost everything I think or say must be owing to his
influence in one way or another. We haven't had anybody but each other for so many years, and
we always think about alike, so of course--"

"I see!" And George's brow darkened with resentment. "So that's it, is it? It's your father's
idea that I ought to go into business and that you oughtn't to be engaged to me until I do."

Lucy gave a start, her denial was so quick. "No! I've never once spoken to him about it. Never!"

George looked at her keenly, and he jumped to a conclusion not far from the truth. "But you
know without talking to him that it's the way he does feel about it? I see."

She nodded gravely. "Yes."

George's brow grew darker still. "Do you think I'd be much of a man," he said, slowly, "if
I let any other man dictate to me my own way of life?"

"George! Who's 'dictating' your--"

"It seems to me it amounts to that!" he returned.

"Oh, no! I only know how papa thinks about things. He's never, never spoken unkindly, or 'dictatingly'
of you." She lifted her hand in protest, and her face was so touching in its distress that
for the moment George forgot his anger. He seized that small, troubled hand.

"Lucy," he said huskily. "Don't you know that I love you?"

"Yes--I do."

"Don't you love me?"

"Yes--I do."

"Then what does it matter what your father thinks about my doing something or not doing anything?
He has his way, and I have mine. I don't believe in the whole world scrubbing dishes and selling
potatoes and trying law cases. Why, look at your father's best friend, my Uncle George Amberson--he's
never done anything in his life, and--"

"Oh, yes, he has," she interrupted. "He was in politics."

"Well, I'm glad he's out," George said. "Politics is a dirty business for a gentleman, and
Uncle George would tell you that himself. Lucy, let's not talk any more about it. Let me tell
mother when I get home that we're engaged. Won't you, dear?"

She shook her head.

"Is it because--"

For a fleeting instant she touched to her cheek the hand that held hers. "No," she said, and
gave him a sudden little look of renewed gayety. "Let's let it stay 'almost'."

"Because your father--"

"Oh, because it's better!"

George's voice shook. "Isn't it your father?"

"It's his ideals I'm thinking of--yes."

George dropped her hand abruptly and anger narrowed his eyes. "I know what you mean," he said.
"I dare say I don't care for your father's ideals any more than he does for mine!"

He tightened the reins, Pendennis quickening eagerly to the trot; and when George jumped out
of the runabout before Lucy's gate, and assisted her to descend, the silence in which they
parted was the same that had begun when Pendennis began to trot.

Chapter XVIII

That evening, after dinner, George sat with his mother and his Aunt Fanny upon the veranda.
In former summers, when they sat outdoors in the evening, they had customarily used an open
terrace at the side of the house, looking toward the Major's, but that more private retreat
now afforded too blank and abrupt a view of the nearest of the new houses; so, without consultation,
they had abandoned it for the Romanesque stone structure in front, an oppressive place.

Its oppression seemed congenial to George; he sat upon the copestone of the stone parapet,
his back against a stone pilaster; his attitude not comfortable, but rigid, and his silence
not comfortable, either, but heavy. However, to the eyes of his mother and his aunt, who occupied
wicker chairs at a little distance, he was almost indistinguishable except for the stiff white
shield of his evening frontage.

"It's so nice of you always to dress in the evening, Georgie," his mother said, her glance
resting upon this surface. It
maintains a lot at first the bounds of thought, to be held of reason, etc., and it is claimed,
can not on it over the barrier to go further. In this Assertion is the consciousness that is
self-evident that something intended as a barrier is, has gone about it already. For a certainty,
limit is, as a barrier determined only in opposition to be at all different, so to be unlimited;
the other is just the addition of a barrier about the same. The stone, not the metal is about
his addition barrier, so for him because it is not bound. However, when such general propositions
of communicating thought that over the barrier not gone possibly be, the thinking will be used not
to see what lies in the concept, so can be referred to the reality, where does such sentences
as the unreal . Show This makes it that thinking something higher than be-ing the reality
of it is should keep away in the higher regions, the same words themselves should be a specified,
It is not a hand proceeds to terms, and it happens on the other hand, that it is also untrue to
reality as against the term behaves .-- Because not think the stone, not even feel to be limited
for him is not a barrier, that is not in it negation & c., for the Sensation, imagination, thinking
that he has not.
 Then, like a cowboy shooting up a peaceful
camp, a frantic devil would hurtle out of the distance, bellowing, exhaust racketing like a
machine gun gone amuck--and at these horrid sounds the surreys and buggies would hug the curbstone,
and the bicycles scatter to cover, cursing; while children rushed from the sidewalks to drag
pet dogs from the street. The thing would roar by, leaving a long wake of turbulence; then
the indignant street would quiet down for a few minutes--till another came.

"There are a great many more than there used to be," Miss Fanny observed, in her lifeless voice,
as the lull fell after one of these visitations. "Eugene is right about that; there seem to
be at least three or four times as many as there were last summer, and you never hear the ragamuffins
shouting 'Get a horse!' nowadays; but I think he may be mistaken about their going on increasing
after this. I don't believe we'll see so many next summer as we do now."

"Why?" asked Isabel.

"Because I've begun to agree with George about their being more a fad than anything else, and
I think it must be the height of the fad just now. You know how roller-skating came in--everybody
in the world seemed to be crowding to the rinks--and now only a few children use rollers for
getting to school. Besides, people won't permit the automobiles to be used. Really, I think
they'll make laws against them. You see how they spoil the bicycling and the driving; people
just seem to hate them! They'll never stand it--never in the world! Of course I'd be sorry
to see such a thing happen to Eugene, but I shouldn't be really surprised to see a law passed
forbidding the sale of automobiles, just the way there is with concealed weapons."

"Fanny!" exclaimed her sister-in-law. "You're not in earnest?"

"I am, though!"

Isabel's sweet-toned laugh came out of the dusk where she sat. "Then you didn't mean it when
you told Eugene you'd enjoyed the drive this afternoon?"

"I didn't say it so very enthusiastically, did I?"

"Perhaps not, but he certainly thought he'd pleased you."

"I don't think I gave him any right to think he'd pleased me" Fanny said slowly.

"Why not? Why shouldn't you, Fanny?"

Fanny did not reply at once, and when she did, her voice was almost inaudible, but much more
reproachful than plaintive. "I hardly think I'd want any one to get the notion he'd pleased
me just now. It hardly seems time, yet--to me."

Isabel made no response, and for a time the only sound upon the dark veranda was the creaking
of the wicker rocking-chair in which Fanny sat--a creaking which seemed to denote content and
placidity on the part of the chair's occupant, though at this juncture a series of human shrieks
could have been little more eloquent of emotional disturbance. However, the creaking gave its
hearer one great advantage: it could be ignored.

"Have you given up smoking, George?" Isabel asked presently.

"No."

"I hoped perhaps you had, because you've not smoked since dinner. We shan't mind if you care to."

"No, thanks."

There was silence again, except for the creaking of the rocking-chair; then a low, clear whistle,
singularly musical, was heard softly rendering an old air from "Fra Diavolo." The creaking stopped.

"Is that you, George?" Fanny asked abruptly.

"Is that me what?"

"Whistling 'On Yonder Rock Reclining'?"

"It's I," said Isabel.

"Oh," Fanny said dryly.

"Does it disturb you?"

"Not at all. I had an idea George was depressed about something, and merely wondered if he
could be making such a cheerful sound." And Fanny resumed her creaking.

"Is she right, George?" his mother asked quickly, leaning forward in her chair to peer at him
through the dusk. "You didn't eat a very hearty dinner, but I thought it was probably because
of the warm weather. Are you troubled about anything?"

"No!" he said angrily.

"That's good. I thought we had such a nice day, didn't you?"

"I suppose so," he muttered, and, satisfied, she leaned back in her chair; but "Fra Diavolo"
was not revived. After a time she rose, went to the steps, and stood for several minutes looking
across the street. Then her laughter was faintly heard.

"Are you laughing about something?" Fanny inquired.

"Pardon?" Isabel did not turn, but continued her observation of what had interested her upon
the opposite side of the street.

"I asked: Were you laughing at something?"

"Yes, I was!" And she laughed again. "It's that funny, fat old Mrs. Johnson. She has a habit
of sitting at her bedroom window with a pair of opera-glasses."

"Really!"

"Really. You can see the window through the place that was left when we had the dead walnut
tree cut down. She looks up and down the street, but mostly at father's and over here. Sometimes
she forgets to put out the light in her room, and there she is, spying away for all the world
to see!"

However, Fanny made no effort to observe this spectacle, but continued her creaking. "I've
always thought her a very good woman," she said primly.

"So she is," Isabel agreed. "She's a good, friendly old thing, a little too intimate in her
manner, sometimes, and if her poor old opera-glasses afford her the quiet happiness of knowing
what sort of young man our new cook is walking out with, I'm the last to begrudge it to her!
Don't you want to come and look at her, George?"

"What? I beg your pardon. I hadn't noticed what you were talking about."

"It's nothing," she laughed. "Only a funny old lady--and she's gone now. I'm going, too--at
least, I'm going indoors to read. It's cooler in the house, but the heat's really not bad anywhere,
since nightfall. Summer's dying. How quickly it goes, once it begins to die."

When she had gone into the house, Fanny stopped rocking, and, leaning forward, drew her black
gauze wrap about her shoulders and shivered. "Isn't it queer," she said drearily, "how your
mother can use such words?"

"What words are you talking about?" George asked.

"Words like 'die' and 'dying.' I don't see how she can bear to use them so soon after your
poor father--" She shivered again.

"It's almost a year," George said absently, and he added: "It seems to me you're using them
yourself."

"I? Never!"

"Yes, you did."

"When?"

"Just this minute."

"Oh!" said Fanny. "You mean when I repeated what she said? That's hardly the same thing, George."

He was not enough interested to argue the point. "I don't think you'll convince anybody that
mother's unfeeling," he said indifferently.

"I'm not trying to convince anybody. I mean merely that in my opinion--well, perhaps it may
be just as wise for me to keep my opinions to myself."

She paused expectantly, but her possible anticipation that George would urge her to discard
wisdom and reveal her opinion was not fulfilled. His back was toward her, and he occupied himself
with opinions of his own about other matters. Fanny may have felt some disappointment as she
rose to withdraw.

However, at the last moment she halted with her hand upon the latch of the screen door.

"There's one thing I hope," she said. "I hope at least she won't leave off her full mourning
on the very anniversary of Wilbur's death!"

The light door clanged behind her, and the sound annoyed her nephew. He had no idea why she
thus used inoffensive wood and wire to dramatize her departure from the veranda, the impression
remaining with him being that she was critical of his mother upon some point of funeral millinery.
Throughout the desultory conversation he had been profoundly concerned with his own disturbing
affairs, and now was preoccupied with a dialogue taking place (in his mind) between himself
and Miss Lucy Morgan. As he beheld the vision, Lucy had just thrown herself at his feet. "George,
you must forgive me!" she cried. "Papa was utterly wrong! I have told him so, and the truth
is that I have come to rather dislike him as you do, and as you always have, in your heart
of hearts. George, I understand you: thy people shall be my people and thy gods my gods. George,
won't you take me back?"

"Lucy, are you sure you understand me?" And in the darkness George's bodily lips moved in unison
with those which uttered the words in his imaginary rendering of this scene. An eavesdropper,
concealed behind the column, could have heard the whispered word "sure," the emphasis put upon
it in the vision was so poignant. "You say you understand me, but are you sure?"

Weeping, her head bowed almost to her waist, the ethereal Lucy made reply: "Oh, so sure! I
will never listen to father's opinions again. I do not even care if I never see him again!"

"Then I pardon you," he said gently.

This softened mood lasted for several moments--until he realized that it had been brought about
by processes strikingly lacking in substance. Abruptly he swung his feet down from the copestone
to the floor of the veranda. "Pardon nothing!" No meek Lucy had thrown herself in remorse at
his feet; and now he pictured her as she probably really was at this moment: sitting on the
white steps of her own front porch in the moonlight, with red-headed Fred Kinney and silly
Charlie Johnson and four or five others--all of them laughing, most likely, and some idiot
playing the guitar!

George spoke aloud: "Riffraff!"

And because of an impish but all too natural reaction of the mind, he could see Lucy with much
greater distinctness in this vision than in his former pleasing one. For a moment she was miraculously
real before him, every line and colour of her. He saw the moonlight shimmering in the chiffon
of her skirts brightest on her crossed knee and the tip of her slipper; saw the blue curve
of the characteristic shadow behind her, as she leaned back against the white step; saw the
watery twinkling of sequins in the gauze wrap over her white shoulders as she moved, and the
faint, symmetrical lights in her black hair--and not one alluring, exasperating twentieth-of-an-inch
of her laughing profile was spared him as she seemed to turn to the infernal Kinney--

"Riffraff!" And George began furiously to pace the stone floor. "Riffraff!" By this hard term--a
favourite with him since childhood's scornful hour--he meant to indicate, not Lucy, but the
young gentlemen who, in his vision, surrounded her. "Riffraff!" he said again, aloud, and again:

"Riffraff!"

At that moment, as it happened, Lucy was playing chess with her father; and her heart, though
not remorseful, was as heavy as George could have wished. But you can not, Lizaveta, I am Hamlet's
a talkative today? "

"Are you finished now, Tonio Kroger?"

"No. But I say nothing more. "

"And it's enough. - Are you expecting a response "?

"Do you have
one?"

"I should think. - I have listened well, Tonio, from beginning
to end, and I will Give you the answer that fits everything you have
said this afternoon, and the the solution for the problem you have
so much worried. Well, then! Nor did she accompany Eugene to the Major's
for dinner, the following Sunday evening, though both were bidden to attend that feast, which
was already reduced in numbers and gayety by the absence of George Amberson. Eugene explained
to his host that Lucy had gone away to visit a school-friend.

The information, delivered in the library, just before old Sam's appearance to announce dinner,
set Miss Minafer in quite a flutter. "Why, George!" she said, turning to her nephew. "How does
it happen you didn't tell us?" And with both hands opening, as if to express her innocence
of some conspiracy, she exclaimed to the others, "He's never said one word to us about Lucy's
planning to go away!"

"Probably afraid to," the Major suggested. "Didn't know but he might break down and cry if
he tried to speak of it!" He clapped his grandson on the shoulder, inquiring jocularly, "That
it, Georgie?"

Georgie made no reply, but he was red enough to justify the Major's developing a chuckle into
laughter; though Miss Fanny, observing her nephew keenly, got an impression that this fiery
blush was in truth more fiery than tender. She caught a glint in his eye less like confusion
than resentment, and saw a dilation of his nostrils which might have indicated not so much
a sweet agitation as an inaudible snort. Fanny had never been lacking in curiosity, and, since
her brother's death, this quality was more than ever alert. The fact that George had spent
all the evenings of the past week at home had not been lost upon her, nor had she failed to
ascertain, by diplomatic inquiries, that since the day of the visit to Eugene's shops George
had gone driving alone.

At the dinner-table she continued to observe him, sidelong; and toward the conclusion of the
meal she was not startled by an episode which brought discomfort to the others. After the arrival
of coffee the Major was rallying Eugene upon some rival automobile shops lately built in a
suburb, and already promising to flourish.

"I suppose they'll either drive you out of the business," said the old gentleman, "or else
the two of you'll drive all the rest of us off the streets."

"If we do, we'll even things up by making the streets five or ten times as long as they are
now," Eugene returned.

"How do you propose to do that?"

"It isn't the distance from the center of a town that counts," said Eugene; "it's the time
it takes to get there. This town's already spreading; bicycles and trolleys have been doing
their share, but the automobile is going to carry city streets clear out to the county line."

The Major was skeptical. "Dream on, fair son!" he said. "It's lucky for us that you're only
dreaming; because if people go to moving that far, real estate values in the old residence
part of town are going to be stretched pretty thin."

"I'm afraid so," Eugene assented. "Unless you keep things so bright and clean that the old
section will stay more attractive than the new ones."

"Not very likely! How are things going to be kept 'bright and clean' with soft coal, and our
kind of city government?"

"They aren't," Eugene replied quickly. "There's no hope of it, and already the boarding-house
is marching up National Avenue. There are two in the next block below here, and there are a
dozen in the half-mile below that. My relatives, the Sharons, have sold their house and are
building in the country--at least, they call it 'the country.' It will be city in two or three
years."

"Good gracious!" the Major exclaimed, affecting 'dismay. And
after a while, imperceptibly, without fuss and noise, it was still off.

But Tonio Kroger for a while stood before the altar cooled, full of
wonder and disappointment the fact that loyalty was impossible on
earth. "You have enough faith in miracles, Eugene--granting that
trolleys and bicycles and automobiles are miracles. So you think they're to change the face
of the land, do you?"

"They're already doing it, Major; and it can't be stopped. Automobiles--"

At this point he was interrupted. George was the interrupter. He had said nothing since entering
the dining room, but now he spoke in a loud and peremptory voice, using the tone of one in
authority who checks idle prattle and settles a matter forever.

"Automobiles are a useless nuisance," he said.

There fell a moment's silence.

Isabel gazed incredulously at George, colour slowly heightening upon her cheeks and temples,
while Fanny watched him with a quick eagerness, her eyes alert and bright. But Eugene seemed
merely quizzical, as if not taking this brusquerie to himself. The Major was seriously disturbed.

"What did you say, George?" he asked, though George had spoken but too distinctly.

"I said all automobiles were a nuisance," George answered, repeating not only the words but
the tone in which he had uttered them. And he added, "They'll never amount to anything but
a nuisance. They had no business to be invented."

The Major frowned. "Of course you forget that Mr. Morgan makes them, and also did his share
in inventing them. If you weren't so thoughtless he might think you rather offensive."

"That would be too bad," said George coolly. "I don't think I could survive it."

Again there was a silence, while the Major stared at his grandson, aghast. But Eugene began
to laugh cheerfully.

"I'm not sure he's wrong about automobiles," he said. "With all their speed forward they may
be a step backward in civilization--that is, in spiritual civilization. It may be that they
will not add to the beauty of the world, nor to the life of men's souls. I am not sure. But
automobiles have come, and they bring a greater change in our life than most of us suspect.
They are here, and almost all outward things are going to be different because of what they
bring. They are going to alter war, and they are going to alter peace. I think men's minds
are going to be changed in subtle ways because of automobiles; just how, though, I could hardly
guess. But you can't have the immense outward changes that they will cause without some inward
ones, and it may be that George is right, and that the spiritual alteration will be bad for
us. Perhaps, ten or twenty years from now, if we can see the inward change in men by that time,
I shouldn't be able to defend the gasoline engine, but would have to agree with him that automobiles
'had no business to be invented.'" He laughed good-naturedly, and looking at his watch, apologized
for having an engagement which made his departure necessary when he would so much prefer to
linger. Then he shook hands with the Major, and bade Isabel, George, and Fanny a cheerful good-night--a
collective farewell cordially addressed to all three of them together--and left them at the table.

Isabel turned wondering, hurt eyes upon her son. "George, dear!" she said. "What did you mean?" 

"I'm ready," he said to the fine gentleman in black. "I am leaving this afternoon." And He ordered
his account and the car that brought him to the harbor, the steamer to Copenhagen. Then he went to
his room and sat down at the table, sat still and upright, by the cheek and looked down into his hand
rested with unseeing eyes at the table. Later, he paid his bill and made his things ready. At
the appointed time was reported the car, and Tonio Kröger descended ready.
 What made you think he was hurt?"

"I know him!" was all of her reply, half whispered.

The Major stared hard at George from under his white eyebrows. "You didn't mean 'him,' you
say, George? I suppose if we had a clergyman as a guest here you'd expect him not to be offended,
and to understand that your remarks were neither personal nor untactful, if you said the church
was a nuisance and ought never to have been invented. By Jove, but you're a puzzle!"

"In what way, may I ask, sir?"

"We seem to have a new kind of young people these days," the old gentleman returned, shaking
his head. "It's a new style of courting a pretty girl, certainly, for a young fellow to go
deliberately out of his way to try and make an enemy of her father by attacking his business!
By Jove! That's a new way to win a woman!"

George flushed angrily and seemed about to offer a retort, but held his breath for a moment;
and then held his peace. It was Isabel who responded to the Major. "Oh, no!" she said. "Eugene
would never be anybody's enemy--he couldn't!--and last of all Georgie's. I'm afraid he was
hurt, but I don't fear his not having understood that George spoke without thinking of what
he was saying--I mean, with-out realizing its bearing on Eugene."

Again George seemed upon the point of speech, and again controlled the impulse. He thrust his
hands in his pockets, leaned back in his chair, and smoked, staring inflexibly at the ceiling.

"Well, well," said his grandfather, rising. "It wasn't a very successful little dinner!"

Thereupon he offered his arm to his daughter, who took it fondly, and they left the room, Isabel
assuring him that all his little dinners were pleasant, and that this one was no exception.

George did not move, and Fanny, following the other two, came round the table, and paused close
beside his chair; but George remained posed in his great imperturbability, cigar between teeth,
eyes upon ceiling, and paid no attention to her. Fanny waited until the sound of Isabel's and
the Major's voices became inaudible in the hall. Then she said quickly, and in a low voice
so eager that it was unsteady:

"George, you've struck just the treatment to adopt: you're doing the right thing!"

She hurried out, scurrying after the others with a faint rustling of her black skirts, leaving
George mystified but incurious. He did not understand why she should bestow her approbation
upon him in the matter, and cared so little whether she did or not that he spared himself even
the trouble of being puzzled about it.

In truth, however, he was neither so comfortable nor so imperturbable as he appeared. He felt
some gratification: he had done a little to put the man in his place--that man whose influence
upon his daughter was precisely the same thing as a contemptuous criticism of George Amberson
Minafer, and of George Amberson Minafer's "ideals of life." Lucy's going away without a word
was intended, he supposed, as a bit of punishment. Well, he wasn't the sort of man that people
were allowed to punish: he could demonstrate that to them--since they started it!

It appeared to him as almost a kind of insolence, this abrupt departure--not even telephoning!
Probably she wondered how he would take it; she even might have supposed he would show some
betraying chagrin when he heard of it.

He had no idea that this was just what he had shown; and he was satisfied with his evening's
performance. But he saw that Inge Holm,
the funny rings, often with an oblivious smile Mr. Knaak's movements pursued, and not only was
there, so all these wonderfully controlled physicality him off when in fact something like admiration.


Chapter XX

Isabel came to George's door that night, and when she had kissed him good-night she remained
in the open doorway with her hand upon his shoulder and her eyes thoughtfully lowered, so that
her wish to say something more than good-night was evident. Not less obvious was her perplexity
about the manner of saying it; and George, divining her thought, amiably made an opening for her.

"Well, old lady," he said indulgently, "you needn't look so worried. I won't be tactless with
Morgan again. After this I'll just keep out of his way."

