There was a sound of hoisting, that gave me warning rather fortunately, for he came striding
upstairs with that great well-grown girl of eight perched on his shoulder as if she had been
a baby, and would have run me down if I had not avoided into the nook on the landing.

All that day and the next those three were out; I never saw them but at meals, when they came
in full of eager questions and comments on their discoveries in farming and other matters.
These were the early bright days of spring, and they were out till after dark, only returning
to eat and go to bed.  I found the fascination of Harold's presence was on all the servants
and dependents, except perhaps our bailiff Bullock, who disliked him from the first.  All the
others declared that they had no doubt about staying on, now that they saw what the young squire
really was.  It made a great impression on them that, when in some farmyard arrangements there
was a moment's danger of a faggot pile falling, he put his shoulder against it and propped
the whole weight without effort.  His manhood, strength, and knowledge of work delighted them,
and they declared already that he would be a good friend to the poor.

I confess that here lay what alarmed me.  He was always given to few words, but I could see
that he was shocked at the contrast between our poor and the Australian settlers, where food
and space were plenty and the wages high.  I was somewhat hurt at his way of viewing what had
always seemed to me perfection, at least all that could be reasonably expected for the poor--our
pet school, our old women, our civil dependents in tidy cottages, our picturesque lodges; and
I did not half like his trenchant questions, which seemed to imply censure on all that I had
hitherto thought unquestionable, and perhaps I told him somewhat impatiently that, when he
had been a little longer here, he would understand our ways and fall naturally into them.

"That's just what I don't want," he said.

"Not want?" I exclaimed.

"Yes; I want to see clearly before I get used to things."

And as, perhaps, I seemed to wonder at this way of beginning, he opened a little, and said,
"It is my father.  He told me that if ever I came here I was to mind and do his work."

"What kind of work?" I asked, anxiously.

"Doing what he meant to have done," returned Harold, "for the poor. He said I should find out
about it."

"You must have been too young to understand much of what he meant then," I said.  "Did he not
regret anything?"

"Yes, he said he had begun at the wrong end, when they were not ripe for it, and that the failure
had ruined him for trying again."

"Then he did see things differently at last?" I said, hoping to find that the sentiments I
had always heard condemned had not been perpetuated.

"Oh yes!" cried Eustace.  "They were just brutes, you know, that nobody could do any good to,
and were only bent on destroying, and had no gratitude nor sense; and that was the ruin of
him and of my father too."

"They were ignorant, and easily maddened," said Harold, gravely. "He did not know how little
they could be controlled.  I must find out the true state of things.  Prometesky said I must
read it up."

"Prometesky!" I cried in despair.  "Oh, Harold, you have not been influenced by that old firebrand?"

"He taught me almost all I know," was the answer, still much to my dismay; but I showed Harold
to the library, and directed him to some old books of my father's, which I fancied might enlighten
him on the subjects on which he needed information, though I feared they might be rather out
of date; and whenever he was not out of doors, he was reading them, sometimes running his fingers
through his yellow hair, or pulling his beard, and growling to himself when he was puzzled
or met with what he did not like.  Eustace's favourite study, meanwhile, was "Burke's Peerage,"
and his questions nearly drove me wild by their absurdity; and Dora rolled on the floor with
my Spitz dog, for she loathed the doll I gave her, and made me more afraid of her than of either
of the others.

Harold was all might and gentleness; Eustace viewed me as a glass of fashion and directory
of English life and manners; but I saw they both looked to me not only to make their home,
but to tame their little wild cat of a child; and that was enough to make her hate and distrust
me. Moreover, she had a gleam of jealousy not far from fierce in her wild blue eyes if she
saw Harold turn affectionately to me, and she always protested sullenly against the "next week,"
when I was to begin her education.

She could only read words of four letters, and could not, or would not, work a stitch.  Harold
had done all her mending.  On the second day I passed by the open door of his room, and saw
him at work on a great rectangular rent in her frock.  I could not help stopping to suggest
that Colman or I might save him that trouble, whereupon Dora slammed the door in my face.

Harold opened it again at once, saying, "You ought to beg Aunt Lucy's pardon;" and when no
apology could be extracted from her, and with thanks he handed over the little dress to me,
she gave a shriek of anger (she hardly ever shed tears) and snatched it from me again.

"Well, well," said Harold, patting her curly head; "I'll finish this time, but not again, Dora.
Next time, Aunt Lucy will be so good as to see to it.  After old Betty's eyes grew bad we had
to do our own needling."

I confess it was a wonderful performance--quite as neat as Colman could have made it; and I
suspect that Harold did not refrain from producing needle and thread from his fat miscellaneous
pocket-book, and repairing her many disasters before they reached the domestic eye; for there
was a chronic feud between Dora and Colman, and the attempts of the latter to make the child
more like a young lady were passionately repelled, though she would better endure those of
a rough little under-housemaid, whose civilisation was, I suppose, not quite so far removed
from her own.

On Sunday, she and Harold disappeared as soon as breakfast was over, and only Eustace remained,
spruce beyond all imagination, and giving himself childlike credit for not being with them;
but when at church I can't say much for his behaviour.  He stared unblushingly, whispered remarks
and inquiries, could not find the places in his book, and appeared incapable of kneeling. 
Our little church at Arghouse was then a chapelry, with merely Sunday morning service by a
curate from Mycening, and the congregation a village one, to the disgust of Eustace, who had
expected to review his neighbours, and thought his get-up thrown away.

"No one at all to see," he observed with discontent over our luncheon, Harold and Dora having
returned from roaming over Kalydon Moor.

"I go to afternoon service at Mycening, Harold," I said.  "Will not you come with me?"

"There will be somebody there?" asked Eustace; to which I replied in the affirmative, but with
some protest against his view of the object, and inviting the others again, but Dora defiantly
answered that Harold was going to swing her on the ash tree.

"You ought to appear at church, Harry," said Eustace.  "It is expected of an English squire.
You see everybody, and everybody sees you."

"Well, then, go," said Harold.

"And won't you?" I entreated.

"I've promised to swing Dora," he answered, strolling out of the room, much to my concern;
and though Eustace did accompany me, it was so evidently for the sake of staring that there
was little comfort in that; and it was only by very severe looks that I could keep him from
asking everyone's name.  I hoped to make every one understand that he was not the squire, but
no one came across us as we went out of church, and I had to reply to his torrent of inquiries
all the way home.

It was a wet evening, and we all stayed in the house.  Harold brought in one of his political
economy studies from the library, and I tried to wile Dora to look at the pictures in a curious
big old Dutch Scripture history, the Sunday delight of our youth.

Eustace came too, as if he wanted the amusement and yet was ashamed to take it, when he exclaimed,
"I say, Harry; isn't this the book father used to tell us about--that they used to look over?"

Harold came, and stood towering above us with his hands in his pockets; but when we came to
the Temptation of Eve, Dora broke out into an exclamation that excited my curiosity too much
not to be pursued, though it was hardly edifying.

"Was that such a snake as Harold killed?"

"I have killed a good many snakes," he answered.

"Yes, but I meant the ones you killed when you were a little tiny boy."

"I don't remember," he said, as if to stop the subject, hating, as he always did, to talk about
himself.

"No, I know you don't," said Dora; "but it is quite true, isn't it, Eustace?"

"Hardly true that Harold ever was a little tiny boy," I could not help saying.

"No, he never was little," said Eustace.  "But it is quite true about the snakes.  I seem to
remember it now, and I've often heard my mother and my Aunt Alice tell of it.  It was at the
first place where we were in New South Wales.  I came running out screaming, I believe--I was
old enough to know the danger--and when they went in there was Harry sitting on the floor,
holding a snake tight by the neck and enjoying its contortions like a new toy."

"Of course," said Harold, "if it were poisonous, which I doubt, the danger would have been
when I let go.  My mother quietly bade me hold him tight, which I suppose I had just sense
enough to do, and in another moment she had snatched up the bill-hook they had been cutting
wood with, and had his head off.  She had the pluck."

I could but gasp with horror, and ask how old he was.  About two! That was clear to their minds
from the place where it happened which Harold could not recollect, though Eustace could.

"But, Harold, you surely are the eldest," I said.

"Oh no; I am six months the eldest," said Eustace, proud of his advantage.

We were to hear more of that by-and-by.

Monday afternoon brought Mr. Prosser, who was closeted with Harold, while Eustace and I devoted
our faculties to pacifying Dora under her exclusion, and preventing her from climbing up to
the window-sill to gaze into the library from without.  She scorned submission to either of
us, so Eustace kept guard by lying on the grass below, and I coaxed her by gathering primroses,
sowing seeds, and using all inducements I could think of, but my resources were nearly exhausted
when Harold's head appeared at the window, and he called, "Eustace! Lucy! here!"

We came at once, Dora before us.

"Come in," said Harold, admitting us at the glass door.  "It is all a mistake.  I am not the
man.  It is Eustace.  Eu, I wish you joy, old chap--"

Mr. Prosser was at the table with a great will lying spread out on it. "I am afraid Mr. Alison
is right, Miss Alison," he said.  "The property is bequeathed to the eldest of the late Mr.
Alison's grandsons born here, not specifying by which father.  If I had copied the terms of
the will I might have prevented disappointment, but I had no conception of what he tells me."

"But Ambrose was Harold's father," I exclaimed in bewilderment, "and he was the eldest."

"The seniority was not considered as certain," said Mr. Prosser, "and therefore the late Mr.
Alison left the property to the eldest child born at home.  'Let us at least have an English-born
heir,' I remember he said to me."

"And that is just what I am not," said Harold.

"I cannot understand!  I have heard Miss Woolmer talk of poor Ambrose's beautiful child, several
months older than Eustace's, and his name was Harold."

"Yes," said Harold, "but that one died on the voyage out, an hour or two before I was born.
He was Harold Stanislas.  I have no second name."

"And I always was the eldest," reiterated Eustace, hardly yet understanding what it involved.

All the needful documents had been preserved and brought home.  There was the extract from
the captain's log recording the burial at sea of Harold Stanislas Alison, aged fifteen months,
and the certificate of baptism by a colonial clergyman of Harold, son of Ambrose and Alice
Alison, while Eustace was entered in the Northchester register, having been born in lodgings,
as Mr. Prosser well recollected, while his poor young father lay under sentence of death.

It burst on him at last.  "Do you mean that I have got it, and not you?"

"That's about it," said Harold.  "Never mind, Eu, it will all come to the same thing in the end."

"You have none of it!"

"Not an acre.  It all goes together; but don't look at me in that way. There's Boola Boola,
you know."

"You're not going back there to leave me?" exclaimed Eustace, with a real sound of dismay,
laying hold of his arm.

"Not just yet, at any rate," said Harold.

"No, no; nor at all," reiterated Eustace, and then, satisfied by the absence of contradiction,
which did, in fact, mean a good deal from the silent Harold, he began to discover his own accession
of dignity. "Then it all belongs to me.  I am master.  I am squire--Eustace Alison, Esquire,
of Arghouse.  How well it sounds.  Doesn't it, Harry, doesn't it, Lucy?  Uncle Smith always
said I was the one cut out for high life. Besides, I've been presented, and have been to a
ball at Government House."

I saw that Mr. Prosser was a little overcome with amusement, and I wanted to make my retreat
and carry off Dora, but she had perched on her favourite post--Harold's knee--and I was also
needed to witness Eustace's signatures, as well as on some matters connected with my own property.
So I stayed, and saw that he did indeed seem lost without his cousin's help.  Neither knew
anything about business of this kind, but Harold readily understood what made Eustace so confused,
that he was quite helpless without Harold's explanations, and rather rough directions what
he was to do.  How like themselves their writing was! Eustace's neat and clerkly, but weak
and illegible; and Harold's as distinct, and almost as large, as a schoolboy's copy, but with
square-turned joints and strength of limb unlike any boy's writing.

The dressing-bell broke up the council, and Harold snatched up his hat to rush out and stretch
his legs, but I could not help detaining him to say:

"Oh, Harry, I am so sorry!"

"Why?" he said.

"What does it leave you, Harry?"

"Half the capital stock farm, twelve thousand sheep, and a tidy sum in the Sydney bank," said
Harold readily.

"Then I am afraid we shall lose you."

"That depends.  I shall set Eustace in the way of doing what our fathers meant; and there's
Prometesky--I shall not go till I have done his business."

I hardly knew what this meant, and could not keep Harold, whose long legs were eager for a
rush in the fresh air; and the next person I met was Eustace.

"Aunt Lucy," he said, "that old fellow says you are going away.  You can't be?"

I answered, truly enough, that I had not thought what to do, and he persisted that I had promised
to stay.

"But that was with Harry," I said.

"I don't see why you should not stay as much with me," he said. "I'm your nephew all the same,
and Dora is your niece; and she must be made a proper sister for me, who have been, &c."

I don't know that this form of invitation was exactly the thing that would have kept me; but
I had a general feeling that to leave these young men and my old home would be utter banishment,
that there was nothing I so cared for as seeing how they got on, and that it was worth anything
to me to be wanted anywhere and by anyone; so I gave Eustace to understand that I meant to
stay.  I rather wished Harold to have pressed me; but I believe the dear good fellow honestly
thought everyone must prefer Eustace to himself; and it was good to see the pat he gave his
cousin's shoulder when that young gentleman, nothing loath, exultingly settled down in the
master's place.

Before long I found out what Harold meant about Prometesky's business; for we had scarcely
begun dinner before he began to consult Mr. Prosser about the ways and means of obtaining a
pardon for Prometesky.  This considerably startled Mr. Prosser.  Some cabinets, he said, were
very lenient to past political offences, but Prometesky seemed to him to have exceeded all
bounds of mercy.

"You never knew the true facts, then?" said Harold.

"I know the facts that satisfied the jury."

"You never saw my father's statement?"

No, Mr. Prosser had been elsewhere, and had not been employed in my brother's trial; he had
only inherited the connection with our family affairs when the matter had passed into comparative
oblivion.

My brothers had never ceased to affirm that he had only started for the farm that had been
Lewthwayte's on hearing that an attack was to be made on it, in hopes of preventing it, and
that the witness, borne against him on the trial by a fellow who had turned king's evidence,
had been false; but they had been unheeded, or rather Prometesky was regarded as the most truly
mischievous of all, as perhaps he really had been, since he had certainly drawn them into the
affair, and his life had barely been saved in consideration of his having rescued a child from
the fire at great personal peril.

Ambrose had written again and again about him to my father, but as soon as the name occurred
the letter had been torn up.  On their liberation from actual servitude they had sent up their
statement to the Government of New South Wales; but in the meantime Prometesky had fared much
worse than they had.  They had been placed in hands where their education, superiority, and
good conduct had gained them trust and respect, and they had quickly obtained a remission of
the severer part of their sentence and become their own masters; indeed, if Ambrose had lived,
he would soon have risen to eminence in the colony.  But Prometesky had fallen to the lot of
a harsh, rude master, who hated him as a foreigner, and treated him in a manner that roused
the proud spirit of the noble.  The master had sworn that the convict had threatened his life,
and years of working in chains on the roads had been the consequence.

It was no time for entertaining a petition on his account, and before the expiration of this
additional sentence Ambrose was dead.

By that time Eustace, now a rich and prosperous man, would gladly have taken his old tutor
to his home, but Prometesky was still too proud, and all that he would do was to build a little
hut under a rock on the Boola Boola grounds, where he lived upon the proceeds of such joiner's
and watchmaker's work as was needed by the settlers on a large area, when things were much
rougher than even when my nephews came home.  No one cared for education enough to make his
gifts available in that direction, except as concerned Harold, who had, in fact, learnt of
him almost all he knew in an irregular, voluntary sort of fashion, and who loved him heartily.

His health was failing now, and to bring him home was one of Harold's prime objects, since
London advice might yet restore him.  Harold had made one attempt in his cause at Sydney, sending
in a copy of his father's dying statement, also signed by his uncle; but though he was told
that it had been received, he had no encouragement to hope it would be forwarded, and had been
told that to apply direct to the Secretary of State, backed by persons from our own neighbourhood,
would be the best chance, and on this he consulted Mr. Prosser, but without meeting much sympathy.
Mr. Prosser said many people's minds had changed with regard to English or Irish demagogues,
and that the Alison Brothers themselves might very probably have been pardoned, but everyone
was tired of Poles, and popular tradition viewed Prometesky as the ogre of the past.  Mr. Prosser
did not seem as if he would even very willingly assist in the drawing up in due form a petition
in the Pole's favour, and declared that without some influential person to introduce it, it
would be perfectly useless.

Eustace turned round with, "There, you see, Harold, nothing can be done."

"I do not see that," said Harold, in his quiet way.

"You do not mean to do anything?"

"Yes, I do."

"But what--what?  What can you do?"

"I do not yet know."

"You see it is of no use.  We shall only get into a scrape with all the gentlemen of the county."

"Never mind now, Eustace," said Harold, briefly.  But I knew the expression of his face by
this time quite well enough to be certain that nothing would make him abandon the cause of
his father's old friend; and that his silence was full of the strongest determination. I think
it fascinated me, and though in my cooler senses I reverted to my old notion of Prometesky
as a dangerous firebrand, I could not help feeling for and with the youth whose soul was set
on delivering his friend from exile.

My turn came the next morning, before Mr. Prosser went away.  He had much to say against my
making Arghouse my home, telling me that I had a full independence and could live where I pleased;
but that I knew already, and had decided on the amount I ought to pay towards the housekeeping.

Then he wanted me to understand how the young men were looked upon, and the dread all the neighbourhood
had of them.  I said I had shared this dread, but on better acquaintance I found it quite undeserved,
and this being the case it was incumbent on their only relation to stand by them, and not shun
them as if they had brought the leprosy.

This he allowed, calling it a generous feeling, if they were worthy of it.  But what greatly
amazed me was his rejoicing that Eustace had proved to be the heir, since nothing was known
against him, and when the other young man was gone there was hope that any little distrusts
might be allayed, and that he might ultimately take his place in the county.

The other young man!  Why should there be any distrust of Harold?  I grew hot and indignant,
and insisted on knowing what was meant; but Mr. Prosser declared that he knew nothing, only
there were vague reports which made him rejoice that Mr. Harold Alison was not called to be
the manager of the property, and would make him question whether a young lady would find it
expedient to be long an inmate of the same house.

What reports could he mean?  No--I could get no more out of him; he was too cautious to commit
himself, and seemed to be satisfied by observing that if I changed my mind, I could at any
time leave my nephews.

"Her nephews," I heard him mutter to himself; "yes, her nephews. No one has any right to object,
and she can but judge for herself--there's no harm done."

I shall always believe, however, that he set on my friends to remonstrate, for letters began
coming in, in all the senses of the imperative mood, commanding and entreating me to leave
Arghouse. There was one such as only Lord Erymanth could write.  He was an old man, and never
could make short work of anything.  They say that his chief political value was to be set on
when anyone was wanted to speak against time.  I know he was very dreadful at all the platforms
in the county; but he was very good and conscientious, and everyone looked up to him as a sort
of father of the country.

But oh! that letter!  Such a battery of heavy arguments against my unprecedented step in taking
up my residence with these unfortunate young men, who, though they had not themselves openly
transgressed the law of the land, yet were the offspring of unhallowed unions with the children
of a felon.  I cannot go through it all, but it hinted that besides their origin, there was
some terrible stain on Harold, and that society could not admit them; so that if I persisted
in casting in my lot with them, I should share the ban.  Indeed, he would have thought my own
good sense and love of decorum would have taught me that the abode of two such youths would
be no fit place for the daughter of such respected parents, and there was a good deal more
that I could not understand about interceding with his sister, and her overlooking my offence
in consideration of my inexperience and impulsiveness.

On my first impulse I wrote to thank my old friend, but to say I could see no harm in an aunt's
being with her nephews, and that I was sure he had only to know them to lay aside all doubts
of their being thorough gentlemen and associates for anybody.  My little niece required my
care, and I should stay and give it to her till some other arrangement was made.  If Lady Diana
were displeased with me, I was very sorry, but I could see no reason for it.

When I looked over the old Earl's letter, before closing mine, some expressions wound out of
the mist that made me uncomfortable, especially when I recollected that though it was a week
since their arrival, no one had attempted to call but Mr. Crosse, the vicar of Mycening, a
very "good man in the pulpit," as the servants said, and active in the parish, but underbred
and no companion.

Our neighbourhood was what is called very clannish.  There were two families, the Horsmans
and the Stympsons, who seemed to make up all the society.  The sons either had the good livings,
or had retired from their professions into cottages round and about, and the first question
after any party was, how many of each.  The outsiders, not decidedly of inferior rank, were
almost driven into making a little clique--if so it might be called--of their own, and hanging
together the more closely. Lord Erymanth of course predominated; but he was a widower of many
years' standing, and his heir lived in a distant county.  His sister, Lady Diana, had been
married to an Irish Mr. Tracy, who had been murdered after a few years by his tenants, upon
which she had come with her three children to live at Arked House. I never could guess how
she came to marry an Irish landlord, and I always thought she must have exasperated his people.
She was viewed as the perfection of a Lady Bountiful and pattern of excellence; but, I confess,
that I always thought of her when I heard of the devout and honourable women who were stirred
up against St. Paul.  She was a person who was admired more than she was liked, and who was
greatly praised and honoured, but somehow did not proportionably endear herself on closer acquaintance,
doing a great deal of good, but all to large masses rather than individuals.  However, all
the neighbourhood had a pride in her, and it was a distinction to be considered a fit companion
for Diana and Viola Tracy.  I never cared for Di, who was her mother over again, and used to
set us to rights with all her might; but she had married early, a very rich man--and Viola
and I had always been exceedingly fond of one another, so that I could not bear to be cut off
from her, however I might be disposed to defy her mother.

The upshot of my perplexities was that I set off to Mycening to lay them before Miss Woolmer,
another of the few belonging to neither clan, to know what all this meant, as well as to be
interested in my nephews.

Mycening is one of the prettiest country towns I know, at least it was twenty years ago.  There
is a very wide street, unpaved, but with a broad smooth gravelled way, slightly sloping down
towards the little clean stone-edged gutters that border the carriage road along the centre,
which is planted on each side with limes cut into arches. The houses are of all sorts, some
old timbered gable-ended ones with projecting upper stories, like our own, others of the handsome
old Queen Anne type with big sash windows, and others quite modern.  Some have their gardens
in front, some stand flush with the road, and the better sort are mixed with the shops and
cottages.

Miss Woolmer lived in a tiny low one, close to the road, where, from her upstairs floor, she
saw all that came and went, and, intellectual woman as she certainly was, she thoroughly enjoyed
watching her neighbours, as by judiciously-arranged looking-glasses, she could do all up and
down the street.  I believe she had been a pretty woman, though on a small scale, and now she
had bright eyes, and a very sweet bright look, though in complexion she had faded into the
worn pallor that belongs to permanent ill health.  She dressed nicely, and if she had been
well, might, at her age, scarcely above forty, have been as much a young lady as Philippa Horsman;
but I fancy the great crush of her life had taken away her girlhood and left her no spring
of constitution to resist illness, so that she had sunk into a regular crippled invalid before
I could remember, though her mind was full of activity.

"You are come to tell me about them, my dear," was her greeting. "I've seen them.  No, I don't
mean that they have been to see me. You'll bring them some day, won't you?  I'm sure Ambrose's
boy would come to see a sick woman.  I watched one of them yesterday pick up old Molly's oranges
for her in the street, when her basket got upset by a cart, and he then paid her for them,
and gave them among the children round.  It did my heart good, I'd not seen such a sight since
the boys were sent away."

"Harold would do anything kind," I said, "or to see an old friend of his father.  The worst
of it is that there seem to be so few who wish to see him, or can even forgive me for staying
with him."

I showed her Lord Erymanth's letter, and told her of the others, asking her what it meant.
"Oh, as to Lady Diana," she said, "there is no doubt about that.  She was greatly offended
at your having sent away her carriage and not having taken her advice, and she goes about saying
she is disappointed in you."

For my mother's sake, and my little Viola, and Auld Lang Syne besides, I was much hurt, and
defended myself in a tone of pique which made Miss Woolmer smile and say she was far from blaming
me, but that she thought I ought to count the cost of my remaining at Arghouse.  And then she
told me that the whole county was up in arms against the new comers, not only from old association
of their name with revolutionary notions, but because the old Miss Stympsons, of Lake Side,
who had connections in New South Wales, had set it abroad that the poor boys were ruffians,
companions of the double-dyed villain Prometesky, and that Harold in especial was a marked
man, who had caused the death of his own wife in a frenzy of intoxication.

At this I fairly laughed.  Harold, at his age, who never touched liquor, and had lived a sort
of hermit life in the Bush, to be saddled with a wife only to have destroyed her!  The story
contradicted itself by its own absurdity; and those two Miss Stympsons were well-known scandal-mongers.
Miss Woolmer never believed a story of theirs without sifting, but she had been in a manner
commissioned to let me know that society was determined not to accept Eustace and Harold Alison,
and was irate at my doing so. Mothers declared that they should be very sorry to give poor
Lucy Alison up, but that they could not have their children brought into contact with young
men little better than convicts, and whom they would, besides, call my cousins, instead of
my nephews.  "I began to suspect it," I said, "when nobody left cards but Mr. Lawless and Peter
Parsons."

"And that is the society they are to be left to?"

"But I shall not leave them," I cried.  "Why should I, to please Miss Stympson and Lord Erymanth?
I shall stand by my own brothers' sons against all the world."

"And if they be worthy, Lucy, your doing so is the best chance of their weathering the storm.
See! is not that one of them?  The grand-looking giant one, who moves like a king of men. 
He is Ambrose's son, is he not?  What a pity he is not the squire!"

Harold was, in effect, issuing from the toy-shop, carrying an immense kite on his arm, like
a shield, while Dora frisked round in admiration, and a train of humbler admirers flocked in
the rear.

I hurried down into the street to tell Harold of my old friend's wish to see them, and he followed
me at once, with that manner which was not courtesy, because, without being polished, it was
so much more. Dora was much displeased, being ardent on the kite's tail, and followed with
sullen looks, while Harold had to stoop low to get into the room, and brushed the low ceiling
with his curly hair as he stood upright, Miss Woolmer gazing up to the very top of him.  I
think she was rather disappointed that he had not taken more after his father; and she told
him that he was like his uncle Lewthwayte, looking keenly to see whether he shrunk from the
comparison to a man who had died a felon's death; but he merely answered, "So I have been told."

Then she asked for his mother, and he briefly replied that she was well and in New Zealand.
There was an attempt at noticing Dora, to which she responded like the wild opossum that she
was, and her fidgeting carried the day.  Harold only made answer to one or two more observations,
and then could not but take leave, promising on the entreaty of the old lady, to come and see
her again.  I outstayed them, being curious to hear her opinion.

"A superb being," she said, with a long breath; "there's the easy strength of a Greek demi-god
in every tread."

"He seems to me more like Thor in Nifelheim," I said, "being, no doubt, half a Viking to begin
with."

"They are all the same, as people tell us now," she said, smiling. "Any way, he looks as if
he was a waif from the heroic age.  But, my dear, did not I hear him call you Lucy?"

"They generally do."

"I would not let them.  Cling to your auntship; it explains your being with them.  A grand
creature!  I feel like the people who had had a visit from the gods of old."

"And you understand how impossible it would be to run away," I said.

She smiled, but added, "Lucy, my dear, that looked very like a wedding-ring!"

I could not think it possible.  Why, he was scarcely five-and-twenty! And yet the suggestion
haunted me, whenever my eyes fell on his countenance in repose, and noted the habitual sadness
of expression which certainly did not match with the fine open face that seemed fitted to express
the joy of strength.  It came on me too when, at the lodge, a child who had been left alone
too long and had fallen into an unmitigated agony of screaming, Harry had actually, instead
of fleeing from the sound, gone in, taken the screamer in his arms, and so hushed and pacified
it, that on the mother's return she found it at perfect rest.

"One would think the gentleman was a father himself, ma'am," she had said to me; and thereupon
Harold had coloured, and turned hastily aside, so that the woman fancied she had offended him
and apologised, so that he had been forced to look back again and say, "Never mind," and "No
harm done," with a half laugh, which, as it now struck me, had a ring of pain in it, and was
not merely the laugh of a shy young man under an impossible imputation.  True, I knew he was
not a religious man, but to believe actual ill of him seemed to me impossible.

He had set himself to survey the Arghouse estate, so as to see how those dying wishes of his
father could best be carried out, and he was making himself thoroughly acquainted with every
man, woman, child, and building, to the intense jealousy of Bullock, who had been agent all
through my mother's time, and had it all his own way.  He could not think why "Mr. Harold"
should be always hovering about the farms and cottages, sometimes using his own ready colonial
hand to repair deficiencies, and sometimes his purse, and making the people take fancies into
their heads that were never there before, and which would make Mr. Alison lose hundreds a year
if they were attended to. And as Mr. Alison always did attend to his cousin, and gave orders
accordingly, the much-aggrieved Bullock had no choice but in delaying their execution and demonstrating
their impracticability, whereas, of course, Harold did not believe in impossibilities.

It was quite true, as he had once said, that though he could not bring about improvements as
readily as if he had been landlord, yet he could get at the people much better, and learn their
own point of view of what was good for them.  They were beginning to idolise him; for, indeed,
there was a fascination about him which no one could resist.  I sometimes wondered what it
was, considering that he was so slow of speech, and had so little sunshine of mirth about him.

I never did enforce my title of Aunt, in spite of Miss Woolmer's advice.  It sounded too ridiculous,
and would have hindered the sisterly feeling that held us together.

Eustace was restless and vexed at not being called upon, and anxious to show himself on any
occasion, and I was almost equally anxious to keep him back, out of reach of mortification.
Both he and Harold went to London on business, leaving Dora with me.  The charge was less severe
than I expected.  My first attempts at teaching her had been frustrated by her scorn of me,
and by Harold's baffling indulgence; but one day, when they had been visiting one of the farms,
the children had been made to exhibit their acquirements, which were quite sufficient to manifest
Dora's ignorance.  Eustace had long declared that if she would not learn of me she must either
have a governess or go to school, and I knew she was fit for neither. Harold, I believe, now
enforced the threat, and when he went away, left her a black silk necktie to be hemmed for
him, and a toy book with flaming illustrations, with an assurance that on her reading it to
him on his return, depended his giving her a toy steam-engine.

Dora knew that Harold kept his word, even with her.  I think she had a great mind to get no
one's assistance but the kitchenmaid's, but this friendship was abruptly terminated by Dora's
arraying the kangaroo in Sarah's best bonnet and cloak, and launching it upon a stolen interview
between her and her sweetheart.  The screams brought all the house together, and, as the hero
was an undesirable party who had been forbidden the house, Sarah viewed it as treachery on
Miss Dora's part, and sulked enough to alienate her.

Dora could make out more to herself in a book than she could read aloud, and one day I saw
her spelling over the table of degrees of marriage in a great folio Prayer-Book, which she
had taken down in quest of pictures.  Some time later in the day, she said, "Lucy, are you
Harry's father's sister?" and when I said yes, she added, with a look of discovery, "A man
cannot marry his father's sister."

