"How, Ina," I answered, sorrowfully. From the tepee I started forth again to hunt food for
my aged parents. All day I tracked the white level lands in vain. Nowhere, nowhere were there
any other footprints but my own! In the evening of this third fast-day I came back without
meat. Only a bundle of sticks for the fire I brought on my back. Dropping the wood outside,
I lifted the door-flap and set one foot within the tepee.

There I grew dizzy and numb. My eyes swam in tears. Before me lay my old gray-haired father
sobbing like a child. In his horny hands he clutched the buffalo-robe, and with his teeth he
was gnawing off the edges. Chewing the dry stiff hair and buffalo-skin, my father's eyes sought
my hands. Upon seeing them empty, he cried out:

"My son, your soft heart will let me starve before you bring me meat! Two hills eastward stand
a herd of cattle. Yet you will see me die before you bring me food!"

Leaving my mother lying with covered head upon her mat, I rushed out into the night.

With a strange warmth in my heart and swiftness in my feet, I climbed over the first hill,
and soon the second one. The moonlight upon the white country showed me a clear path to the
white man's cattle. With my hand upon the knife in my belt, I leaned heavily against the fence
while counting the herd.

Twenty in all I numbered. From among them I chose the best-fattened creature. Leaping over
the fence, I plunged my knife into it.

My long knife was sharp, and my hands, no more fearful and slow, slashed off choice chunks
of warm flesh. Bending under the meat I had taken for my starving father, I hurried across
the prairie.

Toward home I fairly ran with the life-giving food I carried upon my back. Hardly had I climbed
the second hill when I heard sounds coming after me. Faster and faster I ran with my load for
my father, but the sounds were gaining upon me. I heard the clicking of snowshoes and the squeaking
of the leather straps at my heels; yet I did not turn to see what pursued me, for I was intent
upon reaching my father. Suddenly like thunder an angry voice shouted curses and threats into
my ear! A rough hand wrenched my shoulder and took the meat from me! I stopped struggling to
run. A deafening whir filled my head. The moon and stars began to move. Now the white prairie
was sky, and the stars lay under my feet. Now again they were turning. At last the starry blue
rose up into place. The noise in my ears was still. A great quiet filled the air. In my hand
I found my long knife dripping with blood. At my feet a man's figure lay prone in blood-red
snow. The horrible scene about me seemed a trick of my senses, for I could not understand it
was real. Looking long upon the blood-stained snow, the load of meat for my starving father
reached my recognition at last. Quickly I tossed it over my shoulder and started again homeward.

Tired and haunted I reached the door of the wigwam. Carrying the food before me, I entered
with it into the tepee.

"Father, here is food!" I cried, as I dropped the meat near my mother. No answer came. Turning
about, I beheld my gray-haired father dead! I saw by the unsteady firelight an old gray-haired
skeleton lying rigid and stiff.

Out into the open I started, but the snow at my feet became bloody.

V.

On the day after my father's death, having led my mother to the camp of the medicineman, I
gave myself up to those who were searching for the murderer of the paleface.

They bound me hand and foot. Here in this cell I was placed four days ago.

The shrieking winter winds have followed me hither. Rattling the bars, they howl unceasingly:
"Your soft heart! your soft heart will see me die before you bring me food!" Hark! something
is clanking the chain on the door. It is being opened. From the dark night without a black
figure crosses the threshold. * * * It is the guard. He comes to warn me of my fate. He tells
me that tomorrow I must die. In his stern face I laugh aloud. I do not fear death.

Yet I wonder who shall come to welcome me in the realm of strange sight. Will the loving Jesus
grant me pardon and give my soul a soothing sleep? or will my warrior father greet me and receive
me as his son? Will my spirit fly upward to a happy heaven? or shall I sink into the bottomless
pit, an outcast from a God of infinite love?

Soon, soon I shall know, for now I see the east is growing red. My heart is strong. My face
is calm. My eyes are dry and eager for new scenes. My hands hang quietly at my side. Serene
and brave, my soul awaits the men to perch me on the gallows for another flight. I go.

THE TRIAL PATH

It was an autumn night on the plain. The smoke-lapels of the cone-shaped tepee flapped gently
in the breeze. From the low night sky, with its myriad fire points, a large bright star peeped
in at the smoke-hole of the wigwam between its fluttering lapels, down upon two Dakotas talking
in the dark. The mellow stream from the star above, a maid of twenty summers, on a bed of sweetgrass,
drank in with her wakeful eyes. On the opposite side of the tepee, beyond the centre fireplace,
the grandmother spread her rug. Though once she had lain down, the telling of a story has aroused
her to a sitting posture.

Her eyes are tight closed. With a thin palm she strokes her wind-shorn hair.

"Yes, my grandchild, the legend says the large bright stars are wise old warriors, and the
small dim ones are handsome young braves," she reiterates, in a high, tremulous voice.

"Then this one peeping in at the smoke-hole yonder is my dear old grandfather," muses the young
woman, in long-drawn-out words.

Her soft rich voice floats through the darkness within the tepee, over the cold ashes heaped
on the centre fire, and passes into the ear of the toothless old woman, who sits dumb in silent
reverie. Thence it flies on swifter wing over many winter snows, till at last it cleaves the
warm light atmosphere of her grandfather's youth. From there her grandmother made answer:

"Listen! I am young again. It is the day of your grandfather's death. The elder one, I mean,
for there were two of them. They were like twins, though they were not brothers. They were
friends, inseparable! All things, good and bad, they shared together, save one, which made
them mad. In that heated frenzy the younger man slew his most intimate friend. He killed his
elder brother, for long had their affection made them kin."

The voice of the old woman broke. Swaying her stooped shoulders to and fro as she sat upon
her feet, she muttered vain exclamations beneath her breath. Her eyes, closed tight against
the night, beheld behind them the light of bygone days. They saw again a rolling black cloud
spread itself over the land. Her ear heard the deep rumbling of a tempest in the west. She
bent low a cowering head, while angry thunder-birds shrieked across the sky. "Heyã! heyã!"
(No! no!) groaned the toothless grandmother at the fury she had awakened. But the glorious
peace afterward, when yellow sunshine made the people glad, now lured her memory onward through
the storm.

"How fast, how loud my heart beats as I listen to the messenger's horrible tale!" she ejaculates.
"From the fresh grave of the murdered man he hurried to our wigwam. Deliberately crossing his
bare shins, he sat down unbidden beside my father, smoking a long-stemmed pipe. He had scarce
caught his breath when, panting, he began:

"'He was an only son, and a much-adored brother.'

"With wild, suspecting eyes he glanced at me as if I were in league with the man-killer, my
lover. My father, exhaling sweet-scented smoke, assented--'How,' Then interrupting the 'Eya'
on the lips of the round-eyed talebearer, he asked, 'My friend, will you smoke?' He took the
pipe by its red-stone bowl, and pointed the long slender stem toward the man. 'Yes, yes, my
friend,' replied he, and reached out a long brown arm.

"For many heart-throbs he puffed out the blue smoke, which hung like a cloud between us. But
even through the smoke-mist I saw his sharp black eyes glittering toward me. I longed to ask
what doom awaited the young murderer, but dared not open my lips, lest I burst forth into screams
instead. My father plied the question. Returning the pipe, the man replied: 'Oh, the chieftain
and his chosen men have had counsel together. They have agreed it is not safe to allow a man-killer
loose in our midst. He who kills one of our tribe is an enemy, and must suffer the fate of a foe.'

"My temples throbbed like a pair of hearts!

"While I listened, a crier passed by my father's tepee. Mounted, and swaying with his pony's
steps, he proclaimed in a loud voice these words (hark! I hear them now!): "Ho-po! Give ear,
all you people. A terrible deed is done. Two friends--ay, brothers in heart--have quarreled
together. Now one lies buried on the hill, while the other sits, a dreaded man-killer, within
his dwelling." Says our chieftain: "He who kills one of our tribe commits the offense of an
enemy. As such he must be tried. Let the father of the dead man choose the mode of torture
or taking of life. He has suffered livid pain, and he alone can judge how great the punishment
must be to avenge his wrong." It is done.

"'Come, every one, to witness the judgment of a father upon him who was once his son's best
friend. A wild pony is now lassoed. The man-killer must mount and ride the ranting beast. Stand
you all in two parallel lines from the centre tepee of the bereaved family to the wigwam opposite
in the great outer ring. Between you, in the wide space, is the given trial-way. From the outer
circle the rider must mount and guide his pony toward the centre tepee. If, having gone the
entire distance, the man-killer gains the centre tepee still sitting on the pony's back, his
life is spared and pardon given. But should he fall, then he himself has chosen death.'

"The crier's words now cease. A lull holds the village breathless. Then hurrying feet tear
along, swish, swish, through the tall grass. Sobbing women hasten toward the trialway. The
muffled groan of the round camp-ground is unbearable. With my face hid in the folds of my blanket,
I run with the crowd toward the open place in the outer circle of our village. In a moment
the two long files of solemn-faced people mark the path of the public trial. Ah! I see strong
men trying to lead the lassoed pony, pitching and rearing, with white foam flying from his
mouth. I choke with pain as I recognize my handsome lover desolately alone, striding with set
face toward the lassoed pony. 'Do not fall! Choose life and me!' I cry in my breast, but over
my lips I hold my thick blanket.

"In an instant he has leaped astride the frightened beast, and the men have let go their hold.
Like an arrow sprung from a strong bow, the pony, with extended nostrils, plunges halfway to
the centre tepee. With all his might the rider draws the strong reins in. The pony halts with
wooden legs. The rider is thrown forward by force, but does not fall. Now the maddened creature
pitches, with flying heels. The line of men and women sways outward. Now it is back in place,
safe from the kicking, snorting thing.

"The pony is fierce, with its large black eyes bulging out of their sockets. With humped back
and nose to the ground, it leaps into the air. I shut my eyes. I can not see him fall.

"A loud shout goes up from the hoarse throats of men and women. I look. So! The wild horse
is conquered. My lover dismounts at the doorway of the centre wigwam. The pony, wet with sweat
and shaking with exhaustion, stands like a guilty dog at his master's side. Here at the entranceway
of the tepee sit the bereaved father, mother, and sister. The old warrior father rises. Stepping
forward two long strides, he grasps the hand of the murderer of his only son. Holding it so
the people can see, he cries, with compassionate voice, 'My son!' A murmur of surprise sweeps
like a puff of sudden wind along the lines.

"The mother, with swollen eyes, with her hair cut square with her shoulders, now rises. Hurrying
to the young man, she takes his right hand. 'My son!' she greets him. But on the second word
her voice shook, and she turned away in sobs.

"The young people rivet their eyes upon the young woman. She does not stir. With bowed head,
she sits motionless. The old warrior speaks to her. 'Shake hands with the young brave, my little
daughter. He was your brother's friend for many years. Now he must be both friend and brother
to you,'

"Hereupon the girl rises. Slowly reaching out her slender hand, she cries, with twitching lips,
'My brother!' The trial ends."

"Grandmother!" exploded the girl on the bed of sweet-grass. "Is this true?"

"Tosh!" answered the grandmother, with a warmth in her voice. "It is all true. During the fifteen
winters of our wedded life many ponies passed from our hands, but this little winner, Ohiyesa,
was a constant member of our family. At length, on that sad day your grandfather died, Ohiyesa
was killed at the grave."

Though the various groups of stars which move across the sky, marking the passing of time,
told how the night was in its zenith, the old Dakota woman ventured an explanation of the burial
ceremony.

"My grandchild, I have scarce ever breathed the sacred knowledge in my heart. Tonight I must
tell you one of them. Surely you are old enough to understand.

"Our wise medicine-man said I did well to hasten Ohiyesa after his master. Perchance on the
journey along the ghostpath your grandfather will weary, and in his heart wish for his pony.
The creature, already bound on the spirit-trail, will be drawn by that subtle wish. Together
master and beast will enter the next camp-ground."

The woman ceased her talking. But only the deep breathing of the girl broke the quiet, for
now the night wind had lulled itself to sleep.

"Hinnu! hinnu! Asleep! I have been talking in the dark, unheard. I did wish the girl would
plant in her heart this sacred tale," muttered she, in a querulous voice.

Nestling into her bed of sweet-scented grass, she dozed away into another dream. Still the
guardian star in the night sky beamed compassionately down upon the little tepee on the plain.

A WARRIOR'S DAUGHTER

In the afternoon shadow of a large tepee, with red-painted smoke lapels, sat a warrior father
with crossed shins. His head was so poised that his eye swept easily the vast level land to
the eastern horizon line.

He was the chieftain's bravest warrior. He had won by heroic deeds the privilege of staking
his wigwam within the great circle of tepees.

He was also one of the most generous gift givers to the toothless old people. For this he was
entitled to the red-painted smoke lapels on his cone-shaped dwelling. He was proud of his honors.
He never wearied of rehearsing nightly his own brave deeds. Though by wigwam fires he prated
much of his high rank and widespread fame, his great joy was a wee black-eyed daughter of eight
sturdy winters. Thus as he sat upon the soft grass, with his wife at his side, bent over her
bead work, he was singing a dance song, and beat lightly the rhythm with his slender hands.

His shrewd eyes softened with pleasure as he watched the easy movements of the small body dancing
on the green before him.

Tusee is taking her first dancing lesson. Her tightly-braided hair curves over both brown ears
like a pair of crooked little horns which glisten in the summer sun.

