Waiting for her in the grounds below was James Parker, twenty-seven years old, already of a
large criminal experience, although never yet convicted of crime. The two made their way to
New York, were married, and the girl entered upon her career. Her husband, whose real name
was James D. Singley, was a professional Tenderloin crook, ready to turn his hand to any sort
of cheap crime to satisfy his appetites and support life; the money easily secured was easily
spent, and Singley, at the time of his marriage, was addicted to most of the vices common to
the habitués of the under world. His worst enemy was the morphine habit and from her husband
Mrs. Singley speedily learned the use of the drug. At this time Mabel Prentice-Parker-Singley
was about five feet two inches in height, weighing not more than 105 or 110 pounds, slender
to girlishness and showing no maturity save in her face, which, with its high color, brilliant
blue eyes, and her yellow hair, often led those who glanced at her casually to think her good
looking. Further inspection, however, revealed a fox-like expression, an irregularity in the
position of the eyes, a hardness in the lines of the mouth and a flatness of the nose which
belied the first impression. This was particularly true when, after being deprived of morphine
in the Tombs, her ordinary high color gave way at her second trial to a waxy paleness of complexion.
But the story of her career in the Tenderloin would prove neither profitable nor attractive.

The subsequent history of the Parker case is a startling example of the credulity of the ordinary
jury. The evidence secured was absolutely conclusive, but unfortunately juries are generally
unwilling to take the uncorroborated word of a policeman against that of a defendant--particularly
if the defendant be a young and pretty woman. Here at the very outset was a complete confession
on the part of Mrs. Parker, supplemented by illustrations from her own pen of what she could
do. Comparison showed that the signatures she had written without a model upon the Peabody
sheet were identical with those upon the forged checks (Fig. 6) and with Mr. Bierstadt's and
Miss Kauser's handwriting. When Mrs. Parker's case, therefore, came on for pleading, her counsel,
probably because they could think of nothing else to do, entered a plea of insanity. It was
also intimated that the young woman would probably plead guilty, and the case was therefore
placed upon the calendar and moved for trial without much preparation on the part of the prosecution.
Instead of this young person confessing her guilt, however, she amused herself by ogling the
jury and drawing pictures of the Court, the District Attorney and the various witnesses.

Probably no more extraordinary scene was ever beheld in a court of law than that exhibited
by Part II of the General Sessions upon Mabel Parker's first trial for forgery. Attired in
a sky blue dress and picture hat, with new white gloves, she sat jauntily by the side of her
counsel throughout the proceedings toying with her pen and pencil and in the very presence
of the jury copying handwriting which was given her for that purpose by various members of
the yellow press who crowded close behind the rail. "Did he ever give you any fuller account
of his experience than is detailed here?"

"No; he won't talk about it."

"He tried to let the house, however."

"Yes, but he did not succeed for a long time. Finally the mayor took it."

Refolding the paper, I handed it back to Mr. Robinson. I had its contents
well in mind.

"There is one fact to which I should like to call your
attention," said I. "The manifestations, as here recorded, have all
taken place in the lower part of the house. I should have had more
faith in them, if they had occurred above stairs. There are no outlets
through the roof."

"Nor any visible ones below. At least no visible
one was ever found open."

"What about the woman, Bess?" I asked. The natural result, therefore, at the
first trial, was that the detective succeeded in giving the unqualified impression that he
was drawing the long bow in a most preposterous fashion.

At the conclusion of the People's case the evidence that Mrs. Parker had forged the checks
amounted simply to this: That an officer who was greatly interested in her conviction had sworn
to a most astonishing series of facts from which the jury must infer that this exceedingly
astute young person had not only been entirely and completely deceived by a detective, but
also that at almost their first meeting she had confessed to him in detail the history of her
crimes. Practically the only other evidence tending to corroborate his story were a few admissions
of a similar character made by her to newspaper men, matrons and officers at the police station.
Unless the jury were to believe that Mrs. Parker had actually written the signatures on "the
Peabody sheet" there was no evidence that she was the actual forger; hence upon Peabody's word
alone depended the verdict of the jury. The trouble with the case was that it was too strong,
too good, to be entirely credible, and had there been no defense it is exceedingly probable
that the trial would have resulted in an acquittal, since the prosecution had elected to go
to the jury upon the question of whether or not the defendant had actually signed the checks
herself.

Mrs. Parker, however, had withdrawn her plea of insanity and determined to put in a defense,
which proved in its turn to be even more extraordinary than the case against her. This, in
brief, was to the effect that she had known Peabody to be a police officer all along, but that
it had occurred to her that if she could deceive him into believing that it was she herself
who had committed the forgeries her husband might get off, and that later she might in turn
establish her own innocence. She had therefore hastily scratched her name on the top of a sheet
already containing her husband's handwriting and had told Peabody that the signatures had been
written by herself. That the sheet had been written in the officer's presence she declared
to be a pure invention on his part to secure her conviction. She told her extremely illogical
story with a certain winsome naïveté which carried an air of semi-probability with it. From
her deportment on the stand one would have taken her for a boarding school miss who in some
inconsequent fashion had got mixed up in a frolic for which no really logical explanation could
be given.

Then the door in the back of the court room opened and James Parker was led to the bar, where
in the presence of the jury he pleaded guilty to the forgery of the very signature for which
his wife was standing trial. (Kauser check, Fig. 6.) He was then sworn as a witness, took the
stand and testified that he had written all the forged signatures to the checks, including
the signatures upon "the Peabody sheet."

The District Attorney found himself in an embarrassing position. If Parker was the forger,
why not challenge him to write the forged signatures upon the witness stand and thus to prove
his alleged capacity for so doing? The obvious objection to this was that Parker, in anticipation
of this test, had probably been practicing the signature in the Tombs for months. On the other
hand if the District Attorney did not challenge him to write the signatures, the defense would
argue that he was afraid to do so, and that as Parker had sworn himself to be the forger it
was not incumbent upon the defense to prove it further--that that was a matter for cross examination.

With considerable hesitation the prosecuting attorney asked Parker to write the Kauser signature,
which was the one set forth in the indictment charging the forgery, and after much backing
and filling on the part of the witness, who ingeniously complained that he was in a bad nervous
condition owing to lack of morphine, in consequence of which his hand trembled and he was in
no condition to write forgeries, the latter took his pen and managed to make a very fair copy
of the Kauser signature from memory, good enough in fact to warrant a jury in forming the conclusion
that he was in fact the forger. (Fig. 7.) This closed the case.

The defense claimed that it was clear that James Parker was the forger, since he had admitted
it in open court, pleaded guilty to the indictment and proved that he had the capacity. The
prosecution, upon the other hand, argued that the evidence was conclusive that the defendant
herself was the writer of the check. The whole thing boiled down to whether or not the jury
was going to believe that Mrs. Parker had written "the Peabody sheet" in the presence of the
detective, when her husband claimed that, with the exception of Mabel's signature, he had done
it himself and carelessly left the paper in his desk in the room.

The prosecuting attorney was at his wits' end for an argument to meet the fact that Parker
had written a sample forgery of the Kauser signature before the very eyes of the jury. He found
it at last in an offer on his own part in open court during his "summing up" to write for the
jury from memory a better forgery of the Kauser signature than that written by Parker himself,
and thus to show how simple a matter it was to learn to do so. He had taken up his pen and
was about to give a sample of his handiwork in this respect when the defendant grasped her
counsel's arm and whispered: "For God's sake, don't let him do it!" whereupon the lawyer arose
and objected, saying that such evidence was improper, as the case was closed. As might have
been expected under the circumstances, considering the blunders of the prosecution and the
ingenuous appearance of the defendant, the trial ended in a disagreement, the jury standing
eight to four for acquittal.

The District Attorney's office now took up a thorough investigation of the case, with the result
that on a second prosecution Mrs. Parker was confronted with a mass of evidence which it was
impossible for her to refute. A boy named Wallace Sweeney, sentenced to the Elmira Reformatory,
was found to have been an active accomplice of the Parkers for several years, and he was accordingly
brought down to New York, where he gave a complete history of his relations with them. His
story proved beyond any doubt that Mrs. Parker was the forger of the checks in the possession
of the District Attorney, and of many others beside, some of them for very large amounts. The
evidence of Sweeney was of itself quite sufficient to warrant a conviction. To make assurance
doubly sure, however, the District Attorney upon the second trial moved a new indictment, setting
forth as the forgery a check signed "E. Bierstadt," so that when Parker took the stand, as
he had done in the former trial and testified that he was the forger, he found himself unable
to write this new signature, and hence his testimony went for nothing.

But even the testimony of Sweeney was that of an accomplice, requiring corroboration, while
that of Peabody remained the evidence of "a mere policeman," eager to convict the defendant
and "add another scalp to his official belt." With an extraordinary accumulation of evidence
the case hinged on the veracity of these two men, to which was opposed the denial of the defendant
and her husband. It is an interesting fact that in the final analysis of the case the jury
were compelled to determine the issue by evidence entirely documentary in character. It is
also an illustration of what tiny facts stamp whole masses of testimony as true or false.

On her examination Mrs. Parker had sworn among other things: (1) That she had no knowledge
of the envelope, the back of which had been used by Parker for the purpose of directing Rogers,
Peet & Co. to deliver the clothes and money to his messenger--and, of course, that the words
"Mr. Geo. B. Lang" were not in her handwriting. This was one of the envelopes claimed by the
prosecution to have been originally addressed in pencil and sent to themselves by the Parkers
through the mail for this precise purpose. (2) That she had never seen the "Kauser practice
sheets," and that the words "Alice Kauser," repeated hundreds of times thereon, were not in
her handwriting. For some reason unknown to the District Attorney, however, she admitted having
written the words "I am upstairs in the bath-room" upon a similar sheet, but claimed that at
the time this was done the reverse of the paper was entirely blank.

Microscopic examination showed that among the words "Alice" and "Kauser" on the practice sheets
some one had written a capital "M." One of the legs of the "M" crossed and was superimposed
upon a letter in the word "Alice." Hence, whoever wrote the "M" knew what was on the practice
sheet. An enlargement of this "M" and a comparison of it with the "M" in the defendant's signature
to her formal examination in the police court, with the "M" in "Mr." in the address on the
envelope and with that in the "Mrs." on the "Peabody sheet," rendered it obvious that they
were all written by one and the same hand. Therefore it was clear that the defendant was familiar
with the contents of the practice sheets (Fig. 8.), even if she had not written them herself
and had not told the truth in this regard.

Moreover, it was fairly easy to see that the same hand that had written the words "I am upstairs
in the bath-room" upon the second practice sheet had at the same time and with the same pen
written the rest of the sheet. This was clearly perceptible on examining the "e's" and "a's."

A comparison of the address "Mr. Geo. B. Lang" (on Fig. 1) with the name Mrs. James D. Singley
(on Fig. 4) also shows clearly that one and the same person wrote them both. And to the accuracy
of all these self-evident propositions a leading handwriting expert in New York added his unqualified
opinion.

Thus, but for a little carelessness in failing to destroy odd scraps of paper and to disguise
her penmanship which it seemed to her quite unnecessary to do, as in the address of the "Lang"
envelope, Mrs. Parker might well have gone free after all.

It is impossible to describe all the varied dramatic features of this interesting case. No
one who was present is likely to forget the impression made by the defendant at her second
trial, when in defiance of overwhelming proof she still struggled to vindicate herself.

Her counsel contended throughout the trial that she was a hitherto innocent young woman led
astray and started upon a criminal career by a rascally husband, whom she still loved devotedly
and for whose sake she had prepared to confess herself a criminal. That James Parker introduced
his wife to a life of crime there can be no doubt, but that she had a natural predilection
for it must be equally obvious. It is probably true that Mabel Parker's affection for her convict
husband was unfeigned and deep. The natural repugnance of the American jury for convicting
a woman was shown when in spite of the overwhelming proof upon the Parker woman's second trial
the jury remained out eight hours and then found her guilty of "uttering only," with a strong
recommendation for mercy. She was sentenced to the Bedford Reformatory.

II

Five Hundred Million Dollars

This story, which ends in New York, begins in the Department of the Gironde at the town of
Monségur, seventy-five kilometers from Bordeaux, in the little vineyard of Monsieur Emile Lapierre--"landowner."
In 1901 Lapierre was a happy and contented man, making a good living out of his modest farm.
To-day he is--well, if you understand the language of the Gironde, he will tell you with a
shrug of his broad shoulders that he might have been a Monte Cristo had not le bon Dieu willed
it otherwise. For did he not almost have five hundred million dollars--two and a half milliards
of francs--in his very hands? Hein? But he did! Does M'sieu' have doubts? Nevertheless it is
all true. C'est trop vrai! Is M'sieu' tired? And would he care to hear the story? There is
a comfortable chair sous le grand arbre in front of the veranda, and Madame will give M'sieu'
a glass of wine from the presses, across the road. Yes, it is good wine, but there is little
profit in it, when one thinks in milliards.

The landowner lights his pipe and seats himself cross-legged against the trunk of the big chestnut.
Back of the house the vineyard slopes away toward the distant woods in straight, green, trellised
alleys. A dim haze hangs over the landscape sleeping so quietly in the midsummer afternoon.
Down the road comes heavily, creaking and swaying, a wain loaded with a huge tower of empty
casks and drawn by two oxen, their heads swinging to the dust. Yes, it is hard to comprendre
twenty-five hundred million francs.

It was this way. Madame Lapierre was a Tessier of Bordeaux--an ancient bourgeois family, and
very proud indeed of being bourgeois. You can see her passing and repassing the window if you
watch carefully the kitchen, where she is superintending dinner. The Tessiers have always lived
in Bordeaux and they are connected by marriage with everybody--from the blacksmith up to the
Mayor's notary. Once a Tessier was Mayor himself. Years and years ago Madame's great-uncle
Jean had emigrated to America, and from time to time vague rumors of the wealth he had achieved
in the new country reached the ears of his relatives--but no direct word ever came.

Then one hot day--like this--appeared M. le Général. He came walking down the road in the dust
from the gare, in his tall silk hat and frock coat and gold-headed cane, and stopped before
the house to ask if one of the descendants of a certain Jean Tessier did not live hereabouts.
He was fat and red-faced, and he perspired, but--Dieu!--he was distingué, and he had an order
in his buttonhole. Madame Lapierre, who came out to answer his question, knew at once that
he was an aristocrat.

Ah! was she herself the grandniece of Jean Tessier? Then, Heaven be thanked! the General's
toilsome journey was ended. He had much to tell them--when he should be rested. He removed
the silk hat and mopped his shining forehead. He must introduce himself that he might have
credit with Madame, else she might hardly listen to his story, for there had never been a tale
like it before since the world was. Let him present himself--M. le Général Pedro Suarez de
Moreno, Count de Tinoco and Marquis de la d'Essa. Although one was fatigued it refreshed one
to be the bearer of good news, and such was his mission. Let Madame prepare herself to hear.
Yes, it would be proper for her to call M'sieu', her husband, that he might participate.

Over a draft of this same vintage M. le Général imparted to them the secret. Lapierre laughs
and shrugs his shoulders as he recalls the scene--the apoplectic General, with the glass of
wine in one hand, waving the other grandiloquently as he described the wealth about to descend
upon them.

Yes, the General must begin at the beginning, for it was a long story. First, as to himself
and how he came to know of the affair. It had been on his return from the Philippines after
the surrender of Manila, where he had been in command of the armies of Spain, that he had paused
for repose in New York and had first learned of the Tessier inheritance. The precise manner
of his discovery was left somewhat indefinite, but the Lapierres were not particular. So many
distinguished persons had played a part in the drama that the recital left but a vague impression
as to individuals. A certain Madame Luchia, widow of one Roquefailaire, whom he had accidentally
met, had apparently been the instrument of Providence in disclosing the history of Jean Tessier
to the General. She herself had been wronged by the villains and knew all the secrets of the
conspirators. But she had waited for a suitable opportunity to speak. Jean Tessier had died
possessed of properties which to-day, seventy years after, were worth in the neighborhood of
five hundred million dollars! The General paused for the effect, solemnly nodding his head
at his astounded auditors in affirmance. Yes, it was even so!

Five hundred million dollars! No more--and no less! Then he once more took up the thread of
his narrative.

Tessier's lands, originally farms, were to-day occupied by huge magasins, government buildings,
palaces and hotels. He had been a frugal, hardworking, far-seeing man of affairs whose money
had doubled itself year by year. Then had appeared one Emmeric Lespinasse, a Frenchman, also
from Bordeaux, who had plotted to rob him of his estate, and the better to accomplish his purpose
had entered the millionaire's employ. When Tessier died, in 1884, Lespinasse had seized his
papers and the property, destroyed his will, dispersed the clerks, secretaries, "notaries"
and accountants of the deceased, and quietly got rid of such persons as stood actively in his
way. The great wealth thus acquired had enabled him to defy those who knew that he was not
entitled to the fortune, and that the real heirs were in far-away France.

He had prospered like the bay tree. His daughter, Marie Louise, had married a distinguished
English nobleman, and his sons were now the richest men in America. Yet they lived with the
sword of Damocles over their heads, suspended by a single thread, and the General had the knife
wherewith to cut it. Lespinasse, among other things, had caused the murder of the husband of
Madame Luchia, and she was in possession of conclusive proofs which, at the proper moment,
could be produced to convict him of his many crimes, or at least to oust his sons and daughter
from the stolen inheritance.

It was a weird, bizarre nightmare, no more astonishing than the novels the Lapierres had read.
America, they understood, was a land where the rivers were full of gold--a country of bronzed
and handsome savages, of birds of paradise and ruined Aztec temples, of vast tobacco fields
and plantations of thousands of acres of cotton cultivated by naked slaves, while one lay in
a hammock fanned by a "petite nègre" and languidly sipped eau sucrée. Perhaps it is as good
a revenge as the other. It certainly will interfere as much with her peace."

"Oh, oh, not that! I can not bear that!" leaped in anguish from her lips. "I am a pure woman,
let no such torture be inflicted upon me. Speak! tell the truth as you are the son of a woman
you would have us believe honest."

A smile then, cold but alive with gloating triumph, altered the straight
line of his lips for an instant as he advanced toward the door. "A
woman over the possession of whom it is an honor to quarrel!" were
his words as he passed the mayor with a bow.

I looked to see the
mayor spring and grasp him by the throat, but that was left for another
hand. Marie Louise
had been frightfully angry, but afterward her better nature had suggested the return of the
inheritance, or at least a hundred millions or so, to the rightful heirs. The General had left
the palace believing all would be well, and had retired to Paris to await letters and further
developments, but these had never come, and he had discovered that he had been deceived. It
had been merely a ruse on the part of the woman and her husband to gain time, and now every
step that he took was dogged by spies in the pay of the Lespinasses, who followed him everywhere.
But the right would triumph! He had sworn to run the conspiracy to earth!

Many hours were consumed in the telling of the story. The Lapierres were enchanted. More than
that, they were convinced--persuaded that they were heirs to the richest inheritance in the
world, which comprised most of the great American city of New York.

Persons who were going to participate in twenty-five hundred millions of francs could afford
to be hospitable. M. le Général stayed to dinner. A list of the heirs living in or near Bordeaux
was made out with the share of each in the inheritance carefully computed. Madame Lapierre's
was only fifty million dollars--but still that was almost enough to buy up Bordeaux. And they
could purchase Monségur as a country place. The General spoke of a stable of automobiles by
means of which the journey from Bordeaux to the farm could be accomplished in the space of an hour.

That night the good man and his wife scarcely closed their eyes, and the next day, accompanied
by the General, they visited Bordeaux and the neighboring towns and broke the news gently to
the other heirs. There was M. Pettit, the veterinary at Mormand; Tessier, the blacksmith in
Bordeaux; M. Pelegue and his wife, M. Rozier, M. Cazenava and his son, and others. One branch
of the family lived in Brazil--the Joubin Frères and one Tessier of "Saint Bezeille." These
last had to be reached by post, a most annoyingly slow means of communication--mais que voulez-vous?

Those were busy days in and around Bordeaux, and the General was the centre of attraction.
What a splendid figure he cut in his tall silk hat and gold-headed cane! But they were all
very careful to let no inkling of their good fortune leak out, for it might spoil everything--give
some opportunity to the spies of the impostor Lespinasse to fabricate new chains of title or
to prepare for a defense of the fortune. The little blacksmith, being addicted to white wine,
was the only one who did not keep his head. But even he managed to hold his mouth sufficiently
shut. A family council was held; M. le Général was given full power of attorney to act for
all the heirs; and each having contributed an insignificant sum toward his necessary expenses,
they waved him a tremulous good-by as he stood on the upper deck of the steamer, his silk hat
in one hand and his gold-headed cane in the other.

"He will get it, if any one can!" cried the blacksmith enthusiastically.

"It is as good as ours already!" echoed Rozier.

"My friends," Madame Lapierre assured them, "a General of the armies of Spain and a Chevalier
of the Order of Jiminez would die rather than fail in his mission. Besides," she added, her
French blood asserting itself, "he is to get nineteen per cent. of the inheritance!"

As long as the steamer remained in sight the General waved encouragingly, his hat raised toward
Heaven.

"Mais," says Lapierre, with another shrug as he lights his pipe, "even you would have believed
him. Vraiment! He would have deceived the devil himself!"

Up the road the wain comes creaking back again. A crow flaps across the vineyard, laughing
scornfully at good M. Lapierre, and you yourself wonder if such a thing could have been possible.

On a rainy afternoon in March, 1905, there entered the writer's office in the Criminal Courts
Building, New York City, a ruddy, stoutly-built man, dressed in homespun garments, accompanied
by an attractive and vivacious little woman, who, while unable to speak a single word of English,
had no difficulty in making it obvious that she had a story to tell of the most vital importance.
An interpreter was soon found and the names of the visitors disclosed. The lady, who did the
talking for both of them, introduced herself as Madame Valoie Reddon, of Bordeaux, and her
companion as M. Emile Lapierre, landowner, of Monségur, They had come, she explained, from
France to take possession of the inheritance Tessier. She was a personal friend of Madame Lapierre,
and as the Tessiers had exhausted all their money in paying the expenses connected with securing
the fortune, she, being a well-to-do gentlewoman, had come to their assistance, and for the
last few months had been financing the enterprise on a fifteen per cent. basis. If Madame Lapierre
was to receive ten million dollars, then, to be sure, Madame Reddon would have one million
five hundred thouand dollars; but, of course, it was not for the money, but on account of friendship,
that she was aiding them. I would understand that three years had elapsed since a certain distinguished
General Pedro Suarez de Moreno had disclosed to the Lapierres the fact that Madame was the
heiress to the greatest estate in America. M. Lapierre solemnly nodded confirmation as the
lady proceeded. It was the one subject talked about in the Gironde and Bordeaux--that is, among
those who had been fortunate enough to learn anything about it. And for three years the Tessiers,
their wives, their sons' wives, and their connections, had been waiting to receive the glad
tidings that the conspirators had been put to rout and the rightful heirs reinstated.

It was some time before the good lady succeeded in convincing her auditor that such a ridiculous
fraud as she described had actually been perpetrated. But there was M. Lapierre and there was
Madame Valerie Reddon sitting in the office as living witnesses to the fact. What wonderful
person could this General Moreno be, who could hypnotize a hard-headed, thrifty farmer from
the Gironde and a clever little French woman from Bordeaux into believing that five hundred
million dollars was waiting for them on the other side of the Atlantic! I expressed my surprise.
Madame Reddon shrugged her sloping shoulders. Well, perhaps it was hard for M'sieu' to believe,
but then there were the proofs, the documents, the dossier, and, most of all, there was the
General himself. Oh' if M'sieu' could see the General in his tall silk hat and gold-headed cane!

I asked for the documents. Madame Reddon opened her bag and produced a package of nearly one
hundred letters, written in a fine Spanish hand. Oh! he had been a wonderful writer, this gorgeous
Count de Tinoco and Marquis de la d'Essa. She had met him herself when he had been in Bordeaux.
Madame Lapierre had introduced him to her, and she had heard him talk. How beautifully he talked!
The stories of his experiences as General of the armies of Spain under Don Carlos and as Brigadier-General
in the Philippines were as fascinating as a romance. But it was his letters which had really
led her to take a personal interest in the undertaking. With a sigh Madame Valoie untied the
little blue ribbon which bound up the pitiful little history. If M'sieu' would be good enough
to grant the time she would begin at the beginning. Here was his first letter written after
the General's return to America:

    June 25, '02.

    My dear M. Lapierre:

    We have had a terrible voyage. A horrible storm broke loose in
    mid-ocean, endangering all our lives.... The waves, like mountains,
    threatened every instant to swallow us all; the spectacle was
    terrifying. I fell from the top of the stairs 'way down into the
    hole (sic), hurting my right leg in the centre of the tibia bone.
    The ship's doctor, who is nothing but a stupid fool, left me
    helpless almost the entire day.... If ever I should have dreamt what
    would occur to me in this trip, not for all the gold in the world
    would I have embarked. But, now that I am here, I shall not retreat
    before any obstacle, in order to arrive at the fulfillment of my
    enterprise, and no matter at what cost, even at that of my life. It
    is necessary that I succeed--my pride demands it. Those who are in
    the right shall triumph, that is sure.... In the mean time, will you
    kindly give my regards to Madame and your son, and all of your
    relatives, not forgetting your good old servant. Squeezing your hand
    cordially, I bid you adieu.

    Your devoted,

    Pedro S. de Moreno.

"Can you not see the waves, and observe him falling down the hole?" asks Madame Reddon,

"Mais, voici une autre."

    July 11, 1902.

    M. Jean Lapierre.

    My dear M. Lapierre: As soon as I could walk a little I began my
    research for the impostors of the inheritance Tessier. Without a
    doubt some person who is interested in the case has already advised
    them of my arrival in New York, and to take the necessary
    precautions to lead me astray in my researches.

    Already I have discovered almost everything. I know even the house
    in which resided the deceased before his death. It is a house of
    twenty-five stories high, which resembles the Church of Saint
    Magdalene in Paris. To-day it is the biggest bank in New York. I
    have visited it from top to bottom, ascending and descending in
    steel elevators. This is a marvelous palace; it is worth more than
    five million dollars. The house itself has the numbers 100, 102,
    104, 106, 108, 110, 112, 114, 116 and 118. In other words, it covers
    the ground of ten other houses made into one.

    I have also visited six houses belonging to him, which are worth
    millions and are located around Central Park....

    As soon as the brothers Lespinasse knew that I had arrived in New
    York they immediately took their departure, one for Paris to find
    his father, Emmeric Lespinasse, the other to the city of Tuxpan, in
    Mexico, to visit the properties stolen from the heirs. I have come
    to an understanding with the Reverend Father Van Rensselaer, Father
    Superior of the Jesuits, and have offered him two millions for his
    poor, in recompense for his aid to recover and to enter into
    possession of the inheritance. You will find a gentleman in my sitting-room.
    If you come to terms with him, well and good.

    If not, I shall expect you to forget all about him and his errand
    the moment you leave his presence. You understand me?"
    
    "I think so," I replied, meeting her steady look with one equally
    composed.

    Part of my strength--and I think I have some strength--lies in
    the fact that I am quietest when most deeply roused. "I
    am not to talk whatever the outcome."
    "Not even to me," she emphasized. I shall leave, nevertheless, to
    begin my campaign.

    Will you be kind enough to give my regards to your wife and son, and
    to our old friend, etc., etc.

    PEDRO S. DE MORENO.

"May the devil bestow upon him five hundred million toothaches!" exclaims Lapierre, for the
first time showing any sign of animation.

The other letters were read in their order, interspersed with Madame Reddon's explanations
of their effect upon the heirs in France. His description of the elevators of steel and of
the house that covered an entire block had caused a veritable sensation. Alas! those wonders
are still wonders to them, and they still, I fancy, more than half believe in them. The letters
are lying before me now, astonishing emanations, totally ridiculous to a prosaic American,
but calculated to convince and stimulate the imagination of a petit bourgeois.

