"They hain't no RIGHT to shut him up!  SHOVE!--and don't you lose a minute.  Turn him loose!
he ain't no slave; he's as free as any cretur that walks this earth!"

"What DOES the child mean?"

"I mean every word I SAY, Aunt Sally, and if somebody don't go, I'LL go. I've knowed him all
his life, and so has Tom, there.  Old Miss Watson died two months ago, and she was ashamed
she ever was going to sell him down the river, and SAID so; and she set him free in her will."

"Then what on earth did YOU want to set him free for, seeing he was already free?"

"Well, that IS a question, I must say; and just like women!  Why, I wanted the ADVENTURE of
it; and I'd a waded neck-deep in blood to --goodness alive, AUNT POLLY!"

If she warn't standing right there, just inside the door, looking as sweet and contented as
an angel half full of pie, I wish I may never!

Aunt Sally jumped for her, and most hugged the head off of her, and cried over her, and I found
a good enough place for me under the bed, for it was getting pretty sultry for us, seemed to
me.  And I peeped out, and in a little while Tom's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and stood
there looking across at Tom over her spectacles--kind of grinding him into the earth, you know.
And then she says:

"Yes, you BETTER turn y'r head away--I would if I was you, Tom."

"Oh, deary me!" says Aunt Sally; "IS he changed so?  Why, that ain't TOM, it's Sid; Tom's--Tom's--why,
where is Tom?  He was here a minute ago."

"You mean where's Huck FINN--that's what you mean!  I reckon I hain't raised such a scamp as
my Tom all these years not to know him when I SEE him.  That WOULD be a pretty howdy-do.  Come
out from under that bed, Huck Finn."

So I done it.  But not feeling brash.

Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever see --except one, and that
was Uncle Silas, when he come in and they told it all to him.  It kind of made him drunk, as
you may say, and he didn't know nothing at all the rest of the day, and preached a prayer-meeting
sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation, because the oldest man in the world
couldn't a understood it.  So Tom's Aunt Polly, she told all about who I was, and what; and
I had to up and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom
Sawyer--she chipped in and says, "Oh, go on and call me Aunt Sally, I'm used to it now, and
'tain't no need to change"--that when Aunt Sally took me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand it--there
warn't no other way, and I knowed he wouldn't mind, because it would be nuts for him, being
a mystery, and he'd make an adventure out of it, and be perfectly satisfied.  And so it turned
out, and he let on to be Sid, and made things as soft as he could for me.

And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting Jim free in her will;
and so, sure enough, Tom Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a free
nigger free! and I couldn't ever understand before, until that minute and that talk, how he
COULD help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up.

Well, Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and SID had come all right
and safe, she says to herself:

"Look at that, now!  I might have expected it, letting him go off that way without anybody
to watch him.  So now I got to go and trapse all the way down the river, eleven hundred mile,
and find out what that creetur's up to THIS time, as long as I couldn't seem to get any answer
out of you about it."

"Why, I never heard nothing from you," says Aunt Sally.

"Well, I wonder!  Why, I wrote you twice to ask you what you could mean by Sid being here."

"Well, I never got 'em, Sis."

Aunt Polly she turns around slow and severe, and says:

"You, Tom!"

"Well--WHAT?" he says, kind of pettish.

"Don t you what ME, you impudent thing--hand out them letters."

