One of the Biminis that have always been looked for is an American Literature. There was an
impression that there must be such a thing somewhere on a continent that has everything else.
We gave the world tobacco and the potato, perhaps the most important contributions to the content
and the fatness of the world made by any new country, and it was a noble ambition to give it
new styles of art and literature also. There seems to have been an impression that a literature
was something indigenous or ready-made, like any other purely native product, not needing any
special period of cultivation or development, and that a nation would be in a mortifying position
without one, even before it staked out its cities or built any roads. Captain John Smith, if
he had ever settled here and spread himself over the continent, as he was capable of doing,
might have taken the contract to furnish one, and we may be sure that he would have left us
nothing to desire in that direction. But the vein of romance he opened was not followed up.
Other prospectings were made. Holes, so to speak, were dug in New England, and in the middle
South, and along the frontier, and such leads were found that again and again the certainty
arose that at last the real American ore had been discovered. Meantime a certain process called
civilization went on, and certain ideas of breadth entered into our conceptions, and ideas
also of the historical development of the expression of thought in the world, and with these
a comprehension of what American really is, and the difficulty of putting the contents of a
bushel measure into a pint cup. So, while we have been expecting the American Literature to
come out from some locality, neat and clean, like a nugget, or, to change the figure, to bloom
any day like a century-plant, in one striking, fragrant expression of American life, behold
something else has been preparing and maturing, larger and more promising than our early anticipations.
In history, in biography, in science, in the essay, in the novel and story, there are coming
forth a hundred expressions of the hundred aspects of American life; and they are also sung
by the poets in notes as varied as the migrating birds. The birds perhaps have the best of
it thus far, but the bird is limited to a small range of performances while he shifts his singing-boughs
through the climates of the continent, whereas the poet, though a little inclined to mistake
aspiration for inspiration, and vagueness of longing for subtlety, is experimenting in a most
hopeful manner. And all these writers, while perhaps not consciously American or consciously
seeking to do more than their best in their several ways, are animated by the free spirit of
inquiry and expression that belongs to an independent nation, and so our literature is coming
to have a stamp of its own that is unlike any other national stamp. And it will have this stamp
more authentically and be clearer and stronger as we drop the self-consciousness of the necessity
of being American.

JUNE

Here is June again! It never was more welcome in these Northern latitudes. It seems a pity
that such a month cannot be twice as long. It has been the pet of the poets, but it is not
spoiled, and is just as full of enchantment as ever. The secret of this is that it is the month
of both hope and fruition. It is the girl of eighteen, standing with all her charms on the
eve of womanhood, in the dress and temperament of spring. And the beauty of it is that almost
every woman is young, if ever she were young, in June. For her the roses bloom, and the red
clover. It is a pity the month is so short. It is as full of vigor as of beauty. The energy
of the year is not yet spent; indeed, the world is opening on all sides; the school-girl is
about to graduate into liberty; and the young man is panting to kick or row his way into female
adoration and general notoriety. The young men have made no mistake about the kind of education
that is popular with women. The women like prowess and the manly virtues of pluck and endurance.
The world has not changed in this respect. It was so with the Greeks; it was so when youth
rode in tournaments and unhorsed each other for the love of a lady. June is the knightly month.
On many a field of gold and green the heroes will kick their way into fame; and bands of young
women, in white, with their diplomas in their hands, star-eyed mathematicians and linguists,
will come out to smile upon the victors in that exhibition of strength that women most admire.
No, the world is not decaying or losing its juvenility. The motto still is, "Love, and may
the best man win!" How jocund and immortal is woman! Now, in a hundred schools and colleges,
will stand up the solemn, well-intentioned man before a row of pretty girls, and tell them
about Womanhood and its Duties, and they will listen just as shyly as if they were getting
news, and needed to be instructed by a man on a subject which has engaged their entire attention
since they were five years old. In the light of science and experience the conceit of men is
something curious. And in June! the most blossoming, riant, feminine time of the year. The
month itself is a liberal education to him who is not insensible to beauty and the strong sweet
promise of life. The streams run clear then, as they do not in April; the sky is high and transparent;
the world seems so large and fresh and inviting. Our houses, which six months in the year in
these latitudes are fortifications of defense, are open now, and the breath of life flows through
them. So she continued until after Gregory was born; and, somehow, his coming seemed to loosen
the tears, and she cried day and night, till my aunt and the other watcher looked at each
other in dismay, and would fain have stopped her if they had but
known how.