But, turning in the doorway for another glance--so sweet it was to have her all his own again--a
pang shot through him, for the glory was gone from her face--or was it the shadow that made
it so wan and gray?--and no smile hid the questioning anguish of her eyes. Nay, he himself
was fanciful, for it was too far to see, and he could not shake off the sadness of the days
that were past. But he must teach himself to forget them. For Marina had smiled at him, radiantly,
as in the sweet, old days; and together they would deck the chapel for a benediction!

XXVI

Fra Paolo was fast becoming a centre of romance, so many were the attempts from suspicious
quarters to manage private interviews which the Senate had thought necessary to frustrate;
and the fact that he was known to have declined the escort of guards which the Senate urged
upon him as means of safety endowed him with a sort of heroic halo in the eyes of the lesser
multitude. "Fate largo a Fra Paolo," they called in the Merceria if the people pressed him
too closely--"Make way for Fra Paolo!"--and a strange youthfulness, as of satisfied affections,
was beginning to grow upon his calm face. He had had no cravings, feeling that duty sufficed;
yet, through this absolute yielding of himself to express the message with which his life was
charged, his heart had warmed within him, and now, unsought, the people loved him, magnifying
the interest of every minor happening of his life and zealously gathering anecdotes of the
days before he was great.

A group of his brother friars were strolling back and forth under the fretted colonnades of
the greater court of the Servi one evening before vespers, a glow of relish on their genial,
cowled faces, rehearsing the tale of Fra Paolo's unconventional slippers; for it was the hour
of small gossip, and the day had been warm.

"They were scarlet, like an eminence's," explained Fra Giulio, who had secured this choice
bit for the entertainment of his special cronies; "for all colors are one to Fra Paolo, who
hath no distinction for trifles."

"Because he spendeth himself in scheming for honors that belong elsewhere," interposed a disaffected
brother who had strolled up and joined the group uninvited; he belonged to another chapter
of the Servi, and had but recently come among them; honors had passed him by and duties attracted
him less, and he had made no friends within the convent, though he professed great interest
in all that concerned Fra Paolo, and had even offered to wait upon him in chapel or in his cell.

"Thou, Fra Antonio, seek thine own friends!" Fra Giulio retorted, with unusual asperity; "for
this tale is too good for thine hearing, being another triumph for Fra Paolo in the days when
he was only a frate of the Servi."

"Ebbene, and then?" urged the eager auditors, crowding around the speaker, for the incongruity
of the grave padre, in his frayed and rusty gown attempting to usurp a decoration, lent interest
to the petty happening.

"Ebbene, and then his Eminence of Borromeo--for it seemeth that only the illustrious play parts
in this farce"--Fra Giulio continued with keen enjoyment, "his Eminence of Borromeo hath explained
at Rome that Fra Paolo was innocent of contempt of rule."

"Verily, the fault might have been counted to one who hath no sins of the body to atone for!"
sneered Fra Antonio, who could not be converted to the prevailing tone of admiration for this
abnormal being who walked among them not as other men, and toward whom his own attitude was
a singular compound of obsequiousness and cynicism. "Even the slippers of your saint can do
no wrong," he added venomously.

"But thou, in canonized shoes, couldst walk but wearily, Fra Antonio, lest they should lead
thee in unwonted ways!" one of the party retorted maliciously.

"Fra Paolo hath fear of no man, and that which he declareth he knoweth," said another of the
frati, lowering his voice and glancing about him furtively. "And it hath chanced to him, more
than once, to be wiser than the Serenissimo and the Ten themselves--may San Marco have other
uses for his ears! But the day that our famous Signor Bragadin was summoned from his palace
on the Giudecca to make his promised gold for the Signoria, I stood with the crowd in the Merceria
to see him pass, with his two black dogs and their golden collars looking for all the world
like powers of evil! And our gold-maker himself going to the Senate like a noble, with his
friends the Cornaro and the Dandolo in crimson robes--the people thronging to see him pass!"

"Ay, Bragadin was a saintly man!" one of them retorted mockingly. "Dost remember the tale how
that he fooled the worshipful Signoria to leave him a week in peace, that he might take the
blessed sacrament quietly, finding therein 'a holy joy' that should fit him to proceed to the
service of Venice--looking, meanwhile, for means of escape?"

"Davvero! but this was the hour of his highest favor, and I followed with the rest of the crowd
till there was scarce breathing space under the clock tower, where the Magi were just coming
forth to salute the Madonna and the Bambino at the stroke of the day; and the people were shouting
so one could not hear the bell for cries of 'Gold! gold! I caught a glimpse of him standing
quietly just inside the 'Nave d'Oro,' while the other signori who go there to ridotto were
out in the Merceria to see the show; and I made haste away lest the crowd should object to
my habit for being like Fra Paolo's--they were so crazy for Bragadin, following in the footsteps
of the Signoria, like good Venetians!"

"Who told the saying to the Signoria, when it might have crushed Fra Paolo?" Fra Giulio questioned
jealously.

"It may well have been his Excellency the Signor Donato, who was of the Council in those days,
but a man too strong to have a mind to the folly of the others, and who walked about the chamber
giving sign of much displeasure while Bragadin made his gold. And the next day Fra Paolo is
commanded before the Signoria to meet the Provveditor of the Mint--being the only man who hath
dared speak his mind before the Signoria had proved the worthlessness of Bragadin's promise.
And our fine gold-maker exchangeth his palace for a prison; for the test of the crucible is
all too easy for Fra Paolo, who speaketh naught that he knoweth not."

"Santa Maria! here cometh the 'bride,'" some one exclaimed warningly; for none of Fra Paolo's
friends had the courage for frivolity in his grave presence, harmless as it might appear in
his absence, and this watchword was often heard in the cloister as he approached.

He was conversing earnestly with his secretary, Fra Fulgenzio, evidently on business of the
Senate, having remained in the convent all day, contrary to his usual custom; Fra Fulgenzio
had been to and fro with messages, and once had returned from the Ducal Palace escorting several
grave personages who had gone to Fra Paolo's cell for some conference, which gave rise to pleasant
comment in the convent--since the Serenissimo could not dispense with the personal service
of its Consultore for a single day, and every honor shown to Fra Paolo was dear to the hearts
of the Servi.

Fra Paolo paused only for a moment as he passed the group to exchange a greeting, but his keen,
quiet glance took in every expression, from the affectionate smile of old Fra Giulio to the
jealous discontent of Fra Antonio, whose gaze drooped before him while he hastened to give
the accustomed sign of reverence due to one so high in authority.

Fra Paolo considered him seriously for a moment before resuming his stroll. "Fra Antonio,"
he said, in his passionless voice, "the head of the Roman Chapter hath made inquiry for thee,
and knew naught of thy presence here. Thou wilt soon be recalled. That thou doest--do quickly."

A sudden pallor overspread the features of Fra Antonio, who staggered and would have fallen,
as he made an effort to steal away unobserved, had not the others come to his assistance.

"What is thy sudden ailment?" one of them asked him roughly, for he was no favorite.

But before the trembling friar could steady his voice or choose his words he was forgotten,
for the evening bells began to chime for vespers, and as the brothers came flocking through
the cloisters the great bell at the entrance gate on the Fondamenta dei Servi sent back the
special deep-toned call, which took precedence of every order within the convent. Those who
had already reached the chapel streamed back in wild confusion to answer the summons which
filled the court with clanging echoes, while the silvery notes of the chapel chimes sounded
faintly in the pauses of the deeper reverberations--like the voice of a timid child crying
to be comforted when it does not understand.

In the excitement that followed Fra Antonio was forgotten by all but Fra Giulio, who had been
watching him closely as he made his way with difficulty toward the low, arched passage which
led in the direction of the dormitory.

"Lean on me," said Fra Giulio, who stood barring the way.

"Nay," replied the other, who seemed scarcely able to stand, "I must needs reach my cell; a
sudden illness hath overtaken me."

But Fra Giulio, usually so compassionate that he was called "woman hearted," did not move.

"Later a remedy shall be brought thee," he answered coldly. "Thou hearest the great summons
which none of our order may disobey; it is rare and solemn to hear that call. Something of
moment hath chanced. Ecco, now we shall know!" he added in a tone of relief, as Fra Gianmaria
appeared from under the convent entrance, whither he had gone to receive the Chief of the Ten,
who now entered the great court with him in formal state, with a secretary and attendants and
an officer of the guards.

The tumultuous crowd began to range itself in orderly groups at the command of the superior,
and Fra Antonio controlled himself with a supreme effort as a body of palace guards, in brilliant
uniforms, scattered themselves among the black-robed friars. The heavy gates closed behind
them, and the dismal tolling of the bell ended in a silence through which the heart-beats of
Fra Antonio sounded in his ears louder and more ominous than the harsh tones of the summons
had done a moment before.

Who were those two terrible gondoliers all in black, who stood by the water-entrance on the
Fondamenta? Was it the shadow of their great black hats that darkened their features like masks?
Why were they there?

He glanced stealthily at the faces of the friars; they were more full of interest than dread,
while the eyes of the little choristers who stood robed for chapel service shone with delight.
Evidently to all that community the interruption was an event filled with possibilities of
excitement that was welcomed as breaking the monotony of the daily round. Perhaps no one had
noticed those gondoliers! Only Father Gianmaria, the Superior, and the Senator Giustinian Giustiniani,
the Chief of the Ten, were stern and angry; and Fra Paolo stood between them--calm and inscrutable
as ever.

Now, thought Fra Antonio, before the curiosity of the friars had been satisfied,--while no
one was thinking of him,--he must escape! But at every passage leading out of the court a scarlet
coat stood guard, save only before the low doorway of the dormitory stair. Fra Giulio's eyes
were fixed earnestly, adoringly, upon his beloved Fra Paolo, and he had moved a little way
from the wall.

Fra Antonio stole softly in behind him, breathlessly anxious. He was already under the archway
when his unsteady foot stumbled in a hollow of the worn brick pavement just within the opening--in
another moment he should be safe! But a voice, meant for him alone, leaped through all that
crowd and petrified him with horror; it was filled with a sarcastic grace as it offered the
courtesy.

"Whoever hath need to leave this cloister before the Inquiry of Venice is satisfied, shall
be served by the gondola of the Piombi--which waits."

I Piombi! Those prisons under the leads where the heat was slow torture--this was the meaning
of the masked gondoliers!

Surely it was the Chief of the Ten who had spoken! Fra Antonio trembled from head to foot;
but was he not already far enough within the narrow, winding passage to be hidden from the
cruel gaze of that man of power? Half an inch might make the difference between life and death;
he folded his black gown closer about him--stealthily--so that it might not rustle, watching
the faint shadow on the pavement in agony--what if his hand had been seen as he passed it behind
him to gather up the folds!

Those words could not be meant for him; they were merely a general order; there were twenty
men--forty men in that company more wicked than he! He could not turn back and face them to
glide into his place again; it would be certain death; but when the Chief of the Ten or Father
Gianmaria should begin to speak, he must go on.

He lifted one foot to be ready; a great sweat broke out on his forehead--would this silence
never end? He dared not stir until there should be words to hold the crowd; for if he should
be caught----

Were they speaking?--His heart thumped so that he could not hear. Santa Maria!--death could
not be worse!

"Thou art summoned; they are calling thee," said Fra Giulio, close beside him, in a low, hard
voice that changed to one more compassionate as the friar turned his livid face toward him.
"I know not thy fault, but Fra Paolo will plead for thee; for thou art ill, verily."

"Fra Paolo is no man of mercy."

"Nay, but of justice. He will not remember thy discourtesies."

"Discourtesies!" ay, it was true; Fra Giulio did not know--nobody knew; he would take courage
and plead to be forgiven his manifold "discourtesies" toward this idol of the Servi; it was
for this that he was summoned! The palace guards were approaching the low passage, and the
extremity of his need steadied him; he rallied all his powers for a last effort, and, shaking
off their touch, advanced into the court--his face, withered and pain-stricken, might have
plead for him but for the strange hardness of the lines.

"It was a sudden malady that bade me seek my cell," he gasped. "I knew not that your Excellency
had need of me."

He was a ghastly thing in his fear.

The inexorable Chief of the Ten surveyed him in silence for a brief moment that seemed unending.

"Ay, Fra Antonio, we have need of thee--more than another. For word hath reached Venice, privately,
from special friendly sources in Rome, that thou art come hither charged with a message of
vital import to a trusted servant of the Republic. Thou hast leave of the Signoria to declare
it in this presence."

Fra Antonio opened his dry lips and framed some words of which he heard no echo.

"The Inquiry of Venice is satisfied," said the Chief. "Thou art the man whom we seek. Conduct
him to the gondola of the Piombi."

Fra Antonio fell upon his knees in wild supplication as the guards gathered around him, but
the Father Superior detained them with a prohibitory motion.

"I crave your Excellency's pardon. For the better ruling of this community and the clearing
of all the innocent among our brotherhood, I have summoned hither every soul under my rule.
That no scandal may arise, your Excellency will permit that the charge under which this arrest
is made be declared."

Assent was given by an impatient gesture.

"Fra Antonio, while he hath been a recipient of our hospitality," said the Superior, "is described
by trustworthy advices from our Chapter in Rome, but just received, as a person who hath designs
upon the life of a member of this community."

"It is a false scandal," cried Fra Antonio, who had found his voice at last. "I shall not be
condemned without proof!"

"The truth is known," said Fra Paolo, leaning toward him and speaking low. "It were better
for thee to confess--or depart in silence."

But the man was beside himself with fear; he caught at his last, desperate chance of favor,
dragging himself to the feet of Fra Paolo and pouring out an abject tale of petty jealousies
and offenses for which he obsequiously craved pardon of this "idol of the convent," protesting,
with horrible oaths, that he was guilty of nothing more.

The rare shade of compassion that had softened Fra Paolo's face when he gave his warning, deepened
to a glory and his eyes shone with a grace that was like love, as he raised the wretched man
and strove to arrest his torrent of words. "God heareth thee, my brother," he said pleadingly;
"have pity on thine own soul. Kneel to Him alone in thy great need. But spend not thy strength
with trifles that demean us both. If thine heart hath aught against me, I forgive it."

Then turning to the Chief he besought that the trial should be short--"For the man is ill,
and I would have quiet speech with him."

"For the honor of the Servi, let the matter be dispatched, and let proof be brought," the Superior
demanded, surprised and displeased at any softness in Fra Paolo, whose dominant note was justice,
rather than mercy.

"We will grant him the favor of a farewell collation ere he taketh leave of his entertainers,"
said the Giustinian. "Let the refection be brought."

The friars exchanged glances of astonishment and dismay as a dish of fruit and of white bread
were brought forward by two of the ducal guards, on a costly salver wrought with the arms of
Venice. It was like the simple refreshment they had often carried to Fra Paolo's cell when
he had been absorbed by some train of thought, which, according to his wont, he would not suspend
for any hour of sleep or meals until the problem had been conquered. Fra Giulio trembled; he
would have said those were the very grapes he had chosen to tempt Fra Paolo's slender appetite,--white,
with the veins of purple,--all as he had left them on his desk that day, with the plate of
fine white bread, when the midday meal was served--but in no lordly dish.

A faint cry escaped Fra Antonio, and he put his hands before his face.

There was a moment of breathless silence; but no compassion anywhere upon all those strained
and eager faces, except in the eyes of Fra Paolo, which seemed divine in pity, as he drew nearer
the guilty man and put his arm about him to steady him.

"These," said the Chief of the Ten, "fine grapes and wheaten bread, exquisitely flavored with
a most precious powder, thou shalt presently enjoy in this presence,--with the compliments
of the Signoria, who have most carefully considered this repast,--unless thou dost instantly
make frank and full confession of thy deed and thine accomplices.

"And if more be to thy taste," the cruel voice went on, for no answer came, "since in these
matters thou hast a consummate knowledge--thou art permitted, by grace of the Signoria, to
use the contents of this packet, which hath been found within the lining of thy cassock. This
powder hath a marvelous power to still the blood which floweth over-swiftly----"

"We have proof more than sufficient for the arrest, your Excellency," interposed the officer
of the guards, as he gave the signal. "And no deposition can be taken here, for the man hath
fainted from his fright."

But almost unnoticed the guards bore their burden from the cloister to the gondola of the prisons
of the Piombi; for it had taken but a moment to complete the unfinished tale in the minds of
the listeners, and with one accord they were gathering about Fra Paolo, eager to express their
loyalty, their indignation, their gratitude for his escape.

The court was in a tumult. "Fra Paolo!" "Our Fra Paolo!" mingled with bursts of vehement condemnation
and rapid questions. "Our Consultore!" "And because he is necessary to Venice!"

The chimes of the chapel sounding joyously broke in upon these demonstrations, and two little
choristers came running back to tell them that, by order of Fra Gianmaria, a Te Deum for the
safety of Fra Paolo would be sung, in lieu of the interrupted vesper service.

"The Signoria hath had warnings without end," the Chief of the Ten was explaining hastily to
Father Gianmaria, as they strolled toward the chapel. "The Holy Father wanteth him out of Venice,
since he hath been Consultore--for the man is a marvel! But he would rather have him alive
than dead--as the learned Scioppius hath explained, not long since, to Fra Paolo himself! And
this whole plot hath been unveiled to us by one who watcheth secretly in Rome for the interest
of Venice, since there hath been no open communication. It was hatched in the Orsini palace,
in that holy city, not unknown to some of their Eminences; the chief accomplices are friars--we
have the names of the other two; and Piero Salin is on the watch. The stakes are high for the
friars' game--five thousand scudi apiece and a promise of Church preferment; but Piero Salin
hath ways of doing his duty! The Senate will send orders for the better protection of its Consultore;
meanwhile let him not venture forth without two ducal guards."

"Your Excellency knoweth that Fra Paolo will have no state."

"A cowl over their saintly faces, if it please his fancy! It is the order of the Senate, waiting
better plans of safety--a suite in the Ducal Palace or a house connected therewith by some
guarded passage. Warning hath been sent us most urgently, by friends of the Republic, of a
great price and absolution for him who may bring Fra Paolo to Rome--alive or dead!"

XXVII

These days had been important in the Senate. In the deliberations prior to the departure of
di Gioiosa the concessions which Rome had persistently asked had been so persistently and diplomatically
declined that even the wily cardinal dared no longer press them; and it seemed at last that
there was to be truce to the cautious and subtle word-weighing of months past, as di Gioiosa,
suddenly realizing that he held the ultimatum of the Republic, had taken his departure for
Rome in the night--conceiving it easier, perhaps, to confess his partial defeat to the dignified
Signoria by proxy. So he made the announcement through a gentleman of his household the next
morning, while he was already journeying toward the expectant Pope, to whom he carried bitter
disappointment; and the heart of the cardinal himself had been scarcely less set upon those
points of amelioration which he had not obtained. It was a blow to his diplomacy and to his
churchman's pride; for the terms which the cardinal was empowered to offer were scarcely less
haughty than was the attitude which Venice had assumed throughout the quarrel.

His Holiness had wished that Venice, as a first step, should cancel the "Protest" which she
had widely published, declaring the interdict invalid.

But Venice, with cool logic, had declined to accede to this; since the protest, being based
upon the censures, was practically annulled by their withdrawal--which must therefore first
take place. And, although by this same logic she was led to declare that no act on the part
of the Republic would then be necessary to void her protest, she consented to give a writing
to that effect, so soon as the censures should have been withdrawn.

The Pope requested that all who had left Venice on account of the interdict should, upon its
withdrawal, return and be reinstated in their former privileges--making a special point of
including the Jesuits.

But here, also, Venice made and kept to her amendment; all should return, with full privilege
and favor--save only the Jesuits, who had in various ways rendered themselves obnoxious to
the government.

The revocation of those laws which the Pope demanded was not to be thought of, since this would
be questioning the right of Venice to make laws; neither was their suspension possible, for
the laws were just. But his Holiness might rest assured that they would be used in moderation
and Christian piety only--as they had ever been.

The real concession--the only one--was in the case of the ecclesiastical prisoners--the Abbot
of Nervessa and the Canon of Vicenza--whom his Holiness persisted in claiming. But Monsieur
du Fresne, the French Ambassador, suggested that the Republic should, "without prejudice to
her right of jurisdiction over criminal ecclesiastics," give these prisoners to the ambassador
as a mark of special favor to his king, the mediator, who might then consign them to the Pope
if he chose--they being his to deal with.

Venice, with her powers of subtle reasoning, gladly embraced this way out of the difficulty
which had first appeared insuperable. "So to give them," she said, appeased, "confirms rather
than questions our authority, since no one may 'give' to another that over which he exercises
no dominion."

It was not Venice, but France, who was to request that the interdict be withdrawn, that she
might not seem to other nations to be under the ban; for the Republic did not acknowledge that
this condition of disfavor had gone into effect; she could not therefore personally request
the Pope to change an attitude which put only himself in the wrong. But when there was a hint
of "absolution," which the cardinal in his zeal would also ask the Holy Father to pronounce,
Venice was silent from displeasure. She had done no wrong; she would neither ask nor accept
absolution.

The Senate might indeed be weary of these interminable discussions and unending compliments,
and glad of a respite in which to turn to other matters. But there were no idle hours in that
august assembly, though it might chance that some whimsical phase of statesmanship lightened,
by way of entr'acte, the severity of their deliberations. They were, possibly, not unpleasantly
aware of the irony of the situation when a letter from their governor in Constantinople announced
"the extreme solicitude of the Turkish Government for the life and welfare of the Holy Father,"
who had so furthered their interests by widely inciting discord among the nations of Christianity
that, seeing therein a mark of the special favor of Allah, the sultan had ordered prayers and
processions for the continued welfare of his Holiness!

The singular jealousy of the Venetians for the solidarity of their government, with their no
less singular jealousy of individual aggrandizement, together with the rare perception of mental
characteristics that was fostered by the daily culture of the councils in which every noble
took his part, led them constantly to ignore their selfish hopes in order to choose the right
man for the place. These sentiments, acting and reacting upon each other, had secured their
political prosperity; but a disaffection was beginning to make itself felt in the Senate which
led ultimately to over-limitations of power and such multiplied checks and suspicions that
noble living and wise ruling became impossible.

It was a time of suppressed excitement, and there had been a grave discussion as to the growing
power of the Ten, against which some of the senators had dared to express themselves openly;
for many of these strong men were beginning to feel that their government weighed upon them
like a Fate, crushing all liberty and individuality; and of secret trials without defense there
were tragic memories haunting the annals of that grave tribunal.

But so great were the complications of the involved Venetian machine--so many were the mysteries
and fears environing the daily life of these patricians--that each felt the actual to be safer
than the untried unknown, and surrendered the hope of change, tightening the cords that upheld
the government as their only means of safety.

For there was an under side to all this gold-tissued splendor that was sometimes laid bare
to the people, in spite of the deftness with which the Signoria stood tirelessly ready to cover
up the flaws; and a recent sad travesty of justice was one of the weird happenings of this time.

Not long since a formal decree of pardon had been solemnly declared and published throughout
Venetia, at which the people stood aghast. For the man to whom this clemency was graciously
extended had been condemned and executed between the columns of San Marco and San Teodoro,
ten years before--standing accused of conspiracy against the State. There had been many murmurings
when the name of this old patrician, holding honorable office in service of the Republic, had
been erased from the Golden Book; and he had suffered his ignominious death protesting that
the charge was false, and that all who had aided in his condemnation should die before the
year was out. His dying words had proved a grim prophecy, which, encouraged by the pressure
of the senators, induced the Signoria to order a re-investigation of his case, whereby the
manes of this dishonored servant of the State were re-instated in that serene favor now so
worthless.

And to-day the people gathered in gloomy silence while the great bell of the campanile tolled
the call to the solemn funeral pageant by which the Republic offered reparation over the exhumed
body of the victim. The senators, wrapped in mourning cloaks, surrounded the bust of the man
they desired to honor as it was carried in triumph to the church where the tomb was prepared;
and the three avvogadori, who had the keeping of the Golden Book, bore it on a great cushion
behind the marble effigy, the leaf bound open where the name was re-inscribed. Here also walked
the domestics of the re-habilitated noble of Venice--the hatchments that had been doomed to
oblivion freshly embroidered upon their sleeves above their tokens of crêpe. The Doge and the
Signoria all took part in this tragic confession of wrong, doing penance unflinchingly for
the sins of their predecessors; for Venice could be munificent in reparation, not shrinking
from her own humiliation to appease outraged justice and confirm her power, and there was nothing
lacking that might add impressiveness to the pageant.

But the people looked on gloomy and unappeased, filled with a horror which the funeral pomp
did little to quiet; they did not follow as the cortège descended the steps of the Piazzetta
to embark in the waiting gondolas that had been lavishly provided by the Republic. Santissima
Maria! they wanted to get back to their own quarters on the Giudecca and breathe a little sunshine!
What did one noble matter, less or more? "But it's a gloomy barcarolle that a dead man sings!"

"And one that hath not died his own death!" a woman answered under her breath, as she crossed
herself with a shudder.

The wind inflated the empty folds of the crimson robe that draped the bier, carrying it almost
into the water, as the gondolas glided away from the Piazzetta.

"San Marco save us! he wanted none of their pomp," said an onlooker scornfully. "The ten good
years of his life and a quiet grave in San Michele--the Signoria would buy them dear, to give
them to him to-day!"

Yet if some had died unjustly, there was not less need of ceaseless vigilance against unceasing
intrigue, within and without that body which held the power; and one morning the Senate was
thrown into a state of great agitation by disclosures from one of the brothers of the Frari,
indubitably confirmed by the papers which he delivered into the hands of the Doge.

"It is beyond belief!" Giustinian Giustiniani exclaimed to the Lady Laura, "how Spain findeth
method to make traitors in Venice itself! It is a nation treacherous to the core, and it were
beyond the diplomacy of any government,--save only ours,--to maintain relations on such a basis
of fraud."

"What is there of new to chide them for?" she asked with keen interest.

"Is not the old enough to make one wrathful! Boastful threats of arms against the Republic
if she yield not obedience to the Holy Father, with secret promises of armed assistance to
his Holiness to keep him firm in his course, at the very moment of her cringing attempts at
mediation lest France should carry off the glory!--and because Spain hath neither men to spare
for Rome, nor courage to declare against the Republic, nor diplomacy to bring anything to an
issue!"

"Nay, now them art returned to Venice forget the disturbing ways of Spain," the Lady Laura
answered, with an attempt at conciliation. "I am glad that thy mission in that strange land
hath come to an end."

"Ay, but the ways of Spain do make traitors of us all!" Giustinian exclaimed hotly. "When a
senator of the Republic hath such amity for the ambassador of his Most Catholic Majesty, forsooth,
that at vespers and at matins, in the Frari, they must use the self-same kneeling stool--a
tenderness and devotion beautiful to see in men so great; for it is aye one, and aye the other,
and never both who tell their beads at once--that, verily, some brother of the Frari doth take
cognizance of a thing so rare and saintly and bringeth word thereof to the Serenissimo, with
matter of much interest found within the prie-dieu."

"Giustinian!"

"Ay, these minutes of the noble Senator, who acteth so well the spy for favor of Spain, would
do honor to a ducal secretary, for accuracy of information concerning weighty private matters
before the Council! And due acknowledgment of so rare a courtesy doth not fail us in the very
hand of the ambassador himself, for this letter also was intercepted! This frate who hath brought
the information verily deserveth honor for so great a service!"

"And the others?"

"Is there more than one treatment for a traitor?" Giustinian exclaimed, with increasing temper.
"And for the ambassador--it hath already been courteously signified to him that the air of
Venice agreeth not well with one of his devotional tendencies."

"Tell me the name of the traitor," the Lady Laura urged, coming close and laying her hand upon
his shoulder.

"Nay," said her husband, shaking off her touch impatiently, "my anger doth unlock my speech
to a point I had not dreamed, for the matter may be held before the Inquisition! But it is
a name unknown to thee, and new to this dignity, which he weareth like a clown! The freedom
is still too great for this entry to the Senate; the serrata hath done its work too lightly
if it leave space for one parvenu! To-morrow, when thou takest the air in thy gondola, my Lady
Laura, thou shalt look between the columns of the Ducal Palace and know whatever the State
will declare to thee of that which concerneth the government alone! The times are perilous."

"They will be better when the interdict is removed----"

"Ay--no--one knows not; it is a matter too grave for women and too little for the Republic
to grieve about. His Holiness would have us on our knees, weeping like naughty infants, and
abjectly craving his pardon for daring to make our own laws and uphold our prince!"

"Giustinian, there is more to it than that."

"Ay, there is more, if it setteth the women up to preach to us and to expound the laws of the
Republic--a knowledge in which I knew not that they held the mastery! Take not the tone of
Marina, who hath come near to killing herself and making half a fool of Marcantonio."

"Nay, Marco is true to Venice and swerveth not. And for our daughter--she hath suffered till
it breaks my heart to look into her face, poor child! And thou, Giustinian, wert little like
thyself, when she lay almost dying! The Signor Nani hath confessed to me that in Rome there
was much intriguing for her favor--of which she suspected naught. It was a harm to them that
they went to Rome; I would not have had it so."

"Ay, thou would'st not have had it so; thou would'st have had it all thine own way!" retorted
Giustinian, who was becoming impossible to please, now that the paths of government were growing
more thorny and exacting, and the Lion showed no sign of climbing to his portal. "That father
confessor of hers hath much to answer for. Keep the little one well out of the way of their
craft--dost thou hear? He is to be trained for Venice, after the ways of the Ca' Giustiniani.
And Marcantonio--who knows?"

He had drifted into his favorite reverie, and wandered abstractedly out upon the balcony looking
longingly toward the rose-colored palace where his every ambition centred; but he felt the
glittering, jeweled eyes of the patron saint of Venice glare upon him mockingly from his vantage
point upon the column, while the very twist of the out-thrust tongue insinuated a personal
message of malice and defeat.

XXVIII

Venice was flooded with moonlight. The long line of palaces down the Canal Grande shone back
from the breast of the water, starred with lights, repeated again and again in the rippling
surface.

A ceaseless melody filled the air, braided of sounds familiar only to this magic city--echoes
of laughter from balconies high in air, silvery tintinnabulations falling like drippings of
water from speeding oars, franker bursts of merriment from the open windows of the palaces,
low murmured tones of lovers in content from gliding gondolas, hoarse shouts of quick imperious
orders from gondoliers to offending gondoliers, as they passed--apostrophes to liquid names
of guardian saints, too melodious for denunciations, hurled back with triple expletives and
forgotten the next moment in friendly parsiflage; here and there a strain of ordered music,
in serenade, from a group of friendly gondolas swaying only with the tranquil movement of the
water; or the mysterious tone of a violin, uttering a soul prayer meant for some single listener,
which yet steals tremblingly forth upon the night air--more passionate, more beautiful and
true than that other human voice which breaks the quiet of a neighboring calle with some monotonous
love song of the people.

And far away, perhaps, in the quainter squares of the more primitive island villages--in Burano
or Chioggia--before the Duomo, some reader lies at full length in the brilliant moonlight under
the banner of San Marco, his "Boccaccio" open before him, repeating in a half-chant, monotonous
and droning, some favorite tale from the well-worn pages to listeners who pause in groups in
their evening stroll and linger until another story is begun; this time it is some strophe
from the "Gerusalemme," to which a passing gondolier may chant the answering strain--for this
is the very poem of the people, echoing familiarly from lip to lip, and tales from the Tasso
are not seldom wrought into the ebony carvings of their barks. Meanwhile the younger men and
maidens, on a neighboring fondamenta, keep step to the music of some strolling player who lives,
content, on the trifling harvest of these moonlight festivities.

In the great Piazza of San Marco, with its hundreds of lights and its hurrying throng, life
is gayer than in the day. Crowds come and go under the arcades, loiter at the tables closely
set before the brilliant cafes, or stroll with laughter and snatches of song and free Venetian
banter where there is less restraint, up and down the broad space of the Piazza, between the
colonnade and the burnished Eastern magnificence of San Marco, beyond the reach of the yellow
lamp flames--their laughing faces grotesque and weird in the white glare of the moon. But under
the shadow of the Broglio and those great columns of the Ducal Palace there are only slow-moving
figures here and there, wrapped in cloaks, and dark under the low, unlighted arches, talking
in undertones which even the watchful Lion--so near, so cunning--does not always overhear.

But in the calles, half in moonlight and half in shadow, night wears a more poetic air of mystery
and quiet; and if a fear but come in passing some dread spot of tragic memory, a gentle Virgin
at every turning, with a dingy, flickering flame beneath her image, is waiting to grant her
grace--for is not Venice the Virgin City? And on the splendid palaces in the broad canals the
watching Madonna stands glorified in exquisite sculpture and cunningest blendings of color,--ofttimes
a crown of light above her, or rays of stars, symbolic, beneath her feet,--casting her benediction
far out on the water, which, ever in motion, repeats it in shimmering, widening circles--all-embracing--in
which the stars of heaven shine, tangled and confused with these stars of a paradise in which
earth has so large a part.

Yet in the glory and charm of this Venetian night how should there be space for sorrow or thought
of care, or cause for the tears which brimmed the eyes of the Lady Marina, as she sat in her
sculptured balcony at the bend of the Canal Grande, watching for the coming of Marcantonio,
who lingered late at the Senate when every moment was precious to her!

Ever since her husband had left her she had sat with her little one gathered convulsively in
her arms, showering upon him a tenderness so passionate and so unlike herself in its uncontrolled
expression, that the child, wondering and afraid, was but half-beguiled by the rare treat of
the music and the lights of the Canal Grande, and clamored for his nurse.

And now he was gone, with a kiss upon his sweet, round baby-mouth that was like a benediction
and a dirge in which a whole heart of wild mother love sobbed itself out in renunciation--but
to him it was only strange. And she herself had hushed the grieving quiver of his lip, and
quickly filled his dimpled hands with flowers to win the farewell caress of that dancing smile
which irradiated his face like an April sunbeam, parting the pink lips over a vision of pearly
infant teeth.

Below, in the chapel, her maidens were decking it as for a festa with vines and blossoms which
she and Marco had brought that day--that heavenly day--from the beautiful island of Sant' Elenà,
wandering alone, like rustic lovers, over the luxuriant flower-starred meadows and through
the cloistered gardens of its ancient convent, lingering awhile in the chapel of the Giustiniani,
while he rehearsed the deeds of those of his own name who slept there so tranquilly under their
marble effigies--primate, ambassadors, statesmen, and generals; ay, and more than these--lovers,
mothers, and little ones!

And now, while she sat alone in this holy moonlight, the voices of her maidens came in sounds
of merriment through the fretted stonework of the great window, and a sweet odor of altar candles
and incense mingled with the breath of the blossoms that was wafted up to her; for to-morrow,
for the first time since her illness, there would be matins in the chapel of the palazzo, and
Marcantonio had assured her that the new father confessor was much like Fra Francesco--coming,
also, from the convent of the Servi, that he might seem nearer to her who had so loved the
gentle confessor.

Ay, she had loved him, with a holy reverence, for his goodness and gentleness and faith; for
his inflexible grasp of duty, according to his views of right; for his teachings, which she
could understand and which she believed the Holy Mother had taught him--for his self-denial
and suffering.

And now, for a few moments, she forgot herself--forgot to watch for Marco, her thoughts busied
with the sad tale of Fra Francesco, which Piero, always in viaggio for business of the Senate,
had told her but a few days before--news that had reached him from the frontier. The gentle
confessor had indeed completed his pilgrimage, barefooted, to Rome, but had gained no favor
with the Holy Father; having at first been welcomed as a deserter from the enemy's camp, flattered,
and plied with questions, to which Fra Francesco gave no answers--wishing no harm to Venice
nor to any who sat in the councils of the Republic. Whereupon his lodgings had been changed
and all communications with the brothers of the Servite chapel in Rome had been forbidden.
And again, and more than once, he had been brought forth to be questioned; and again there
had been nothing told of that which they sought, for they asked him of his friends, and his
heart was true. But it was told that he had used strange words. "Each man is answerable to
his own soul and to God for that which he believeth. He answereth not for the faith of another
man--nor shall he bring danger upon his friend--who hath also his conscience and God for judge
of his faith and actions."

"But what of Fra Paolo?" he had been asked; "How doth he defend himself for leading thus the
cause of Venice against Rome?"

"Am I my brother's keeper?" the gentle Fra Francesco had answered; and had said no more.

"Thou shalt at least show us how one may obtain speech with him, for the furtherance of his
soul's salvation--apart from the vigilance of the Senate, and without suspicion in the convent
that the message cometh from Rome, else were it not received in that unholy city."

And in this also Fra Francesco was obdurate. And then, for disobedience to authority, acknowledged
lawful by his own submission, came prison--wherein he languished, always obdurate,--and death,--perhaps
from discontent or homesickness, one knows not; or from failure of his plans; or--there was
a question of torture, but one knows not if it were true.

"No, no, it was not true!" Marina had exclaimed, quivering, when Piero had told her the story.
"It is wicked to say these things--and they are not true!"

But now, alone--apart from all the brightness about her, from every hope of happiness except
those few brief hours with Marco--she did not know if it might not be true; her heart was too
sad to deny any pain that had been or that might be; but Fra Francesco's sad and gentle eyes
seemed to smile upon her through whatever distance might be between them--of this, or of any
other world--without reproach for those who had bidden him suffer, and charging her to keep
her faith.

"If it be true," she said, "the end of pain is reached, and he hath won his happiness.--Why
cometh not my Marco?"

A gondola of the Nicolotti detached itself from a group of serenaders just above the palace,
was caught for a few moments among the pali before the Ca' Giustiniani, and then floated leisurely
down toward the Piazzetta. She noted it idly while she sat waiting for Marco, for in the gondola
there was a graceful figure, closely wrapped, clasping her mantle yet more closely with a hand
that was white and slender enough for one of the nobility; yet the gondolier wore the black
sash of the Nicolotti with the great hat of a bravo shading his face. "It is some intrigue,"
she said, almost unconsciously, in the midst of her sad dreaming.

"Oh, Marco, thou art come! It hath been long without thee."

"The Senate is but just dismissed," he answered, smiling fondly at the eagerness which gave
to her pale face a passing flush of health. "But why is the Lady Beata not with thee?" he questioned
abruptly.

"She is in the chapel, making it fair with flowers."

"Thou knowest it, Marina?"

"She came to me with a question but a little while ago, when Marconino was with me--and I wished
to be alone. Marco, he was so beautiful! And the day has been a dream; I wished for no one
but for thee alone."

He held her hand in a mute caress, but with preoccupation, while his eyes wandered back to
the Piazzetta searchingly.

"It is strange," he muttered to himself, still watching from the end of the balcony. "It was
an echo of the Lady Beata's voice that startled me, crossing the Piazzetta saying two words
only--'In Padua.'"

Then rousing himself, he turned brightly to his wife. "Carina, I have news for thee, for the
time hath been momentous for us in Venice. Di Gioiosa hath gone forward, these many days, with
terms from Venice; and soon, it is thought, there will be peace."

Terms from Venice to Rome!--but the words did not move her from her resolve to let no shadow
of their difference mar the beauty of this night.

She looked at him wearily. "It is ever the same," she said, "through this long, dreary year--ever
the same! Let us forget it all for this one night. Let us talk together of our Marconino!"

And as if there had been no questions--no interdict--no pain--while the night sounds died into
silence and the moon withdrew her glamor and left them alone to the solemn mystery of the starlight,
they sat and talked together of love and their little one and their hopes for him, and of things
that lie too deep for utterance--save by one to one--far into that beautiful Venetian night,
with the odor of flowers and incense blown up to them on the breath of the sea.

XXIX

The yellow lamp flames were burning late in the cabinet of Girolamo Magagnati, who took less
note of the difference between evening hours and those of early dawn since there was no longer
in his household a beloved one to guard from weariness. Nay, the night was rather the time
in which he might forget himself and plunge more whole-heartedly into his schemes of work--financial
or creative. For the world was surely on the eve of discoveries important to his art, and it
would be well if he might secure them, before his working days should pass, for the Stabilimento
Magagnati.

Piero Salin stood in the doorway as he glanced up from the drawings that littered his table--the
dark oak table which had seemed a centre of cheer to Girolamo, when, in this very chamber,
his child had made a radiance for him in which the lines of his life shone large and satisfying.

Girolamo never seemed to remember that this son-in-law was a great man among the people; to
him he was only Piero Salin, barcariol; the single token of the old man's favor was that in
his thought he no longer added the despicable word toso; and it was a proof that he was mellowing
with the years, for Girolamo never forgot this unwelcome and dishonorable past, and Piero was
always ill at ease in his presence.

"Messer Magagnati," he began awkwardly, twirling his black cap in his hand rather after the
fashion of a gondolier than of the Chief of the Nicolotti, "I must crave, by dawn of the morrow,
the blessing of San Nicolò--of holy memory."

"Enter," said Girolamo, with a reluctance not wholly concealed by his attempt at courtesy,
for he felt the moments to be the more precious that the dawn was near; but the invocation
of the sailor's patron saint portended a journey. "Verily, Piero, thy comings and goings have
been, of late, so frequent that one learns the wisdom of not mourning over-much when thou dost
crave an ave at the shrine of San Nicolò. May he grant thee favoring breezes! Thou art in favor
with the Ten, they tell me."

Piero shrugged his shoulders. "Favor or disfavor," he said, "it is but the turning of the head--and
both may lead to that place of unsought distinction between San Marco and San Teodoro, if the
orders of their Excellencies bring not the end they sought. But it matters little--a candle
flame is better blown out than dying spent."

"And whither art thou bent on the morrow?"

"Nay, Messer Girolamo, that is not mine own secret. But this word would I leave with thee;
if, perchance, I return not before many days, seek me on the border-land--at the point nearest
Roman dominions." He had come close to the old merchant, and uttered the last words in a tone
very low and full of meaning.

Girolamo started. "On the border-land of Rome!" he echoed. "This mission of thine is then weighty;
and thou fearest----"

"Nay, I fear naught," said Piero haughtily. "But the times are perilous; and later, if thou
would'st seek me, thou hast the clew. But of the mission, to which I am sworn in secrecy, let
it not be known that I have so much as named it--it would argue ill for me and thee. And the
clew is for thy using only. Meanwhile, forget that I have spoken. The Ave Maria will soon waken
the fishers of Murano. Addio!"

But he still waited as if he had not uttered all his mind. Girolamo studied his face closely.

"There is more," he said. "Speak!"

"By the Holy Madonna of San Donato!" said Piero, casting off his restraint with a sudden impulse,
"if I come not back, I would have thee know that if ever there came a chance to me to serve
Marina--the Lady Marina of the Giustiniani--I, Piero, barcariol or gastaldo, would serve her
as a soldier may serve a saint. For she hath been good to the Zuanino. Ay, though it cost me
my life, I would serve her like a saint in heaven!" he repeated. Then, flushed with the shame
of such unwonted speech and confession, he hastened to the door, and his steps were already
resounding on the stone floor of the passage when Girolamo recovered from his astonishment
sufficiently to follow him into the shadow and command him to stop.

"Thou hast seen my daughter--thou hast news of her?"

"Ay, yestere'en, at the Ave Maria, I spoke with her, in Santa Maria dell' Orto, coming upon
her kneeling before the great picture of Jacopo Robusti--she, saint enough already to wear
a gloria and looking as if the heart of her were worn away from grief! She hath need of thee
daily, for her love for thee is great, and death not far."

"Tell it plainly!" commanded Girolamo, hastening after the retreating figure and violently
grasping his arm to detain him. "Have I failed to her in aught? She is soul of my soul! Maledetto!
why dost thou break my heart?"

"Look to thine other son-in-law!" Piero retorted wrathfully; "him of the crimson robe who sits
in the Councils of Venice, and findeth no cure for thy daughter--dying of terror beside him."

"It is a base slander!" cried old Girolamo, trembling with anger and fear. "Never was wife
more beloved and petted! Marcantonio hath no thought, save for Marina and Venice!"

"Ay, 'for Marina and Venice,'" was the scornful answer, "but Venice first. Splendor and gifts
and the pleasing of every whim, if he could but guess it--gold for her asking, and her palace
no better than a cross for her dwelling; for the one thing she needeth for her peace and life
he giveth not!"

"What meanest thou?" cried Girolamo, furiously. "Hath he not spent a fortune on physicians--sparing
nothing, save to torment her no more, since their skill is but weariness to her! She is eating
her heart out for this quarrel with Rome--which no man may help, and it is but foolishness
for women to meddle with; and she hath ever been too much under priestly sway. Why earnest
thou hither this night?"

"For this cause and for no other," said Piero solemnly, "that thou mightest find me, if need
should be for any service to her. And to swear to thee, by the Madonna and every saint of Venice,
that I would give my life for her!"

But old Girolamo grew the angrier for Piero's professions of loyalty. "Shall her father do
less than thou?" he questioned, wrathfully. "On the morrow will I go to her, and leave her
no more until she forgets."

"By all the saints in heaven, and every Madonna in Venice, and our Lady of every traghetto!"
Piero exclaimed, as he wrenched himself away from Girolamo's angry grasp, while the old man
staggered against the wall, still holding a bit of cloth from the gondolier's cloak in his
closed hand, "I am vowed to my mission before this dawn! What I have spoken is for duty to
thine house, and not in anger--though I could color my stiletto in good patrician blood and
die for it gaily, if that would help her!"

But Girolamo could not yet find his voice, and Piero, with his hand on the latch of the great
iron gates of the water-story, turned and called back: "Women are not like men, and Marina
is like no other woman that ever was born in Venice. Whether it be the priests that have bewitched
her--may the Holy Madonna have mercy, and curse them for it!--or whether she be truly the Blessed
Virgin of San Donato come to earth again, one knows not. But, Messer Magagnati,"--and the voice
came solemnly from the dark figure dimly outlined against the gray darkness beyond the iron
bars,--"thy daughter is dying for this curse of the Most Holy Father--'il mal anno che Dio
le dia!' (may heaven make him suffer for it!)--and she hath no peace in Venice. She will never
forget nor change. If thy love be great, as thou hast said, thou wilt find some way to help
her. For in Venice she hath no peace."

The old merchant, dazed by Piero's hot words, was a pitiful figure, standing, desolate, behind
the closed bars of his gate, the night wind lifting his long beard and parting the thin gray
locks that flowed from under his cap, while he called and beckoned impotently to Piero to return,
repeating meanwhile mechanically, with no perception of their meaning, those strange words
of Piero's--"In Venice she hath no peace." He stood, peering out into the gray gloom and listening
to the lessening plash of the oar, until the gondola of the gastaldo was already far on the
way to San Marco, where sat the Ten.

But it was not of Piero's mission he was thinking, but of his child--saying over and over again
those fateful words, "In Venice she hath no peace." Had Piero said that?

Suddenly the entire speech recurred to him--insistent, tense with meaning. She could not live
in Venice. Marina had no peace in Venice. She would never forget nor change. She had need of
him--of her father's love; and if he loved enough, he would find a way!

Chilled and heart-sick he turned, and with no torch and missing the voice which had guided
him through the long, dark passage, he groped his way to his cabinet and sat down to confront
a graver problem than any he had ever conquered with Marina's aid. He would find a way--but
"it must not be in Venice!" How could they leave Venice? Were they not Venetians born, and
was not Venice in trouble? To leave her now were to deny her. It could not be!

He put the argument many times, feverishly at first, then more calmly--coming always to the
same conclusion, "it could not be." It was a comfort to reach so sensible and positive a decision.
To-morrow he would go to his daughter, and meanwhile he must continue his work; he needed to
reassert his power, for he had been strangely shaken.

He drew the scattered papers together, but the lines, blurred and confused, carried no meaning;
the fragments of broken glass in the little trays beside him were a dull, untranslucent gray,
and written all over papers and fragments, in vivid letters that burned into his brain, were
those other terrible words of Piero's which he had tried in vain to forget--"Thy daughter is
dying for this curse." Marina--dying!

How should Piero know more about Marina than her own father knew? Did he profess to be a physician
that one should credit his every word? What did he mean by his impudent boast of "dying for
her, if need should be!" Had she not her husband and father to care for her? Her husband "who
was denying her the only thing that could give her life and peace," Piero had said.--What was
the matter with his insulting words, that he could not forget them?--Had she not her father,
who was going to her on the morrow, when he had matured his plans, and would do whatever she
wished--"in Venice"? Her father "who loved her, as his own soul"--that was what he had said
to Piero, with the memory of all those dear years when they had been all in all to each other,
in this home.

Was it for hours or moments only that he sat in torture--enduring, reasoning, placing love
against pride, Marina against Venice, Venice against a father's weakness, duty to the Republic
before the need of this only child who was "soul of his soul"?

The last of his race--inheriting the traditions and passionate attachments of that long line
of loyal men who had founded and built up the stabilimento which was the pride of Murano; of
the people, yet ennobled by the proffer of the Senate, and grandsire to the son of one of the
highest nobles of the Republic--what was there left in life for him away from Venice? How should
he bear to die dishonored and disinherited by the country which he had deserted in her hour
of struggle? For never any more might one return who should desert Venice for Rome!

And those panes of brilliant, crystal clarity which he had dreamed of adding to the honors
of the Stabilimento Magagnati--so strong that a single sheet might be framed in the great spaces
of the windows of the palaces and show neither curve nor flaw--so pure that their only trace
of color should come from a chance reflection which would but lend added charm--these might
not be the discovery of his later days, though the time was near in which this gift must come
to Venice. He had not dreamed that he could ever say, while strength yet remained to think
and plan, "The house of Magagnati has touched its height, and others may come forward to do
the rest for Venice."

And the secret lay so near--scarcely eluding him!

It was no mere empty jealousy, nor trivial wish for fame, nor greed of recompense--of which
he had enough--that forced the veins out on the strong forehead of this master-worker, as he
struggled with this question of surrendering all for his daughter's peace. It was the art in
which his ancestors had taken the lead from the earliest industrial triumphs of the Republic--an
art in which Venice stood first--and in his simple belief it was not less to their glory than
the work of a Titian or a Sansovino. In this field he wrought whole-hearted, with the passion
of an artist who has achieved, and his place and part in the Republic, as in life, was bounded
for him by his art. "To stand with folded hands--always, hereafter, to be unnecessary to Venice!"

How should one who had not been born in Venice ever guess the strange fascination of that magic
city for her sons, or dream with what a passion the blood of generations of Venetian ancestry
surged in one's veins, compelling patriotism, so that it was not possible to do aught with
one's gifts and life that did not enhance the greatness of so fair a kingdom! It was the wonderful
secret of the empire of Venice that here the pride of self was counted only as a factor in
the superior pride of her dominion.

Marina had been proud of his cabinet, and he took the little antique lamp she used to hold
for him and unlocked the door with a tremulous hand, standing unsteadily before it and trying
to hearten himself, as he ruthlessly flashed the light so that each fantastic bit came out
in perfect beauty, glowing with the wonderful coloring of transparent gems.

But suddenly those fearful words of Piero's played riot among them, obliterating every trace
of beauty, every claim of Venice, every question as to his own judgment or Marina's reasoning--even
the ignominy of the secret flight. "Thy daughter dying!"

The letters blazed like stars, gleaming among his papers--glittering around the chair where
Marina used to sit, climbing up into the air, closing nearer to him--wavering, writhing lines
of living fire, tracing those awful words he could not forget----

"My God!" he cried, "is not Marina more than all!" There was no longer anything in life that
he willed to do but to win peace for her, according to her whim.

"Stino!" he shrieked, with a voice louder than the clang of the rude iron bell whose rope had
broken in his impetuous hand.

"Light me a fire in the brazier, and burn me this rubbish!" he commanded of the foreman who
entered, aghast at the imperious summons, and yet more amazed at the destruction of those precious
pages over which his master had spent days of brooding; but he ventured no protest.

"And here," said Girolamo, with a look of relief, as the last paper shrivelled and curled into
smoke, "are the keys of these cabinets--thou knowest their contents, and that they are precious.
And here shalt thou remain, as master, until my return--keeping all in order, as thou knowest
how, and loyally serving the interest of the stabilimento. All moneys which I may send for
thou shalt instantly remit by trusty messenger."

"How long doth the Master remain away?"

"So long as it may please the Lady Marina, who hath need of change. And if I return not," Girolamo
resumed, after a moment's pause which gave solemnity to his words, "my will shall be found
filed with the Avvogadori del Commun; and thou, Stino, shalt answer to the summons they will
send thee--if I come no more."

"Master!" cried the faithful Stino, greatly troubled, for these preparations filled him with
dread, and were strange indeed for so old a man who had never yet left Venice for a night.
"Life is other than we know it away from Venice; and the heart of us goes mourning for the
sight and sound of the sea and the color of our skies!"

"Nay, Stino, I have said it," his master answered, unmoved by his imploring eyes.

"When goest thou--that all may be ready?"

"Now; ere the dawn!" Girolamo cried with sudden resolution. "I would say my Ave Maria in the
chapel of the Lady Marina. Rouse the gondolier, and lift the curtain that I may see how soon
the day cometh."

"Master, dear Master," said Stino tenderly, as he drew the heavy draperies aside. "Already
the sun is high, and the household hath been, these many hours, awake."

"So!" Girolamo answered with deep gravity, for the battle had been longer than he had dreamed,
yet with his habitual control. "I knew not the time--my thoughts held me. Stino, if I return
not, may the saints bless thee for all thou hast been to me since the Lady Marina hath dwelt
in the palazzo Giustiniani. And in my will thou art not forgotten."

As Girolamo issued from his own portal, closely followed by Stino and the other superintendents
of the great stabilimento who were filled with foreboding at this sudden and surprising decision
of their good master, several gondolas wearing the colors of the Giustiniani floated into the
waterway from the broad lagoon; and with them, like a flock of sea-birds in their habits of
gray and their cowls of white, came the sisters of San Donato, returning from that early chanted
Mass at the palazzo Giustiniani which had been a dream of the Lady Marina's happier days.

The young Senator had urged his boatmen to feverish speed, and his own gondola was far in advance
of the train. He bounded from his bark the moment it neared the steps, and, rushing blindly
toward the dwelling, encountered his father-in-law on the threshold.

"She is here--Marina?" he questioned, half crazed with grief; and, forgetful of the usual courtesies,
would have pushed him aside to enter. "I have come with her maidens and her child to take her
home. Let me go to her!"

And, as Girolamo stood, dumb and dazed, "I beseech thee--conceal her not!"

Looking into each other's faces for one anguished moment, they knew, without need of further
speech, that she had gone from them both.

Girolamo gave a great and bitter cry, "My son!" folding his arms about the younger man in measureless
grief and compassion.

And when they could trust their footsteps they went desolately into the house together.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Nay," Girolamo had answered to every argument. "It is for thee to remain in Venice with her
child, that the Signoria be not wroth with the Ca' Giustiniani, and for me to seek and care
for her--mayhap, if heaven be merciful, to bring her to thee again! She cannot be far to seek."

"In Padua!" cried Marcantonio, with sudden conviction. "They will sleep in Padua to-night.
It was the voice of the Lady Beata!"

XXX

"Art thou sure, Marina?"

"Ay, Piero, though it were death to me; and death were sweeter----"

Her hair lay like a wreath of snow across her forehead, from stress of the night's vigil, her
lip trembled like a grieved child's, but in her exquisite face there was the grace of a spirit
strong and tender.

He helped her silently into the gondola and steered it carefully between the pali which rose
like a scattered sheaf, glowing with the colors of the Giustiniani, in the water before her
palace. And thus, in the early dawn--unattended, with the sadness of death in her pallid face--the
lady of the Giustiniani floated away from her beautiful home--away from happiness and love--into
a future cheerless and dim as the dawn lights that were faintly tinging the sea. For the day
was breaking, full of gloom, under a sky of clouds, and the wind blew chill from across the Lido.

She sat with her gray mantle shrouding her face, and neither of them spoke, while the gondola,
under Piero's deft guidance, quickly gained the steps of the Piazzetta and passed on to San
Giorgio. Then she touched his arm entreatingly.

"Oh, let us wait one moment before we lose sight of the palazzo! Madre Beatissima, have them
in thy keeping!"

She stretched out her hands unconsciously, with a gesture of petition, and her mantle slipped
back, exposing her pallid, pain-stricken face and her whitened tresses.

Piero was startled at the havoc the night had made, for he had seen her only the day before,
in answer to her summons, when she had been far more like herself.

"Santa Maria!" he exclaimed, crossing himself, and awkward under the unaccustomed sense of
an overwhelming compassion. "The Holy Mother must shrive me for breaking my vow, for if San
Marco and San Teodoro would give me a place between them before the matins ring again--mistaking
me for a traitor--I cannot take thee from Venice. We will return," and already the gondola
was yielding to his stroke. "Let Marcantonio bring thee himself to Rome."

"Piero, thou hast sworn to me! Thou shalt abide by thy promise!" she cried, seizing the oar
in her trembling hand.

"Ay, Marina, I have sworn to thee," he answered, with slow pauses, "and by our Holy Mother
of San Giorgio, I will serve thee like a saint in heaven. Yet I would thou wert in thy home
again--already thou hast broken thy heart for love of it."

The gondolas of the people were gathering about the steps of the palaces, bringing their burdens
for the day's ongoings in those luxurious homes; the bells were calling to early Mass; the
stir of life was beginning in the city; soon, in her own palace, her little one would wake,
and Marco--She stood with straining eyes, yearning for the chance of a face in her palace window--the
bare last chance of another sight of his dear face. She did not know that Piero was watching
her--compassionate and comprehending--while she was struggling to outlive the agony for the
very love's sake which made it so keen.

It was the only sweetness left in life for her, that this cruel parting was yet for Marco's
sake; that she might still plead with the Holy Father for this desperate need of which Marco
seemed unconscious--since, in a vision never to be forgotten, the blessed Madre of San Donato
had confided this mission to her. She could bear everything to win such a blessing for her
beloved ones, only she must reach Rome--surely the Madre Beatissima would let her live to reach
the Holy City!

The tide was brimming the canals, rising over the water steps; the growing light gleamed coldly
on the polished marbles of her palace, burnishing the rich gold fretwork of frieze and tracery--but
not any face of any dear one responded to her hungry longing, watching for her in the deep
spaces of the windows, in token of the love from which she was fleeing.

This also--this last longing--she must surrender!

Her white face grew brave again; she sat down and drew her veil--the ample fazzuolo of the
Muranese--more closely about her. "I am ready," she said, and turned her face resolutely forward.

As they rounded San Giorgio, turning into the broad Giudecca, a shoal of little boats came
over the water from Murano.

"They are the nuns of San Donato!" she said in amazement, and drawing her veil closer. "Piero,
canst thou not ask their whither?"

It was so strange, on this morning of all others, to see them turn in the direction of Ca'
Giustiniani; there came a vision of her chapel, which her maidens were decking--of the dear
altar, at which she should kneel no more--and she held her breath to hear the answer.

"Will the most Reverend Mother bless the boat of a gondolier of the people; and his sister,
who hath been ill and craveth the morning air?" Piero, who had discarded every emblem of his
office, and wore only the simple dress of the Nicolotti, put the question easily, without fear
of recognition. "And there is no great trouble in the city which calleth these illustrious
ladies so early from Murano?"

"Nay; but the Senator Giustiniani hath prayed us for a grace to his sweet lady, for the chapel
hath been closed while she hath been too ill for service; and to-day it will be opened, dressed
with flowers, and we--because she loveth greatly our Madonna of San Donato and hath shown bounty,
with munificent gifts, to all the parish--will chant the matins in her oratory."

They gave the benediction and passed.

While Marcantonio, with his tender thought for Marina fresh in his heart, was waking to find
only her note of farewell.

"Only because I love thee, Marco mio, I have the strength to leave thee. And it is the Madonna
who hath called me. Forgive, and forget not thy sad Marina."

"Marina--" Piero began awkwardly, for argument was not his forte, and Marina had always conquered
him. "'Chi troppo abbraccia nulla stringe,' one gains nothing who grasps too much. Thou wast
ever one for duty, and if the Senator Marcantonio will not take thee to Rome----"

"No, Piero, he cannot; he is one of the rulers of Venice."

"Thou, then--his wife----"

How could he venture to counsel her, of whose will and wisdom he had always stood in awe? It
seemed to Piero that he had already delivered an oration; yet he felt that there was more to
say, but his thoughts grew confused in seeking for expression, and it was a relief to him to
communicate his uncertainty to the motion of his gondola.

The unsteady movement said more to her than words, for Piero was an unfailing stroke.

"It is the men only of whom the Republic hath need," she explained, unflinchingly; "but for
the women there is no conflict of duty--the Holy Church is first. 'Prayers for the women and
deeds for the men'--thou hast seen it written."

"And thy father?" Piero questioned, unconvinced, recalling the interview of a few hours before.

A quick, tender light flashed and passed in her eyes; a ray of color trembled on her cheek.
"I shall grieve him," she said, "but he will forgive, for ever hath he bidden me choose the
right." Her voice broke and she was silent, while she sought for some token in the folds of
her robe. "Thou wilt take him this when thou returnest, that he may know I hold him dear."

"Marina!" he pleaded, growing eloquent, with a last desperate effort, "thou wast ever an angel
to the Zuanino--thou canst not leave thine own bimbo!"

She did not answer immediately, but she clasped and unclasped her hands passionately. "He is
safe," she said at last, very low and struggling for control. "He hath the blessing of the
Holy Father, given when it might avail; and the little ones are ever in the care of the Blessed
Mother. It is not for my baby that I needs must go--but for Marco and my father, and for Venice.
Santissima Maria, because thou sendest me, shalt thou not grant the strength!"

There was a silence between them while they floated on, for Piero had many things to think
of. He was accustomed to accomplish whatever he undertook, for he was not a man to fail from
lack of resource, nor to be overcome by fears and scruples. By means of his passes and his
favor with the government he could reach the borders of the Venetian dominions without suspicion,
from whence he would escort Marina to the nearest convent and place her in safety with the
Mother Superior, to whom he would confide the story of her distinguished guest and secure for
her the treatment due to a Venetian princess; which, under the circumstances, would be an easy
matter, as no member of a noble Venetian house espousing the side of Rome would be met with
any but the most flattering reception. To provide Marina with companionship, Piero had confided
her intended flight to the Lady Beata Tagliapietra, being sure of her devotion; and she would
be waiting for them at Padua with two trusted gondoliers and whatever might be needful from
the wardrobe of the Lady of the Giustiniani. The fact that he had broken his promise of secrecy
did not trouble him, since it was in Marina's service, which made the action honorable; and
were it not so, the little perjury was well atoned for by a keg of oil anonymously sent to
the traghetto of San Nicolò è San Raffaele, "pel luminar al Madonna";[8] and Piero had much
faith in anonymous gifts, for confessions were not always convenient for an officer of his
dignity. But it was perhaps too much to expect that these poor little traghetto lamps should
be more than dimly luminous, since the oil was so largely provided by fines for delinquencies!

  [8] To light the Madonna.

With an easy conscience, also, he had helped himself to the requisite funds for their journey,
amply estimated, from the treasury of the Nicolotti, which was in his keeping; and his reasoning
savored of Venetian subtlety, with a hint of his toso training. Had not the Lady of the Giustiniani
offered to guarantee the funds necessary for the assessments of the state, when Piero, doubtful
of their resources, would have declined the position of gastaldo grande, cumbered as it was
with the uncomfortable requirement that the chief should be personally responsible for all
dues and taxes levied upon the traghetti? Piero was not the first gastaldo who had wished to
escape an honor that weighed so heavily, and a very serious penalty was already decreed for
such contempt of office by that tribunal tireless in vigilance.

So, without compunction, Piero had taken the needful, sure that when he returned Marina's husband
or her father would repay it.

Could he return--after helping a patrician to escape from Venice into the heart of the country
with which the Republic was at war? It looked doubtful even to Piero, with his indomitable
temperament, but he wasted no sentiment upon this question; for if he might not return there
were other countries in which a man could live. Or, should he be pursued and lighted upon by
the far-seeing eye of the Ten, he could die but once and get into trouble no more! He crossed
himself decorously as he dismissed the matter; but it was not an event that he could change
by pondering.

There was another question that interested him more keenly at this moment; when Messer Girolamo
should know that his daughter was not in Venice, could he fail to comprehend the hint he had
given a few hours before, and would he not follow them to Rome, as Piero devoutly hoped, for
he wished to leave Marina in her father's care. It was not easy to predict what Messer Girolamo
might do--the case had been too doubtful for a more explicit confession, and Piero had been
wise in his generation.

He turned now to Marina with the question: "If thou hadst told thy father of thy wish mayhap
he might have come with thee?"

She shook her head sadly and made no answer, but after awhile she said, "He is like the others.
They cannot understand the need, for to them the Madonna hath not revealed the desperate state
of Venice."

"Yet thou knowest, Marina, that already the great cardinal--but lately come from France--hath
started for Rome to make up this quarrel?"

"That is what the Senate will not understand!" she cried, with flashing eyes. "The Holy Father
will have submission and penance, in place of embassies and pomp. One must go to him quite
simply, from the people, saying, 'We have sinned; have mercy upon Venice!' Piero, thou knowest
that awful vision of the Tintoret? It is Venice that he hath painted in her doom--the great
floods bursting in upon her--all the agony and the anguish and the desolation of God's wrath!
Santa Maria! I cannot bear it!" She closed her eyes, shuddering and sick with terror.

"It was the way with Jacopo," said Pietro irreverently. "He was full of freaks, and some demon
hath tormented him. He was a man like others--not one for a revelation."

"Hush, Piero!" she implored; "it breaks my heart! This also may be counted against Venice,
for it is the Holy Madonna who hath granted me the vision."

If Piero was silent he was only restrained by deference to Marina from invoking the aid of
every saint in the calendar, in copious malediction, on this miserable Jacopo who had so increased
the trouble in Marina's eyes--since women had such foolish faith in pictures.

"Jacopo Robusti, posing for a seer, and foretelling the end of the world, like a prophet or
a saint! Goffone!"[9] Piero was paddling furiously. "Jacopo, of the Fondamenta del Mori--not
better than others--with that boastful sentence blazoned on his door!--'The coloring of Titian,
with the drawing of Angelo!'"

  [9] Great fool!

But he forgot even his resentment against Jacopo in his anxiety as he watched Marina, asking
himself if it would be possible for her to pray herself back into healthful life again, even
in the dominions of the Holy Father; for he realized that nothing could help her but this one
thing on which her heart was set--while he was yet, if possible, more utterly without sympathy
for the fear that moved her than her father or Marcantonio had been. But if the one woman in
Venice had but one desire, however desperate and incomprehensible,--"Basta! It is enough,"
said Piero to himself,--she should not die with it unfulfilled, if he could compass it.

Yet, at the thought of death his heart sank. "It was the Madonna which thou beheldest in thy
vision--not the cross?" he asked her quickly, making the fateful sign as he spoke, to avert
this dread presage of death, and afraid of her answer; for Marina was failing before his eyes,
and doubtless, in her vision, there had been some apparition of a cross; and even the less
devout among the gondoliers were still dominated by some of the superstitions which gave a
picturesque color to the habits of the people.

But she, too earnest in her faith to take any note of a less serious mood, answered simply:

"It was the very Madonna herself, as thou knowest her in San Donato, who came to me in the
palazzo one night when I slept not, and gave me the mission to save Venice,--scarce able to
speak for her great sadness, and the tears dropping, as thou knowest her in San Donato,--commanding
me to go before the Holy Father and pray for mercy to Venice. She it was who told me that our
prayers pass not up beyond the clouds which hang above a city under doom of interdict. Oh,
Piero, hasten; for my strength is little, and Rome is far!"

When the Lady of the Giustiniani had sent for Piero to meet her in Santa Maria dell' Orto,
to ask him to manage her escape to Rome, it had not been possible to refuse her; all his attempts
at reasoning were in vain. "I must go," she said, with that invincible persistence which he
never could combat. "If thou wilt not help me, I go alone." She was kneeling before the terrible
"Judgment" of the Tintoret, and the face she had lifted to him in appeal was white with agonized
comprehension.

The journey had been long and wearisome; all day they had been slowly toiling against the tide;
and long since Piero had summoned to his aid a trusted gondolier who had been ordered to follow
them at a little distance, and who, at a sign from the gastaldo, had silently left his bark
to drift and taken his place at the other end of the gondola in which the fugitives were making
their way to Padua.

They had passed the domain of the Laguna Morta, weird and half-forbidding, with tangles of
sea-plants and upspringing wild fowl calling to each other with hoarse cries across the marshes--with
armies of water beetles zigzagging in the shallows, and crabs and lizards crawling upon the
scattered sand heaps among the coarse sea-grasses, while small fish brought unexpected dimples
to the deeper pools that lay between. And the mingled odor of waters fresh and salt was broken
into a breath now pungent and pleasant, now almost noisome, as the light breeze stirred the
shallows of this strange domain which was neither land nor sea. Yet even here the pale sea-holly
and the evening primrose made redeeming spots of beauty, with their faint hues of violet and
yellow; and a distant water-meadow shimmered like the sea, with the tender blue of the spreading
lavender.

They had passed Fusina, and the lagoon lay silvery, like a trail of moonlight behind them--Venice
in the distance, opalesque, radiant, a city of dreams. The clouds above them, beautiful with
changing sunset lights, were no longer mirrored on a still lagoon, but mottled the broken surfaces
of the river with hues of bronze and purple, between the leaves of the creeping water-plants
which clogged the movement of the oars; for they had exchanged the liquid azure pavement of
their "Città Nobilissima" for the brown tide of the Brenta. On the river's brink the rushes
were starred with lilies and iris and ranunculus, and the fragrance of sheeted flowers from
the water-meadows came to them fresh and delicious, mingled with the salt breath of the sea,
while swallows--dusky, violet-winged--circled about their bows, teasing their progress with
mystic eliptical flight--like persistent problems perpetually recurring, yet to be solved by
fate alone.

It was the hour of the Ave Maria, and Marina roused herself from her sad reverie. The clouds
piled themselves in luminous masses and drifted into the hollows of the wonderful Euganean
hills, and a crimson sunset tinged peaks and clouds with glory, as Padua with its low arcaded
streets, and San Antonio--cousin to San Marco in minarets and Eastern splendor--and the Lion
of Saint Mark upon his lofty column, closed the vista of their weary day. The chimes of Venice
were too far for sound, but from every campanile of this quaint city the vesper bells, solemn
and sweet, pealed forth their call to prayer--as if no threat of Rome's displeasure made a
discord in their harmony.

XXXI

Piero had watched all night before the little inn of the "Buon Pesce," impatient to meet and
conquer his fate, while above, in an upper room, the ladies Marina and Beata tried to sleep;
but before the dawn they were off again, down by the way of the brown, rolling river, taking
the weary length to Brondolo and the sea.

There were two gondolas now, and the men in each pulled as if the prize of a great regatta
awaited them--Nicolotti against Castellani--and silently, saving voice and strength for a great
need.

It might have seemed a pleasure party, save for the stress of their speed, as they swept by
the groves of poplar and catalpa, which bordered the broad flood, to the sound of the waters
only and the song of the birds in the wood; water-lilies floated in the pools along the shore;
currents of fragrance were blown out to them on wandering winds; and in the felze, as they
were nearing Brondolo, Marina and the Lady Beata, soothed by the gliding motion and the monotonous
plash of the oars into the needed sleep which the night had failed to bring them, were unaware
of the colloquy between Piero and his gondolier.

"Antonio!" Piero called cautiously to the man who was rowing behind the felze, "I have somewhat
to say to thee; are there those within thy vision who may hear our speech?"

"Padrone, no; but the time is short for speaking much, for we reach the lock with another turn
of the Brenta."

"May the blessed San Nicolò send sunshine to dazzle the jewels in the eyes of Messer San Marco
till we are safe beyond it and out of Chioggia!" Piero exclaimed fervently. "And thou, Antonio,
swear me again thy faith--or swear it not, as thou wilt. But thou shalt choose this moment
whom thou wilt serve; and it shall go ill with thee if thou keep not thy troth."

"By San Marco and San Teodoro," Antonio responded readily, crossing himself devoutly as he
spoke, "I swear to do thy bidding, Messer Gastaldo."

"And thou wilt die for the people against the nobles if need should be?"

"If thou leadest, Gastaldo Grande."

"Hast thou a pouch beneath thy stiletto where thou mayest defend with thy life what I shall
give thee?"

Antonio displayed it silently.

"This for the need of the cause in thy hand," said Piero, passing him a purse of gold. "But
gold is worthless to this token which shall win thee the hearing of the bancali, and the aid
of every loyal son of San Nicolò, and shall be proof that thou bearest my orders and my trust."

The trust was great--the bancali were the governing board of the traghetti.

Antonio unfastened his doublet and secured the precious token under his belt.

"Command then, caro padrone."

"Slacken thy pace, for this may be our last speech together. Are those who follow true as thou?"

"Messer Gastaldo," Antonio answered with reluctance, "by signs which be but trifles to relate,--by
a word dropped in Padua, and not for mine ear,--one of them--I know not which--hath, perchance,
affair with a master mightier than thou." He made the usual gesture which indicated the Three
of that terrible Inquisition whose name was better left unsaid--a sign much used in Venice
where the very walls had ears.

It was a blow to Piero, but he wasted no words.

"They then--both--are apart from this and all my counsel. It shall be for thee alone, Antonio."

"So safer, Messer Gastaldo. I listen--and forget, save as it shall serve thee."

"First, then, Antonio; I have sworn to escort the Lady of the Giustiniani in safety to Rome,
from which naught shall keep me--save if the Ten have other plans, the Madonna doth forgive
the broken vow!"

It was a strange admission from a man stalwart and fearless like Piero, but he made it without
shame, as a soldier acquiescing in destiny.

"Santissima Maria!" Antonio ejaculated with unusual fervor and crossing himself in full realization
of the meaning.

"At Brondolo a brig is waiting--orange and yellow of sail, device of a blazing sun; a hunchback,
with doublet of orange above the mast for luck, and a fine figure of a gobbo upon the deck--a
living hunchback--by which thou shalt know it for mine, and bound to my order whether it come
by me or by my token. If we reach and board her it shall be well--and Rome, so will it heaven,
before us all! But if the dreaded ones are on the search and overtake us----"

Again the sign.

The tragedy of the situation was in his face as he looked steadily at Antonio, who did not flinch.

"Thy duty, then, Antonio, shall lie elsewhere. Thou must escape, unseen, while they lay hands
upon the lady and me, whom first they will secure before they give thee a thought."

Antonio instantly touched his stiletto, and looked his question with a fearless glance.

"Nay," said the gastaldo scornfully, and drawing a line quickly about his own throat. "Thou
wilt serve me better with thy head in its place. Thou shalt return to Venice--by Fusina or
Brondolo, as thy wit shall serve thee--leaving the precious gondolieri to prove whether their
silken sashes be badges of men or traitors! Art thou listening?"

"Command me, padrone!"

"Within two days, if I be free, the bancali shall have news of me. Listen well, Antonio,"--again
the hand and eyes went up with the dreaded unmistakable sign,--"if thou seest THEM seize me
before thou takest leave, wait no longer than to plan with the bancali to come and demand my
release. Thou shalt tell the bancali that I sent thee; thou shalt tell them there are affairs
of moment for the Nicolotti which shall go hard for the traghetti if I be not there to work
them--Art listening, Antonio?" he questioned feverishly.

Antonio's eyes were fastened upon his. "Padrone, yes!" he answered breathlessly.

"With my token thou canst command the loyalty of every Nicolotto--is it thine oar that made
that rustle?--and perchance, if there were a rising of the traghetti to demand aught of the
Signoria--come nearer, Antonio!--the Castellani also, if they willed to join with their traghetti
in asking for justice--would not serve under my token the less heartily for the word, confided
low to their bancali--dost understand?--that if their taxes and their fines oppress them, these
also, I being free, will pay this year to the maledetto Avvogadoro del Commun."

Antonio gravely bowed his head in assent.

"This at thy discretion--thou understandest, Antonio--and so that no violence come from the
massing of the people, but only the proof of its will and of the numbers who make the demand.
Only--if it be not granted, they shall make a stand at the traghetti and fight----"

"Padrone, yes!"

"For--thou dost mark me, Antonio?--this Lady of the Giustiniani hath been a saint among the
people; she hath given them much in gifts--she hath given almost her life in prayers and penances,
that heaven may avert its wrath from Venice, which she in truth believeth the Holy Father--may
the saints make him suffer for it!--hath brought upon the people by his curse--may heaven forbid!
And she, being now noble, hath preferred the cause of the people to the cause of the nobles,
and bringeth upon her the displeasure of the Signoria by her flight to Rome. For--see it well,
Antonio!--if the Senate hold the Lady of the Giustiniani for fault in this,"--Piero paused
and uttered the last words with a slow, mysterious emphasis, while Antonio listened with an
intensity that missed no shading of meaning,--"it will be the cause of the people against the
nobles."

"If they harm her not," he resumed in his usual tone, after a moment's pause, "my fate shall
be avenged in the judgment and command of the bancali of the Nicolotti only. They shall not
risk the people's good for the poor life of one leader!"

"Padrone!" Antonio cried, with flashing eyes. "Commandi altro?" ("Hast thou other commands?")

"None, save that if I return not--and not otherwise--thou shalt seek with my token the Master
Girolamo Magagnati; thou shalt tell him of this my confidence, holding nothing back; and thou
shalt pray him, of his honor, to discharge the debt which may be found lacking in the treasury
of the Nicolotti,--since the moneys have been taken for the need of the lady on her journey,--the
which, if I return, I have means, and more, to repay."

The two men grasped hands and looked into each other's eyes for a brief recording moment, having
each touched that best in the other which was not shown to all men, and so begotten trust each
in each.

"By the Holy Madonna and San Nicolò, I will not fail!" Antonio promised, and in a moment had
seized his oar again and was springing forward on the bridge of his gondola, as if his thoughts
were light and rhythmic as his motions.

They sped on with a few swift, silent strokes--then, "Brondolo!" he cried brightly; but a sudden
desperate steadying of resolution was felt in the fierce stroke which sent the gondola forward
with a jerk.

The fishing-skiffs of Chioggia fluttered like gaudy butterflies before them, dipping their
wings of orange and crimson and every conceivable sunset tint to catch the breeze; and the
air was suddenly vibrant with sounds of traffic and busy life. Men called to each other with
song and jest from heavily laden barks, while they waited the hour of sailing; or lay at ease
on the top of their wares, smoking luxurious draughts of content from their comrade pipes,--lords
of their craft, though their couch was but a pile of cabbages or market produce,--exchanging
some whimsical comment upon the affairs of busier neighbors which brimmed these frequent hours
of dolce far niente with unflagging interest.

And there, among the lighter shipping, was the brig bound to the order of the gastaldo grande,
with the yellow sails and device of the rising sun--with the gobbo in orange doublet on the
masthead for good luck, and the gobbo on the deck to make it sure. Piero turned and looked
for it, as they passed the lock. And there too----

"Corpo di San Marco!" ejaculated Antonio under his breath, for he stood higher than Piero upon
the bridge of the gondola and facing forward.

There, full in sight, and riding proudly at anchor, the beautiful curves of her swan-like prows
made cannon proof with plates of shining steel,--and below, in lieu of figurehead to promise
victory, those letters of dread omen, C.D.X.,--with thirty oars-men from the arsenal of Venice,
to ensure her speed, each ready at his oar-lock to wield his oar, with a band of marksmen trained
to finest tempered arms to quell the resistance which no Venetian would dare offer with those
letters on the prow; the gold and scarlet banner of San Marco, for good fortune, at her masthead;
the wind swelling her impatient sail, as the curb but frets the steed--the galley of the Ten
was not waiting without a purpose!

The shock of the boats as they passed through the lock had roused the sleepers rudely, and
Piero had time but for a swift glance of command to Antonio, bidding him escape, when a gondola
bearing the ducal colors floated out from the sea of small waiting craft and saluted them courteously.
The dignified signor who addressed them wore the violet robe and stole of a secretary of the
Doge, and his face was the face of that secretary in whose silken hand the gastaldo's had lain
prisoned when he took the oath of office!

Resistance was impossible.

"Messer Gastaldo," said the secretary suavely, "it hath pleased those who have ever the welfare
of Venice at heart to provide for the most noble Lady of the Giustiniani an escort which better
fitteth her rank than the size of thy barchetta permitteth, and a dwelling more honorable than
the 'Osteria del Buon Pesce,' where, in company of the Lady Beata Tagliapietra, she hath passed
the night."

The secretary paused and placidly noted the effect of his words upon Piero, who could have
gnashed his teeth for anger at those talking walls of Venice which had betrayed him--so cautiously
had he told his secret to the Lady Beata only, in that short moonlight stroll!

At a sign from the secretary a second gondola, wearing the ducal livery and filled with the
gorgeous costumes of the palace guards, came out from the floating mass and approached the
gondola of the people, where the Lady Marina sat trembling like a frightened fawn.

There was a struggle among the lesser craft to draw closer to this dramatic centre; they jostled
each other unceremoniously; a splash, like a falling oar, was heard, but scarce noted in the
absorbing interest of the moment; only a bare-legged boy jumped off from a tiny fishing-skiff
near which the oar had floated, and swam with it to to the gondola from which it had fallen--since
it was this boat which was making the carnival for them! Piero, alone, had slightly turned
his head and noted that no one now stood on the ponte piede behind the felze of his gondola.

"The galley waits to receive the noble ladies to whom I am commissioned by those who have sent
me to offer my respectful homage," said the secretary, bowing low before the felze. "The noble
ladies will proceed thither in the ducal gondola which attends them. And thou, Messer Gastaldo,
wilt graciously aid me in their escort--since, verily, they owe much to thy chivalry."

It was a pleasant scene for the onlookers.

But the Lady Marina sat motionless, and gave neither word nor sign in response to the invitation
of the ducal secretary.

"Shall the pleasure of the lady of this noble house not be consulted?" Piero questioned, struggling
to cover his defiance under a tone of deference.

But his answer was only in the secretary's eyes,--smiling, imperious,--more defiant than his
own impotent will; and in the courtly waiting attitude, which had not changed, and which seemed
unbearably to lengthen out the passing seconds.

The Lady Beata, winding compassionate arms around her friend, had raised her veil, whispering
words of tenderness.

But there was no recognition in the glance that met hers--only the immeasurable pathos of a
hopeless surrender; the fervent passion of Marina's will and faith had made all things seem
possible of achievement, though Venice was against her, for had not the mission been given
her in a vision by the Holy Madonna of San Donato--Mother of Sorrows--and was not the issue
sure? And yielding all thought of self she had braced every faculty to accomplish the holy
task of which she alone felt the urgency. But the overtaxed heart and brain could endure no
longer thwarting; their activity and unquestioning purpose had been her only power; and the
moment she ceased to struggle will and reason fled together.

Pitifully acquiescent, she went with them unresisting.

       *       *       *       *       *

A haze that was not luminous hung in the sky; night was creeping on without a sunset, as they
battled their way up the Giudecca against the current which rushed like a boiling torrent around
San Giorgio--the blue calm of the waters turned to a frenzied, foam-lashed green.

The men rowed fast, with tight-furled sail, but the storm came faster; ranks of threatening
clouds were hurrying from the east, gathering like armies of vengeful spirits, darker, closer
about them, shutting off every breath of air; an oppression, throbbing with nameless fears,
was upon them--a hush, as if life had ceased; then the scorching, withering torment of a fierce
sirocco, and the moan of the wind, like a soul in pain.

Marina grew faint and wide-eyed for terror, but they could not soothe her by word or touch;
she sat with clasped hands, gasping for breath, listening to the low, long boom on the shores
of the Lido, like muffled thunder, ceaselessly recurring--the terrible noise of the great waves
beating against the sea-walls--beating and breaking in fury, tossing their spray high in air
and whirling it in clouds, like rain mists, far across the lagoon. Would the barriers stand--or
yield and leave them to their doom? Were the great waters of the Adriatic uprising in vengeance
to overwhelm this city in her sin? Boom upon boom sounded through all the voices of the storm.
Santa Maria! was it this that the Tintoretto had foretold!

A dazzling, frenzied flash of light,--a vast peal of thunder that was like the wrath of a mighty,
offended God,--then darkness, and a torrent of rain--the waters in the shifting path of the
wind leaping up to meet the waters from the sky!

The vesper bells of Venice came sobbing through the storm, tossed and broken by the tornado
into a wraith of a dirge; and now, by some fantastic freak of nature, as the winds rose higher,
the iron tongues from every campanile--for a brief moment of horror--came wrangling and discordant,
as if tortured by some demon of despair.

  "Ave Maria, Gratia plena!"

the women cried together, falling on their knees, while the men toiled and struggled to hold
the invincible galley of the Ten outside the whirling path of the storm--advancing and retreating
at the will of the elements, against which their own splendid, human strength was like the
feeble, untaught effort of a helpless infant.

The words rose in a wail between the gusts.

For measureless moments, mighty as hours, they battled between San Marco and San Giorgio, tossed
to and fro--now nearer the haven of the great white dome, now--as a lightning flash unveiled
San Marco--near enough to see a cloud of frightened doves go whirling over the flood which
swept the Piazza from end to end and poured out under the great gates of the Ducal Palace into
the lagoon.

"Summa Parens clementia--nocte surgentes----"

XXXII

A Day momentous for Venice--or was it Rome?--had come and passed; it chronicled the right of
the Crown to make its own laws within its own realm, without reference to ecclesiastical claims
which had hitherto been found hampering; it defined the limits of Church and State, as no protest
had hitherto done.

But Venice was calm in her triumph as she had been unmoved in disaster, and would not reflect
the jubilant tone of the cardinal when he had returned from Rome empowered to withdraw the
censures upon the terms stipulated by the Republic.

Yet, at this latest moment, the cardinal mediator, from lack of discretion, had come near to
failure; for the terms being less favorable than he had desired to obtain for the Holy Father,
he could not resist attempting to win some little further grace before pronouncing the final
word, when the Signoria, weary of temporizing, told him plainly that his Holiness must come
at once to a decision, or Venice would forget that she had so far yielded as to listen to any
negotiations.

There was no pageant at the close of this long drama of which the princes of Europe had been
interested spectators. Venice sat smiling and unruffled under her April skies when the ducal
secretary escorted the two famous prisoners from the dungeons of the Palace to the residence
of the French ambassador, and there, without prejudice to the Republic's right of jurisdiction
over criminal ecclesiastics, explicitly stipulated, bestowed this gift--so fitting for the
gratification of a "Most Christian Majesty"--upon the representative of France, who must indeed
have breathed more freely when this testimonial of favor, with its precious burden of nameless
crimes, had been consigned by him to one who waited as an appointee of the Pope.

The Doge and the Signoria sat in their accustomed places in their stately Assembly Chamber
when the cardinal came with congratulations upon the withdrawal of the interdict, and the words
of the Serenissimo, as he gave the promised parchment, were few and dignified.

"I thank the Lord our God that his Holiness hath assured himself of the purity of our intentions
and the sincerity of our deeds."

And the writing of that parchment, sealed with the seal of Saint Mark, stood thus:

"Essendo state levate le Censure è restate parimente rivocato il Protesto." ("The censures
having been taken off the protest remains equally revoked.")

It was whispered low that the cardinal, under his cape, made the sign of the cross and murmured
a word of absolution. But if the Signoria suspected his intention there was no movement of
acquiescence; only, when the short ceremony of the passing of the document was completed, they
observed the usual forms of courtesy with which the audience of so princely an envoy is closed
when his mission is accomplished.

If Paul V had surrendered with reluctance his hope of a sumptuous ceremony in San Pietro, where
delegates of penitent Venetians should kneel in public and confess and be graciously absolved--if
the Cardinal di Gioiosa had indulged flattering visions of a procession of priests and people
to the patriarchal church in the Piazza, with paeans of joy-bells and shouts of gladness that
Venice was again free to resume her worship, and that her penitent people were pardoned sons
of the Church--he was doomed to disappointment. The cardinals of Spain and France, attended
only by their households, celebrated Mass in the ducal chapel of San Marco; and the people
came and went--as they did before and after, through that day and all the days since the interdict
had been pronounced, in this and all the churches of Venice--and scarcely knew that their doom
was lifted, as they had hardly realized that the curse had ever penetrated from those distant
doors of San Pietro to the sanctuary of San Marco!

But the world knew and never forgot how that stately court of Venice had met the thunder of
the Vatican and lessened its power forever.

The cause had been won in moderation and dignity upon a basis of civil justice that was none
the less accredited because the Teologo Consultore who sat in chancelor's robes behind the
throne was a zealous advocate of the primitive principles of Christianity, and defended, without
fear of obloquy or death, the right of the individual conscience to interpret for itself the
laws of right,--as founded upon the words of Christ,--because the extraordinary keenness, fineness,
and breadth of his masterly mind enabled him to conceive with unusual definiteness the limits
of civil and spiritual authority, and to ascribe the overgrowth of error upon the Church he
loved to the misconception and weakness of human nature. He did not place Venice, the superb,--with
her pride and pomp and power and intellectual astuteness, with her faults and worldliness and
her magnificent statesmanship,--against the spiritual kingdom of Christ's Church on earth and
declare for Venice against the Church.

But he weighed in the clear poise of his brain the Book of the Divine Law--which none knew
better than he--with the laws of the princes of this world--which also few knew better--and
declared that One, lowly and great, had defined the limits of the Church's jurisdiction when
He said, "My kingdom is not of this world."

But in Rome the reasoning was not so simple, and threats of vengeance pursued this "terrible
friar," whose bold judgments had ruled the councils of rebellious Venice.

But though peace was declared with Rome the labors of the Senate were scarcely lessened; there
were still adjustments to be made which were not whispered abroad--there were embassies to
be dissolved and appointed, gifts to be voted, honors to be heaped upon the head of the man
whose counsels had led to such results, and in whose person the Senate now united the three
offices of the Counsellors to the Doge, making Fra Paolo sole Teologo Consultore.

It was the first time in the history of the Republic that such honors had been voted, for Venice
was not wont to be over-generous in recognition of individual service; and this friend of statesmen,
scholars, and princes temporal and spiritual, preserved the greatness of his simplicity unspoiled
in prosperity and power--as was possible only to a spirit ruled by inflexible principle and faith.

When the Senate voted him a palace near San Marco he preferred his simple quarters among his
brethren of the Servi. When, in proof of their appreciation, they doubled his salary and would
have trebled it again--"Nay," said he, "it is but my duty that I have done. May the honorable
words of the Senate's recognition but hold before me that which, by God's help, I may yet accomplish";
and he would take but so much as he might bestow in charity and gifts to his convent, having
for himself no need nor tastes that were not met by the modest provision of his order.

And when, having refused to go to Rome for reconciliation--being not penitent--or for preferment,
which would not come without penitence, Fra Paolo still pursued, unmoved, the quiet tenor of
his daily round, from convent to palace, without pause or tremor, in spite of continued warning;--"My
life," he said, "is in the hands of God. My duty hath he confided to mine own effort."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Lady Marina was a guest in the Ducal Palace, detained under surveillance, yet treated with
much honor; her friends might see her in the presence of the ducal guards who watched within
the doors of her sumptuous chambers, but she was not free to go to her own, who had guarded
her with such laxity that in striving to reach the court of the enemy she had imperiled the
dignity of the Republic by her silent censure. Marcantonio had trembled more when, the morning
after the storm, news had reached him that the fugitive was in the keeping of the Signoria,
than if the message had announced her death. What might he not expect of their jealousy!

But a ducal secretary had received him with courtesy and conducted him at once into the audience
chamber of the Doge, who bade him send for her maidens that she might be cared for tenderly,
for her stay at the Palace would be indefinite. It was a royal command, against which pleading
or rebellion were alike useless.

"Most Serene Prince!" cried Marcantonio in agony, "I beseech thee leave me that gift which
a gracious Senate once so generously bestowed! I have never swerved in loyalty--though my heart
was nigh to breaking that I might not grant her prayer!"

But one in attendance spoke quickly; for the face of the good Leonardo Donato was full of compassion,
and he might not be trusted to serve the higher interests of the Republic.

"It is of the clemency of the Serenissimo," said that inflexible voice, "that the Lady Marina
reaps not the penalty of her flight and of her disloyalty to the State, since she hath sought
to place her private judgment beyond the wisdom of the rulers of Venice."

The figure stood motionless in the shadow of a column, muffled in a long black mantle, a black
beretta partially concealing the face.

There was an icy inflection in the tones which sent a chill to Marcantonio's heart as he listened.
One of the Chiefs of the Ten was always a member of the still more dreaded Inquisition, whose
identity was never known, and the passionless voice held a hint of indisputable authority--was
his suffering wife to rely upon the mercy of the most puissant member of this terrible commission!

"Take my life for hers!" he implored, so beside himself with grief and terror that he disclosed
his fear for Marina; "and bid her return to care for our little one."

"Not so," said the emotionless voice; "the Lady Marina hath disproved her right to care for
a noble of Venice. It would be to imperil his loyalty to leave the child under his mother's
influence."

"My God!" cried Marcantonio bitterly; "take me to her and let us die together--if the Republic
may grant us so much grace!"

Again the Doge would have spoken compassionate words, but the other interposed:

"The State hath little use for the lady's life--save in her keeping. And she herself, perchance,
hath less. For so hath her strange whim wrought upon her that she knoweth naught of that which
passeth around her, and one face to her is like another."

The young Senator turned from the cruel speaker to the Doge in mute appealing agony. The old
man grasped his hand in a steadying clasp.

"Let us go to her," said Leonardo, very low, when he could command his voice. "She is like
a lovely child--resisting nothing. It is some shock--it will pass."

       *       *       *       *       *

And now there came a day when the proud heart of Venice was stirred to its core, for a messenger
dashed breathless into the Council Chamber--an excited, protesting throng of the populace surging
in through the open door behind him. "Fra Paolo! Il caro Padre! Morto!"

"Dead!" They started to their feet with ready imprecations. Fra Paolo, who had left them an
hour before, with the Signor Malipiero and his devoted secretary! They exchanged glances of
terrible comprehension--the triumph of Venice was avenged upon the faithful servant of the State!

The Consiglio broke up in confusion.

"Eccellentissimi," the messenger explained to the horror-stricken questioners, "they were five,--rushing
out from the dark of the convent wall against him when he came alone down the steps of the
Ponte della Pugna,--the villains held the others down. And Fra Paolo lay dead on the Fondamenta--stabbed
in many places, as if one would cut him in bits--and the stiletto still in his forehead! And
they sent me----"

"'Alone'? you ask me, Illustrissimi?--Santissima Vergine! the whole city pouring in to the
cries of those that found him; and the murderers off before one could touch them, and never
a guard near! They carried him into the Servi.--And the people--furious--are storming the palazzo
of the nuncio as I pass; and some one cries that the envoy is off to the Lido, with his fine
friends, who start for Rome. A thousand devils!--May the good San Nicolò send them to feed
the fishes!"

The Senate, to testify its honor, grief, and sympathy for the beloved Counsellor, had instantly
adjourned, and its members repaired in great numbers to the convent to make personal inquiries,
returning to a new session prolonged through the night; for Fra Paolo, who had fainted from
loss of blood on his pallet in the Servite cell, had recovered consciousness and hovered between
life and death--his humble bed attended by the most famous physicians and surgeons whom the
Republic could summon to her aid. The secretaries, meanwhile, were busy in preparing resolutions
of affection by which to honor him in the sight of the Venetian people; letters of announcement
to foreign courts, as if he had been of the blood royal; proclamations of reward for the persons
of the criminals, alive or dead, which, before the day had dawned, the Signori della Notte
had affixed to the doors of San Marco, along the Rialto, on the breast of Ser Robia, that all
might read. And for means of bringing the offenders to justice they plotted and schemed as
none but Venetians could do.

It was three days since the storm, and the gastaldo had not yet been released, he also was
simply detained, without ignominy or discomfort in rooms set apart for prisoners of State before
they had been brought to trial; for the events of these days had been too absorbing to permit
of an examination of his case. And now, in the gray dawn which broke upon that night of anxiety
and excitement, alternating between hope and fear as frequent messengers, each guarded by a
detachment of palace guards, appeared with fresh news from the convent, the weary senators
strolled up and down in the great chambers opening on the sea façade of the Ducal Palace discussing
the event in a more desultory way--its meaning, its dangers, the achievements of the great
man who might, even now, be receiving the viaticum in the convent of the Servi.

He was first named with terms of endearment strange upon the lips of that stately assembly--"Il
caro Padre," "Teologo amato di Venezia"--yet the guards had failed to seize those villains
who lay in wait at the Ponte della Pugna! The bridges and traghetti must be closely watched.--Ah--the
gastaldo grande!

"Hath one yet been named Condottiere for this frontier service?" questioned one of the older
senators, among a group of the more important men who had detached themselves from the others
and strolled out into the great loggia on the sea façade for a reviving breath of the morning
air. "For such an employ there is none like Piero Salin for daring and intrigue; and the assassins
may linger long in hiding on the route to Rome."

And so they first remembered Piero in these crowded days and discussed his fault with a degree
of leniency that would have been foreign to the traditions of Venice had he not been needed
for important secret service.

Meanwhile, Fra Paolo was still the theme among the senators at large in the Council Chamber.
"Il miracolo del suo secolo," they called him, as they rehearsed the opinions of the learned
men of their age in every field of science.

"It cannot be from knowledge, acquired as all men learn, that he taketh this position in such
varied sciences," said the Senator Morosini; "for a life-time doth suffice to few men for such
attainment in one field as he hath reached in all. It must be that the marvel of his mind doth
hold some central truth which maketh all science cognate."

"Else were he not 'friend and master' to Galileo of Padua."

"And it is told that Acquapendente, who hath been summoned by the Signoria to bestow his skill,
hath learned of him some matters which he taught in the medical school of Bologna. The world
hath not his equal for learning."

"By the blessed San Marco!" ejaculated one under his breath, who had been idly leaning on the
balustrade, as he crossed himself and looked furtively around to note whether he had been overheard.

But the others of the group, keenly alive to danger, had instantly joined him.

"Was this some new intrigue?" "Was the night not already full with horror?" they questioned
of each other, thrilled with dread and superstition.

Dawn was growing over the water, and the gray and oily surface of the lagoon was closely dotted
with gondolas, distinct and black in the morning twilight; they came sweeping on from San Nicolò
and Castello--black and red, breast to breast--gathering impetus as they neared the Piazzetta,
in numbers which must have left every traghetto of Venice deserted; Nicolotti and Castellani--allies,
since they never had been friends! It was some intrigue of the people, or some favor they had
come to ask--to-day, when the Senate might not spare one thought for disorder among the masses!

Weary and overwrought, after their night of sorrowful labor, they looked at each other in consternation.

