PREFACE

In the month of August, 1841, I attended an anti-slavery convention in Nantucket, at which
it was my happiness to become acquainted with FREDERICK DOUGLASS, the writer of the following
Narrative. He was a stranger to nearly every member of that body; but, having recently made
his escape from the southern prison-house of bondage, and feeling his curiosity excited to
ascertain the principles and measures of the abolitionists,--of whom he had heard a somewhat
vague description while he was a slave,--he was induced to give his attendance, on the occasion
alluded to, though at that time a resident in New Bedford.

Fortunate, most fortunate occurrence!--fortunate for the millions of his manacled brethren,
yet panting for deliverance from their awful thraldom!--fortunate for the cause of negro emancipation,
and of universal liberty!--fortunate for the land of his birth, which he has already done so
much to save and bless!--fortunate for a large circle of friends and acquaintances, whose sympathy
and affection he has strongly secured by the many sufferings he has endured, by his virtuous
traits of character, by his ever-abiding remembrance of those who are in bonds, as being bound
with them!--fortunate for the multitudes, in various parts of our republic, whose minds he
has enlightened on the subject of slavery, and who have been melted to tears by his pathos,
or roused to virtuous indignation by his stirring eloquence against the enslavers of men!--fortunate
for himself, as it at once brought him into the field of public usefulness, "gave the world
assurance of a MAN," quickened the slumbering energies of his soul, and consecrated him to
the great work of breaking the rod of the oppressor, and letting the oppressed go free! Capable
of high attainments as an intellectual and moral being--needing nothing but a comparatively
small amount of cultivation to make him an ornament to society and a blessing to his race--by
the law of the land, by the voice of the people, by the terms of the slave code, he was only
a piece of property, a beast of burden, a chattel personal, nevertheless!

A beloved friend from New Bedford prevailed on Mr. DOUGLASS to address the convention: He came
forward to the platform with a hesitancy and embarrassment, necessarily the attendants of a
sensitive mind in such a novel position. After apologizing for his ignorance, and reminding
the audience that slavery was a poor school for the human intellect and heart, he proceeded
to narrate some of the facts in his own history as a slave, and in the course of his speech
gave utterance to many noble thoughts and thrilling reflections. As in addition to being a Legislative
Councillor, he was Secretary for Crown Lands, Land Claims Commissioner, and Registrar-General he
cannot have been able to spend much time with the Library. For all that, his influence was considerable
and Gisborne, in his book New Zealand Rulers and Statesmen, says "He was for many years the
mainstay of the General Assembly Library. He was, it may be said, the father of that institution;
and it is mainly owing to his love of literature, and to his great ability in the organisation
and classification of a library that the success of the institution with comparatively small
means was so marked at the date of his departure from the Colony in 1871."

Just how long he was Librarian is not clear, but probably with the library attendant and additional
assistance during the session there was sufficient staff to carry out all the work. It was not
until 1875 that Ewen McColl, the attendant, became Sub-Librarian, though it is possible he may
have been in fact Librarian as early as 1871.

1870-1900

The last 30 years of the nineteenth century were spent by the Library Committee in enlarging the
Library and in trying to obtain an adequate and suitable building to house it. The vote was
raised to £300 in 1867 and £600 in 1874, while in addition the adoption of a new standing order
for Private Bills in 1870 gave the fees up to £25 for a Bill that passed both Houses to the
Library fund. Fines levied on members were also devoted to the Library fund, though this has
never been a lucrative source. Among others, the fine of £75 imposed on Mr Lusk was received in 1875,
and a similar sum from the Hon. Mr Robinson, but the historic fine of £500 inflicted on the manager
of the Bank of New Zealand in 1896 was never received.

Private Bill fees varied from nothing to £150, so that the income was between £650 and £750.
The money was not spent on books only, but included expenditure on binding, periodicals, and on
insurance. In the eighties and early nineties insurance premiums on the collection housed in
a wooden building were £100 per annum and, though they were reduced, even in the last years of the
century, £40 had to be used for this purpose.

Even so the Library stock was increasing annually by some 1,400 volumes. In 1871 there were 8,330
volumes, in 1877, 14,580. Five years later the figure had increased to 21,000, and to 30,000
in 1887, reaching 52,000 in 1902. Most of the growth was due to purchase, but the Library had
many friends, especially among members, and they were most generous.

Their gifts filled gaps specially in New Zealand material, while others gave books of value on
subjects not of great interest to Parliament. Among such donors were Carleton, Mantell, and
Sheehan, to mention only a few.

The Library had other friends who were no less helpful. New Zealand was represented at the Philadelphia
Centenary Exhibition in 1876 by Dr Hector. He made arrangements with the Smithsonian Institution
in Washington for the General Assembly Library to receive United States Government papers and
for New Zealand in turn to supply New Zealand official publications
to the Institution.

This was the Library's first large exchange agreement and, while the material received under it
has often threatened to swamp it, very many valuable items have been added from this source.

The
overtures to the British Government first made in 1858 do not finally seem to have succeeded
until 1883. In this year Lord Derby in a circular dispatch to all colonies offered to exchange British
official papers for those of the colonies to be sent to the British Museum. The Library Committee
jumped at the offer; it had since 1874 been buying sets of parliamentary
papers and immediately approached the Cabinet to authorise that New
Zealand publications should be sent. As a result the Library possesses
an extremely valuable and still growing collection of British official
papers.

The Library was in addition receiving New Zealand newspapers
and publications of all kinds and it had other exchange arrangements
with Canada and the Australian States. Until 1884, 81 newspapers were
being bound regularly out of 153 received, but in this year because
of the lack of space and the expense the number was reduced to 24.
For all this the Library was adding to its holdings of newspapers
at a fairly rapid rate.

The increase in the number of books necessitated
an increase in storage space.
To illustrate the effect of slavery on the white man,--to show that he has no powers of endurance,
in such a condition, superior to those of his black brother,--DANIEL O'CONNELL, the distinguished
advocate of universal emancipation, and the mightiest champion of prostrate but not conquered
Ireland, relates the following anecdote in a speech delivered by him in the Conciliation Hall,
Dublin, before the Loyal National Repeal Association, March 31, 1845. "No matter," said Mr.
O'CONNELL, "under what specious term it may disguise itself, slavery is still hideous. It has
a natural, an inevitable tendency to brutalize every noble faculty of man. An American sailor,
who was cast away on the shore of Africa, where he was kept in slavery for three years, was,
at the expiration of that period, found to be imbruted and stultified--he had lost all reasoning
power; and having forgotten his native language, could only utter some savage gibberish between
Arabic and English, which nobody could understand, and which even he himself found difficulty
in pronouncing. So much for the humanizing influence of THE DOMESTIC INSTITUTION!" Admitting
this to have been an extraordinary case of mental deterioration, it proves at least that the
white slave can sink as low in the scale of humanity as the black one.

Mr. DOUGLASS has very properly chosen to write his own Narrative, in his own style, and according
to the best of his ability, rather than to employ some one else. It is, therefore, entirely
his own production; and, considering how long and dark was the career he had to run as a slave,--how
few have been his opportunities to improve his mind since he broke his iron fetters,--it is,
in my judgment, highly creditable to his head and heart. He who can peruse it without a tearful
eye, a heaving breast, an afflicted spirit,--without being filled with an unutterable abhorrence
of slavery and all its abettors, and animated with a determination to seek the immediate overthrow
of that execrable system,--without trembling for the fate of this country in the hands of a
righteous God, who is ever on the side of the oppressed, and whose arm is not shortened that
it cannot save,--must have a flinty heart, and be qualified to act the part of a trafficker
"in slaves and the souls of men." I am confident that it is essentially true in all its statements;
that nothing has been set down in malice, nothing exaggerated, nothing drawn from the imagination;
that it comes short of the reality, rather than overstates a single fact in regard to SLAVERY
AS IT IS. The experience of FREDERICK DOUGLASS, as a slave, was not a peculiar one; his lot
was not especially a hard one; his case may be regarded as a very fair specimen of the treatment
of slaves in Maryland, in which State it is conceded that they are better fed and less cruelly
treated than in Georgia, Alabama, or Louisiana. Many have suffered incomparably more, while
very few on the plantations have suffered less, than himself. Yet how deplorable was his situation!
what terrible chastisements were inflicted upon his person! what still more shocking outrages
were perpetrated upon his mind! with all his noble powers and sublime aspirations, how like
a brute was he treated, even by those professing to have the same mind in them that was in
Christ Jesus! to what dreadful liabilities was he continually subjected! how destitute of friendly
counsel and aid, even in his greatest extremities! how heavy was the midnight of woe which
shrouded in blackness the last ray of hope, and filled the future with terror and gloom! what
longings after freedom took possession of his breast, and how his misery augmented, in proportion
as he grew reflective and intelligent,--thus demonstrating that a happy slave is an extinct
man! how he thought, reasoned, felt, under the lash of the driver, with the chains upon his
limbs! what perils he encountered in his endeavors to escape from his horrible doom! and how
signal have been his deliverance and preservation in the midst of a nation of pitiless enemies!

This Narrative contains many affecting incidents, many passages of great eloquence and power;
but I think the most thrilling one of them all is the description DOUGLASS gives of his feelings,
as he stood soliloquizing respecting his fate, and the chances of his one day being a freeman,
on the banks of the Chesapeake Bay--viewing the receding vessels as they flew with their white
wings before the breeze, and apostrophizing them as animated by the living spirit of freedom.
Who can read that passage, and be insensible to its pathos and sublimity? Compressed into it
is a whole Alexandrian library of thought, feeling, and sentiment--all that can, all that need
be urged, in the form of expostulation, entreaty, rebuke, against that crime of crimes,--making
man the property of his fellow-man! O, how accursed is that system, which entombs the godlike
mind of man, defaces the divine image, reduces those who by creation were crowned with glory
and honor to a level with four-footed beasts, and exalts the dealer in human flesh above all
that is called God! Why should its existence be prolonged one hour? Is it not evil, only evil,
and that continually? What does its presence imply but the absence of all fear of God, all
regard for man, on the part of the people of the United States? Heaven speed its eternal overthrow!

So profoundly ignorant of the nature of slavery are many persons, that they are stubbornly
incredulous whenever they read or listen to any recital of the cruelties which are daily inflicted
on its victims. They do not deny that the slaves are held as property; but that terrible fact
seems to convey to their minds no idea of injustice, exposure to outrage, or savage barbarity.
Tell them of cruel scourgings, of mutilations and brandings, of scenes of pollution and blood,
of the banishment of all light and knowledge, and they affect to be greatly indignant at such
enormous exaggerations, such wholesale misstatements, such abominable libels on the character
of the southern planters! As if all these direful outrages were not the natural results of
slavery! As if it were less cruel to reduce a human being to the condition of a thing, than
to give him a severe flagellation, or to deprive him of necessary food and clothing! As if
whips, chains, thumb-screws, paddles, blood-hounds, overseers, drivers, patrols, were not all
indispensable to keep the slaves down, and to give protection to their ruthless oppressors! To
ensure that its recommendations were carried out, and to control and report on the work of
the Library, the Committee suggested that an officer, the Librarian of the General Assembly,
should be appointed. This was done and the first Librarian was Major F. E. Campbell, the Clerk
of the House of Representatives.

Two other matters also were considered of sufficient moment to be mentioned. One was the supply
of newspapers that had been cancelled as the Government had promised to supply files from Government
offices. The other was the acquisition of British Government publications, which would be of
great value to the Library. The Committee noted the successful approach of the Canadian Parliamentary
Librarian to the British Government and proposed that either Mr J. E. Fitzgerald, who was in England,
or the Colonial Agent should be asked to see if the Library could not be given such documents.

Once again two years elapsed before Parliament met again, and the Librarian reported that there
were now books, separated from the Provincial Council Library, but in an adjoining room. The approaches
to the British Government had not been entirely fruitful, but there was promise of success.

1860-1870

The
Library now possessed books and a librarian and the next 10 years were to be amongst the most
adventurous of the Library's story. However, they began quietly when in 1861 the Committee recommended
the appointment of a permanent messenger for the Library instead of a sessional one.

Next year the session was held in Wellington in the Provincial Council Chambers. A case of books
was sent for use of members. Unfortunately it was lost when the White Swan carrying the Governor
and Auckland members was wrecked near Castlepoint. The published list gives 50 books, mainly
reference works on constitutional and economic matters, but the greater loss was that of the
House, which was deprived of not only its documentary records but also most of the early printed papers.
The Committee, nothing daunted, recommended that the books be replaced and used the mishap to
have the vote raised to £500 for the year.

The sessions of 1863 and 1864 were both held in Auckland. In the latter year the Librarian was
instructed to prepare cases so that the books could be moved to Wellington along with the
other Government records.

Parliament took over the old Provincial Council Chambers in Wellington
but they were enlarged to meet its requirements.

The Library had a new home built specially for it costing £1,800 which was, with extensions,
to provide an uneasy resting place for the next 35 years. In one paper the new library was described
as "a very lofty handsome building with large painted windows". In another, "The Library is
a fine room, handsomely decorated and the walls are fitted with bookshelves." It was of wood.

Details about the administration of the Library during the early years
are few, but it appears that the Committee was undoubtedly the mainspring
of the organisation.

It contained men such as Carleton, Fitzherbert, Travers, and Domett, to mention only the best known,
who were interested not only in the Library for its own sake but also in the part it could
play in parliamentary affairs and in providing pleasure to members.

The Committee was responsible for book selection, carried out mainly during the session. While control
over the Library in the recess lay with representatives of the House
and Council, from the first H. F. Carleton, Chairman of Committees
of the House, and a classical scholar, was responsible for seeing
the books were obtained and that the funds were expended.

Until 1861
the only assistance in the Library was provided by a sessional messenger,
but a full-time sub-librarian was provided from 1862. When Parliament
moved to Wellington different arrangements were necessary and in 1866
the Committee suggested that a permanent librarian should be appointed.


WM. LLOYD GARRISON BOSTON, May 1, 1845.

LETTER FROM WENDELL PHILLIPS, ESQ.

BOSTON, APRIL 22, 1845.

My Dear Friend:

You remember the old fable of "The Man and the Lion," where the lion complained that he should
not be so misrepresented "when the lions wrote history."

I am glad the time has come when the "lions write history." We have been left long enough to
gather the character of slavery from the involuntary evidence of the masters. One might, indeed,
rest sufficiently satisfied with what, it is evident, must be, in general, the results of such
a relation, without seeking farther to find whether they have followed in every instance. Indeed,
those who stare at the half-peck of corn a week, and love to count the lashes on the slave's
back, are seldom the "stuff" out of which reformers and abolitionists are to be made. I remember
that, in 1838, many were waiting for the results of the West India experiment, before they
could come into our ranks. Those "results" have come long ago; but, alas! few of that number
have come with them, as converts. A man must be disposed to judge of emancipation by other
tests than whether it has increased the produce of sugar,--and to hate slavery for other reasons
than because it starves men and whips women,--before he is ready to lay the first stone of
his anti-slavery life.

I was glad to learn, in your story, how early the most neglected of God's children waken to
a sense of their rights, and of the injustice done them. Experience is a keen teacher; and
long before you had mastered your A B C, or knew where the "white sails" of the Chesapeake
were bound, you began, I see, to gauge the wretchedness of the slave, not by his hunger and
want, not by his lashes and toil, but by the cruel and blighting death which gathers over his soul.

In connection with this, there is one circumstance which makes your recollections peculiarly
valuable, and renders your early insight the more remarkable. You come from that part of the
country where we are told slavery appears with its fairest features. Let us hear, then, what
it is at its best estate--gaze on its bright side, if it has one; and then imagination may
task her powers to add dark lines to the picture, as she travels southward to that (for the
colored man) Valley of the Shadow of Death, where the Mississippi sweeps along.

Again, we have known you long, and can put the most entire confidence in your truth, candor,
and sincerity. Every one who has heard you speak has felt, and, I am confident, every one who
reads your book will feel, persuaded that you give them a fair specimen of the whole truth.
No one-sided portrait,--no wholesale complaints,--but strict justice done, whenever individual
kindliness has neutralized, for a moment, the deadly system with which it was strangely allied.
You have been with us, too, some years, and can fairly compare the twilight of rights, which
your race enjoy at the North, with that "noon of night" under which they labor south of Mason
and Dixon's line. Tell us whether, after all, the half-free colored man of Massachusetts is
worse off than the pampered slave of the rice swamps!

In reading your life, no one can say that we have unfairly picked out some rare specimens of
cruelty. We know that the bitter drops, which even you have drained from the cup, are no incidental
aggravations, no individual ills, but such as must mingle always and necessarily in the lot
of every slave. They are the essential ingredients, not the occasional results, of the system.

After all, I shall read your book with trembling for you. Some years ago, when you were beginning
to tell me your real name and birthplace, you may remember I stopped you, and preferred to
remain ignorant of all. With the exception of a vague description, so I continued, till the
other day, when you read me your memoirs. I hardly knew, at the time, whether to thank you
or not for the sight of them, when I reflected that it was still dangerous, in Massachusetts,
for honest men to tell their names! They say the fathers, in 1776, signed the Declaration of
Independence with the halter about their necks. You, too, publish your declaration of freedom
with danger compassing you around. In all the broad lands which the Constitution of the United
States overshadows, there is no single spot,--however narrow or desolate,--where a fugitive
slave can plant himself and say, "I am safe." The whole armory of Northern Law has no shield
for you. I am free to say that, in your place, I should throw the MS. into the fire.

You, perhaps, may tell your story in safety, endeared as you are to so many warm hearts by
rare gifts, and a still rarer devotion of them to the service of others. One thousand seven hundred
and seventy-seven inquiries were made, an increase of 322 over the previous year. Of these, 563
were answered in less than five minutes, 569 took between five and 15 minutes, and the remainder,
645, took over 15 minutes to answer. This statement of times does not record the fact that many
of the inquiries took much longer than 15 minutes. Indeed some had several days spent on them
by one or more members of the reference staff.

Such questions are not answered by merely marking a passage in a book or two; they require
the material to be abstracted and rewritten ready for use by the member making the inquiry. This
service is becoming increasingly popular with members who cannot themselves afford the time
needed to do all the research involved.

Seventy-eight new research students registered for the first time during the year, the largest
number yet to have done so in any one year. Some are university students working on theses; others
are engaged on research for publication. The use of the Library in this way shows how valuable
its resources are for many students.

INTERNATIONAL EXCHANGE

Twenty-four cases were received by the Library
for its own use during the year, while 5,823 packets were received
from abroad, 3,685 being posted, the remainder being forwarded by
Internal Affairs messenger.

 He was not sure of the exact year of his birth, but he knew that
it was 1817 or 1818. As a young boy he was sent to Baltimore, to be a house servant, where
he learned to read and write, with the assistance of his master's wife. In 1838 he escaped
from slavery and went to New York City, where he married Anna Murray, a free colored woman
whom he had met in Baltimore. Soon thereafter he changed his name to Frederick Douglass. In
1841 he addressed a convention of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society in Nantucket and so
greatly impressed the group that they immediately employed him as an agent. He was such an
impressive orator that numerous persons doubted if he had ever been a slave, so he wrote NARRATIVE
OF THE LIFE OF FREDERICK DOUGLASS. During the Civil War he assisted in the recruiting of colored
men for the 54th and 55th Massachusetts Regiments and consistently argued for the emancipation
of slaves. After the war he was active in securing and protecting the rights of the freemen.
In his later years, at different times, he was secretary of the Santo Domingo Commission, marshall
and recorder of deeds of the District of Columbia, and United States Minister to Haiti. His
other autobiographical works are MY BONDAGE AND MY FREEDOM and LIFE AND TIMES OF FREDERICK
DOUGLASS, published in 1855 and 1881 respectively. He died in 1895.

CHAPTER I

I was born in Tuckahoe, near Hillsborough, and about twelve miles from Easton, in Talbot county,
Maryland. I have no accurate knowledge of my age, never having seen any authentic record containing
it. By far the larger part of the slaves know as little of their ages as horses know of theirs,
and it is the wish of most masters within my knowledge to keep their slaves thus ignorant.
I do not remember to have ever met a slave who could tell of his birthday. They seldom come
nearer to it than planting-time, harvesttime, cherry-time, spring-time, or fall-time. A want
of information concerning my own was a source of unhappiness to me even during childhood. The
white children could tell their ages. I could not tell why I ought to be deprived of the same
privilege. I was not allowed to make any inquiries of my master concerning it. He deemed all
such inquiries on the part of a slave improper and impertinent, and evidence of a restless
spirit. The nearest estimate I can give makes me now between twenty-seven and twenty-eight
years of age. I come to this, from hearing my master say, some time during 1835, I was about
seventeen years old.

My mother was named Harriet Bailey. She was the daughter of Isaac and Betsey Bailey, both colored,
and quite dark. My mother was of a darker complexion than either my grandmother or grandfather.

My father was a white man. He was admitted to be such by all I ever heard speak of my parentage.
The opinion was also whispered that my master was my father; but of the correctness of this
opinion, I know nothing; the means of knowing was withheld from me. My mother and I were separated
when I was but an infant--before I knew her as my mother. It is a common custom, in the part
of Maryland from which I ran away, to part children from their mothers at a very early age.
Frequently, before the child has reached its twelfth month, its mother is taken from it, and
hired out on some farm a considerable distance off, and the child is placed under the care
of an old woman, too old for field labor. For what this separation is done, I do not know,
unless it be to hinder the development of the child's affection toward its mother, and to blunt
and destroy the natural affection of the mother for the child. This is the inevitable result.

I never saw my mother, to know her as such, more than four or five times in my life; and each
of these times was very short in duration, and at night. She was hired by a Mr. Stewart, who
lived about twelve miles from my home. She made her journeys to see me in the night, travelling
the whole distance on foot, after the performance of her day's work. She was a field hand,
and a whipping is the penalty of not being in the field at sunrise, unless a slave has special
permission from his or her master to the contrary--a permission which they seldom get, and
one that gives to him that gives it the proud name of being a kind master. I do not recollect
of ever seeing my mother by the light of day. She was with me in the night. She would lie down
with me, and get me to sleep, but long before I waked she was gone. Very little communication
ever took place between us. Death soon ended what little we could have while she lived, and
with it her hardships and suffering. She died when I was about seven years old, on one of my
master's farms, near Lee's Mill. I was not allowed to be present during her illness, at her
death, or burial. She was gone long before I knew any thing about it. Never having enjoyed,
to any considerable extent, her soothing presence, her tender and watchful care, I received
the tidings of her death with much the same emotions I should have probably felt at the death
of a stranger.

Called thus suddenly away, she left me without the slightest intimation of who my father was.
The whisper that my master was my father, may or may not be true; and, true or false, it is
of but little consequence to my purpose whilst the fact remains, in all its glaring odiousness,
that slaveholders have ordained, and by law established, that the children of slave women shall
in all cases follow the condition of their mothers; and this is done too obviously to administer
to their own lusts, and make a gratification of their wicked desires profitable as well as
pleasurable; for by this cunning arrangement, the slaveholder, in cases not a few, sustains
to his slaves the double relation of master and father.

I know of such cases; and it is worthy of remark that such slaves invariably suffer greater
hardships, and have more to contend with, than others. They are, in the first place, a constant
offence to their mistress. She is ever disposed to find fault with them; they can seldom do
any thing to please her; she is never better pleased than when she sees them under the lash,
especially when she suspects her husband of showing to his mulatto children favors which he
withholds from his black slaves.

Every year brings with it multitudes of this class of slaves. It was doubtless in consequence
of a knowledge of this fact, that one great statesman of the south predicted the downfall of
slavery by the inevitable laws of population. Whether this prophecy is ever fulfilled or not,
it is nevertheless plain that a very different-looking class of people are springing up at
the south, and are now held in slavery, from those originally brought to this country from
Africa; and if their increase do no other good, it will do away the force of the argument,
that God cursed Ham, and therefore American slavery is right.

I have had two masters. My first master's name was Anthony. I do not remember his first name.
He was generally called Captain Anthony--a title which, I presume, he acquired by sailing a
craft on the Chesapeake Bay. He was not considered a rich slaveholder. He owned two or three
farms, and about thirty slaves. His farms and slaves were under the care of an overseer. The
overseer's name was Plummer. Mr. Plummer was a miserable drunkard, a profane swearer, and a
savage monster. He always went armed with a cowskin and a heavy cudgel. I have known him to
cut and slash the women's heads so horribly, that even master would be enraged at his cruelty,
and would threaten to whip him if he did not mind himself. Master, however, was not a humane
slaveholder. It required extraordinary barbarity on the part of an overseer to affect him.
He was a cruel man, hardened by a long life of slaveholding. He would at times seem to take
great pleasure in whipping a slave. I have often been awakened at the dawn of day by the most
heart-rending shrieks of an own aunt of mine, whom he used to tie up to a joist, and whip upon
her naked back till she was literally covered with blood. No words, no tears, no prayers, from
his gory victim, seemed to move his iron heart from its bloody purpose. The louder she screamed,
the harder he whipped; and where the blood ran fastest, there he whipped longest. He would
whip her to make her scream, and whip her to make her hush; and not until overcome by fatigue,
would he cease to swing the blood-clotted cowskin. I remember the first time I ever witnessed
this horrible exhibition. I was quite a child, but I well remember it. I never shall forget
it whilst I remember any thing. It was the first of a long series of such outrages, of which
I was doomed to be a witness and a participant. It struck me with awful force. It was the blood-stained
gate, the entrance to the hell of slavery, through which I was about to pass. It was a most
terrible spectacle. I wish I could commit to paper the feelings with which I beheld it.

This occurrence took place very soon after I went to live with my old master, and under the
following circumstances. Aunt Hester went out one night,--where or for what I do not know,--and
happened to be absent when my master desired her presence. He had ordered her not to go out
evenings, and warned her that she must never let him catch her in company with a young man,
who was paying attention to her belonging to Colonel Lloyd. The young man's name was Ned Roberts,
generally called Lloyd's Ned. Why master was so careful of her, may be safely left to conjecture.
She was a woman of noble form, and of graceful proportions, having very few equals, and fewer
superiors, in personal appearance, among the colored or white women of our neighborhood.

Aunt Hester had not only disobeyed his orders in going out, but had been found in company with
Lloyd's Ned; which circumstance, I found, from what he said while whipping her, was the chief
offence. Had he been a man of pure morals himself, he might have been thought interested in
protecting the innocence of my aunt; but those who knew him will not suspect him of any such
virtue. Before he commenced whipping Aunt Hester, he took her into the kitchen, and stripped
her from neck to waist, leaving her neck, shoulders, and back, entirely naked. He then told
her to cross her hands, calling her at the same time a d----d b---h. After crossing her hands,
he tied them with a strong rope, and led her to a stool under a large hook in the joist, put
in for the purpose. He made her get upon the stool, and tied her hands to the hook. She now
stood fair for his infernal purpose. Her arms were stretched up at their full length, so that
she stood upon the ends of her toes. He then said to her, "Now, you d----d b---h, I'll learn
you how to disobey my orders!" and after rolling up his sleeves, he commenced to lay on the
heavy cowskin, and soon the warm, red blood (amid heart-rending shrieks from her, and horrid
oaths from him) came dripping to the floor. I was so terrified and horror-stricken at the sight,
that I hid myself in a closet, and dared not venture out till long after the bloody transaction
was over. I expected it would be my turn next. It was all new to me. I had never seen any thing
like it before. I had always lived with my grandmother on the outskirts of the plantation,
where she was put to raise the children of the younger women. I had therefore been, until now,
out of the way of the bloody scenes that often occurred on the plantation.

CHAPTER II

My master's family consisted of two sons, Andrew and Richard; one daughter, Lucretia, and her
husband, Captain Thomas Auld. They lived in one house, upon the home plantation of Colonel
Edward Lloyd. My master was Colonel Lloyd's clerk and superintendent. He was what might be
called the overseer of the overseers. I spent two years of childhood on this plantation in
my old master's family. It was here that I witnessed the bloody transaction recorded in the
first chapter; and as I received my first impressions of slavery on this plantation, I will
give some description of it, and of slavery as it there existed. The plantation is about twelve
miles north of Easton, in Talbot county, and is situated on the border of Miles River. The
principal products raised upon it were tobacco, corn, and wheat. These were raised in great
abundance; so that, with the products of this and the other farms belonging to him, he was
able to keep in almost constant employment a large sloop, in carrying them to market at Baltimore.
This sloop was named Sally Lloyd, in honor of one of the colonel's daughters. My master's son-in-law,
Captain Auld, was master of the vessel; she was otherwise manned by the colonel's own slaves.
Their names were Peter, Isaac, Rich, and Jake. These were esteemed very highly by the other
slaves, and looked upon as the privileged ones of the plantation; for it was no small affair,
in the eyes of the slaves, to be allowed to see Baltimore.

Colonel Lloyd kept from three to four hundred slaves on his home plantation, and owned a large
number more on the neighboring farms belonging to him. The names of the farms nearest to the
home plantation were Wye Town and New Design. "Wye Town" was under the overseership of a man
named Noah Willis. New Design was under the overseership of a Mr. Townsend. The overseers of
these, and all the rest of the farms, numbering over twenty, received advice and direction
from the managers of the home plantation. This was the great business place. It was the seat
of government for the whole twenty farms. All disputes among the overseers were settled here.
If a slave was convicted of any high misdemeanor, became unmanageable, or evinced a determination
to run away, he was brought immediately here, severely whipped, put on board the sloop, carried
to Baltimore, and sold to Austin Woolfolk, or some other slave-trader, as a warning to the
slaves remaining.

Here, too, the slaves of all the other farms received their monthly allowance of food, and
their yearly clothing. The men and women slaves received, as their monthly allowance of food,
eight pounds of pork, or its equivalent in fish, and one bushel of corn meal. Their yearly
clothing consisted of two coarse linen shirts, one pair of linen trousers, like the shirts,
one jacket, one pair of trousers for winter, made of coarse negro cloth, one pair of stockings,
and one pair of shoes; the whole of which could not have cost more than seven dollars. When
these failed them, they went naked until the next allowance-day. Children from seven to ten
years old, of both sexes, almost naked, might be seen at all seasons of the year.

There were no beds given the slaves, unless one coarse blanket be considered such, and none
but the men and women had these. This, however, is not considered a very great privation. They
find less difficulty from the want of beds, than from the want of time to sleep; for when their
day's work in the field is done, the most of them having their washing, mending, and cooking
to do, and having few or none of the ordinary facilities for doing either of these, very many
of their sleeping hours are consumed in preparing for the field the coming day; and when this
is done, old and young, male and female, married and single, drop down side by side, on one
common bed,--the cold, damp floor,--each covering himself or herself with their miserable blankets;
and here they sleep till they are summoned to the field by the driver's horn. At the sound
of this, all must rise, and be off to the field. There must be no halting; every one must be
at his or her post; and woe betides them who hear not this morning summons to the field; for
if they are not awakened by the sense of hearing, they are by the sense of feeling: no age
nor sex finds any favor. Mr. Severe, the overseer, used to stand by the door of the quarter,
armed with a large hickory stick and heavy cowskin, ready to whip any one who was so unfortunate
as not to hear, or, from any other cause, was prevented from being ready to start for the field
at the sound of the horn.

Mr. Severe was rightly named: he was a cruel man. I have seen him whip a woman, causing the
blood to run half an hour at the time; and this, too, in the midst of her crying children,
pleading for their mother's release. He seemed to take pleasure in manifesting his fiendish
barbarity. Added to his cruelty, he was a profane swearer. It was enough to chill the blood
and stiffen the hair of an ordinary man to hear him talk. Scarce a sentence escaped him but
that was commenced or concluded by some horrid oath. The field was the place to witness his
cruelty and profanity. His presence made it both the field of blood and of blasphemy. From
the rising till the going down of the sun, he was cursing, raving, cutting, and slashing among
the slaves of the field, in the most frightful manner. His career was short. He died very soon
after I went to Colonel Lloyd's; and he died as he lived, uttering, with his dying groans,
bitter curses and horrid oaths. His death was regarded by the slaves as the result of a merciful
providence.

Mr. Severe's place was filled by a Mr. Hopkins. He was a very different man. He was less cruel,
less profane, and made less noise, than Mr. Severe. His course was characterized by no extraordinary
demonstrations of cruelty. He whipped, but seemed to take no pleasure in it. He was called
by the slaves a good overseer.

The home plantation of Colonel Lloyd wore the appearance of a country village. All the mechanical
operations for all the farms were performed here. The shoemaking and mending, the blacksmithing,
cartwrighting, coopering, weaving, and grain-grinding, were all performed by the slaves on
the home plantation. The whole place wore a business-like aspect very unlike the neighboring
farms. The number of houses, too, conspired to give it advantage over the neighboring farms.
It was called by the slaves the Great House Farm. Few privileges were esteemed higher, by the
slaves of the out-farms, than that of being selected to do errands at the Great House Farm.
It was associated in their minds with greatness. A representative could not be prouder of his
election to a seat in the American Congress, than a slave on one of the out-farms would be
of his election to do errands at the Great House Farm. They regarded it as evidence of great
confidence reposed in them by their overseers; and it was on this account, as well as a constant
desire to be out of the field from under the driver's lash, that they esteemed it a high privilege,
one worth careful living for. He was called the smartest and most trusty fellow, who had this
honor conferred upon him the most frequently. The competitors for this office sought as diligently
to please their overseers, as the office-seekers in the political parties seek to please and
deceive the people. The same traits of character might be seen in Colonel Lloyd's slaves, as
are seen in the slaves of the political parties.

The slaves selected to go to the Great House Farm, for the monthly allowance for themselves
and their fellow-slaves, were peculiarly enthusiastic. While on their way, they would make
the dense old woods, for miles around, reverberate with their wild songs, revealing at once
the highest joy and the deepest sadness. They would compose and sing as they went along, consulting
neither time nor tune. The thought that came up, came out--if not in the word, in the sound;--and
as frequently in the one as in the other. They would sometimes sing the most pathetic sentiment
in the most rapturous tone, and the most rapturous sentiment in the most pathetic tone. Into
all of their songs they would manage to weave something of the Great House Farm. Especially
would they do this, when leaving home. They would then sing most exultingly the following words:--

     "I am going away to the Great House Farm!
     O, yea! O, yea! O!" I have frequently found myself in
tears while hearing them. The mere recurrence to those songs, even
now, afflicts me; and while I am writing these lines, an expression of
feeling has already found its way down my cheek.

I have often been utterly astonished, since I came to the north, to find persons who could
speak of the singing, among slaves, as evidence of their contentment and happiness. It is impossible
to conceive of a greater mistake. Slaves sing most when they are most unhappy. The songs of
the slave represent the sorrows of his heart; and he is relieved by them, only as an aching
heart is relieved by its tears. At least, such is my experience. I have often sung to drown
my sorrow, but seldom to express my happiness. Crying for joy, and singing for joy, were alike
uncommon to me while in the jaws of slavery.

CHAPTER III

Colonel Lloyd kept a large and finely cultivated garden, which afforded almost constant employment
for four men, besides the chief gardener, (Mr. M'Durmond.) This garden was probably the greatest
attraction of the place. During the summer months, people came from far and near--from Baltimore,
Easton, and Annapolis--to see it. It abounded in fruits of almost every description, from the
hardy apple of the north to the delicate orange of the south. This garden was not the least
source of trouble on the plantation. Its excellent fruit was quite a temptation to the hungry
swarms of boys, as well as the older slaves, belonging to the colonel, few of whom had the
virtue or the vice to resist it. Scarcely a day passed, during the summer, but that some slave
had to take the lash for stealing fruit. The colonel had to resort to all kinds of stratagems
to keep his slaves out of the garden. The last and most successful one was that of tarring
his fence all around; after which, if a slave was caught with any tar upon his person, it was
deemed sufficient proof that he had either been into the garden, or had tried to get in. In
either case, he was severely whipped by the chief gardener. This plan worked well; the slaves
became as fearful of tar as of the lash. They seemed to realize the impossibility of touching
TAR without being defiled.

The colonel also kept a splendid riding equipage. His stable and carriage-house presented the
appearance of some of our large city livery establishments. His horses were of the finest form
and noblest blood. His carriage-house contained three splendid coaches, three or four gigs,
besides dearborns and barouches of the most fashionable style.

This establishment was under the care of two slaves--old Barney and young Barney--father and
son. To attend to this establishment was their sole work. But it was by no means an easy employment;
for in nothing was Colonel Lloyd more particular than in the management of his horses. The
slightest inattention to these was unpardonable, and was visited upon those, under whose care
they were placed, with the severest punishment; no excuse could shield them, if the colonel
only suspected any want of attention to his horses--a supposition which he frequently indulged,
and one which, of course, made the office of old and young Barney a very trying one. They never
knew when they were safe from punishment. They were frequently whipped when least deserving,
and escaped whipping when most deserving it. Every thing depended upon the looks of the horses,
and the state of Colonel Lloyd's own mind when his horses were brought to him for use. If a
horse did not move fast enough, or hold his head high enough, it was owing to some fault of
his keepers. It was painful to stand near the stable-door, and hear the various complaints
against the keepers when a horse was taken out for use. "This horse has not had proper attention.
He has not been sufficiently rubbed and curried, or he has not been properly fed; his food
was too wet or too dry; he got it too soon or too late; he was too hot or too cold; he had
too much hay, and not enough of grain; or he had too much grain, and not enough of hay; instead
of old Barney's attending to the horse, he had very improperly left it to his son." To all
these complaints, no matter how unjust, the slave must answer never a word. Colonel Lloyd could
not brook any contradiction from a slave. When he spoke, a slave must stand, listen, and tremble;
and such was literally the case. I have seen Colonel Lloyd make old Barney, a man between fifty
and sixty years of age, uncover his bald head, kneel down upon the cold, damp ground, and receive
upon his naked and toil-worn shoulders more than thirty lashes at the time. Colonel Lloyd had
three sons--Edward, Murray, and Daniel,--and three sons-in-law, Mr. Winder, Mr. Nicholson,
and Mr. Lowndes. All of these lived at the Great House Farm, and enjoyed the luxury of whipping
the servants when they pleased, from old Barney down to William Wilkes, the coach-driver. I
have seen Winder make one of the house-servants stand off from him a suitable distance to be
touched with the end of his whip, and at every stroke raise great ridges upon his back.

To describe the wealth of Colonel Lloyd would be almost equal to describing the riches of Job.
He kept from ten to fifteen house-servants. He was said to own a thousand slaves, and I think
this estimate quite within the truth. Colonel Lloyd owned so many that he did not know them
when he saw them; nor did all the slaves of the out-farms know him. If they have any thing
to say of their masters, it is generally in their masters' favor, especially when speaking
to an untried man. They think their own better than that of others. These quarrels would almost
always end in a fight between the parties, and those that whipped were supposed to have gained
the point at issue. They seemed to think that the greatness of their masters was transferable
to themselves. It was considered as being bad enough to be a slave; but to be a poor man's
slave was deemed a disgrace indeed!

CHAPTER IV

Mr. Hopkins remained but a short time in the office of overseer. Why his career was so short,
I do not know, but suppose he lacked the necessary severity to suit Colonel Lloyd. Mr. Hopkins
was succeeded by Mr. Austin Gore, a man possessing, in an eminent degree, all those traits
of character indispensable to what is called a first-rate overseer. Mr. Gore had served Colonel
Lloyd, in the capacity of overseer, upon one of the out-farms, and had shown himself worthy
of the high station of overseer upon the home or Great House Farm.

Mr. Gore was proud, ambitious, and persevering. He was artful, cruel, and obdurate. He was
just the man for such a place, and it was just the place for such a man. It afforded scope
for the full exercise of all his powers, and he seemed to be perfectly at home in it. He was
one of those who could torture the slightest look, word, or gesture, on the part of the slave,
into impudence, and would treat it accordingly. There must be no answering back to him; no
explanation was allowed a slave, showing himself to have been wrongfully accused. Mr. Gore
acted fully up to the maxim laid down by slaveholders,--"It is better that a dozen slaves should
suffer under the lash, than that the overseer should be convicted, in the presence of the slaves,
of having been at fault." No matter how innocent a slave might be--it availed him nothing,
when accused by Mr. Gore of any misdemeanor. To be accused was to be convicted, and to be convicted
was to be punished; the one always following the other with immutable certainty. To escape
punishment was to escape accusation; and few slaves had the fortune to do either, under the
overseership of Mr. Gore. He was just proud enough to demand the most debasing homage of the
slave, and quite servile enough to crouch, himself, at the feet of the master. He was ambitious
enough to be contented with nothing short of the highest rank of overseers, and persevering
enough to reach the height of his ambition. He was cruel enough to inflict the severest punishment,
artful enough to descend to the lowest trickery, and obdurate enough to be insensible to the
voice of a reproving conscience. He was, of all the overseers, the most dreaded by the slaves.
His presence was painful; his eye flashed confusion; and seldom was his sharp, shrill voice
heard, without producing horror and trembling in their ranks.

Mr. Gore was a grave man, and, though a young man, he indulged in no jokes, said no funny words,
seldom smiled. His words were in perfect keeping with his looks, and his looks were in perfect
keeping with his words. Overseers will sometimes indulge in a witty word, even with the slaves;
not so with Mr. Gore. He spoke but to command, and commanded but to be obeyed; he dealt sparingly
with his words, and bountifully with his whip, never using the former where the latter would
answer as well. When he whipped, he seemed to do so from a sense of duty, and feared no consequences.
He did nothing reluctantly, no matter how disagreeable; always at his post, never inconsistent.
He never promised but to fulfil. He was, in a word, a man of the most inflexible firmness and
stone-like coolness.

His savage barbarity was equalled only by the consummate coolness with which he committed the
grossest and most savage deeds upon the slaves under his charge. Mr. Gore once undertook to
whip one of Colonel Lloyd's slaves, by the name of Demby. He had given Demby but few stripes,
when, to get rid of the scourging, he ran and plunged himself into a creek, and stood there
at the depth of his shoulders, refusing to come out. Mr. Gore told him that he would give him
three calls, and that, if he did not come out at the third call, he would shoot him. The first
call was given. Demby made no response, but stood his ground. The second and third calls were
given with the same result. Mr. Gore then, without consultation or deliberation with any one,
not even giving Demby an additional call, raised his musket to his face, taking deadly aim
at his standing victim, and in an instant poor Demby was no more. His mangled body sank out
of sight, and blood and brains marked the water where he had stood.

A thrill of horror flashed through every soul upon the plantation, excepting Mr. Gore. He alone
seemed cool and collected. He was asked by Colonel Lloyd and my old master, why he resorted
to this extraordinary expedient. His reply was, (as well as I can remember,) that Demby had
become unmanageable. He was setting a dangerous example to the other slaves,--one which, if
suffered to pass without some such demonstration on his part, would finally lead to the total
subversion of all rule and order upon the plantation. He argued that if one slave refused to
be corrected, and escaped with his life, the other slaves would soon copy the example; the
result of which would be, the freedom of the slaves, and the enslavement of the whites. Mr.
Gore's defence was satisfactory. She was immediately buried, but had not been in her untimely
grave but a few hours before she was taken up and examined by the coroner, who decided that
she had come to her death by severe beating. The offence for which this girl was thus murdered
was this:--She had been set that night to mind Mrs. Hicks's baby, and during the night she
fell asleep, and the baby cried. She, having lost her rest for several nights previous, did
not hear the crying. They were both in the room with Mrs. Hicks. There was a warrant issued
for her arrest, but it was never served. Thus she escaped not only punishment, but even the
pain of being arraigned before a court for her horrid crime.

Whilst I am detailing bloody deeds which took place during my stay on Colonel Lloyd's plantation,
I will briefly narrate another, which occurred about the same time as the murder of Demby by
Mr. Gore.

Colonel Lloyd's slaves were in the habit of spending a part of their nights and Sundays in
fishing for oysters, and in this way made up the deficiency of their scanty allowance. An old
man belonging to Colonel Lloyd, while thus engaged, happened to get beyond the limits of Colonel
Lloyd's, and on the premises of Mr. Beal Bondly. At this trespass, Mr. Bondly took offence,
and with his musket came down to the shore, and blew its deadly contents into the poor old man.

Mr. Bondly came over to see Colonel Lloyd the next day, whether to pay him for his property,
or to justify himself in what he had done, I know not. At any rate, this whole fiendish transaction
was soon hushed up. There was very little said about it at all, and nothing done.

CHAPTER V

As to my own treatment while I lived on Colonel Lloyd's plantation, it was very similar to
that of the other slave children. I was not old enough to work in the field, and there being
little else than field work to do, I had a great deal of leisure time. The most I had to do
was to drive up the cows at evening, keep the fowls out of the garden, keep the front yard
clean, and run of errands for my old master's daughter, Mrs. Lucretia Auld. Vienna is the original
home of the waltz. The "Blue Danube" was composed on the shores of the river which flows through
the Austrian capital.

The dominant religion of the German Empire is Protestant, but in the
Dual Monarchy it is Roman Catholic among the ruling Germans in Austria
and Magyars in Hungary.

In Austria and in Hungary most of the land is held in great estates. The peasants, as in Germany,
sometimes own a few strips of land near their miserable villages. Possession of land is necessary
to the standing of any noble. In Hungary, for example, no noble sits in the house of Magnates
or House of Lords unless he is the owner of a certain amount of land.

Once across the Hungarian border, one sees the people taking a certain
delight in refusing to understand German.

The names of the railway stations are in Hungarian, and the uniforms of station officials, conductors,
etc., differ from those in Austria. Every effort is made by the population to emphasise the fact
that Hungary is an independent kingdom, joined to Austria by personal rule alone.

There is no melting pot in this part of the world. In the Lower House of the Hungarian parliament
sit forty-three Croatian delegates, Croatia being that part of southwestern
Hungary near the Adriatic where the inhabitants are of Slav blood.

By the Hungarian constitution those delegates have the right to speak in the Hungarian parliament
in their own language and so from time to time a Croatian delegate arises in his place and delivers
an ambitious harangue in Croatian, understood by no one except his fellow delegates who already
know what he intends to talk about. This is only one example of how these peoples cling tenaciously
to their language and national rights.

It is possible to find in Hungary an Hungarian village, a German village,
a Slav village and a Roumanian village, all within a short distance
of each other.

Men from each of these villages after one month in the United States throw aside their national
costume and buy their clothes in the same Bowery shop, eat the same food and send their children
to the same public school not only without protest, but with eagerness, whereas, in Hungary,
not one of the inhabitants of these different villages would think of abandoning his national
traits to learn the language of his German neighbours.

Because commands are given in German in the armies of the Dual Monarchy all the male population,
at least during the term of their military service, have been compelled
to learn some German.

But this they forget as soon as possible when they return from their period of military service.

Many
members of these races go to America and after working there a short time amass enough money to
return to Austria-Hungary and purchase a small piece of land,--the ambition of every one born
of the soil.

One of the sons of Prince Lichtenstein told me that a friend who was running for the Hungarian
Lower House in a district of Hungary largely inhabited by Slavs, spoke in Hungarian and, finding
that his audience did not understand him, tried German. Finally, when matters had come to
a standstill, some one in the back of the room called out to him, asking if he spoke English.
The candidate answered that he did. Whereupon the crowd told him to speak English which nearly
all understood, and so the Hungarian, a candidate for parliament in Hungary, was forced, in order
to be understood, to address his Hungarian electors in the language
which they had learned in America.

Franz Ferdinand, whose murder at Sarajevo was used by the Central
Powers as a pretext for a war determined on long before that time,
was the heir to the throne of the late Francis Joseph.

He was a romantic character. He visited frequently at the house of Archduchess Isabella, where
Countess Chotek, of a Bohemian noble family, was a lady in waiting. Franz Ferdinand fell violently
in love with the fair Bohemian, and in his desire to marry, enlisted the aid of Koloman Szell, Premier
of Hungary.

Szell told friends how Franz Ferdinand loved mystery and how, when he wanted to talk to him about
marriage plans, instead of meeting somewhere openly in Vienna, would arrange that Szell's train
should stop in the open fields. Szell, on alighting and following directions, would find Franz
Ferdinand hiding behind a designated haystack.

In a country where one royal family not only rules but owns the land, this attempt of Archduke
Franz Ferdinand, then heir to the throne, and mad with love, to marry Countess Sophie Chotek, lady
in waiting to Archduchess Isabella, caused a palace revolution. By the aid of Szell he at last
succeeded in carrying out the marriage. But this was only after he and his wife had been required
to submit to the most humiliating conditions and subscribe to a marriage contract or promise
which was not only enacted thereafter as a statute in Hungary, but was formally put on record by
the Austrian parliament.

In this declaration, Franz Ferdinand declared it to be "his firm and resolute resolve to marry
Countess Sophie Chotek, that he had sought, in accordance with the laws of the house, to obtain
consent of the Imperial and Royal Apostolic Majesty, the Emperor and King, Francis Joseph I,
gloriously reigning, that the most serene, supreme head of the Arch house had deigned graciously
to grant this permission and that Franz Ferdinand, however (describing himself as 'We'), recognise
the house laws and declare them binding on Us particularly with regard to this marriage declaration,
that our Marriage with Countess Chotek is not a marriage of equal birth, but a morganatic one
and is to be considered as such for all time, and that in consequence neither our wife nor our
issue or descendants is entitled to possess or claim those rights, titles, armorial bearings
and privileges that belong to wives of equal birth and to children of archdukes or marriages
of equal birth." Franz Ferdinand, further, recognised that his children from this marriage
would have no right to succeed to the throne in the kingdoms and lands of Austria nor, consequently,
to the lands of the Hungarian Crown and that they were excluded from the order of succession.

He further agreed and promised not only for himself but for his wife and children, that none of
them would ever attempt to revoke this declaration.

The old Emperor gave the wife of Franz Ferdinand the title of Princess
Hohenberg and later raised her to the rank of duchess which, in the
Central Empires, is a higher rank than that of princess.

She was also created a Serene Highness after the birth of her third child, Prince Ernest, in
1904. The first child, Princess Sophie, was born in 1901, and the second, Prince Maximilian Charles,
in 1902.

In spite of the rank thus granted to her, the Duchess of Hohenberg was frequently slighted by Archdukes
and Archduchesses of the House of Hapsburg, and when the present Emperor, the Archduke Charles
Francis Joseph, married Princess Zita of Bourbon-Parma, in 1911, and this marriage was followed
by the birth of a son, on November 20, 1912, it was plain to Franz Ferdinand and his wife that
the hostility of the old Emperor and the other members of the House of Hapsburg, aided by events,
had succeeded in definitely excluding his children by Countess Sophie from the throne.

These slights to his wife, so marked as to cause the publication of articles inspired by himself
in a newspaper devoted to his interests, and the birth of the heir
to Carl, must have had a profound influence on melancholy Franz Ferdinand.

In

all Europe there was one monarch clever enough to take advantage of the situation, to win Franz Ferdinand
to him by the honours he paid to the Duchess of Hohenberg,--the German Emperor. Kaiser Wilhelm
invited the pair to Potsdam and there both were made to feel that in one court, at least,
the honours due to a wife of equal birth were paid to the ex-Countess
Sophie.

This Potsdam visit was in 1909, and I believe that, thereafter, the German Emperor and Franz
Ferdinand met on other occasions.

In the chapter on Emperor Wilhelm, I have stated the belief prevalent, even in Germany, that
he intended as his first step towards his openly expressed ambition for world dominion, to make
himself, on the death of Francis Joseph, Emperor of a Great Continental Empire in which the
German Princes, his sons, should occupy the thrones of Hungary and Bohemia, the heir of the
House of Austria to rule as king or grand duke of Austria with possibly another German ruled
kingdom touching the sea on the south.

There are some who believe that when the Kaiser, accompanied by von Tirpitz, visited Franz Ferdinand
at Konopisht in June, 1914, before the Kiel week, that a great conspiracy was entered into,
in which it was arranged that a great Central Empire should be created with one of the sons of
the Duchess of Hohenberg on the throne of Bohemia and the other provided for by some newly carved
out kingdom made from Bosnia, or a portion of Serbia. And it may have been part of this plot
that Eitel Fritz and other sons of the Kaiser should be provided with thrones derived from Balkan
territory.

It will be remembered that as Franz Ferdinand and his wife fell under the assassin's bullet at
Sarajevo he called out: "Sophie, live for our children!" His devotion to his wife and to their
children was extraordinary. He was continually sparing from his income so that on his death
his sons would have a large sum of money, saved from the income of estates which they could not
inherit.

It is hard to believe that such a crime against the House of Hapsburg and against his own country
was contemplated from the inside of royalty. But one event seems a confirmation of this theory.
The dead Franz Ferdinand and his wife were buried with such lack of honour, almost with such
contempt, as to lead to the belief that the head of the House of Hapsburg, Emperor Francis Joseph
himself, without whose directions the Chamberlain, Count Montenuovo, would not have dared to act,
discovered his heir in some act against the laws or fortunes of the Imperial House.

For the funeral arrangements were such, that the Austrian and Hungarian aristocracy were moved
to protest and as a result a belated order was issued directing that the troops of the Vienna Garrison
should take part in the funeral ceremonies. About one hundred and fifty members of the leading
families of Hungary and Austria, without invitation, entered the funeral procession and followed
the bodies to the railway station. The London Times correspondent called attention to this in
cables to his newspaper at the time.

Personally, I do not incline to this view, but I do believe that at Konopisht the war of 1914
was finally agreed on. Too many bits of evidence point to this and from something said to me
at Kiel by a very high personage, before the assassinations at Sarajevo, I would have guessed
that war was coming, had it not been impossible for me to believe that the world was to be plunged
into war simply because the German people were restless under the rule of the autocracy.

When the murders occurred at Sarajevo, all plans had been laid for war and the death of Franz
Ferdinand and the Duchess of Hohenberg merely gave another excuse to begin hostilities, after
Austria, in the Council of Potsdam, had ratified all the arrangements made by the Emperor Wilhelm
and Franz Ferdinand for the European war. Undoubtedly the German Emperor used his influence
with Franz Ferdinand and his wife in order to secure the former's aid in dragging Austria into
the war,--a war begun to win the dominion of the world.

How many in America have heard the name of Sophie Chotek?

Yet the ambitions of this woman have done much to send to war the
splendid youths who from all the ends of the earth gather in France
to fight the fight of freedom.

The clever German Emperor, playing upon her ambitions, induced the gloomy, hated Franz Ferdinand to
consent to the world war, and matters had gone so far that even the death of the Archduke
Franz Ferdinand could not change the situation nor turn the war party of Hungary and Austria
from their programme of blood. Eighty-four years of age, the old Francis Joseph could only offer
a weak defence to the martial insistence of Tisza, Premier of Hungary, and his able understrapper,
Forgotsch, who represented him in the Foreign Office at Vienna and who undoubtedly is the
man who drafted the forty-eight hour ultimatum to Servia.

Berliners say that although the German Emperor gave the Duchess of Hohenberg all the honours
due to the wife of an Austrian Archduke, heir to the throne of the Austrian Empire, he was careful
not to bring her claims in direct conflict with any Prussian female Royalty and that on the
first visit of Franz Ferdinand and his wife to Potsdam, when the doors of the banquet room were
thrown open, it was seen that the Kaiser had skilfully placed all the guests at small tables,
sitting at one with the Empress and his two guests. In this way he prevented a conflict of precedence
and a possible scene with some Prussian royal princess.

After one of these Potsdam visits, the Austrian government appropriated three hundred millions for
new Skoda cannon and a great and unexpected increase of the navy was voted. In Austria itself it
was seen that the German influence was dragging Austria-Hungary nearer and nearer to war.

Ferdinand disliked the Hungarians and in turn was hated by them. If he had attained the throne
of the Empire, as his children could not inherit, he would have endeavoured
first to remove that obstacle, but if he had not succeeded he intended,
as I have said, either to restore the kingdom of Bohemia and place
his son, child of a Bohemian mother, on the newly created throne,
or create, possibly from conquered lands, another kingdom over which
his heir could reign.

The Magyars, the real Hungarian ruling race, are most skilful politicians. Their elections often
are corrupt and all the tricks of the politician are in use in Hungary.

In many families political talent seems hereditary. Tisza, the Premier of Hungary for the period
for some time before the war, was the son of Tisza, who was Premier of Hungary about the year
1875. Kossuth, son of the great Kossuth, has been active in politics. The father of Count Julius
Andrassy was Premier about 1866 and favoured Germany, a policy which has been inherited by
his son. One of the sons-in-law of Count Andrassy's wife, Marquis Pallavicini, came to America
to act as best man when my wife's sister married Count Sigray.

Andrassy came to Berlin during the war where I had several long talks with him. The one desire of
Hungarians and Austrians alike is for peace, but surrounded by the armies of their German masters,
they have lost their independence of action, a bitter blow to the Magyars, who are not fond
of the Germans.

Count Stephen Tisza is an obstinate and able man, so many sided that it is related of him that
he fought a duel, rode a steeplechase and made a great speech in Parliament, all in one day.

Duelling
is still a custom in Hungary, Austria and Germany. Once when I was in Hungary I took supper
with a Count who had been second in a duel that day. One young Magnate was at a restaurant
with an actress who wore a wide brimmed hat. Another young Magnate of his acquaintance looked
under the hat brim to see who the girl was. Result: a duel with sabres in a riding school.
On this occasion, as the insult was not deadly, the use of sharp points was forbidden. The
duel was stopped after one young Magnate received a cut on the forehead.

Stephen Tisza, on first taking office, was permitted by the old Emperor to obtain some apparent
concessions for Hungary in order to make his premiership popular. It was arranged that Hungarian
flags should be carried by Hungarian regiments, and that the officers of those regiments all should
be Hungarians, but German was to be used as the military language and language of command even in
the Hungarian regiments.

As soon as Tisza became premier for the first time, Count Apponyi left the Liberal party and lately
Count Julius Andrassy and his wife's sons-in-law, Count Karoli and Marquis Pallavicini, have been
in violent opposition to Tisza, Pallavicini even fighting a duel with the Prime Minister.

In a country where the majority of the inhabitants are Roman Catholics it is rather strange that
Tisza and his father, both strong Protestants, should have attained the Premiership. The father
of Count Stephen Tisza was even more obstinate than his son and greatly oppressed the Slovaks
and Roumanians within the borders of Hungary.

A great responsibility lies at the door of Stephen Tisza. He allowed the Germans to use him in bringing
on the world war. Doubtless he believed that Russia and the Powers would not move, that Austria-Hungary
could seize or invade Serbia, while Germany terrorised the world as in 1908 when Bosnia and
Herzegovina were added to the Imperial dominions. But his failure to read the intentions of Russia
and the other Powers is no excuse for the calamity he brought on Hungary and the world, no excuse
for the fact that his country is now overwhelmed by Kaiserism, its armies surrounded by the
armies of Germany and its very independence threatened by the subtle influence and intrigues of the master
intriguer of the world,--the German Kaiser.

The franchise in Austria and in Hungary is like that given grudgingly
to the Prussian, a mere ghost of suffrage.

Autocracy rules. In Hungary, particularly the Magyars, seeking to keep the political power
in their hands, oppose a broadening of the franchise. Tisza has always been against any letting
down of the bars, but when the young and brilliant Count Esterhazy was made Premier, many looked
for a change--a change which has, however, not yet come.

The new Emperor Carl at first seemed to exhibit Liberal tendencies, but only for a moment.

The events in Russia will have a grave effect in Austria-Hungary.
More than a million Russians are prisoners in the Dual Monarchy, nearly
a million of whose subjects are in Russia--and of these at least fifty
thousand Czechs are fighting the Austrians and Germans in the ranks
of the Roumanian army. Many more will refuse to leave Russia, but
the coming back of one-half, after having witnessed the winning of
liberty by the Russians, will influence their countrymen in no small
degree. Just as the French soldiers under Lafayette and Rochambeau,
after helping us gain our independence, returned from the free fields
of America to a France where the burdens of the plain people were
almost unendurable and brought on the great French Revolution, the
soldiers and prisoners who return to Prussia and to Austria-Hungary
from the strange scenes of the Russian Revolution may, perhaps, leaven
the inert slave masses of the Central Empires with a spirit of revolt
for liberty.

We should institute a great propaganda from the Italian
front. For instance, I have been told by a man who has been on that
front, a man who should know, that if a few American troops were sent
there and signs erected stating "Come over and surrender to the Americans,
you will be taken to America well fed and paid a dollar per day when
you volunteer to work," there would be a great rush of Austro-Hungarian
troops eager to be taken prisoner.

The losses of Austria and Hungary
have been enormous--men up to fifty-five have been drafted for the
army, and the troops have often suffered defeat and the horrors of
retreat at the hands of Russians, Serbians, and Italians.

And all
the time the iron hand of the German Kaiser grasps more and more of
the power. Cheerless prospect it is for the once gay Hungarians, the
once happy Austrians, if to financial ruin and the killing of the
flower of their youth is to be added the iron horror of Prussian domination.

Our
citizens of Austrian and especially of Hungarian descent have been
loyal to their new flag. And our great President with enlightened
wisdom has eased the enemy alien regulations so as to favour those
born in the Dual Monarchy. America will never forget the loyalty,
ungrudgingly given by those of her people born under the double eagle
of the Hapsburgs.

In my many visits to Hungary I grew to like and
admire the Hungarians. Natural in manners, hospitable, polite, there
is something in them that wins Americans. How different the open hospitality
and friendliness in Budapest from the stern, cold formality of the
Prussian capital!

And with all friends of Hungary I hope that that
country will soon throw off the trance of Prussianism, which has led
the Dual Monarchy into a Dance of Death.

CHAPTER XVI

GERMAN INFLUENCE
ON THE NORTHERN NEUTRALS

Just as I had the opportunity to study conditions
in Austria, so also I came in contact with the politics and diplomacy
of the nations contiguous to Germany on the north.

My grandfather,
Benjamin F. Angel, was American Minister to Sweden and Norway and
on leaving received from the King the Order of St. Olaf. I have always
taken a deep interest in Scandinavian affairs and it behooves the
American people to regard closely what is happening nowadays in Norway,
Sweden and Denmark. Hearing the
word in this connection very often, I set about learning what it meant. The dictionary afforded
me little or no help. I found it was "the act of abolishing;" but then I did not know what
was to be abolished. Here I was perplexed. I did not dare to ask any one about its meaning,
for I was satisfied that it was something they wanted me to know very little about. After a
patient waiting, I got one of our city papers, containing an account of the number of petitions
from the north, praying for the abolition of slavery in the District of Columbia, and of the
slave trade between the States. From this time I understood the words abolition and abolitionist,
and always drew near when that word was spoken, expecting to hear something of importance to
myself and fellow-slaves. The light broke in upon me by degrees. I went one day down on the
wharf of Mr. Waters; and seeing two Irishmen unloading a scow of stone, I went, unasked, and
helped them. When we had finished, one of them came to me and asked me if I were a slave. I
told him I was. He asked, "Are ye a slave for life?" I told him that I was. He said it was
a shame to hold me. They both advised me to run away to the north; that I should find friends
there, and that I should be free. I was afraid that these seemingly good men might use me so;
but I nevertheless remembered their advice, and from that time I resolved to run away. I looked
forward to a time at which it would be safe for me to escape. I was too young to think of doing
so immediately; besides, I wished to learn how to write, as I might have occasion to write
my own pass. I consoled myself with the hope that I should one day find a good chance. Meanwhile,
I would learn to write.

The idea as to how I might learn to write was suggested to me by being in Durgin and Bailey's
ship-yard, and frequently seeing the ship carpenters, after hewing, and getting a piece of
timber ready for use, write on the timber the name of that part of the ship for which it was
intended. When a piece of timber was intended for the larboard side, it would be marked thus--"L."
When a piece was for the starboard side, it would be marked thus--"S." A piece for the larboard
side forward, would be marked thus--"L. F." When a piece was for starboard side forward, it
would be marked thus--"S. F." For larboard aft, it would be marked thus--"L. A." For starboard
aft, it would be marked thus--"S. A." I soon learned the names of these letters, and for what
they were intended when placed upon a piece of timber in the ship-yard. I immediately commenced
copying them, and in a short time was able to make the four letters named. After that, when
I met with any boy who I knew could write, I would tell him I could write as well as he. The
next word would be, "I don't believe you. Let me see you try it." I would then make the letters
which I had been so fortunate as to learn, and ask him to beat that. In this way I got a good
many lessons in writing, which it is quite possible I should never have gotten in any other
way. During this time, my copy-book was the board fence, brick wall, and pavement; my pen and
ink was a lump of chalk. With these, I learned mainly how to write. I then commenced and continued
copying the Italics in Webster's Spelling Book, until I could make them all without looking
on the book. My mistress used to go to class meeting at the Wilk Street meetinghouse every
Monday afternoon, and leave me to take care of the house. When left thus, I used to spend the
time in writing in the spaces left in Master Thomas's copy-book, copying what he had written.
I continued to do this until I could write a hand very similar to that of Master Thomas. Thus,
after a long, tedious effort for years, I finally succeeded in learning how to write. He died
while on a visit to see his daughter at Hillsborough. Cut off thus unexpectedly, he left no
will as to the disposal of his property. It was therefore necessary to have a valuation of
the property, that it might be equally divided between Mrs. Lucretia and Master Andrew. I was
immediately sent for, to be valued with the other property. Here again my feelings rose up
in detestation of slavery. I had now a new conception of my degraded condition. Prior to this,
I had become, if not insensible to my lot, at least partly so. I left Baltimore with a young
heart overborne with sadness, and a soul full of apprehension. I took passage with Captain
Rowe, in the schooner Wild Cat, and, after a sail of about twenty-four hours, I found myself
near the place of my birth. I had now been absent from it almost, if not quite, five years.
I, however, remembered the place very well. I was only about five years old when I left it,
to go and live with my old master on Colonel Lloyd's plantation; so that I was now between
ten and eleven years old.

We were all ranked together at the valuation. Silvery-headed age and sprightly youth, maids
and matrons, had to undergo the same indelicate inspection. At this moment, I saw more clearly
than ever the brutalizing effects of slavery upon both slave and slaveholder.

After the valuation, then came the division. I have no language to express the high excitement
and deep anxiety which were felt among us poor slaves during this time. Our fate for life was
now to be decided. we had no more voice in that decision than the brutes among whom we were
ranked. A single word from the white men was enough--against all our wishes, prayers, and entreaties--to
sunder forever the dearest friends, dearest kindred, and strongest ties known to human beings.
In addition to the pain of separation, there was the horrid dread of falling into the hands
of Master Andrew. He was known to us all as being a most cruel wretch,--a common drunkard,
who had, by his reckless mismanagement and profligate dissipation, already wasted a large portion
of his father's property. We all felt that we might as well be sold at once to the Georgia
traders, as to pass into his hands; for we knew that that would be our inevitable condition,--a
condition held by us all in the utmost horror and dread.

I suffered more anxiety than most of my fellowslaves. I had known what it was to be kindly
treated; they had known nothing of the kind. They had seen little or nothing of the world.
They were in very deed men and women of sorrow, and acquainted with grief. Their backs had
been made familiar with the bloody lash, so that they had become callous; mine was yet tender;
for while at Baltimore I got few whippings, and few slaves could boast of a kinder master and
mistress than myself; and the thought of passing out of their hands into those of Master Andrew--a
man who, but a few days before, to give me a sample of his bloody disposition, took my little
brother by the throat, threw him on the ground, and with the heel of his boot stamped upon
his head till the blood gushed from his nose and ears--was well calculated to make me anxious
as to my fate. After he had committed this savage outrage upon my brother, he turned to me,
and said that was the way he meant to serve me one of these days,--meaning, I suppose, when
I came into his possession.

Thanks to a kind Providence, I fell to the portion of Mrs. Lucretia, and was sent immediately
back to Baltimore, to live again in the family of Master Hugh. Their joy at my return equalled
their sorrow at my departure. It was a glad day to me. I had escaped a worse than lion's jaws.
I was absent from Baltimore, for the purpose of valuation and division, just about one month,
and it seemed to have been six.

Very soon after my return to Baltimore, my mistress, Lucretia, died, leaving her husband and
one child, Amanda; and in a very short time after her death, Master Andrew died. She stands--she
sits--she staggers--she falls--she groans--she dies--and there are none of her children or
grandchildren present, to wipe from her wrinkled brow the cold sweat of death, or to place
beneath the sod her fallen remains. Will not a righteous God visit for these things? Master
now lived in St. Michael's. Not long after his marriage, a misunderstanding took place between
himself and Master Hugh; and as a means of punishing his brother, he took me from him to live
with himself at St. Michael's. Here I underwent another most painful separation. It, however,
was not so severe as the one I dreaded at the division of property; for, during this interval,
a great change had taken place in Master Hugh and his once kind and affectionate wife. The
influence of brandy upon him, and of slavery upon her, had effected a disastrous change in
the characters of both; so that, as far as they were concerned, I thought I had little to lose
by the change. But it was not to them that I was attached. It was to those little Baltimore
boys that I felt the strongest attachment. I had received many good lessons from them, and
was still receiving them, and the thought of leaving them was painful indeed. I was leaving,
too, without the hope of ever being allowed to return. Master Thomas had said he would never
let me return again. The barrier betwixt himself and brother he considered impassable.

I then had to regret that I did not at least make the attempt to carry out my resolution to
run away; for the chances of success are tenfold greater from the city than from the country.

I sailed from Baltimore for St. Michael's in the sloop Amanda, Captain Edward Dodson. On my
passage, I paid particular attention to the direction which the steamboats took to go to Philadelphia.
I found, instead of going down, on reaching North Point they went up the bay, in a north-easterly
direction. I deemed this knowledge of the utmost importance. My determination to run away was
again revived. I resolved to wait only so long as the offering of a favorable opportunity.
When that came, I was determined to be off.

CHAPTER IX

I have now reached a period of my life when I can give dates. I left Baltimore, and went to
live with Master Thomas Auld, at St. Michael's, in March, 1832. It was now more than seven
years since I lived with him in the family of my old master, on Colonel Lloyd's plantation.
We of course were now almost entire strangers to each other. He was to me a new master, and
I to him a new slave. I was ignorant of his temper and disposition; he was equally so of mine.
A very short time, however, brought us into full acquaintance with each other. I was made acquainted
with his wife not less than with himself. They were well matched, being equally mean and cruel.
I was now, for the first time during a space of more than seven years, made to feel the painful
gnawings of hunger--a something which I had not experienced before since I left Colonel Lloyd's
plantation. It went hard enough with me then, when I could look back to no period at which
I had enjoyed a sufficiency. It was tenfold harder after living in Master Hugh's family, where
I had always had enough to eat, and of that which was good. I have said Master Thomas was a
mean man. He was so. Not to give a slave enough to eat, is regarded as the most aggravated
development of meanness even among slaveholders. Master Thomas gave us enough of neither coarse
nor fine food. There were four slaves of us in the kitchen--my sister Eliza, my aunt Priscilla,
Henny, and myself; and we were allowed less than a half of a bushel of corn-meal per week,
and very little else, either in the shape of meat or vegetables. It was not enough for us to
subsist upon. We were therefore reduced to the wretched necessity of living at the expense
of our neighbors. This we did by begging and stealing, whichever came handy in the time of
need, the one being considered as legitimate as the other. A great many times have we poor
creatures been nearly perishing with hunger, when food in abundance lay mouldering in the safe
and smoke-house, and our pious mistress was aware of the fact; and yet that mistress and her
husband would kneel every morning, and pray that God would bless them in basket and store!

Bad as all slaveholders are, we seldom meet one destitute of every element of character commanding
respect. My master was one of this rare sort. I do not know of one single noble act ever performed
by him. The leading trait in his character was meanness; and if there were any other element
in his nature, it was made subject to this. He was mean; and, like most other mean men, he
lacked the ability to conceal his meanness. Captain Auld was not born a slaveholder. He had
been a poor man, master only of a Bay craft. He came into possession of all his slaves by marriage;
and of all men, adopted slaveholders are the worst. He was cruel, but cowardly. He commanded
without firmness. In the enforcement of his rules, he was at times rigid, and at times lax.
At times, he spoke to his slaves with the firmness of Napoleon and the fury of a demon; at
other times, he might well be mistaken for an inquirer who had lost his way. He did nothing
of himself. He might have passed for a lion, but for his ears. In all things noble which he
attempted, his own meanness shone most conspicuous. His airs, words, and actions, were the
airs, words, and actions of born slaveholders, and, being assumed, were awkward enough. He
was not even a good imitator. He possessed all the disposition to deceive, but wanted the power.
Having no resources within himself, he was compelled to be the copyist of many, and being such,
he was forever the victim of inconsistency; and of consequence he was an object of contempt,
and was held as such even by his slaves. The luxury of having slaves of his own to wait upon
him was something new and unprepared for. He was a slaveholder without the ability to hold
slaves. He found himself incapable of managing his slaves either by force, fear, or fraud.
We seldom called him "master;" we generally called him "Captain Auld," and were hardly disposed
to title him at all. I doubt not that our conduct had much to do with making him appear awkward,
and of consequence fretful. Our want of reverence for him must have perplexed him greatly.
He wished to have us call him master, but lacked the firmness necessary to command us to do
so. His wife used to insist upon our calling him so, but to no purpose. In August, 1832, my
master attended a Methodist camp-meeting held in the Bay-side, Talbot county, and there experienced
religion. I indulged a faint hope that his conversion would lead him to emancipate his slaves,
and that, if he did not do this, it would, at any rate, make him more kind and humane. I was
disappointed in both these respects. It neither made him to be humane to his slaves, nor to
emancipate them. If it had any effect on his character, it made him more cruel and hateful
in all his ways; for I believe him to have been a much worse man after his conversion than
before. Prior to his conversion, he relied upon his own depravity to shield and sustain him
in his savage barbarity; but after his conversion, he found religious sanction and support
for his slaveholding cruelty. He made the greatest pretensions to piety. His house was the
house of prayer. He prayed morning, noon, and night. He very soon distinguished himself among
his brethren, and was soon made a class-leader and exhorter. His activity in revivals was great,
and he proved himself an instrument in the hands of the church in converting many souls. His
house was the preachers' home. They used to take great pleasure in coming there to put up;
for while he starved us, he stuffed them. We have had three or four preachers there at a time.
The names of those who used to come most frequently while I lived there, were Mr. Storks, Mr.
Ewery, Mr. Humphry, and Mr. Hickey. I have also seen Mr. George Cookman at our house. We slaves
loved Mr. Cookman. We believed him to be a good man. We thought him instrumental in getting
Mr. Samuel Harrison, a very rich slaveholder, to emancipate his slaves; and by some means got
the impression that he was laboring to effect the emancipation of all the slaves. When he was
at our house, we were sure to be called in to prayers. When the others were there, we were
sometimes called in and sometimes not. Mr. Cookman took more notice of us than either of the
other ministers. He could not come among us without betraying his sympathy for us, and, stupid
as we were, we had the sagacity to see it.

While I lived with my master in St. Michael's, there was a white young man, a Mr. Wilson, who
proposed to keep a Sabbath school for the instruction of such slaves as might be disposed to
learn to read the New Testament. We met but three times, when Mr. West and Mr. Fairbanks, both
class-leaders, with many others, came upon us with sticks and other missiles, drove us off,
and forbade us to meet again. Thus ended our little Sabbath school in the pious town of St.
Michael's.

I have said my master found religious sanction for his cruelty. As an example, I will state
one of many facts going to prove the charge. I have seen him tie up a lame young woman, and
whip her with a heavy cowskin upon her naked shoulders, causing the warm red blood to drip;
and, in justification of the bloody deed, he would quote this passage of Scripture--"He that
knoweth his master's will, and doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes."

Master would keep this lacerated young woman tied up in this horrid situation four or five
hours at a time. I have known him to tie her up early in the morning, and whip her before breakfast;
leave her, go to his store, return at dinner, and whip her again, cutting her in the places
already made raw with his cruel lash. The secret of master's cruelty toward "Henny" is found
in the fact of her being almost helpless. When quite a child, she fell into the fire, and burned
herself horribly. Her hands were so burnt that she never got the use of them. She could do
very little but bear heavy burdens. She was to master a bill of expense; and as he was a mean
man, she was a constant offence to him. He seemed desirous of getting the poor girl out of
existence. He gave her away once to his sister; but, being a poor gift, she was not disposed
to keep her. Master Thomas was one of the many pious slaveholders who hold slaves for the very
charitable purpose of taking care of them.

My master and myself had quite a number of differences. He found me unsuitable to his purpose.
My city life, he said, had had a very pernicious effect upon me. It had almost ruined me for
every good purpose, and fitted me for every thing which was bad. One of my greatest faults
was that of letting his horse run away, and go down to his father-inlaw's farm, which was about
five miles from St. Michael's. I would then have to go after it. My reason for this kind of
carelessness, or carefulness, was, that I could always get something to eat when I went there.
Master William Hamilton, my master's father-in-law, always gave his slaves enough to eat. I
never left there hungry, no matter how great the need of my speedy return. Master Thomas at
length said he would stand it no longer. I had lived with him nine months, during which time
he had given me a number of severe whippings, all to no good purpose. He resolved to put me
out, as he said, to be broken; and, for this purpose, he let me for one year to a man named
Edward Covey. Mr. Covey was a poor man, a farm-renter. He rented the place upon which he lived,
as also the hands with which he tilled it. Mr. Covey had acquired a very high reputation for
breaking young slaves, and this reputation was of immense value to him. It enabled him to get
his farm tilled with much less expense to himself than he could have had it done without such
a reputation. Some slaveholders thought it not much loss to allow Mr. Covey to have their slaves
one year, for the sake of the training to which they were subjected, without any other compensation.
He could hire young help with great ease, in consequence of this reputation. Added to the natural
good qualities of Mr. Covey, he was a professor of religion--a pious soul--a member and a class-leader
in the Methodist church. All of this added weight to his reputation as a "nigger-breaker."
I was aware of all the facts, having been made acquainted with them by a young man who had
lived there. I nevertheless made the change gladly; for I was sure of getting enough to eat,
which is not the smallest consideration to a hungry man.

CHAPTER X

I had left Master Thomas's house, and went to live with Mr. Covey, on the 1st of January, 1833.
I was now, for the first time in my life, a field hand. In my new employment, I found myself
even more awkward than a country boy appeared to be in a large city. I had been at my new home
but one week before Mr. Covey gave me a very severe whipping, cutting my back, causing the
blood to run, and raising ridges on my flesh as large as my little finger. The details of this
affair are as follows: Mr. Covey sent me, very early in the morning of one of our coldest days
in the month of January, to the woods, to get a load of wood. He gave me a team of unbroken
oxen. He told me which was the in-hand ox, and which the off-hand one. She is with Josef.

Yours of the Shamrock, DERMOTT MCDERMOTT.

The Countess de Nemours' house in Paris stood in the centre of the street of the Two Repentant
Magdalens. An iron door in a griffoned arch opened into a sunny court-yard, where peacocks strutted
by an old fountain, and a black poodle, who was both a thief and a miser, snarled at the passers-by.

On
the right of the entrance, in a kind of sentry-box, Quantrelle the Red acted as concierge. He
was a man above the peasant class, ridiculously long and spare, with an unbroken record for
thirty years of drunkenness and quarrelling. His narrow head was covered with irregular tufts
of scarlet hair, and in his forehead were heavy furrows which curved down over the nose and
waved upward and back to the temple. His eyebrows were red tufts standing fiercely out over his little
red-brown eyes, and his nose, long, lean, and absurdly pointed, seemed peering at his great
teeth, yellowed by much smoking of cigarettes. He added to his charms an attire intentionally
bizarre, for he dressed himself, so to speak, in character. And with these natural and achieved
drawbacks to his appearance he had the temper of a wasp, so that it was small wonder that
questionings were rife as to the reason of his retention, his overpaid retention, in the De
Nemours' household. He had a wit of his own, had Quantrelle. Frequently his pleasing fancy led
him to admit visitors when he knew Madame de Nemours to be absent, and, after conducting them
by some circuitous route to unexpected rooms, he would leave them waiting until discovered by
any chance domestic who happened by. And when they were ushered forth to the street he would
follow them with a torrent of shrill apology, retiring, in a paroxysm of silent laughter, behind
the shutters of his little box. Why Madame de Nemours endured his vagaries was indeed strange,
for she was one who demanded of every other domestic something of an over-obsequiousness in
service. It was a well-known fact, however, that he held an assured position in the household,
and that the Countess only smiled at his grimaces and drinking, rewarding him with frequent gifts
and holidays in the country.

On the morning of Dermott's coming, Quantrelle the Red sat in his
little house peering out, monkeylike, expectantly, at the passers-by,
and craning his long neck to keep a constant eye on the corner around
which the Irishman was to arrive.

As the brougham drew up to the curb the Red One sprang to his feet, threw the iron doors wide apart,
and stood bowing double as McDermott entered.

"Ah, my Quantrelle!" he cried, gayly, at sight of the thin grotesqueness. "Still in your old place;
still taking care of madame!"

"Till the end," was the answer, with a serious note in the voice.

"You have not changed much in the three years since I saw you last," Dermott said, inspecting
him closely.

"Nor you, monsieur," Quantrelle answered. "In fact, you have changed little since twelve years
ago, when I hid you and young Monsieur de Chevanne on top of my box here, after some escapade,
to keep you both from the police." He scrutinized McDermott closely as he spoke. "And it's not
the money (which I know well you will give me anyhow) which makes me say you are more beautiful
than ever, monsieur. The same elegant pallor; the same pursuit in the eye! Had I had your
looks"; he made a clucking sound in his cheek with his tongue; "and your clothes! Always the
blacks and grays and very elegant! They are not my colors," he drew himself to his straightest
to exhibit his maroon coat and trousers and wide green cravat with an assumed satisfaction;
"but each has his own style," he finished.

McDermott laughed. "You are sober, Quantrelle!"

"Distressingly so, monsieur!"

"And if I give you money you would use it for--" McDermott paused.

"Charity, monsieur," the Red One answered, his eyes drooped religiously. He took the gold coin which
Dermott gave him, tossed it into the sunshine, and slipped it into
his pocket with a bow.

"You will notice, I honor your integrity by not biting it to see if it be counterfeit."

"Knowing your character, it is indeed a compliment," McDermott said. "Au revoir, my Quantrelle!"

"Au
revoir, Monsieur l'Irlandais!"

And Dermott passed.

Inside he found the Countess waiting in the drawing-room, and she greeted him with hands outstretched,
kissing him on both cheeks in the French fashion. Afterward she stood regarding him with a slow,
sweet smile, which came from one of the kindest hearts in the world.

"And this," she said, in a beautiful, quiet, warm voice, "is the Irish cousin who has not been
to see me for so very long!"

Although past fifty, she was tall and slight, with the grace of a girl. Her hair, white and soft
and wavy, was worn high in a style quite her own; her skin was pink and white as a child's; her
blue eyes shone with tenderness, and they had a merry, dancing light in them continually. Her face
was of a delicate oval, with a nose slender, beautifully modelled, and exceptionally high
between the eyes. She wore a green-white dress of cloth individual in its cut and very plain,
with an old silver belt and brooch to match. Her hands, fragile and beautiful as shells, were
ringless.

"It seems so perfectly flat to say that I am glad to see you, doesn't it?" she asked, as Dermott
smiled down at her.

"I like it just the same," he answered.

"When did you get in?" she inquired.

"I came over from Havre yesterday. I was busy with some English folk about a mine, or I would have
tried to see you last evening."

"And you will stay--" She paused.

"Ten days at most."

"Ah!" she said. "That's horrid! You will miss so many pleasant things! A Bernhardt first night for
one."

"I'm a horny-handed son of toil, beautiful cousin," he answered, "and I have come on business only."

There
was a pause, which Dermott felt the Countess was waiting for him to break.

"Patricia," he said, a beautiful consideration for her in his voice, "I want to spare you in
every way I can in reviewing the bitter business of your early marriage. I have written you
only what was absolutely necessary for you to know. I discovered by accident that your first
husband left quite an estate. If you were his wife and had a living child at the time of his
death, and if these facts can be established, this property belongs to you. You have not as much
money as you should have. I shall get his estate for you--if I can."

"About the records?" she inquired.

"If you have them ready I shall go over to Tours to-morrow to make a search for the sister of
the priest."

"Dermott, dear," the Countess said, putting her hand on his shoulder affectionately, "you are
not going to make trouble for any one, are you?"

"Am I not?" he answered, with a short laugh. "Am I not?"

She took a bundle of papers, which she had evidently prepared for him, from a desk which stood
between the windows, but made no motion to give them to him.

"It's all so far in the past," she said, "no one can ever know what I suffered. But I want
no one else to suffer in order that I may have what you term my rights."

"Patricia," Dermott answered, gravely, "the thing is all a bit in the air as yet. Your first
marriage will be difficult to establish. The French law requires such absolute proof that I may not
be able to obtain it. Now, don't let us discuss the matter further, nor worry that kind heart
of yours." He patted her head affectionately as he spoke.

In the years past she had known him well enough to remember his moods, and she gave him the papers
in silence.

"About Mademoiselle Dulany," she continued. "Since your letter, I have made inquiries concerning
her. I shall be glad to know her, for her own sake as well as yours."

"I'm going to ask a great favor of you for her, Patricia," he answered. "You live in this great
house alone. It would be better to have more people about you. I want you to see much of her,
for I am hoping that some day she may be my wife."

He spoke the last word tenderly, a bit wistfully.

"Ah, Dermott," she cried, "I had no idea! I shall be so glad to do anything I can! Why couldn't
she come and stay with me?"

"That is like you," he answered, gratefully; "but such things can never be arranged happily.
They must grow. Wait until you meet her. I am to see her to-night. I will bring her to you to-morrow,
if I may."

"It is arranged, this marriage?" she asked, delighted at a bit of romance.

"Not in the least," he answered, concisely.

"But she loves you?"

"On the contrary," he said, quietly, "she loves another."

"And you are hoping--" The Countess hesitated.

"Not hoping," Dermott answered, "determined."

"How old is she?"

"Nearly nineteen, and Irish."

"Irish girls are hard to change."

"But you loved your second husband, did you not?" Dermott inquired.

"I hope I was a good wife," the Countess answered, evasively, adding, "But you remember our own
Tom Moore!"

"'The wild freshness of morning--'?"

Dermott stood looking into the fire, his eyes drooped, his face saddened.

"But there is something else to remember as well," Madame de Nemours said, touching him on the
shoulder and looking up at him admiringly. "The half-gods go when the gods arrive. And you
have everything in your favor. You are so great a man and such a charming fellow, Dermott!"

* * * * *

On the following day Katrine came alone to see Madame de Nemours, Dermott having concluded wisely
that his presence would be but a drawback to any quick acquaintance between the two.

"I am Katrine," the girl answered, in response to the Countess' query. "Mr. McDermott has been
so kind as to send me to you."

"It came about in this way," the Countess explained, drawing Katrine to a couch and still keeping
her hand. "There was a time when I knew Dermott, my cousin, very well. That was in Ireland, before
he became the great man he now is. Since that time we have written to each other always, for
he has been kind enough to give me his friendship. He came yesterday. I was sad, and told him
of my lonesomeness. It is best, is it not, to be quite frank when two people are meeting as you
and I are doing? In spite of all this," and here she made a slight gesture to include her
luxurious surroundings, "I am quite a poor woman. And so when I told Dermott that I was lonesome
in this great house, with none but servants, no companions, he spoke to me of you. He was quite
practical. He said that you spent much money as you were living. He told me of your great beauty
and your greater voice. I became very much interested in you, and we arranged for this talk.
Now that I have seen you, I want you to come and live with me very much, very much." She was
so charming in her kindness, this great lady! "But you may not desire it. The situation is
awkward for me." She smiled here, and a humorous light danced in her eyes, for with all her
graciousness she was quite certain of her charm. "And so we will leave you to think it over and
tell Mr. McDermott, who will in turn tell the decision to me. That will save my vanity from being
hurt openly in case you do not come."

Impulsively, Katrine clasped both the Countess' hands in hers.

"I want to come very much," she said. "There was never any one with whom I would rather be. I know now
that you are the lady of whom Monsieur Josef spoke to me once. 'Ach!' he said, you know his
way, 'she is the greatest lady in the world! It is not what she does, but what she is so beautifully.'"

As
Katrine spoke with the earnestness of voice and manner always her own, the Countess leaned forward
suddenly with a startled look.

"Who is it that you remind me of?" she cried, drawing her, black brows together. "If I could only
think! Who is it that you remind me of?"

XVIII

KATRINE MEETS ANNE LENNOX

During McDermott's ten days' stay in Paris, Katrine saw him constantly. The evening after her
first visit to the Countess he received with a gay air of irresponsibility the news that she was
to take up her residence with Madame de Nemours, and though he personally assisted in the establishing
of herself and Nora in the queer old house, it was with the manner of one in no way responsible
for what was going forward.

Some sunny rooms on the third floor were given her, a great piano was enthroned in a bright corner,
gay flowers bloomed against the faded tapestry, and the Countess urged her to choose from many pictures
the ones she desired for intimate friends.

She knew that McDermott visited Josef to speak of her, and that he returned delighted with the visit;
but in all of his attentions there seemed even to the watchful eyes of the Countess more brotherly
kindness than the solicitude of a lover. On the night before his return to the States he had
a long talk with Madame de Nemours. His visit to Tours had resulted in nothing, and it was with
some depression of spirits that he was making his farewells.

But the Countess was too much occupied with her new protégé to be downcast over any mythical inheritance
in America, and as she stood under the lamps in the doorway bidding him farewell, she said, with
girlish enthusiasm: "Don't you think about it any more. I have enough to live on nicely. And
as for that glorious Katrine, I'll deave her ears with your name! No praises. Ah, I'm too
old and wise for that! It will be this way. 'It's a pity,' I'll say, 'that Dermott is not better-looking,'
and she'll answer, 'Sure he's one of the handsomest men in the world.' And the next day, 'How
unfortunate he is so niggardly?' 'Niggardly!' she'll cry. 'He gives away everything he has.
He's the soul of generosity!' Ah, trust me!" the Countess ended.

"She shall persuade herself there's none other like you. And there's not!" she cried, kissing
her hand to him as he went down the steps.

Within the week after McDermott's leaving Paris there occurred two events, seemingly remote from
Katrine's existence, which later wrought the greatest changes in her life.

The first of these was the alarming illness of Quantrelle the Red. After a day of peculiarly unbearable
conduct on his part, the other domestics in the house had revolted, and late in the evening turned
him out to pass the night in his fireless sentry-box. For ten days after this occurrence he
hovered between life and death with an inflammation of the lungs, during which period the De
Nemours' household learned his real power, for the Countess flew into a paroxysm of rage at
his treatment, discharged the cook and one of the upper maids, harangued the others, sent
for the best doctors in Paris, and herself assisted in the nursing, taking little sleep or
nourishment until the old fellow was well on his way to recovery.

During all of this turmoil Katrine went quietly back and forth to her lessons, in no way questioning
the conduct of the Countess, for she understood to the full that human hearts form attachments
by no rule.

One evening during Quantrelle's convalescence, when the Countess was
her sunny self again, she offered, unasked, an explanation of her
seemingly singular conduct.

"Little person," she said, putting her hand on Katrine's shoulder,
"you mustn't judge too harshly my Irish temper. It was gratitude to
Quantrelle which made me act as I did. There were two years of my
life when I should have died but for him."

It was an amazing statement,
and Katrine's face showed her astonishment.

"When I was sixteen,"
Madame de Nemours continued, "I was sent to a convent school at Tours.
Quantrelle's father was gate-keeper there, and let me pass out the
night I went to be married. I was only a child." The Countess covered
her face with both hands, as though to shut out some horrid sight.
"He was an American, a Protestant, and my father cursed me. Two years
after the marriage my husband deserted me. Perhaps," she paused in
her story, "perhaps Dermott has told you this?"

"He has never spoken
of it to me," said Katrine.

"After my baby came," Madame de Nemours
continued, "I was alone with poverty and ill health, and for two years,
two years," she repeated, impressively, "Quantrelle, a long, thin-legged,
red-haired boy, kept me alive with the money he could earn and the
scant assistance his mother could lend him. It was eleven years later,
four years after my baby's death and my father's forgiveness, that
I married the Count. Katrine, darling, I gave him a great affection
and entire devotion, but my heart died with the first love. To have
that first year over! Ah, there was never another like him! You could
never know, Katrine, how different he was from others."

"It was long
ago?" Katrine asked.

"Thirty years. Dermott has recently been demanding
papers of me. It seems there may be some property in America belonging
to my first husband which he can claim for me."

A premonition of
the truth came to Katrine at the sound of Dermott's name.

"And your
first husband's name?" she inquired. "Will it pain you to tell it?"

"Not
at all," the Countess answered, with a sad smile. "It was Francis
Ravenel."

The sound of the name itself brought no shock to Katrine.
She seemed to have heard it before it was spoken, but she made no
sign.

She knew it was Frank's father of whom Madame de Nemours spoke,
and the tales of him in North Carolina had more than prepared her
for wild doings in his student days. It seemed strange, however, that
Frank had never spoken of an early marriage of his father. But the
more she thought of it, the firmer became her belief that he had never
known it.

It was not until the gray of the following morning that
she comprehended to the full the weighty significance of Madame de
Nemours' early marriage, and saw clearly the significance of Dermott's
stay in Carolina, with the direful resulting that might come to Frank
from the Irishman's investigations there.

"If Frank's father married
in America, with a wife and child living in France--" But here Katrine
stopped in her thinking, putting the idea from her mind as one too
horrid to entertain.

The second apparently disconnected event which
led by a circuitous route to the death of Madame de Nemours, as well
as to the discovery of that missing witness for whom McDermott long
had searched, was announced quietly by the Countess herself one morning
of the following May.

Looking up from the Paris Herald, she said
to Katrine, "I see that Anne Lennox has leased the old Latour Place
in the Boulevard Haussmann for an indefinite period."

The three months
following the coming of Mrs. Lennox made no change in their lives
whatever. Katrine was aware that Madame de Nemours and Anne exchanged
visits of courtesy, each missing the other, but early in July she
went with the Countess and Josef to Brittany and spent the summer
in work, the world forgetting and by the world forgot.

And the divine
days with Josef by the sea! His wisdom, his temper, his splendid intolerance,
his prophetic imaginings, as he stormed at the imbecility of his kind!

"It's
this damned idea of realism that's killing art!" he shrieked one day,
on the rocks at Concarneau. "Who wants things natural? If Jones and
Smith could be taught by reiterating life as it is, the race of fools
would soon become extinct. My neighbor loves his neighbor's wife,
and they go off together and there is murder done. Does the reading
of this in book or paper stop my going off with the woman I love if
I have the chance? Not a whit! Art must raise one's ideals. It's the
only thing that helps you, me, any one!"

Or, again, and this was
at twilight, waiting under the old crucifix for the herring-boats
to come in: "Anybody with eyesight can imitate the actual. The real!
What has the creative mind to do with that? It is not one great and
innocent-minded girl you are to represent in Marguerite, it is all
girlhood in its innocence and surrender."

And another time, on the
way home from Pont-Aven:

"Women of detail, women who indulge themselves
in soul-wearying repetition of the little affairs of life, have driven
more men to perdition than all the Delilahs ever created."

And Katrine
and he laughed together at his anathema, and went forward into a dusky
French twilight, singing as they went.

Around her room she pinned
the written slips which he gave at every lesson, Scripture which seemed
perverted to uses other than its own:

"He that endureth to the end,
the same shall be saved.

"Live with Goethe's Faust--learn it. You
will understand Gounod's better.

"All art comes from the same kind
of nature. If you didn't sing yours, you would paint it, carve it,
write it, play it out; for, if it is in you to create something artistic,
nothing human can stop your doing it.

"There are no mute, inglorious
Miltons. Every one who has the qualifications for success succeeds."

As
time passed the letters to her unknown benefactor became more and
more intimate in tone by reason of her race and youth. No answer ever
coming to any of them, it was as though her thoughts were written
and cast into the eternal silence.

Upon the second anniversary of
her farewell to Francis Ravenel, which was soon after her return from
Brittany to Paris, she took from the depths of an old trunk the mementos
of that time which seemed to her so far away. Such trifling things:
a pine cross tied with blue ribbon; a grass ring which he had made
for her once in the barley-field; a note or two; a book of collected
poems, marked. Trifling things, indeed! but her heart throbbed with
the sense of his presence as she held them in her hands.

In the next
room Nora was clattering some tea things, making the plain, homely
bustle that frequently keeps one sane. Out-of-doors it was one of
Paris' divine gray days, with pinks and lavenders showing in the shadows;
but neither the in-door noise nor the outside beauty held her. She
was back in the Carolinas with her first love; there was the odor
of pine and honeysuckle in the Paris air, a harvest moon in the sky.

"To
forgive and forget and understand."

On the impulse of the moment
she decided to write her story to the unknown with no names, telling
the pain which haunted her always; the pain which she felt would be
hers until the end. Having finished the narrative, she concluded:

"I
am trying to make it very clear to you. You have been, you are, so
kind. But I want you to know about me exactly as I am. The world would
say that this man did not treat me well. He had faults; he had ignorances;
we are none of us perfect; he was not a great man. But he was just
as I would have him."

And, womanlike, she added a postscript:

"You
send me too much money. Lessons in fencing, dancing, languages, music,
cost a great deal. I have not been spending it all, although I have
been helping an art student, who has almost starved himself to death
in a room built on a roof, painting by candle-light.

"P.P.S.--Also
a girl who tried to drown herself because she cannot sing, but she
writes beautifully. I will send you one of her poems, to show you
she is worth helping.

"P.P.P.S.--Also a very poor rag-picker with,
I think, twelve children. He looks even worse than this."

The routine
of her life having been thoroughly established the preceding winter,
she fell easily again into the old lines. Every day she lunched with
Madame de Nemours. Sometimes, when engagements left them both free,
they dined together in quite a stately manner in the high, old tapestry
room, and once in a fortnight she was bidden to dinner with friends
of this great lady--Bartand, the dramatist; President Arnot; or Prince
Cassini, with his terrible vitality and schemes for universal betterment.

One
morning she was disturbed at her studies by a card from the Countess,
saying that Mrs. Lennox was below and wished to see her. She had grown
accustomed to the desire of strangers to be presented to her, for,
as Dermott had told her, the news of her voice was already newspaper
copy. In the drawing-room she found Madame de Nemours by the window
talking animatedly, in her pleasant, low voice, to a lady, young and
vivacious, wearing aggressive mourning. For instance, a slave loves
molasses; he steals some. His master, in many cases, goes off to town, and buys a large quantity;
he returns, takes his whip, and commands the slave to eat the molasses, until the poor fellow
is made sick at the very mention of it. The same mode is sometimes adopted to make the slaves
refrain from asking for more food than their regular allowance. A slave runs through his allowance,
and applies for more. His master is enraged at him; but, not willing to send him off without
food, gives him more than is necessary, and compels him to eat it within a given time. Then,
if he complains that he cannot eat it, he is said to be satisfied neither full nor fasting,
and is whipped for being hard to please! I have an abundance of such illustrations of the same
principle, drawn from my own observation, but think the cases I have cited sufficient. The
practice is a very common one.

On the first of January, 1834, I left Mr. Covey, and went to live with Mr. William Freeland,
who lived about three miles from St. Michael's. I soon found Mr. Freeland a very different
man from Mr. Covey. Though not rich, he was what would be called an educated southern gentleman.
Mr. Covey, as I have shown, was a well-trained negro-breaker and slave-driver. The former (slaveholder
though he was) seemed to possess some regard for honor, some reverence for justice, and some
respect for humanity. The latter seemed totally insensible to all such sentiments. Mr. Freeland
had many of the faults peculiar to slaveholders, such as being very passionate and fretful;
but I must do him the justice to say, that he was exceedingly free from those degrading vices
to which Mr. Covey was constantly addicted. The one was open and frank, and we always knew
where to find him. The other was a most artful deceiver, and could be understood only by such
as were skilful enough to detect his cunningly-devised frauds. Another advantage I gained in
my new master was, he made no pretensions to, or profession of, religion; and this, in my opinion,
was truly a great advantage. Were I to be again reduced to the chains of slavery, next to that
enslavement, I should regard being the slave of a religious master the greatest calamity that
could befall me. For of all slaveholders with whom I have ever met, religious slaveholders
are the worst. I have ever found them the meanest and basest, the most cruel and cowardly,
of all others. It was my unhappy lot not only to belong to a religious slaveholder, but to
live in a community of such religionists. Very near Mr. Freeland lived the Rev. Daniel Weeden,
and in the same neighborhood lived the Rev. Rigby Hopkins. These were members and ministers
in the Reformed Methodist Church. Mr. Weeden owned, among others, a woman slave, whose name
I have forgotten. This woman's back, for weeks, was kept literally raw, made so by the lash
of this merciless, religious wretch. He used to hire hands. His maxim was, Behave well or behave
ill, it is the duty of a master occasionally to whip a slave, to remind him of his master's
authority. Such was his theory, and such his practice.

Mr. Hopkins was even worse than Mr. Weeden. His chief boast was his ability to manage slaves.
He did this to alarm their fears, and strike terror into those who escaped. His plan was to
whip for the smallest offences, to prevent the commission of large ones. Mr. Hopkins could
always find some excuse for whipping a slave. It would astonish one, unaccustomed to a slaveholding
life, to see with what wonderful ease a slaveholder can find things, of which to make occasion
to whip a slave. It is said, he has the devil in him, and it must be whipped out. Does he speak
loudly when spoken to by his master? Then he is getting high-minded, and should be taken down
a button-hole lower. Does he forget to pull off his hat at the approach of a white person?
Then he is wanting in reverence, and should be whipped for it. Does he ever venture to vindicate
his conduct, when censured for it? Then he is guilty of impudence,--one of the greatest crimes
of which a slave can be guilty. Does he ever venture to suggest a different mode of doing things
from that pointed out by his master? He is indeed presumptuous, and getting above himself;
and nothing less than a flogging will do for him. Does he, while ploughing, break a plough,--or,
while hoeing, break a hoe? It is owing to his carelessness, and for it a slave must always
be whipped. Mr. Hopkins could always find something of this sort to justify the use of the
lash, and he seldom failed to embrace such opportunities. There was not a man in the whole
county, with whom the slaves who had the getting their own home, would not prefer to live,
rather than with this Rev. Mr. Hopkins. And yet there was not a man any where round, who made
higher professions of religion, or was more active in revivals,--more attentive to the class,
love-feast, prayer and preaching meetings, or more devotional in his family,--that prayed earlier,
later, louder, and longer,--than this same reverend slave-driver, Rigby Hopkins.

But to return to Mr. Freeland, and to my experience while in his employment. He, like Mr. Covey,
gave us enough to eat; but, unlike Mr. Covey, he also gave us sufficient time to take our meals.
He worked us hard, but always between sunrise and sunset. He required a good deal of work to
be done, but gave us good tools with which to work. His farm was large, but he employed hands
enough to work it, and with ease, compared with many of his neighbors. My treatment, while
in his employment, was heavenly, compared with what I experienced at the hands of Mr. Edward Covey.

Mr. Freeland was himself the owner of but two slaves. Their names were Henry Harris and John
Harris. The rest of his hands he hired. These consisted of myself, Sandy Jenkins,* and Handy
Caldwell.

Henry and John were quite intelligent, and in a very little while after I went there, I succeeded
in creating in them a strong desire to learn how to read. This desire soon sprang up in the
others also. They very soon mustered up some old spelling-books, and nothing would do but that
I must keep a Sabbath school. I agreed to do so, and accordingly devoted my Sundays to teaching
these my loved fellow-slaves how to read. Neither of them knew his letters when I went there.
Some of the slaves of the neighboring farms found what was going on, and also availed themselves
of this little opportunity to learn to read. It was understood, among all who came, that there
must be as little display about it as possible. It was necessary to keep our religious masters
at St. Michael's unacquainted with the fact, that, instead of spending the Sabbath in wrestling,
boxing, and drinking whisky, we were trying to learn how to read the will of God; for they
had much rather see us engaged in those degrading sports, than to see us behaving like intellectual,
moral, and accountable beings. My blood boils as I think of the bloody manner in which Messrs.
Wright Fairbanks and Garrison West, both class-leaders, in connection with many others, rushed
in upon us with sticks and stones, and broke up our virtuous little Sabbath school, at St.
Michael's--all calling themselves Christians! humble followers of the Lord Jesus Christ! But
I am again digressing.

I held my Sabbath school at the house of a free colored man, whose name I deem it imprudent
to mention; for should it be known, it might embarrass him greatly, though the crime of holding
the school was committed ten years ago. I had at one time over forty scholars, and those of
the right sort, ardently desiring to learn. They were of all ages, though mostly men and women.
I look back to those Sundays with an amount of pleasure not to be expressed. They were great
days to my soul. The work of instructing my dear fellow-slaves was the sweetest engagement
with which I was ever blessed. We loved each other, and to leave them at the close of the Sabbath
was a severe cross indeed. When I think that these precious souls are to-day shut up in the
prison-house of slavery, my feelings overcome me, and I am almost ready to ask, "Does a righteous
God govern the universe? and for what does he hold the thunders in his right hand, if not to
smite the oppressor, and deliver the spoiled out of the hand of the spoiler?" These dear souls
came not to Sabbath school because it was popular to do so, nor did I teach them because it
was reputable to be thus engaged. Every moment they spent in that school, they were liable
to be taken up, and given thirty-nine lashes. They came because they wished to learn. Their
minds had been starved by their cruel masters. They had been shut up in mental darkness. I
taught them, because it was the delight of my soul to be doing something that looked like bettering
the condition of my race. I kept up my school nearly the whole year I lived with Mr. Freeland;
and, beside my Sabbath school, I devoted three evenings in the week, during the winter, to
teaching the slaves at home. And I have the happiness to know, that several of those who came
to Sabbath school learned how to read; and that one, at least, is now free through my agency.

The year passed off smoothly. It seemed only about half as long as the year which preceded
it. I went through it without receiving a single blow. I will give Mr. Freeland the credit
of being the best master I ever had, till I became my own master. For the ease with which I
passed the year, I was, however, somewhat indebted to the society of my fellow-slaves. They
were noble souls; they not only possessed loving hearts, but brave ones. We were linked and
interlinked with each other. I loved them with a love stronger than any thing I have experienced
since. It is sometimes said that we slaves do not love and confide in each other. In answer
to this assertion, I can say, I never loved any or confided in any people more than my fellowslaves,
and especially those with whom I lived at Mr. Freeland's. I believe we would have died for
each other. We never undertook to do any thing, of any importance, without a mutual consultation.
We never moved separately. We were one; and as much so by our tempers and dispositions, as
by the mutual hardships to which we were necessarily subjected by our condition as slaves.

At the close of the year 1834, Mr. Freeland again hired me of my master, for the year 1835.
But, by this time, I began to want to live upon free land as well as with freeland; and I was
no longer content, therefore, to live with him or any other slaveholder. I began, with the
commencement of the year, to prepare myself for a final struggle, which should decide my fate
one way or the other. My tendency was upward. I was fast approaching manhood, and year after
year had passed, and I was still a slave. These thoughts roused me--I must do something. I
therefore resolved that 1835 should not pass without witnessing an attempt, on my part, to
secure my liberty. But I was not willing to cherish this determination alone. My fellow-slaves
were dear to me. I was anxious to have them participate with me in this, my life-giving determination.
I therefore, though with great prudence, commenced early to ascertain their views and feelings
in regard to their condition, and to imbue their minds with thoughts of freedom. I bent myself
to devising ways and means for our escape, and meanwhile strove, on all fitting occasions,
to impress them with the gross fraud and inhumanity of slavery. I went first to Henry, next
to John, then to the others. I found, in them all, warm hearts and noble spirits. They were
ready to hear, and ready to act when a feasible plan should be proposed. This was what I wanted.
I talked to them of our want of manhood, if we submitted to our enslavement without at least
one noble effort to be free. We met often, and consulted frequently, and told our hopes and
fears, recounted the difficulties, real and imagined, which we should be called on to meet.
At times we were almost disposed to give up, and try to content ourselves with our wretched
lot; at others, we were firm and unbending in our determination to go. Whenever we suggested
any plan, there was shrinking--the odds were fearful. Our path was beset with the greatest
obstacles; and if we succeeded in gaining the end of it, our right to be free was yet questionable--we
were yet liable to be returned to bondage. We could see no spot, this side of the ocean, where
we could be free. We knew nothing about Canada. Our knowledge of the north did not extend farther
than New York; and to go there, and be forever harassed with the frightful liability of being
returned to slavery--with the certainty of being treated tenfold worse than before--the thought
was truly a horrible one, and one which it was not easy to overcome. We were hemmed in upon
every side. Here were the difficulties, real or imagined--the good to be sought, and the evil
to be shunned. On the one hand, there stood slavery, a stern reality, glaring frightfully upon
us,--its robes already crimsoned with the blood of millions, and even now feasting itself greedily
upon our own flesh. This in itself was sometimes enough to stagger us; but when we permitted
ourselves to survey the road, we were frequently appalled. Upon either side we saw grim death,
assuming the most horrid shapes. Now it was starvation, causing us to eat our own flesh;--now
we were contending with the waves, and were drowned;--now we were overtaken, and torn to pieces
by the fangs of the terrible bloodhound. I say, this picture sometimes appalled us, and made us

     "rather bear those ills we had,
     Than fly to others, that we knew not of."

In coming to a fixed determination to run away, we did more than Patrick Henry, when he resolved
upon liberty or death. With us it was a doubtful liberty at most, and almost certain death
if we failed. For my part, I should prefer death to hopeless bondage.

Sandy, one of our number, gave up the notion, but still encouraged us. Our company then consisted
of Henry Harris, John Harris, Henry Bailey, Charles Roberts, and myself. Henry Bailey was my
uncle, and belonged to my master. Charles married my aunt: he belonged to my master's father-in-law,
Mr. William Hamilton.

The plan we finally concluded upon was, to get a large canoe belonging to Mr. Hamilton, and
upon the Saturday night previous to Easter holidays, paddle directly up the Chesapeake Bay.
On our arrival at the head of the bay, a distance of seventy or eighty miles from where we
lived, it was our purpose to turn our canoe adrift, and follow the guidance of the north star
till we got beyond the limits of Maryland. Our reason for taking the water route was, that
we were less liable to be suspected as runaways; we hoped to be regarded as fishermen; whereas,
if we should take the land route, we should be subjected to interruptions of almost every kind.
Any one having a white face, and being so disposed, could stop us, and subject us to examination.

The week before our intended start, I wrote several protections, one for each of us. As well
as I can remember, they were in the following words, to wit:--

"This is to certify that I, the undersigned, have given the bearer, my servant, full liberty
to go to Baltimore, and spend the Easter holidays. Written with mine own hand, &c., 1835.

"WILLIAM HAMILTON,

"Near St. Michael's, in Talbot county, Maryland."

We were not going to Baltimore; but, in going up the bay, we went toward Baltimore, and these
protections were only intended to protect us while on the bay.

As the time drew near for our departure, our anxiety became more and more intense. It was truly
a matter of life and death with us. The strength of our determination was about to be fully
tested. At this time, I was very active in explaining every difficulty, removing every doubt,
dispelling every fear, and inspiring all with the firmness indispensable to success in our
undertaking; assuring them that half was gained the instant we made the move; we had talked
long enough; we were now ready to move; if not now, we never should be; and if we did not intend
to move now, we had as well fold our arms, sit down, and acknowledge ourselves fit only to
be slaves. This, none of us were prepared to acknowledge. This was in the middle of the week,
at the end of which we were to be off. We went, as usual, to our several fields of labor, but
with bosoms highly agitated with thoughts of our truly hazardous undertaking. We tried to conceal
our feelings as much as possible; and I think we succeeded very well.

After a painful waiting, the Saturday morning, whose night was to witness our departure, came.
I hailed it with joy, bring what of sadness it might. Friday night was a sleepless one for
me. I probably felt more anxious than the rest, because I was, by common consent, at the head
of the whole affair. The responsibility of success or failure lay heavily upon me. The glory
of the one, and the confusion of the other, were alike mine. The first two hours of that morning
were such as I never experienced before, and hope never to again. Early in the morning, we
went, as usual, to the field. We were spreading manure; and all at once, while thus engaged,
I was overwhelmed with an indescribable feeling, in the fulness of which I turned to Sandy,
who was near by, and said, "We are betrayed!" "Well," said he, "that thought has this moment
struck me." We said no more. I was never more certain of any thing.

The horn was blown as usual, and we went up from the field to the house for breakfast. I went
for the form, more than for want of any thing to eat that morning. Just as I got to the house,
in looking out at the lane gate, I saw four white men, with two colored men. The white men
were on horseback, and the colored ones were walking behind, as if tied. I watched them a few
moments till they got up to our lane gate. Here they halted, and tied the colored men to the
gate-post. I was not yet certain as to what the matter was. In a few moments, in rode Mr. Hamilton,
with a speed betokening great excitement. He came to the door, and inquired if Master William
was in. He was told he was at the barn. Mr. Hamilton, without dismounting, rode up to the barn
with extraordinary speed. In a few moments, he and Mr. Freeland returned to the house. By this
time, the three constables rode up, and in great haste dismounted, tied their horses, and met
Master William and Mr. Hamilton returning from the barn; and after talking awhile, they all
walked up to the kitchen door. There was no one in the kitchen but myself and John. Henry and
Sandy were up at the barn. Mr. Freeland put his head in at the door, and called me by name,
saying, there were some gentlemen at the door who wished to see me. I stepped to the door,
and inquired what they wanted. They at once seized me, and, without giving me any satisfaction,
tied me--lashing my hands closely together. I insisted upon knowing what the matter was. They
at length said, that they had learned I had been in a "scrape," and that I was to be examined
before my master; and if their information proved false, I should not be hurt.

In a few moments, they succeeded in tying John. They then turned to Henry, who had by this
time returned, and commanded him to cross his hands. "I won't!" said Henry, in a firm tone,
indicating his readiness to meet the consequences of his refusal. "Won't you?" said Tom Graham,
the constable. "No, I won't!" said Henry, in a still stronger tone. With this, two of the constables
pulled out their shining pistols, and swore, by their Creator, that they would make him cross
his hands or kill him. Each cocked his pistol, and, with fingers on the trigger, walked up
to Henry, saying, at the same time, if he did not cross his hands, they would blow his damned
heart out. "Shoot me, shoot me!" said Henry; "you can't kill me but once. Shoot, shoot,--and
be damned! I won't be tied!" This he said in a tone of loud defiance; and at the same time,
with a motion as quick as lightning, he with one single stroke dashed the pistols from the
hand of each constable. As he did this, all hands fell upon him, and, after beating him some
time, they finally overpowered him, and got him tied.

During the scuffle, I managed, I know not how, to get my pass out, and, without being discovered,
put it into the fire. We were all now tied; and just as we were to leave for Easton jail, Betsy
Freeland, mother of William Freeland, came to the door with her hands full of biscuits, and
divided them between Henry and John. Henry nor John would never have thought of such a thing."
I made no reply, and was immediately hurried off towards St. Michael's. Just a moment previous
to the scuffle with Henry, Mr. Hamilton suggested the propriety of making a search for the
protections which he had understood Frederick had written for himself and the rest. But, just
at the moment he was about carrying his proposal into effect, his aid was needed in helping
to tie Henry; and the excitement attending the scuffle caused them either to forget, or to
deem it unsafe, under the circumstances, to search. So we were not yet convicted of the intention
to run away.

When we got about half way to St. Michael's, while the constables having us in charge were
looking ahead, Henry inquired of me what he should do with his pass. I told him to eat it with
his biscuit, and own nothing; and we passed the word around, "Own nothing;" and "Own nothing!"
said we all. Our confidence in each other was unshaken. We were resolved to succeed or fail
together, after the calamity had befallen us as much as before. We were now prepared for any
thing. We were to be dragged that morning fifteen miles behind horses, and then to be placed
in the Easton jail. When we reached St. Michael's, we underwent a sort of examination. We all
denied that we ever intended to run away. We did this more to bring out the evidence against
us, than from any hope of getting clear of being sold; for, as I have said, we were ready for
that. The fact was, we cared but little where we went, so we went together. Our greatest concern
was about separation. We dreaded that more than any thing this side of death. We found the
evidence against us to be the testimony of one person; our master would not tell who it was;
but we came to a unanimous decision among ourselves as to who their informant was. "Sure," he
went on, comparing them, "ye've a right to be proud of each other! Ye make a fine couple, the
two of you. And now"--putting his cap, gloves, and riding-whip on the window-ledge--"I'll
have coffee if you'll offer it. Let me"--taking some sugar--"eat, drink, and be merry, for to-morrow,"
he laughed--"why, to-morrow I may have talked myself to death!"

Frank rose from his chair and stood by the chimney, regarding the Irishman as one might have viewed
a performer in a play, realizing to the full what his mother had meant by the "charm of McDermott,"
for it was a thing none could deny, for the subtle Celt complimented the ones to whom he spoke
by an approving and admiring attention, and conveyed the impression that the roads of his life
had but led him to their feet.

"To tell the truth," McDermott continued, noting and by no means displeased by Frank's scrutiny,
"I had heard ye were home, Mr. Ravenel, and came early to see you
with a purpose--two purposes, I might say.

First, I wanted to talk to you concerning Patrick Dulany, the overseer whom I got for your mother
last year. Ye've not see him yet?"

"I arrived only last night, Mr. McDermott," Francis answered.

"True, I'd forgotten. It's a strange life Patrick's had, and a sad one. He's of my own college
in Dublin, but a good dozen years older than I. 'Twas in India I knew him first. He's one of
the Black Dulanys of the North, and we fought side by side at Ramazan. What a time! What a time!
In the famous charge up the river, when we turned, I lost my horse, and in that backward plunge my
life was not worth taking. While I was lying there half dead and helpless, this Dulany got from his
old gray, flung me across his saddle, and carried me nine miles back to the camp. Judge if I
love him!"

Mr. McDermott looked from the window with the fixed gaze of one struggling with unshed tears.

"The next month he was ordered home, and soon after fell the bitter business of the marriage in
Italy. I stood up with him. She was the most beautiful creature I have ever seen--save one;
and a voice--God! I heard her sing in Milan once. The king was there; the opera 'La Favorita.'
She was sent for to the royal box. We had the horses out of her carriage and dragged it home
ourselves. What a night it was! What a night it was!"

McDermott paused as in an ecstasy of remembrance.

"What was her name?" Francis asked.

"Ah, that"--he threw out his hand with a dramatic gesture--"'tis a
thing I swore never to mention. 'Tis a fancy of Dulany's to let it
die in silence."

"And she left him?" Mrs. Ravenel's voice was full
of sympathy as she spoke.

"For another!" Dermott made a dramatic
pause, relishing his climaxes. "And then she died."

"So, for his
daughter's sake"--there was a curious hesitancy in his speech just
here, but he carried it off jauntily--"his daughter, a primrose girl
and the love of my life, I've come to ask that you be a bit lenient
with him, Mr. Ravenel, at the times he has taken a drop too much,
as your lady mother has been in the year past. I think you'll find
him able to manage, for, in spite of his infirmity, black and white
fall under his spell alike."

"If Frank has a fault, Mr. McDermott,
which I do not think he has, it's over-generosity. You need have no
fear for your friend," Mrs. Ravenel said, proudly, putting her hand
on Frank's shoulder.

As her son turned to kiss the slender fingers,
Dermott McDermott regarded the two curiously.

"You're fortunate in
having a son of twenty--"

In a few weeks after I went to Baltimore, Master Hugh hired me to Mr. William Gardner, an extensive
ship-builder, on Fell's Point. I was put there to learn how to calk. It, however, proved a
very unfavorable place for the accomplishment of this object. Mr. Gardner was engaged that
spring in building two large man-of-war brigs, professedly for the Mexican government. The
vessels were to be launched in the July of that year, and in failure thereof, Mr. Gardner was
to lose a considerable sum; so that when I entered, all was hurry. There was no time to learn
any thing. Every man had to do that which he knew how to do. Damn you, if you move, I'll knock
your brains out!"

This was my school for eight months; and I might have remained there longer, but for a most
horrid fight I had with four of the white apprentices, in which my left eye was nearly knocked
out, and I was horribly mangled in other respects. The facts in the case were these: Until
a very little while after I went there, white and black ship-carpenters worked side by side,
and no one seemed to see any impropriety in it. All hands seemed to be very well satisfied.
Many of the black carpenters were freemen. Things seemed to be going on very well. All at once,
the white carpenters knocked off, and said they would not work with free colored workmen. Their
reason for this, as alleged, was, that if free colored carpenters were encouraged, they would
soon take the trade into their own hands, and poor white men would be thrown out of employment.
They therefore felt called upon at once to put a stop to it. And, taking advantage of Mr. Gardner's
necessities, they broke off, swearing they would work no longer, unless he would discharge
his black carpenters. Now, though this did not extend to me in form, it did reach me in fact.
I, of course, kept the vow I made after the fight with Mr. Covey, and struck back again, regardless
of consequences; and while I kept them from combining, I succeeded very well; for I could whip
the whole of them, taking them separately. They, however, at length combined, and came upon
me, armed with sticks, stones, and heavy handspikes. One came in front with a half brick. There
was one at each side of me, and one behind me. While I was attending to those in front, and
on either side, the one behind ran up with the handspike, and struck me a heavy blow upon the
head. It stunned me. I fell, and with this they all ran upon me, and fell to beating me with
their fists. I let them lay on for a while, gathering strength. In an instant, I gave a sudden
surge, and rose to my hands and knees. Just as I did that, one of their number gave me, with
his heavy boot, a powerful kick in the left eye. The shortest speech often requires the verification
of facts to be found in books, and the most economical and satisfactory solution is a library.
The General Assembly of New Zealand, to give Parliament its more correct title, was not long
in deciding this. It met first in 1854 and again in 1855 without a library. At the beginning
of the session of 1856, however, the need seems to have been evident for on 6 June Mr W. T.
L. Travers from Waimea moved in the House that a library should at once be formed, and a Select
Committee set up to consider the best means of establishing one. Three weeks later the Legislative
Council followed suit with a similar motion, though here it is interesting to note that Dr Richardson
stated that the Councillors had been using the library of the Attorney-General.

The

Assembly shared its meeting place with the Auckland Provincial Council, which had in 1853 formed
its own library. It was decided that it would be to the advantage of both legislatures to
possess a joint library, and on the motion of the chairman the Council was approached to find if
it had any objections. The Council did not have any, and in addition offered to provide the librarian
and an equal grant for books as well as fittings if the Assembly would provide a room.

On 28 July 1856 the report was laid on the tables of the two Houses, a list of books for purchase
given to the Speakers, and a recommendation made that the sum of £100 be placed on the estimates
for books. The money was voted, after which Parliament was adjourned, not to meet again until
1858.

The Committee was once again set up, and the situation was such that once again the terms of
reference were to consider the best means of establishing a library. The books ordered in 1856,
principally on legal and constitutional matters, were there branded "General Assembly" but they
were not a library; members had to rely largely on the Provincial Council collection which
comprised nine-tenths of the total books available. In its report, the Committee suggested that
£300 be devoted to library purposes, and recommended a list of books to be purchased even if
they cost more than the £320 available--£20 had not been spent in 1856.
The Committee was not happy about the joint Library, but as matters
stood thought it hardly desirable to end the arrangement. It was,
however, of the opinion that as soon as practicable the Library should
be placed on an independent footing. Of course, it was impossible to get any white man
to volunteer his testimony in my behalf, and against the white young men. Even those who may
have sympathized with me were not prepared to do this. It required a degree of courage unknown
to them to do so; for just at that time, the slightest manifestation of humanity toward a colored
person was denounced as abolitionism, and that name subjected its bearer to frightful liabilities.
The watchwords of the bloody-minded in that region, and in those days, were, "Damn the abolitionists!"
and "Damn the niggers!" There was nothing done, and probably nothing would have been done if
I had been killed. Such was, and such remains, the state of things in the Christian city of
Baltimore.

Master Hugh, finding he could get no redress, refused to let me go back again to Mr. Gardner.
He kept me himself, and his wife dressed my wound till I was again restored to health. He then
took me into the ship-yard of which he was foreman, in the employment of Mr. Walter Price.
There I was immediately set to calking, and very soon learned the art of using my mallet and
irons. In the course of one year from the time I left Mr. Gardner's, I was able to command
the highest wages given to the most experienced calkers. I was now of some importance to my
master. My pathway became much more smooth than before; my condition was now much more comfortable.
When I could get no calking to do, I did nothing. During these leisure times, those old notions
about freedom would steal over me again. When in Mr. Gardner's employment, I was kept in such
a perpetual whirl of excitement, I could think of nothing, scarcely, but my life; and in thinking
of my life, I almost forgot my liberty. I have observed this in my experience of slavery,--that
whenever my condition was improved, instead of its increasing my contentment, it only increased
my desire to be free, and set me to thinking of plans to gain my freedom.

I was now getting, as I have said, one dollar and fifty cents per day. I contracted for it;
I earned it; it was paid to me; it was rightfully my own; yet, upon each returning Saturday
night, I was compelled to deliver every cent of that money to Master Hugh. And why? Not because
he earned it,--not because he had any hand in earning it,--not because I owed it to him,--nor
because he possessed the slightest shadow of a right to it; but solely because he had the power
to compel me to give it up. Of these 494 were sent to libraries other than those of Government Departments
through the New Zealand Library Association interloan scheme.

The Library in its turn borrowed 23 books from other libraries under
the same scheme.

In addition to members of Parliament, some thousand people have access to the Library and enjoy borrowing
privileges of one kind or another.

REFERENCE INQUIRIES

Once again there has been an increase in the
reference questions to which the Library staff has had to attend. Secondly, such a statement would
most undoubtedly induce greater vigilance on the part of slaveholders than has existed heretofore
among them; which would, of course, be the means of guarding a door whereby some dear brother
bondman might escape his galling chains. I deeply regret the necessity that impels me to suppress
any thing of importance connected with my experience in slavery. It would afford me great pleasure
indeed, as well as materially add to the interest of my narrative, were I at liberty to gratify
a curiosity, which I know exists in the minds of many, by an accurate statement of all the
facts pertaining to my most fortunate escape. They do nothing towards enlightening the slave,
whilst they do much towards enlightening the master. They stimulate him to greater watchfulness,
and enhance his power to capture his slave. Let him be left to feel his way in the dark; let
darkness commensurate with his crime hover over him; and let him feel that at every step he
takes, in pursuit of the flying bondman, he is running the frightful risk of having his hot
brains dashed out by an invisible agency. Let us render the tyrant no aid; let us not hold
the light by which he can trace the footprints of our flying brother. But enough of this.

In the early part of the year 1838, I became quite restless. I could see no reason why I should,
at the end of each week, pour the reward of my toil into the purse of my master. When I carried
to him my weekly wages, he would, after counting the money, look me in the face with a robber-like
fierceness, and ask, "Is this all?" He was satisfied with nothing less than the last cent.
He would, however, when I made him six dollars, sometimes give me six cents, to encourage me.
It had the opposite effect. I regarded it as a sort of admission of my right to the whole.
The fact that he gave me any part of my wages was proof, to my mind, that he believed me entitled
to the whole of them. I always felt worse for having received any thing; for I feared that
the giving me a few cents would ease his conscience, and make him feel himself to be a pretty
honorable sort of robber. My discontent grew upon me. I was ever on the look-out for means
of escape; and, finding no direct means, I determined to try to hire my time, with a view of
getting money with which to make my escape. In the spring of 1838, when Master Thomas came
to Baltimore to purchase his spring goods, I got an opportunity, and applied to him to allow
me to hire my time. He unhesitatingly refused my request, and told me this was another stratagem
by which to escape. He told me I could go nowhere but that he could get me; and that, in the
event of my running away, he should spare no pains in his efforts to catch me. He exhorted
me to content myself, and be obedient. He told me, if I would be happy, I must lay out no plans
for the future. He said, if I behaved myself properly, he would take care of me. Indeed, he
advised me to complete thoughtlessness of the future, and taught me to depend solely upon him
for happiness. He seemed to see fully the pressing necessity of setting aside my intellectual
nature, in order to contentment in slavery. But in spite of him, and even in spite of myself,
I continued to think, and to think about the injustice of my enslavement, and the means of escape.

About two months after this, I applied to Master Hugh for the privilege of hiring my time.
He was not acquainted with the fact that I had applied to Master Thomas, and had been refused.
He too, at first, seemed disposed to refuse; but, after some reflection, he granted me the
privilege, and proposed the following terms: I was to be allowed all my time, make all contracts
with those for whom I worked, and find my own employment; and, in return for this liberty,
I was to pay him three dollars at the end of each week; find myself in calking tools, and in
board and clothing. My board was two dollars and a half per week. This, with the wear and tear
of clothing and calking tools, made my regular expenses about six dollars per week. This amount
I was compelled to make up, or relinquish the privilege of hiring my time. This arrangement,
it will be perceived, was decidedly in my master's favor. It relieved him of all need of looking
after me. His money was sure. He received all the benefits of slaveholding without its evils;
while I endured all the evils of a slave, and suffered all the care and anxiety of a freeman.
I found it a hard bargain. But, hard as it was, I thought it better than the old mode of getting
along. It was a step towards freedom to be allowed to bear the responsibilities of a freeman,
and I was determined to hold on upon it. I bent myself to the work of making money. I was ready
to work at night as well as day, and by the most untiring perseverance and industry, I made
enough to meet my expenses, and lay up a little money every week. I went on thus from May till
August. There was surely never anything kinder or better in the world than this belittling of the
whole matter.

"And I may never be strong again--"

"Then I can have my own way more," she laughed.

"And your voice--"

"Beloved," she said, gravely, "I can never give up my singing. Don't think me vain when I say
I sing too well to make it right for me to give it up. I don't believe that anybody who does
a thing well, who has the real gift, can give it up. But that I shall never have to sing for
money is a great happiness for me. I can sing for the poorer folk, for the ones who really feel.
Ah," she cried, "I've plans of my own, Josef and I! And the study and the pain were to teach
me how unimportant all things are in this world save only love."

"Katrine! Katrine!" he cried, "you must help me to be square to you!" He raised his hand, feeble from
illness, in the manner of one who takes an oath. "I solemnly swear that I will never do you the
injustice--"

"Don't!" she cried, springing quickly to her feet and catching the upraised hand quickly to her
breast. "Don't!" Adding quickly, with a laugh, "It's dreadful to commit perjury!"

Their hands were still clasped as Mrs. Ravenel came out to join them. In the lavender gown,
with her fair face smiling, and carrying a work-bag of the interminable knitting in one hand, she
did not look in the least the emissary of fate she really was.

"Mr. de Peyster has sent some letters, Frank. He writes me that none of them are of importance,
but that you may care to look them over. And they made me think of a great envelope of papers
which I had meant to send to you before you were taken ill. I found it just after you had
been looking up all those family affairs, before you went abroad! I put them with my knitting,
and naturally forgot.

Your father gave it to me, oh, so many years ago! and I put it in the cedar chest." She gave
the papers to Frank, talking in a gay, unimportant manner as she did so. "Isn't that curious
on the outside?" she demanded. "'To be opened in case my will is ever disputed.' Now, who did
your father think would ever dispute his will? I had been a faithful and," she laughed, "more
or less obedient wife for many years. And you were too small to dispute anything except matters
with your tutor. Don't look them over now, dearest, they may worry you!"
Frank took the envelope with an inexplicable feeling of hope. That
his mother had forgotten important papers did not surprise him in
the least. She had once taken a mortgage held by his father and pasted
it over a place in a chimney where it smoked. She said herself that
her temperament was not one for affairs.

A quick exchange of glances
passed between Frank and Katrine as he excused himself to go to his
room for rest, and then, alone at twilight, he broke the seal upon
the confession of that Francis who had preceded him. To his utter
confounding, he discovered in the envelope a certificate of legal
marriage between Francis Ravenel and Patricia McDermott, duly witnessed
and sealed. Wrapped with several letters which had been exchanged
between them was a detailed account of the unfortunate affair in his
father's crooked writing, and inside of all a bill of divorce, which
had been obtained in Illinois previous to the elder Ravenel's marriage
with the beautiful Julie D'Hauteville, of New Orleans.

As Frank read
the history of the boyish folly he felt that little excusing was needed
for his dead father, for the early marriage seemed but an escapade
of a spoiled and self-indulgent boy with a headstrong and sentimental
girl, neither of whom had taken a thought for the future. The love of them was my tender point, and shook my decision
more than all things else. Besides the pain of separation, the dread and apprehension of a
failure exceeded what I had experienced at my first attempt. The appalling defeat I then sustained
returned to torment me. I felt assured that, if I failed in this attempt, my case would be
a hopeless one--it would seal my fate as a slave forever. I could not hope to get off with
any thing less than the severest punishment, and being placed beyond the means of escape. It
required no very vivid imagination to depict the most frightful scenes through which I should
have to pass, in case I failed. The wretchedness of slavery, and the blessedness of freedom,
were perpetually before me. It was life and death with me. But I remained firm, and, according
to my resolution, on the third day of September, 1838, I left my chains, and succeeded in reaching
New York without the slightest interruption of any kind. How I did so,--what means I adopted,--what
direction I travelled, and by what mode of conveyance,--I must leave unexplained, for the reasons
before mentioned.

I have been frequently asked how I felt when I found myself in a free State. I have never been
able to answer the question with any satisfaction to myself. The remembrance of her on the wind-blown
hill came back to him; the scarlet handkerchief waved against the blue of the sky, and the brave
call over the brown grass: "Don't think of me! Good-bye!" It seemed
in some way to have been a cry of victory. In writing to a dear
friend, immediately after my arrival at New York, I said I felt like one who had escaped a
den of hungry lions. This state of mind, however, very soon subsided; and I was again seized
with a feeling of great insecurity and loneliness. I was yet liable to be taken back, and subjected
to all the tortures of slavery. This in itself was enough to damp the ardor of my enthusiasm.
But the loneliness overcame me. There I was in the midst of thousands, and yet a perfect stranger;
without home and without friends, in the midst of thousands of my own brethren--children of
a common Father, and yet I dared not to unfold to any one of them my sad condition. I was afraid
to speak to any one for fear of speaking to the wrong one, and thereby falling into the hands
of money-loving kidnappers, whose business it was to lie in wait for the panting fugitive,
as the ferocious beasts of the forest lie in wait for their prey. The motto which I adopted
when I started from slavery was this--"Trust no man!" I saw in every white man an enemy, and
in almost every colored man cause for distrust. It was a most painful situation; and, to understand
it, one must needs experience it, or imagine himself in similar circumstances. Let him be a
fugitive slave in a strange land--a land given up to be the hunting-ground for slaveholders--whose
inhabitants are legalized kidnappers--where he is every moment subjected to the terrible liability
of being seized upon by his fellowmen, as the hideous crocodile seizes upon his prey!--I say,
let him place himself in my situation--without home or friends--without money or credit--wanting
shelter, and no one to give it--wanting bread, and no money to buy it,--and at the same time
let him feel that he is pursued by merciless men-hunters, and in total darkness as to what
to do, where to go, or where to stay,--perfectly helpless both as to the means of defence and
means of escape,--in the midst of plenty, yet suffering the terrible gnawings of hunger,--in
the midst of houses, yet having no home,--among fellow-men, yet feeling as if in the midst
of wild beasts, whose greediness to swallow up the trembling and half-famished fugitive is
only equalled by that with which the monsters of the deep swallow up the helpless fish upon
which they subsist,--I say, let him be placed in this most trying situation,--the situation
in which I was placed,--then, and not till then, will he fully appreciate the hardships of,
and know how to sympathize with, the toil-worn and whip-scarred fugitive slave. 

He's called away, Miss Katrine. Ye should have seen him as he crawled to the doorway and fell
on it. I got him to his own seat by the window, and he's wanting you, Miss Katrine, he's wanting
you sore! So I come, in part to tell you, but more to have ye prepare yerself for the change
in him, for his end's in sight!"

Although she was trembling from head to foot and had grown ashen pale, Katrine spoke calmly.

"He
came alone?"

Nora shook her head in the affirmative.

"It seems, Miss Katrine, that there was some organic trouble; that the great specialist, whose
name is gone from me, warned him not to try the cure. He said the other disease was too far
along. But your father wanted to be himself again. It was for you he wanted it. It was the
disgrace he was to you that was on his mind always."

"Ah!" she cried, "there was still enough of the old pride in him for that! We must pretend not
to understand that he is ill, we must try just to seem glad that he is back home with us again."

When
Katrine entered the room where her father sat, she found him, as Nora had said, by the window,
his head thrown back, his eyes closed; nor did he open them at her coming, though by a poor movement
of the hands he made her understand his knowledge of her presence.

"Little Katrine," he said, while two great tears welled from under
the closed lids. "Little Bother-the-House! I have come back to you.
There is no one can help me except you."

Katrine made a swift movement
to be near him. Kneeling, she drew his poor, sorrowing head to her
breast, and in the twilight these two, the one so old and weak and
loving, the other so young and desolate and brave, clung to each other,
blinded by the vision of the separation so soon to be.

In nearly
every crisis of life there comes some twist in affairs which seems
to turn the screws harder or sets them to making one flinch in a new
and unexpected place.

"JAMES W. C. PENNINGTON

"NEW YORK, SEPT. 15, 1838"

     *She was free.

     **I had changed my name from Frederick BAILEY to that of
     JOHNSON.

Upon receiving this certificate, and a five-dollar bill from Mr. Ruggles, I shouldered one
part of our baggage, and Anna took up the other, and we set out forthwith to take passage on
board of the steamboat John W. Richmond for Newport, on our way to New Bedford. At last, with
a sigh, he closed the instrument. "I am not one given to extravagance in language," he said,
"but you have the greatest natural voice I have ever heard. It is almost placed. Sit down a minute,
I want to talk to you. Two kinds of pupils I have had in my life: those with voice and no temperament,
and those with temperament and no voice. God seldom gives both; if He does, it is the great
artist that may be made. To be great one must have both. But even with both given, one must
have the ability to work, to work like a galley-slave, to work when all the world is resting,
at the dead of night, in the small hours of the morning. When all the others have let go, you must
hold on, till your head is tired and your body aches and you faint
by the wayside; but you must never let go, you must learn to endure
to the end.

You will understand me. It is the mental part of which I speak. I do not mean that you are
to wear your voice or your body out practising. It's something far harder. You must learn to surrender
yourself, to lose your life to have it!" He looked at her keenly. She was drinking his words
in, as it were, and the expression on her face assured even him. "Do you want me," he said,
suddenly coming nearer, "to tell you about yourself; what I see in you?"

She bent her head, quivering from head to foot, before the power of this man, who seemed uncanny in his
knowledge.

"You have had some great sorrow. It is an unhappy love-affair. I understand." Here he smiled
his critical, unfathomable, remote smile. "You are not yet eighteen, and have been capable of
a great sorrow! Child," he said, "thank God for it! You have a voice of gold. We will make of that
sorrow diamonds and rubies and pearls to set in the voice, so that the world will stand at gaze
before you. When you have real insight you will know that nothing was ever taken from us that
more was not put in its place."

"Master," she said, with something of his own abruptness, "may I talk
to you a little, a very little, about myself?"

Already Josef realized
the charm of her companionship as well as the adoring humility with
which her eyes shone into his and the unquestioning way she placed
herself under his direction. He nodded his permission with a smile. I must hold on to that, to preserve a sense of my
identity. Mr. Johnson had just been reading the "Lady of the Lake," and at once suggested that
my name be "Douglass." From that time until now I have been called "Frederick Douglass;" and
as I am more widely known by that name than by either of the others, I shall continue to use
it as my own.

I was quite disappointed at the general appearance of things in New Bedford. The impression
which I had received respecting the character and condition of the people of the north, I found
to be singularly erroneous. I had very strangely supposed, while in slavery, that few of the
comforts, and scarcely any of the luxuries, of life were enjoyed at the north, compared with
what were enjoyed by the slaveholders of the south. I probably came to this conclusion from
the fact that northern people owned no slaves. I supposed that they were about upon a level
with the non-slaveholding population of the south. I knew they were exceedingly poor, and I
had been accustomed to regard their poverty as the necessary consequence of their being non-slaveholders.
I had somehow imbibed the opinion that, in the absence of slaves, there could be no wealth,
and very little refinement. And upon coming to the north, I expected to meet with a rough,
hard-handed, and uncultivated population, living in the most Spartan-like simplicity, knowing
nothing of the ease, luxury, pomp, and grandeur of southern slaveholders. Such being my conjectures,
any one acquainted with the appearance of New Bedford may very readily infer how palpably I
must have seen my mistake.

In the afternoon of the day when I reached New Bedford, I visited the wharves, to take a view
of the shipping. Here I found myself surrounded with the strongest proofs of wealth. Lying
at the wharves, and riding in the stream, I saw many ships of the finest model, in the best
order, and of the largest size. Upon the right and left, I was walled in by granite warehouses
of the widest dimensions, stowed to their utmost capacity with the necessaries and comforts
of life. Added to this, almost every body seemed to be at work, but noiselessly so, compared
with what I had been accustomed to in Baltimore. There were no loud songs heard from those
engaged in loading and unloading ships. I heard no deep oaths or horrid curses on the laborer.
I saw no whipping of men; but all seemed to go smoothly on. Every man appeared to understand
his work, and went at it with a sober, yet cheerful earnestness, which betokened the deep interest
which he felt in what he was doing, as well as a sense of his own dignity as a man. To me this
looked exceedingly strange. From the wharves I strolled around and over the town, gazing with
wonder and admiration at the splendid churches, beautiful dwellings, and finely-cultivated
gardens; evincing an amount of wealth, comfort, taste, and refinement, such as I had never
seen in any part of slaveholding Maryland.

Every thing looked clean, new, and beautiful. I saw few or no dilapidated houses, with poverty-stricken
inmates; no half-naked children and barefooted women, such as I had been accustomed to see
in Hillsborough, Easton, St. Michael's, and Baltimore. The people looked more able, stronger,
healthier, and happier, than those of Maryland. I was for once made glad by a view of extreme
wealth, without being saddened by seeing extreme poverty. But the most astonishing as well
as the most interesting thing to me was the condition of the colored people, a great many of
whom, like myself, had escaped thither as a refuge from the hunters of men. I found many, who
had not been seven years out of their chains, living in finer houses, and evidently enjoying
more of the comforts of life, than the average of slaveholders in Maryland. I found the colored
people much more spirited than I had supposed they would be. I found among them a determination
to protect each other from the blood-thirsty kidnapper, at all hazards. Soon after my arrival,
I was told of a circumstance which illustrated their spirit. A colored man and a fugitive slave
were on unfriendly terms. The former was heard to threaten the latter with informing his master
of his whereabouts. Straightway a meeting was called among the colored people, under the stereotyped
notice, "Business of importance!" The betrayer was invited to attend. The people came at the
appointed hour, and organized the meeting by appointing a very religious old gentleman as president,
who, I believe, made a prayer, after which he addressed the meeting as follows: "Friends, we
have got him here, and I would recommend that you young men just take him outside the door,
and kill him!" With this, a number of them bolted at him; but they were intercepted by some
more timid than themselves, and the betrayer escaped their vengeance, and has not been seen
in New Bedford since. I believe there have been no more such threats, and should there be hereafter,
I doubt not that death would be the consequence.

I found employment, the third day after my arrival, in stowing a sloop with a load of oil.
It was new, dirty, and hard work for me; but I went at it with a glad heart and a willing hand.
I was now my own master. It was a happy moment, the rapture of which can be understood only
by those who have been slaves. It was the first work, the reward of which was to be entirely
my own. There was no Master Hugh standing ready, the moment I earned the money, to rob me of
it. I worked that day with a pleasure I had never before experienced. I was at work for myself
and newly-married wife. It was to me the starting-point of a new existence. When I got through
with that job, I went in pursuit of a job of calking; but such was the strength of prejudice
against color, among the white calkers, that they refused to work with me, and of course I
could get no employment.*

     * I am told that colored persons can now get employment at
     calking in New Bedford--a result of anti-slavery effort.

Finding my trade of no immediate benefit, I threw off my calking habiliments, and prepared
myself to do any kind of work I could get to do. Mr. Johnson kindly let me have his wood-horse
and saw, and I very soon found myself a plenty of work. There was no work too hard--none too
dirty. I was ready to saw wood, shovel coal, carry wood, sweep the chimney, or roll oil casks,--all
of which I did for nearly three years in New Bedford, before I became known to the anti-slavery
world.

In about four months after I went to New Bedford, there came a young man to me, and inquired
if I did not wish to take the "Liberator." I told him I did; but, just having made my escape
from slavery, I remarked that I was unable to pay for it then. I, however, finally became a
subscriber to it. The paper came, and I read it from week to week with such feelings as it
would be quite idle for me to attempt to describe. The paper became my meat and my drink. My
soul was set all on fire. Its sympathy for my brethren in bonds--its scathing denunciations
of slaveholders--its faithful exposures of slavery--and its powerful attacks upon the upholders
of the institution--sent a thrill of joy through my soul, such as I had never felt before!

I had not long been a reader of the "Liberator," before I got a pretty correct idea of the
principles, measures and spirit of the anti-slavery reform. I took right hold of the cause.
I could do but little; but what I could, I did with a joyful heart, and never felt happier
than when in an anti-slavery meeting. I seldom had much to say at the meetings, because what
I wanted to say was said so much better by others. "Not all; a part, a very little part," he returned.
"But meet the man, my child, and you will see how much has been done by both of us. On Saturday
morning you will come to me. You will say, 'Prophetic man, I am ashamed through all my being
to have loved so slight a thing.' You will find you have outgrown him, and he will have only
the weight of the Santa Claus, which children painlessly outgrow. And ever after you will have
toward him a kindly mother-feeling, for that is woman's way toward their first loves."

Katrine shook her head. "I do not want to forget."

"No," said Josef, "you never have wanted to forget, and that has made it hard for me. You have
a strange creed of your own. But sometimes, when I know beyond words that I have received a
'wireless' message from you over the roof-tops, I begin to believe you dangerous, Katrine Dulany.
But your belief of 'mind-curing' people into being better has the seed of truth in it which makes
so many new creeds dangerous. You can make yourself so great by fine thinking that the people
who come in contact with you understand and are uplifted."

"It is a thing more subtle, Greatness!" Katrine answered.

"It is not a thing more subtle, Obstinacy!" he returned, with a laugh. "However, have your way!
You are ordered, to Fontainebleau to-morrow. Your voice is in rags, shall I say? You will stay for
two weeks at the house of Madame Lomard. You will lie in the open and breathe much. And so, good-bye
to you!"

XIX

A VISION OF THE PAST

Anne Lennox's residence in Paris was more closely connected with Frank Ravenel than the world
knew. In a letter which she had received from Mrs. Ravenel, after her illness at Bar Harbor, that
comfort-loving old lady had written that she would like to go abroad for the winter if there
could be found some homelike place to stay.

Mrs. Lennox had grown tired of New York, and she quickly devised a plan to take some of her servants
with her, find a suitable establishment in Paris, and ask Mrs. Ravenel to make her a prolonged
visit. That Francis would probably accompany his mother to Europe and visit her as frequently as
business made it possible was not overlooked in Anne Lennox's calculations.

But Mrs. Ravenel, who was too fearful of her comfort to trust written descriptions, asked her
son to step over to Paris, as she jauntily put it, and see Anne's home before she committed herself.

"She
writes me," said Mrs. Ravenel, eyeing the invitation suspiciously, "that she has taken a house like
a palace. I lived in a palace once in Venice. The walls were of marble, with moisture on them constantly,
and there was but four feet of rug on a tiled floor forty feet square. When I asked for fire
they brought me a china basket with three or four semi-hot coals in it, and placed it in the
exact centre of the room where one was liable to trip over it. The experience cured me of 'dreaming
to dwell in marble halls.' I want heat, electricity, and a large bath of my own."

According to his mother's wishes, Frank had written to Anne that business was bringing him
to Paris, and that he would give himself the pleasure of calling upon her some time within
the following fortnight.

In the stately old house, which she had taken on the Boulevard Haussmann, Anne awaited Frank's
coming with more emotion than she acknowledged to herself. She knew that he had arrived in Paris
two days before, had seen that he was at the Grand Club, and the day previous had received
from him a note asking permission to call at four. He had been more than deliberate in his
attentions, a deliberation to which she had become accustomed. It was, in fact, part of his charm.
Often, in past years, he had hurt her so much by his coldness that his coming brought a keener
pleasure than the presence of a more ardent suitor might have done,
if he could with any exactness be termed a suitor at all.

Long before
her ill-assorted marriage had been dissolved by the death of her husband,
Anne Lennox's name had been connected with that of Francis Ravenel.
But it was one of the few affairs of his life which had caused no
scandal, one which other women had slurred over with a laugh.

"Anne's
all right, you know," they explained, "and really Frank and she would
have been very well suited to each other if they could have married.
At worst nothing but a flirtation; and who, knowing her husband, can
blame her?" These were the excuses framed for Mrs. Lennox by her many
friends. The death of her husband had brought the general belief that
a wedding between Frank and herself would naturally follow. Nearly
four years had elapsed, however, and marriage between them seemed
no nearer than it had ever done.

Frank's present visit to Paris,
Anne Lennox knew, with some bitterness, was a business one. He had
made that disappointingly plain to her in his letter. But as she awaited
his coming in a white crêpe gown, which made her seem so fair and
young, she hoped the words might be spoken which would bring to her
the desired end. They are always ready to sacrifice, but seldom to show mercy.
They are they who are represented as professing to love God whom they have not seen, whilst
they hate their brother whom they have seen. They love the heathen on the other side of the
globe. They can pray for him, pay money to have the Bible put into his hand, and missionaries
to instruct him; while they despise and totally neglect the heathen at their own doors.

Such is, very briefly, my view of the religion of this land; and to avoid any misunderstanding,
growing out of the use of general terms, I mean by the religion of this land, that which is
revealed in the words, deeds, and actions, of those bodies, north and south, calling themselves
Christian churches, and yet in union with slaveholders. It is against religion, as presented
by these bodies, that I have felt it my duty to testify.

I conclude these remarks by copying the following portrait of the religion of the south, (which
is, by communion and fellowship, the religion of the north,) which I soberly affirm is "true
to the life," and without caricature or the slightest exaggeration. It is said to have been
drawn, several years before the present anti-slavery agitation began, by a northern Methodist
preacher, who, while residing at the south, had an opportunity to see slaveholding morals,
manners, and piety, with his own eyes. "Shall I not visit for these things? saith the Lord.
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?"

A PARODY

     "Come, saints and sinners, hear me tell
     How pious priests whip Jack and Nell,
     And women buy and children sell,
     And preach all sinners down to hell,
     And sing of heavenly union.

     "They'll bleat and baa, dona like goats,
     Gorge down black sheep, and strain at motes,
     Array their backs in fine black coats,
     Then seize their negroes by their throats,
     And choke, for heavenly union.

     "They'll church you if you sip a dram,
     And damn you if you steal a lamb;
     Yet rob old Tony, Doll, and Sam,
     Of human rights, and bread and ham;
     Kidnapper's heavenly union.

     "They'll loudly talk of Christ's reward,
     And bind his image with a cord,
     And scold, and swing the lash abhorred,
     And sell their brother in the Lord
     To handcuffed heavenly union.

     "They'll read and sing a sacred song,
     And make a prayer both loud and long,
     And teach the right and do the wrong,
     Hailing the brother, sister throng,
     With words of heavenly union.

     "We wonder how such saints can sing,
     Or praise the Lord upon the wing,
     Who roar, and scold, and whip, and sting,
     And to their slaves and mammon cling,
     In guilty conscience union.

     "They'll raise tobacco, corn, and rye,
     And drive, and thieve, and cheat, and lie,
     And lay up treasures in the sky,
     By making switch and cowskin fly,
     In hope of heavenly union.

     "They'll crack old Tony on the skull,
     And preach and roar like Bashan bull,
     Or braying ass, of mischief full,
     Then seize old Jacob by the wool,
     And pull for heavenly union.

     "A roaring, ranting, sleek man-thief,
     Who lived on mutton, veal, and beef,
     Yet never would afford relief
     To needy, sable sons of grief,
     Was big with heavenly union. 

     The way to live well is to work well."
     
     Ever gratefully yours, KATRINE DULANY.

Another
     letter came in the same mail, which Frank read
     with a distaste for the writer of it, for the affair that made such
a letter possible.

     It was from another woman, but
     something in the fervent little soul
     beyond the seas called to him,
     to the best in him, and he tore the
     other note to pieces and wrote a line or two in answer which closed
an affair before it was well begun.

     "Two others oped their iron jaws,
     And waved their children-stealing paws;
     There sat their children in gewgaws;
     By stinting negroes' backs and maws,
     They kept up heavenly union.

     "All good from Jack another takes,
     And entertains their flirts and rakes,
     Who dress as sleek as glossy snakes,
     And cram their mouths with sweetened cakes;
     And this goes down for union."

Sincerely and earnestly hoping that this little book may do something toward throwing light
on the American slave system, and hastening the glad day of deliverance to the millions of
my brethren in bonds--faithfully relying upon the power of truth, love, and justice, for success
in my humble efforts--and solemnly pledging my self anew to the sacred cause,--I subscribe myself,

FREDERICK DOUGLASS LYNN, Mass., April 28, 1845.

THE END

