Three other letters belonging to the same year show how deeply Michelangelo was touched and
gratified by the distinguished honour Varchi paid him. In an earlier chapter of this book I
have already pointed out how this correspondence bears upon the question of his friendship
with Tommaso dei Cavalieri, and also upon an untenable hypothesis advanced by recent Florentine
students of his biography. The incident is notable in other ways because Buonarroti was now
adopted as a poet by the Florentine Academy. With a width of sympathy rare in such bodies,
they condoned the ruggedness of his style and the uncouthness of his versification in their
admiration for the high quality of his meditative inspiration. To the triple crown of sculptor,
painter, architect, he now added the laurels of the bard; and this public recognition of his
genius as a writer gave him well-merited pleasure in his declining years.

While gathering up these scattered fragments of Buonarroti's later life, I may here introduce
a letter addressed to Benvenuto Cellini, which illustrates his glad acceptance of all good
work in fellow-craftsmen:--

"My Benvenuto,--I have known you all these years as the greatest goldsmith of whom the world
ever heard, and now I am to know you for a sculptor of the same quality. Messer Bindo Altoviti
took me to see his portrait bust in bronze, and told me it was by your hand. I admired it much,
but was sorry to see that it has been placed in a bad light. If it had a proper illumination,
it would show itself to be the fine work it is."

VI

Lionardo Buonarroti was at last married to Cassandra, the daughter of Donato Ridolfi, upon
the 16th of May 1553. One of the dearest wishes which had occupied his uncle's mind so long,
came thus to its accomplishment. His letters are full of kindly thoughts for the young couple,
and of prudent advice to the husband, who had not arranged all matters connected with the settlements
to his own satisfaction. Michelangelo congratulated Lionardo heartily upon his happiness, and
told him that he was minded to send the bride a handsome present, in token of his esteem. "I
have not been able to do so yet, because Urbino was away. Now that he has returned, I shall
give expression to my sentiments. They tell me that a fine pearl necklace of some value would
be very proper. I have sent a goldsmith, Urbino's friend, in search of such an ornament, and
hope to find it; but say nothing to her, and if you would like me to choose another article,
please let me know." This letter winds up with a strange admonition: "Look to living, reflect
and weigh things well; for the number of widows in the world is always larger than that of
the widowers." Ultimately he decided upon two rings, one a diamond, the other a ruby. He tells
Lionardo to have the stones valued in case he has been cheated, because he does not understand
such things; and is glad to hear in due course that the jewels are genuine. After the proper
interval, Cassandra expected her confinement, and Michelangelo corresponded with his nephew
as to the child's name in case it was a boy. He writes intelligently of his work, and with a greater
freedom as to detail than our more exigeant censorship allows; so that you get an excellent
picture of the daily life of a campaigner in the greatest of all wars. He met the English in
Flanders, admired and liked their looks and ways.... A very charming record of a gallant soldier,
a chosen soul.

* * * * *

In the first few pages of At the Serbian Front in Macedonia (LANE), Mr. E.P. STEBBING tells so
many little anecdotes that I began to wonder if he was ever going to get there. When, however,
he has got into his stride, he gives us information which is all the more valuable because we
hear so little of the Macedonian campaign. Mr. STEBBING was appointed Transport Officer to a
unit of the Scottish Women's Hospitals that was sent to the Serbian Front. Naturally he has much
to say of the work done by these brave and untiring women. Under exceptionally difficult circumstances
their courage never failed, and it is good to remember that their arrival at Ostrovo was of
the greatest possible service to the Serbs. That is one part of the book, and it is well told.
The other is of actual war, and here Mr. STEBBING was given ample opportunities to observe.
No one can read his account of the taking of Kajmaktcalan without feeling the keenest admiration for the
gallantry of the Serbs. He also describes very graphically the frontal
attack by the French upon the Kenali lines in October, 1916. The British
public is too apt to look upon the Macedonian campaign as a prolonged
picnic, and for them a dose of Mr. STEBBING would be excellent medicine.
I wish someone with our own troops would do as sound a service for
them as is done here for the Serbs and French.

We have seen that Vasari worked for a short time as pupil under Michelangelo, and that during
the pontificate of Paul III. they were brought into frequent contact at Rome. With years their
friendship deepened into intimacy, and after the date 1550 their correspondence forms one of
our most important sources of information. Michelangelo's letters begin upon the 1st of August
in that year. Vasari was then living and working for the Duke at Florence; but he had designed
a chapel for S. Pietro a Montorio in Rome, where Julius III. wished to erect tombs to the memory
of his ancestors; and the work had been allotted to Bartolommeo Ammanati under Michelangelo's
direction.

This business, otherwise of no importance in his biography, necessitated the writing of despatches,
one of which is interesting, since it acknowledges the receipt of Vasari's celebrated book:--

"Referring to your three letters which I have received, my pen refuses to reply to such high
compliments. I should indeed be happy if I were in some degree what you make me out to be,
but I should not care for this except that then you would have a servant worth something. However,
I am not surprised that you, who resuscitate the dead, should prolong the life of the living,
or that you should steal the half-dead from death for an endless period."

It seems that on this occasion he also sent Vasari the sonnet composed upon his Lives of the
Painters. Though it cannot be called one of his poetical masterpieces, the personal interest
attaching to the verses justifies their introduction here:--

  With pencil and with palette hitherto
  You made your art high Nature's paragon;
  Nay more, from Nature her own prize you won,
  Making what she made fair more fair to view.

  Now that your learned hand with labour new
  Of pen and ink a worthier work hath done,
  What erst you lacked, what still remained her own,
  The power of giving life, is gained for you.

  If men in any age with Nature vied
  In beauteous workmanship, they had to yield
  When to the fated end years brought their name.

  You, re-illuming memories that died,
  In spite of Time and Nature have revealed
  For them and for yourself eternal fame.

Vasari's official position at the ducal court of Florence brought him into frequent and personal
relations with Cosimo de' Medici. The Duke had long been anxious to lure the most gifted of
his subjects back to Florence; but Michelangelo, though he remained a loyal servant to the
Medicean family, could not approve of Cosimo's despotic rule. Moreover, he was now engaged
by every tie of honour, interest, and artistic ambition to superintend the fabric of S. Peter's.
He showed great tact, through delicate negotiations carried on for many years, in avoiding
the Duke's overtures without sacrificing his friendship. Wishing to found his family in Florence
and to fund the earnings of his life there, he naturally assumed a courteous attitude. A letter
written by the Bishop Tornabuoni to Giovanni Francesco Lottini in Rome shows that these overtures
began as early as 1546. The prelate says the Duke is so anxious to regain "Michelangelo, the
divine sculptor," that he promises "to make him a member of the forty-eight senators, and to
give him any office he may ask for." The affair was dropped for some years, but in 1552 Cosimo
renewed his attempts, and now began to employ Vasari and Cellini as ambassadors. Soon after
finishing his Perseus, Benvenuto begged for leave to go to Rome; and before starting, he showed
the Duke Michelangelo's friendly letter on the bust of Bindo Altoviti. "He read it with much
kindly interest, and said to me: 'Benvenuto, if you write to him, and can persuade him to return
to Florence, I will make him a member of the Forty-eight.' Accordingly I wrote a letter full
of warmth, and offered in the Duke's name a hundred times more than my commission carried;
but not wanting to make any mistake, I showed this to the Duke before I sealed it, saying to
his most illustrious Excellency: 'Prince, perhaps I have made him too many promises.' He replied:
'Michel Agnolo deserves more than you have promised, and I will bestow on him still greater
favours.' To this letter he sent no answer, and I could see that the Duke was much offended
with him."

While in Rome, Cellini went to visit Michelangelo, and renewed his offers in the Duke's name.
What passed in that interview is so graphically told, introducing the rustic personality of
Urbino on the stage, and giving a hint of Michelangelo's reasons for not returning in person
to Florence, that the whole passage may be transcribed as opening a little window on the details
of our hero's domestic life:--

"Then I went to visit Michel Agnolo Buonarroti, and repeated what I had written from Florence
to him in the Duke's name. He replied that he was engaged upon the fabric of S. Peter's, and
that this would prevent him from leaving Rome. I rejoined that, as he had decided on the model
of that building, he could leave its execution to his man Urbino, who would carry out his orders
to the letter. I added much about future favours, in the form of a message from the Duke. Upon
this he looked me hard in the face, and said with a sarcastic smile: 'And you! to what extent
are you satisfied with him?' Although I replied that I was extremely contented and was very
well treated by his Excellency, he showed that he was acquainted with the greater part of my
annoyances, and gave as his final answer that it would be difficult for him to leave Rome.
To this I added that he could not do better than to return to his own land, which was governed
by a prince renowned for justice, and the greatest lover of the arts and sciences who ever
saw the light of this world. As I have remarked above, he had with him a servant of his who
came from Urbino, and had lived many years in his employment, rather as valet and housekeeper
than anything else; this indeed was obvious, because he had acquired no skill in the arts.
Consequently, while I was pressing Michel Agnolo with arguments he could not answer, he turned
round sharply to Urbino, as though to ask him his opinion. The fellow began to bawl out in
his rustic way: 'I will never leave my master Michel Agnolo's side till I shall have flayed
him or he shall have flayed me.' These stupid words forced me to laugh, and without saying
farewell, I lowered my shoulders and retired."

This was in 1552. The Duke was loth to take a refusal, and for the next eight years he continued
to ply Michelangelo with invitations, writing letters by his own hand, employing his agents
in Rome and Florence, and working through Vasari. The letters to Vasari during this period
are full of the subject. Michelangelo remains firm in his intention to remain at Rome and not
abandon S. Peter's. As years went on, infirmities increased, and the solicitations of the Duke
became more and more irksome to the old man. His discomfort at last elicited what may be called
a real cry of pain in a letter to his nephew:--

"As regards my condition, I am ill with all the troubles which are wont to afflict old men. However,
being quite resolved not to notice, I gave no sign whatever that I did notice. But, when evening
came, and he showed in Jarber, and, when Jarber wouldn't be helped off with his cloak, and poked
his cane into cane chair-backs and china ornaments and his own eye, in trying to unclasp his
brazen lions of himself (which he couldn't do, after all), I could have shaken them both.

As
it was, I only shook the tea-pot, and made the tea. Jarber had brought from under his cloak, a
roll of paper, with which he had triumphantly pointed over the way,
like the Ghost of Hamlet's Father appearing to the late Mr. Kemble,
and which he had laid on the table.

"A discovery?" said I, pointing to it, when he was seated, and had got his tea-cup.--"Don't
go, Trottle."

"The first of a series of discoveries," answered Jarber. "Account of a former tenant, compiled
from the Water Rate, and Medical Man."

"Don't go, Trottle," I repeated. For, I saw him making imperceptibly to the door.

"Begging your pardon, ma'am, I might be in Mr. Jarber's way?"

Jarber looked that he decidedly thought he might be. I relieved myself with a good angry croak,
and said--always determined not to notice:

"Have the goodness to sit down, if you please, Trottle. I wish you to hear this."

Trottle bowed in the stiffest manner, and took the remotest chair he could find. Even that,
he moved close to the draught from the keyhole of the door.

"Firstly," Jarber began, after sipping his tea, "would my Sophon--"

"Begin again, Jarber," said I.

"Would you be much surprised, if this House to Let should turn out
to be the property of a relation of your own?"

"I should indeed be
very much surprised."

"Then it belongs to your first cousin (I learn,
by the way, that he is ill at this time) George Forley."

"Then that
is a bad beginning. I cannot deny that George Forley stands in the
relation of first cousin to me; but I hold no communication with him.
George Forley has been a hard, bitter, stony father to a child now
dead. George Forley was most implacable and unrelenting to one of
his two daughters who made a poor marriage. George Forley brought
all the weight of his band to bear as heavily against that crushed
thing, as he brought it to bear lightly, favouringly, and advantageously
upon her sister, who made a rich marriage. I hope that, with the measure
George Forley meted, it may not be measured out to him again. I will
give George Forley no worse wish."

I was strong upon the subject,
and I could not keep the tears out of my eyes; for, that young girl's
was a cruel story, and I had dropped many a tear over it before.

"The
house being George Forley's," said I, "is almost enough to account
for there being a Fate upon it, if Fate there is. I have all that is necessary with me, and will
do my utmost, while remaining in his company, to extract useful information and suggestions."
We know from Vasari's Life of Michelangelo that the plans for decorating the Palace were settled
to his own and the Duke's satisfaction during these colloquies at Rome.

Later on in the year, Cosimo came in person to Rome, attended by the Duchess Eleonora. Michelangelo
immediately waited on their Highnesses, and was received with special marks of courtesy by
the Duke, who bade him to be seated at his side, and discoursed at length about his own designs
for Florence and certain discoveries he had made in the method of working porphyry. These interviews,
says Vasari, were repeated several times during Cosimo's sojourn in Rome; and when the Crown-Prince
of Florence, Don Francesco, arrived, this young nobleman showed his high respect for the great
man by conversing with him cap in hand.

The project of bringing Buonarroti back to Florence was finally abandoned; but he had the satisfaction
of feeling that, after the lapse of more than seventy years, his long connection with the House
of Medici remained as firm and cordial as it had ever been. It was also consolatory to know
that the relations established between himself and the reigning dynasty in Florence would prove
of service to Lionardo, upon whom he now had concentrated the whole of his strong family affection.

In estimating Michelangelo as man, independent of his eminence as artist, the most singular
point which strikes us is this persistent preoccupation with the ancient house he desired so
earnestly to rehabilitate. He treated Lionardo with the greatest brutality. Nothing that this
nephew did, or did not do, was right. Yet Lionardo was the sole hope of the Buonarroti-Simoni
stock. When he married and got children, the old man purred with satisfaction over him, but
only as a breeder of the race; and he did all in his power to establish Lionardo in a secure
position.

VII

Returning to the history of Michelangelo's domestic life, we have to relate two sad events
which happened to him at the end of 1555. On the 28th of September he wrote to Lionardo: "The
bad news about Gismondo afflicts me deeply. I am not without my own troubles of health, and
have many annoyances besides. In addition to all this, Urbino has been ill in bed with me three
months, and is so still, which causes me much trouble and anxiety." Gismondo, who had been
declining all the summer, died upon the 13th of November. His brother in Rome was too much
taken up with the mortal sickness of his old friend and servant Urbino to express great sorrow.
"Your letter informs me of my brother Gismondo's death, which is the cause to me of serious
grief. We must have patience; and inasmuch as he died sound of mind and with all the sacraments
of the Church, let God be praised. I am in great affliction here. Urbino is still in bed, and
very seriously ill. I do not know what will come of it. I feel this trouble as though he were
my own son, because he has lived in my service twenty-five years, and has been very faithful.
Being old, I have no time to form another servant to my purpose; and so I am sad exceedingly.
If then, you know of some devout person, I beg you to have prayers offered up to God for his
recovery."

The next letter gives a short account of his death:--

"I inform you that yesterday, the 3rd of December, at four o'clock, Francesco called Urbino
passed from this life, to my very great sorrow. He has left me sorely stricken and afflicted;
nay, it would have been sweeter to have died with him, such is the love I bore him. Less than
this love he did not deserve; for he had grown to be a worthy man, full of faith and loyalty.
So, then, I feel as though his death had left me without life, and I cannot find heart's ease.
I should be glad to see you, therefore; only I cannot think how you can leave Florence because
of your wife."

To Vasari he wrote still more passionately upon this occasion:--

"I cannot write well; yet, in answer to your letter, I will say a few words. I would counsel
all who appreciate the exquisitely sensitive Récit d'une Soeur, with which he not unfavourably
compares it, to go rather to the French original of these letters of a young captain of the famous
Chasseurs Alpins. I had him with
me twenty-six years, and found him above measure faithful and sincere. Now that I had made
him rich, and thought to keep him as the staff and rest of my old age, he has vanished from
my sight; nor have I hope left but that of seeing him again in Paradise. God has given us good
foundation for this hope in the exceedingly happy ending of his life. Even more than dying,
it grieved him to leave me alive in this treacherous world, with so many troubles; and yet
the better part of me is gone with him, nor is there left to me aught but infinite distress.
I recommend myself to you, and beg you, if it be not irksome, to make my excuses to Messer
Benvenuto (Cellini) for omitting to answer his letter. The trouble of soul I suffer in thought
about these things prevents me from writing. Remember me to him, and take my best respects
to yourself."

How tenderly Michelangelo's thought dwelt upon Urbino appears from this sonnet, addressed in
1556 to Monsignor Lodovico Beccadelli:--

  God's grace, the cross, our troubles multiplied,
    Will make us meet in heaven, full well I know:
    Yet ere we yield, our breath on earth below,
    Why need a little solace be denied?
  Though seas and mountains and rough ways divide
    Our feet asunder, neither frost nor snow
    Can make the soul her ancient love; or ego;
    Nor chains nor bonds the wings of thought have tied. The
  coveted cross of the Legion of Honour comes to him
    before the end, and he wins the affection
    and confidence of his men--a soldier's highest
  prize. A deep religious conviction unclouded
    by superstition sustains his courage.
    

