He did the same during the first days of convalescence, which he prolonged as much as possible,
in order to give the same distinction to the magistrates, come at what time they might, and
privately to the great people of the Court and the ambassadors.  He fancied himself a tribune
of the people, and aspired to their favour and their dangerous power.  From this he turned
to other affectations which had the same aim against M. le Duc d'Orleans.  He multiplied the
Te Deums that he induced the various ranks of petty officers of the King to have sung on different
days and in different churches; he attended all, took with him as many people as he could,
and for six weeks continued this game.  A Te Deum was sung in every church in Paris.  He spoke
of nothing else, and above the real joy he felt at the King's recovery, he put on a false one
which had a party smell about it, and which avowed designs not to be mistaken.

The King went in state to Notre Dame and Saint Genevieve to thank God. These mummeries, thus
prolonged, extended to the end of August and the fete Saint-Louis.  Each year there, is on
that day a concert in the garden.  The Marechal de Villeroy took care that on this occasion,
the concert should become a species of fete, to which he added a display of fireworks.  Less
than this would have been enough to draw the crowd. It was so great that a pin could not have
fallen to the ground through the mass of people wedged against each other in the garden.  The
windows of the Tuileries were ornamented, and were filled with people.  All the roofs of the
Carrousel, as well as the Place, were covered with spectators.

The Marechal de Villeroy was in; his element, and importuned the King, who tried to hide himself
in the corners at every moment.  The Marechal took him by the arm, and led him, now to the
windows where he could see the Carrousel, and the houses covered with people; now to those
which looked upon the garden, full of the innumerable crowd waiting for the fete.  Everybody
cried 'Vive le Roi!'  when he appeared, but had not the Marechal detained him, he would have
run away and hid himself.

"Look, my master," the Marechal would say, "all that crowd, all these people are yours, all
belong to you; you are the master of them: look at them a little therefore, to please them,
for they are all yours, they are all devoted to you."

A nice lesson this for a governor to give to a young King, repeating it every time he leads
him to the windows, so fearful is he lest the boy- sovereign shall forget it!  I do not know
whether he received similar lessons from those who had the charge of his education.  At last
the Marechal led him upon the terrace, where, beneath a dais, he heard the end of the concert,
and afterwards saw the fireworks.  The lesson of the Marechal de Villeroy, so often and so
publicly repeated, made much stir, and threw but little honour upon him.  He himself experienced
the first effect of is fine instruction. 

"Everything depends on who you know to send The Crazy ride - leaving Nicholas continued its
abstraction -. You know what Jesus told the Samaritan when he spoke to her in the well, in
a situation similar to what you and I now have ...».

Fortunata smiled, understanding affecting the appointment, but had remained in the dark.

"If you want to improve living and edificársenos internally to acquire the necessary strength
here I am. Why, why are we? When I considered certain reform you, perhaps do not put so many
objections to the wedding with my brother. The poor man is crazy about you, I said last night
if not let him marry you die. My aunt wants to persuade her, but I told him "Quiet, quiet, things
must be seen slowly. We do not rush, aunt, "and why I came here. I pledge to you cure the disease
of the imagination that is to have unworthy man love he lost. Having achieved this, you will
love that has to be her husband, forward and spiritual love, not of the senses ... neither more nor
less. Oh, I met I so successful of these, I have saved so many people believed damaged forever!
Convince you, in this as in other things, all is get to it, everything is starting ... Imagine how
well the reform will be when we shall live happy and considerate, have a respectable name,
and shall be none to worship, not for his personal thanks, that damn what they mean, but by spiritual,
that is what matters. At first you'll have to make some effort; will need to forget your good
palm heart. This is perhaps most difficult, but let us realized that the only truth is the beauty
of the soul, my daughter, because of the body ...». realize worms  'Twas because M. le Duc d'Orleans
was vexed with this childish behaviour, so calculated to do him great injury, that he wished
me to supersede the Marechal de Villeroy as governor of the King.  This, as before said, I
would never consent to.  As for the Marechal, his absurdities met with their just reward, but
at a date I have not yet come to.

CHAPTER CVI

Before this illness of the King, that is to say, at the commencement of June, I went one day
to work with M, le Duc d'Orleans, and found him alone, walking up and down the grand apartment.

"Holloa!  there," said he, as soon as he saw me; then, taking me by the hand, "I cannot leave
you in ignorance of a thing which I desire above all others, which is of the utmost importance
to me, and which will cause you as much joy as me; but you must keep it profoundly secret."
Then bursting out laughing, "If M. de Cambrai knew that I had told it to you, he would never
pardon me."  And he proceeded to state that perfect reconciliation had been established between
himself and the King and Queen of Spain; that arrangements had been made by which our young
King was to marry the Infanta of Spain, as soon as he should be old enough; and the Prince
of the Asturias (the heir to the Spanish throne) was to marry Mademoiselle de Chartres, the
Regent's daughter.

If my joy at this was great, my astonishment was even greater; M. le Duc d'Orleans embraced
me, and the first surprise over, I asked him how he had contrived to bring about these marriages;
above all, that of his daughter.  He replied that it had all been done in a trice by the Abbe
Dubois, who was a regular devil when once he had set his mind upon anything; that the King
of Spain had been transported at the idea of the King of France marrying the Infanta; and that
the marriage of the Prince of the Asturias had been the 'sine qua non' of the other.

After we had well talked over the matter and rejoiced thereon, I said to the Regent that the
proposed marriage of his daughter must be kept profoundly secret until the moment of her departure
for Spain; and that of the King also, until the time for their execution arrived; so as to
prevent the jealousy of all Europe.  At this union, so grand and so intimate, of the two branches
of the royal family, such a union having always been the terror of Europe and disunion the
object of all its policy--this policy having only too well succeeded--I urged that the sovereigns
must be left as long as possible in the confidence they had acquired, the Infanta above all,
being but three years old (she was born at Madrid on the morning of the 30th of March, 1718),
by which means the fears of Europe upon the marriage of Mademoiselle de Chartres with the Prince
of the Asturias would be coloured--the Prince could wait, he having been born in August, 1707,
and being accordingly only fourteen years of age.  "You are quite right," replied M. le Duc
d'Orleans, "but this can't be, because in Spain they wish to make public the declarations of
marriage at once, indeed, as soon as the demand is made and the declaration can be signed."

"What madness!"  cried I; "what end can this tocsin have except to arouse all Europe and put
it in movement!  They must be made to understand this, and we must stick to it; nothing is
so important."

"All this is true," said M. le Duc d'Orleans. It was possible that no one guessed the substitution. Hands. The first
was the early break to take the gold and silver from the New small change, more than two pesetas in
dogs that the object had changed in the grocery store.

I said of course not, shrugging my shoulders at his unseasonable impatience.

During the discussion which followed, I did not forget to think of myself, the occasion being
so opportune for making the fortunes of my second son.  I remembered then, that as matters
were advanced to this point, a special ambassador must be sent to Spain, to ask the hand of
the Infanta for the King, and to sign the compact of marriage; that the ambassador must be
a nobleman of mark and title, and thus I begged the Duke to give me this commission, with a
recommendation to the King of Spain, so as to make my second son, the Marquis of Ruffec, grandee
of Spain.

M. le Duc d'Orleans scarcely allowed me to finish, immediately accorded me what I had asked,
promised me the recommendation with many expressions of friendship, and asked me to keep the
whole matter secret, and make no preparation that would disclose it.

I knew well enough why he enjoined me to secrecy.  He wished to have the time to make Dubois
swallow this pill. Better way. And this is sanity or
what? It will be called philosophy ... God has his hand, if after giving the opposite philosophy.
"

- Will you go see it? - The boy asked after the most natural.

- Me? ... but how things have ... I see it is useless to make plays
you. With that talentazo you're throwing, nothing escapes you ...
I see her! Just out of curiosity I wanted to know what I know ...
From now on, as if there were.  The fact is, I feared that Dubois,
not being able to hinder my embassy, might keep me in Spain in a sort of exile, under pretence
of business, in order to get rid of me altogether. Events proved that my precaution was not
altogether useless. Which degradation get
one when it drops like that! I was so silly, that I thought I always had to live among such
a mob. Well, no I mean, the daughter of my soul ... a day that went hence the chopper, the Second
querindango.

Dubois, as I expected, was vexed beyond measure at my embassy, and resolved to ruin me and
throw me into disgrace.  I was prepared for this, and I soon saw it was so.  At first, I received
from him nothing but professions of friendship and of attachment for me, congratulations that
M. le Duc d'Orleans had accorded to me an embassy my merit deserved, and which would be productive
of such useful results for my children. And as I was forced
to cast out those ideas, because he does not fit in mind and was overflowing, was herself to
say them not to drown. "Now I do not fear comparisons. Among she and I, what a difference!
 He slipped
through my hands like an eel until the moment for my departure drew near.  As he saw it approach,
he began to preach to me of magnificence, and wished to enter into details respecting my suite.
I described it to him, and everybody else would have been satisfied, but as his design was
to ruin me, he cried out against it, and augmented it by a third.  I represented to him the
excessive expense this augmentation would cause, the state of the finances, the loss upon the
exchange: his sole reply was that the dignity of the King necessitated this expense and show;
and that his Majesty would bear the charge.  I spoke to M. le Duc d'Orleans, who listened to
me with attention, but being persuaded by the Cardinal, held the same language.

This point settled, the Cardinal must needs know how many coats I should take, and how many
I should give to my sons.--in a word, there was not a single detail of table or stable that
he did not enter into, and that he did not double.  My friends exhorted me not to be obstinate
with a man so impetuous, so dangerous, so completely in possession of M. le Duc d'Orleans,
pointing out to me that when once I was away he might profit by my absence, and that, meanwhile,
everything relating to my embassy must pass through his hands.  All this was only too true.
I was obliged, therefore, to yield, although I felt that, once embarked, the King's purse would
be spared at the expense of mine.

As soon as the marriages were declared, I asked to be declared as ambassador, so that I might
openly make my preparations, which, it will be remembered, I had been forbidden to do. What blood? Cleaned bedspread as
he could, blowing dust. Then noticed that his right hand and kept his shirt cuff some signals, and dealt
in erase carefully. Also needed pestle a good wipe.
  The Cardinal wished to put me to double the necessary expense, by compelling me
to have my liveries, dresses, etc., made in the utmost precipitation; and this happened.  He
thought, too, I should not be able to provide myself with everything in time; and that he might
represent this to M. le Duc d'Orleans, and in Spain, as a fault, and excite envious cries against
me.

Nevertheless, I did not choose to press him: to announce my embassy, at the same time trying
to obtain from him the instructions I was to receive, and which, passing through him and the
Regent done, told nothing to the public, as my preparations would have done.  But I could not
obtain them.  Dubois carelessly replied to me, that in one or two conversations the matter
would be exhausted.  He wished me to know nothing, except vaguely; to leave no time for reflection,
for questions, for explanations; and to throw me thus into embarrassments, and to cause me
to commit blunders which he intended to make the most of. 

Had gone well ... God knows where. He looked around with curiosity overjoyed that smallest things
inspire the person out of a long captivity. His thinking Gallardo is that sweet freedom, recreating
with their own ideas.  He led me to his Majesty at once, and there and then my embassy was
announced.  Upon leaving the King's cabinet, M. le Duc d'Orleans made me jump into his coach,
which was waiting for him, and took me to the Palais Royal, where we began to speak seriously
upon the affairs of my embassy.

I fancy that Cardinal Dubois was much annoyed at what had been done, and that he would have
liked to postpone the declaration yet a little longer. But this now was impossible.  The next
day people were sent to work upon my equipments, the Cardinal showing as much eagerness and
impatience respecting them, as he had before shown apathy and indifference. This beautiful piece will banish, and preserves
only the people with admirable instinct. It out of the coffers in the big times of life for baptisms
and weddings, as it gives the wind a song of joy in which is a verse for the country.
  At last, the hurry to
make me set out was so great, that such of the things as were ready he sent on by rapid conveyance
to Bayonne, at a cost by no means trifling to me.

