On the other hand, the conclusions drawn by many of those reading the reports were probably
unjustified. The infinite plenty was one thing. Making constant and profitable use of it was
another.

Thus, although Smith cited an impressive roster of edible fish in the vicinity of Jamestown,
it was not to follow that the settlers were always able to turn them to advantage. There were
several good reasons.

Long before Jamestown the fisheries off the coast of Northern America and Canada were known
to be richly productive, with promise of an organized and dependable industry. But farther
south conditions were found to be quite different. The fishing in the Chesapeake bay had frustrating
ways. Sometimes there were hordes of fish. Again they stayed away in large numbers. They were
usually present during warm weather when spoilage was worst. The first colonists had no ice
at all and very little salt. Frequent spells of damp weather made sun-drying impractical. If
more fish were caught than could be eaten at once, the excess was very likely wasted. Fishing
gear was consistently inadequate. But from the very first, fishing and its development had
been kept in mind by the promoters of the colony.

Fishing rights were defined in 1606 in letters patent to Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Somers
and others, as recorded in the Charter granted in 1606:

    They shall have all ... fishings ... from the said first seat of
    their plantation and habitation by the space of fifty miles of
    English statute measure, all along the said coast of Virginia and
    America, towards the west and southwest, as the coast lies ... and
    also all ... fishings for the space of fifty English miles ... all
    along the said coast of Virginia and America, towards the east and
    northeast ... and also ... fishings ... from the same, fifty miles
    every way on the sea coast, directly into the mainland by the space
    of one hundred like English miles. 

And what do you think about, pray?"

"About you!"

    And that began it: he was a gallant man, and he had been a brave one.
He was not aware how far he was going on so short an acquaintance,
but his temerity was not displeasing to the lady. These they call quintans, as the
    West Indians call their canoas. They make them with one tree, by
    burning and scraping away the coals with stones and shells till
    they have made them in the form of a trough. Some of them are an
    ell deep and forty or fifty foot in length and some will transport
    forty men, but the most ordinary are smaller and will ferry ten or
    twenty, with some luggage, over their broadest rivers. Instead of
    oars, they use paddles and sticks, with which they will row faster
    than we in our barges. They have nets for fishing, for the quantity
    as formerly braided and meshed as ours and these are made of bark
    of certain trees, deer sinews, or a kind of grass, which they call
    pemmenaw, of which their women between their hands and thighs, spin
    a thread very even and readily, and this thread serves for many
    uses, as about their housing, their mantles of feathers and their
    [?] and they also with it make lines for angles.

    Their angles are long small rods at the end whereof they have a
    cleft to which the line is fastened, and at the line they hang a
    hook, made either of a bone grated (as they nock their arrows) in
    the form of a crooked pin or fishhook, or of the splinter of a
    bone, and with a thread of the line they tie on the bait. They use
    also long arrows tied on a line, wherewith they shoot at fish in
    the rivers. Those of Accowmack use staves, like unto javelins,
    headed with bone; with these they dart fish, swimming in the
    water....

    By their houses they have sometimes a scaena or high stage, raised
    like a scaffold, or small spelts, reeds, or dried osiers covered
    with mats which gives a shadow and is a shelter ... where on a loft
    of hurdles they lay forth their corn and fish to dry....

    They are inconstant in everything but what fear constrain them to
    keep; crafty, timorous, quick of apprehension, ingenious enough in
    their own works, as may testify their weirs in which they take
    their fish, which are certain enclosures made of reeds and framed
    in the fashion of a labyrinth or maze set a fathom deep in the
    water with divers chambers or beds out of which the entangled fish
    cannot return or get out, being once in. Well may a great one by
    chance break the reeds and so escape, otherwise he remains a prey
    to the fishermen the next low water which they fish with a net at
    the end of a pole....

The earliest observers reveal how intimately food from the waters was linked with the colonists'
experiences. George Percy wrote in 1607:

    We came to a place [Cape Henry] where they [natives] had made a
    great fire and had been newly roasting oysters. When they perceived
    our coming, they fled away to the mountains and left many of the
    oysters in the fire. We ate some of the oysters which were very
    large and delicate in taste.

This was April 27 of that year. Oyster roasts have been a Virginia institution ever since.
He continued:

    Upon this plot of ground [Lynnhaven Bay] we got good store of
    mussels and oysters, which lay on the ground as thick as stones. We
    opened some and found in many of them pearls.

The pearls would probably not have been worth mentioning, except as a novelty, if they had
come from oysters alone. The Virginia oyster pearl lacks luster. But the mussel, particularly
the one found in the James river, yields an iridescent pearl of some little value.

A month later more oysters, in a form unknown in Virginia today, were obtained from Indians
by Captain Christopher Newport in return for ornaments, according to Gabriel Archer in 1607:

    He notwithstanding with two women and another fellow of his own
    consort followed us some six miles with baskets full of dried
    oysters and met us at a point, where calling to us, we went ashore
    and bartered with them for most of their victuals.

A letter from the Council in Virginia to the Council in England in 1607 stated:

    We are set down eighty miles within a river, for breadth, sweetness
    of water, length navigable up into the country, deep and bold
    channel, so stored with sturgeon and other sweet fish as no man's
    fortune has ever possessed the like. And, as we think, if more may
    be wished in a river it will be found.

After various vicissitudes John Smith confessed:

    Though there be fish in the sea, fowls in the air, and beasts in
    the woods, their bounds are so large, they so wild, and we so weak
    and ignorant, we cannot much trouble them.

George Percy introduced a happier note:

    It pleased God, after a while, to send those people which were our
    mortal enemies [Indians] to relieve us with victuals, as bread,
    corn, fish, and flesh in great plenty, which was the setting up of
    our feeble men, otherwise we had all perished.

John Smith tells about another crisis:

    Our victuals being within eighteen days spent and the Indians'
    trade decreasing, I was sent to the mouth of the river, to
    Kecoughtan [Hampton], an Indian town, to trade for corn and try the
    river for fish, but our fishing we could not effect by reason of
    the stormy weather.... Only of sturgeon we had great store, whereon
    our men would so greedily surfeit, as it cost many their lives.

And still another:

    From May to September, those that escaped lived upon sturgeon and
    sea crabs.

And this:

