   [7] The Boones and five other families set out from their
       homes on the Yadkin, Sept. 25, 1773. In Powell's Valley they
       were joined by forty people under Boone's brother-in-law,
       William Bryan. While the main party were slowly advancing
       through the valley, a small squad, under Boone's oldest son,
       James, went on a side expedition for flour, cattle, and other
       supplies. With these they had nearly caught up to the advance,
       when, not knowing they were so near, they camped on the evening
       of October 9 a few miles in the rear. Early in the morning of
       the 10th, a small band of Shawnees and Cherokees, who were
       nominally at peace with the whites, fell upon and, after cruel
       tortures, slaughtered them. In Dunmore's speech at Fort Pitt,
       this tragedy in Powell's Valley was alluded to as one of the
       chief causes of the Indian war of 1774. At the Camp Charlotte
       treaty (October, 1774), some of the plunder from this massacre
       was delivered up by the savages. After the tragedy, the greater
       part of the Kentucky caravan returned to their homes, but the
       Boones spent the winter of 1773-74 at a settlement some forty
       miles distant, on Clinch River. During the Dunmore War, Boone
       was active as an Indian fighter.--R. G. T.

   [8] The leader of this party was Capt. Thomas Bullitt. He
       was born in Fauquier county, Va., in 1730; was one of
       Washington's captains at the Great Meadows (1754), and fought
       gallantly with Braddock (1755) and Forbes (1758); in 1763, was
       made adjutant-general of Virginia; during the early part of the
       Revolution he held the same office in the Southern Department
       of the United States, but resigned in 1776 because not
       promoted; he died in Fauquier county, in 1778. The project of
       Franklin, Walpole, and others to found the Colony of
       Pittsylvania, with its seat at the mouth of the Great Kanawha,
       greatly stimulated Western land speculation, and there was a
       rush of those holding military land warrants to locate claims.
       Lord Dunmore's agent at Fort Pitt, Dr. John Connolly--with whom
       his lordship was doubtless in partnership--had large interests
       of this character, and Bullitt went to the Falls of the Ohio
       (1773) to survey lands for him. Bullitt had a surveyor's
       commission from Williams and Mary College, but Col. William
       Preston, county surveyor for Fincastle county--in which
       Kentucky was then included--declined to recognize any but his
       own deputies. Preston carried his point, and the lands were
       re-surveyed the following year (1774) by his deputies. Bullitt
       had laid off a town on this Connolly survey; but the Revolution
       soon broke out, Bullitt was otherwise engaged, Dunmore was
       deposed, Connolly was imprisoned, and the scheme fell through.
       In 1778, George Rogers Clark camped at the Falls on his way to
       the Illinois, and the garrison he established there grew into
       the town of Louisville. With Bullitt's surveying party in 1773,
       were James Douglas, James Harrod, James Sodousky, Isaac Hite,
       Abraham Haptonstall, Ebenezer Severns, John Fitzpatrick, John
       Cowan,--prominent names in later Kentucky history,--and
       possibly others. George Rogers Clark was probably with the
       party during a part of its canoe voyage down the Ohio, but
       seems to have gone no farther than Big Bone Creek.--R. G. T.

   [9] This was done by a party of men from the Monongahela,
       under the guidance of James Harrod; by whom was built the first
       cabin for human habitancy ever erected in Kentucky. This was on
       the present site of Harrodsburg.

  [10] These are the Pipe Creek and Baker's Bottom affairs,
       respectively mentioned on pp. 134, 149, notes. Yellow Creek,
       opposite Baker's Bottom, empties into the Ohio 51 miles below
       Pittsburg; Wheeling is 91 miles below Pittsburg, and Pipe Creek
       104.--R. G. T.

  [11] There is some difficulty in fixing on the precise time
       when these occurrences happened. Col. Ebenezer Zane says that
       they took place in the latter part of April, and that the
       affair at Captina preceded the one at Yellow creek a few days.
       John Sappington, who was of the party at Baker's, and is said
       to be the one who killed Logan's brother, says, the murders at
       that place occurred on the 24th of May, and that the skirmish
       at Captina was on the day before (23rd May.) Col. Andrew
       Swearingen, a presbyterian gentleman of much respectability,
       one of the early settlers near the Ohio above Wheeling, and
       afterwards intimate with those engaged at both places, says
       that the disturbance opposite Yellow creek preceded the
       engagement [113] at Captina, and that the latter, as was then
       generally understood, was caused by the conduct of the Indians,
       who had been at Yellow creek and were descending the river,
       exasperated at the murder of their friends at Baker's. Mr.
       Benjamin Tomlinson, who was the brother-in-law of Baker and
       living with him at the time, says that this circumstance
       happened in May, but is silent as to the one at Captina. These
       gentlemen all agree in the fact that Logan's people were
       murdered at Baker's. Indeed Logan himself charges it as having
       been done there. The statement of Sappington, that the murders
       were caused by the abusive epithets of Logan's brother and his
       taking the hat and coat of Baker's brother in law is confirmed
       by Col. Swearingen and others; who also say that for some days
       previous, the neighborhood generally had been engaged in
       preparing to leave the country, in consequence of the menacing
       conduct of the Indians.

       ------

       Comment by R. G. T.--The date is now well established--April
       30. Withers is altogether too lenient, in his treatment of the
       whites engaged in this wretched massacre. Logan, encamped at
       the mouth of Yellow River, on the Ohio side, was a peaceful,
       inoffensive Indian, against whom no man harbored a suspicion;
       he was made a victim of race hatred, in a time of great popular
       excitement. Joshua Baker, who was settled opposite him on
       Baker's Bottom, in Virginia, kept a low grog-shop tavern, and
       had recently been warned not to sell more liquor to Indians.
       Daniel Greathouse lived in the vicinity--a cruel, bloodthirsty
       fellow, who served Connolly as a local agent in fomenting
       hatred of Indians. It will be remembered (p. 131, note) that
       Cresap's party were intending to strike the camp of Logan, but
       that they abandoned the project. In the meantime, probably
       without knowledge of Cresap's intent, Greathouse had collected
       a party of 32 borderers to accomplish the same end. Logan's
       camp seemed too strong for them to attack openly; so they
       secreted themselves in Baker's house, and when Logan's family,
       men and women, came over to get their daily grog, and were
       quite drunk, set upon them and slew and tomahawked nine or ten.
       The chief, standing on the Ohio bank, heard the uproar and
       witnessed the massacre; he naturally supposed that the
       murderers were led by Cresap. From a friend of the whites,
       Logan became their implacable enemy, and during the ensuing war
       his forays were the bloodiest on the border. We shall hear of
       him and his famous speech, later on.

  [12] It was then that Westfall's and Casinoe's forts were
       erected in Tygart's valley,--Pricket's, on Pricket's
       creek,--Jackson's on Ten Mile, and Shepherd's on Wheeling
       creek, a few miles above its mouth. There were also others
       established in various parts of the country and on the
       Monongahela and Ohio rivers. Nutter's fort, near to Clarksburg,
       afforded protection to the inhabitants on the West Fork, from
       its source, to its confluence with the Valley river; and to
       those who lived on Buchannon and on Hacker's creek, as well as
       to the residents of its immediate vicinity.

  [13] June 20, Col. William Preston, having charge of the
       defenses of Fincastle county, authorized Capt. William Russell
       to employ two faithful woodsmen to go to Kentucky and inform
       the several surveying parties at work there, of their danger.
       June 26, Russell replied, "I have engaged to start immediately
       on the occasion, two of the best hands I could think of--Daniel
       Boone and Michael Stoner; who have engaged to reach the country
       as low as the Falls, and to return by way of Gasper's Lick on
       Cumberland, and through Cumberland Gap; so that, by the
       assiduity of these men, if it is not too late, I hope the
       gentlemen will be apprized of the imminent danger they are
       daily in."

       Boone and Stoner journeyed overland to Harrodsburg, where
       Col. James Harrod and thirty men were making improvements
       and laying out the town. The thrifty Boone secured a good
       lot, hastily built a claim cabin, and proceeded on his
       tour. At Fontaine Blue, three miles below Harrodsburg, the
       two scouts found another party of surveyors, whom they warned;
       and in going down the Kentucky River came across Capt. John
       Floyd's surveying party,--eight men, who had left Preston's
       house for Kentucky, April 9,--who agreed to meet them farther
       down the river. But circumstances prevented a reunion, and
       Floyd's band penetrated through the wilderness on their own
       account, and had a painful journey of sixteen days' duration
       before reaching Russell's Fort on Clinch River. Meanwhile,
       Boone and Stoner descended to the mouth of the Kentucky, and
       thence to the Falls of the Ohio, and found more surveyors at
       Mann's Lick, four miles southeast. Indians were making bloody
       forays through the district, and the scouts had frequent
       thrilling adventures. Finally, after having been absent
       sixty-one days and travelled 800 miles, they reached Russell's
       on the Clinch, in safety. Russell was absent on the Point
       Pleasant campaign, and Boone set out with a party of recruits
       to reinforce him, but was ordered back to defend the Clinch
       settlements. He was busy at this task until the close of
       the war. He was present at the Watauga treaty, March 17, 1775;
       later that year, he led another band to Kentucky, and early
       in April built Fort Boone, on Kentucky River, "a little below
       Big Lick," the nucleus of the Henderson colony.--R. G. T.

  [14] The party numbered about four hundred men. The line of
       march was about ninety miles in length, as estimated by the
       zig-zag course pursued.--R. G. T.

  [15] They were Jonathan Zane, Thomas Nicholson and Tady
       Kelly. A better woodsman than the first named of these three,
       perhaps never lived.

  [16] Doddridge locates Wapatomica "about sixteen miles below
       the present Coshocton." Butterfield (History of the Girtys)
       places it "just below the present Zanesville, in Logan county,
       Ohio, not a great distance from Mac-a-cheek." For localities of
       Indian towns on the Muskingum, see map in St. John de Creve
       Coeur's Lettres d'un Cultivateur Américain (Paris, 1787),
       III., p. 413.--R. G. T.

  [17] John Hargus, a private in Capt. Cresap's company, while
       stationed as a vidette below the main army, observed an Indian
       several times raising his head above his blind, and looking
       over the river. Charging his rifle with a second ball, he
       fired, and both bullets passed through the neck of the Indian,
       who was found next day and scalped by Hargus.

  [18] Logan was the son of Shikellemus, a celebrated chief of
       the Cayuga nation, who dwelt at Shamokin, and always attached
       to the [118] English, was of much service to them on many
       occasions. After the close of Dunmore's war, Logan became
       gloomy and melancholy, drank freely and manifested symptoms of
       mental derangement. He remained some time at Detroit, and while
       there, his conduct and expressions evinced a weariness of the
       world. Life he said had become a burden to him, he knew no more
       what pleasure was, and thought it had been better if he had
       never existed. In this disponding and disconsolate condition he
       left Detroit, and on his way between that place and Miami, is
       said to have been murdered.

  [19] See p. 149, note, for account of the massacre.--R. G. T.

[121] CHAPTER VII.

When information of the hostile deportment of the Indians was carried to Williamsburg, Col.
Charles Lewis sent a messenger with the intelligence to Capt. John Stuart, and requesting of
him, to apprize the inhabitants on the Greenbrier river that an immediate war was anticipated,
and to send out scouts to watch the warrior's paths beyond the settlements. The vigilance and
activity of Capt. Stuart, were exerted with some success, to prevent the re-exhibition of those
scenes which had been previously witnessed on Muddy creek and in the Big Levels: but they could
not avail to repress them altogether.

In the course of the preceding spring, some few individuals had begun to make improvements
on the Kenhawa river below the Great Falls; and some land adventurers, to examine and survey
portions of the adjoining country. To these men Capt. Stuart despatched an express, to inform
them that apprehensions were entertained of immediate irruptions being made upon the frontiers
by the Indians, and advising them to remove from the position which they then occupied; as
from its exposed situation, without great vigilance and alertness, they must necessarily fall
a prey to the savages.

When the express arrived at the cabin of Walter Kelly, twelve miles below the falls, Capt.
John Field of Culpepper (who had been in active service during the French war, and was then
engaged in making surveys,) was there with a young Scotchman and a negro woman. Kelly with
great prudence, directly sent his family to Greenbrier, under the care of a younger brother.
But Capt. Field, considering the apprehension as groundless, determined on remaining with Kelly,
who from prudential motives did not wish to subject himself to observation by mingling with
others.[1] Left with no persons but the Scotchman and negro, they were not long permitted to
doubt the reality of those dangers, of which they had been forewarned by Capt Stuart.

[122] Very soon after Kelly's family had left the cabin, and while yet within hearing of it,
a party of Indians approached, unperceived, near to Kelly and Field, who were engaged in drawing
leather from a tan trough in the yard. The first intimation which Field had of their approach
was the discharge of several guns and the fall of Kelly. He then ran briskly towards the house
to get possession of a gun, but recollecting that it was unloaded, he changed his course, and
sprang into a cornfield which screened him from the observation of the Indians; who, supposing
that he had taken shelter in the cabin, rushed immediately into it. Here they found the Scotchman
and the negro woman, the latter of whom they killed; and making prisoner of the young man,
returned and scalped Kelly.

When Kelly's family reached the Greenbrier settlement, they mentioned their fears for the fate
of those whom they had left on the Kenhawa, not doubting but that the guns which they heard
soon after leaving the house, had been discharged at them by Indians. Capt. Stuart, with a
promptitude which must ever command admiration, exerted himself effectually to raise a volunteer
corps, and proceed to the scene of action, with the view of ascertaining whether the Indians
had been there; and if they had, and he could meet with them, to endeavor to punish them for
the outrage, and thus prevent the repetition of similar deeds of violence.

They had not however gone far, before they were met by Capt. Field, whose appearance of itself
fully told the tale of woe. He had ran upwards of eighty miles, naked except his shirt, and
without food; his body nearly exhausted by fatigue, anxiety and hunger, and his limbs greviously
lacerated with briers and brush. Captain Stuart, fearing lest the success of the Indians might
induce them to push immediately for the settlements, thought proper to return and prepare for
that event.

In a few weeks after this another party of Indians came to the settlement on Muddy creek, and
as if a certain fatality attended the Kelly's, they alone fell victims to the incursion. As
the daughter of Walter Kelly was walking with her uncle (who had conducted the family from
the Kenhawa) some distance from the house, which had been converted into a temporary fort,
and in which they lived, they were discovered and fired upon; the latter was killed and scalped,
and the former being overtaken in her flight, was carried into captivity.

After the murder of Brown, and the taking of Hellen and Robinson, the inhabitants on the Monongahela
and its upper branches, alarmed for their safety, retired into forts. But in the ensuing September,
as Josiah Pricket and Mrs. Susan Ox, who had left Pricket's fort for the purpose of driving
up their cows, were returning in the evening they were way laid by a party of Indians, who
had been drawn to the path by the tinkling of the cowbell. Pricket was killed and scalped,
and Mrs. Ox taken prisoner.

[123] It was in the course of this season, that Lewis Wetsel[2] first gave promise of that
daring and discretion, which were so fully developed in his maturer years, and which rendered
him among the most fortunate and successful of Indian combatants. When about fourteen years
old, he and his brother Jacob, (still younger) were discovered some distance from the house,
by a party of Indians, who had been prowling through the settlements on the Ohio river, with
the expectation of fortunately meeting with some opportunity of taking scalps or making prisoners.
As the boys were at some distance from them, and in a situation too open to admit of their
being approached without perceiving those who should advance towards them, the Indians determined
on shooting the larger one, lest his greater activity might enable him to escape. A shot was
accordingly discharged at him, which, partially taking effect and removing a portion of his
breast bone, so far deprived him of his wonted powers, that he was easily overtaken; and both
he and his brother were made prisoners. The Indians immediately directed their steps towards
their towns, and having travelled about twenty miles beyond the Ohio river, encamped at the
Big Lick, on the waters of McMahon's creek, on the second night after they had set off. When
they had finished eating, the Indians laid down, without confining the boys as on the preceding
night, and soon fell to sleep. After making some little movements to test the soundness of
their repose, Lewis whispered to his brother that he must get up and go home with him; and
after some hesitation on the part of Jacob, they arose and set off. Upon getting about 100
yards from the camp, Lewis stopped, and telling his brother to await there, returned to the
camp and brought from thence a pair of mocasons for each of them. He then observed, that he
would again go back and get his father's gun; this he soon effected, and they then commenced
their journey home. The moon shining brightly, they were easily able to distinguish the trail
which they had made in going out; but had not however pursued it far, before they heard the
Indians coming in pursuit of them. So soon as Lewis perceived by the sound of their voices
that they were approaching tolerably near to them, he led his brother aside from the path,
and squatting down, concealed themselves 'till their pursuers had passed them; when they again
commenced travelling and in the rear of the Indians. Not overtaking the boys as soon as was
expected, those who had been sent after them, began to retrace their steps. Expecting this,
the boys were watchful of every noise or object before them, and when they heard the Indians
returning, again secreted themselves in the bushes, and escaped observation. They were then
followed by two, of the party who had made them prisoners, on horseback; but by practising
the same stratagem, they eluded them also; and on the next day reached the Ohio river opposite
to Wheeling. Apprehensive that it would be dangerous to apprize those on the opposite side
of the river of their situation, by hallooing, Lewis set himself to work as silently, and yet
as expeditiously [124] as possible, and with the aid of his little brother, soon completed
a raft on which they safely crossed the Ohio; and made their way home.

That persons, should, by going out from the forts, when the Indians were so generally watching
around them, expose themselves to captivity or death, may at first appear strange and astonishing.
But when the mind reflects on the tedious and irksome confinement, which they were compelled
to undergo; the absence of the comforts, and frequently, of the necessaries of life, coupled
with an overweening attachment to the enjoyment of forest scenes and forest pastimes, it will
perhaps be matter of greater astonishment that they did not more frequently forego the security
of a fortress, for the uncertain enjoyment of those comforts and necessaries, and the doubtful
gratification of this attachment. Accustomed as they had been "free to come and free to go,"
they could not brook the restraint under which they were placed; and rather than chafe and
pine in unwilling confinement, would put themselves at hazard, that they might revel at large
and wanton in the wilderness. Deriving their sustenance chiefly from the woods, the strong
arm of necessity led many to tempt the perils which environed them; while to the more chivalric
and adventurous "the danger's self were lure alone." The quiet and stillness which reigned
around, even when the enemy were lurking nearest and in greater numbers, inspired many too,
with the delusive hope of exemption from risk, not unfrequently the harbinger of fatal consequences.
It seemed indeed, impracticable at first to realize the existence of a danger, which could
not be perceived. And not until taught by reiterated suffering did they properly appreciate
the perilous situation of those, who ventured beyond the walls of their forts. But this state
of things was of short duration. The preparations, which were necessary to be made for the
projected campaign into the Indian country, were completed; and to resist this threatened invasion,
required the concentrated exertions of all their warriors.

The army destined for this expedition, was composed of volunteers and militia, chiefly from
the counties west of the Blue ridge, and consisted of two divisions. The northern division,
comprehending the troops, collected in Frederick, Dunmore,[3] and the adjacent counties, was
to be commanded by Lord Dunmore, in person;[4] and the southern, comprising the different companies
raised in Botetourt, Augusta and the adjoining counties east of the Blue ridge, was to be led
on by Gen. Andrew Lewis. These two divisions, proceeding by different routes, were to form
a junction at the mouth of the Big Kenhawa, and from thence penetrate the country north west
of the Ohio river, as far as the season would admit of their going; and destroy all the Indian
towns and villages which they could reach.

About the first of September, the troops placed under the command [125] of Gen. Lewis rendezvoused
at Camp Union (now Lewisburg) and consisted of two regiments, commanded by Col. William Fleming
of Botetourt and Col. Charles Lewis of Augusta, and containing about four hundred men each.
At Camp Union they were joined by an independent volunteer company under Col. John Field of
Culpepper; a company from Bedford under Capt. Buford and two from the Holstein settlement (now
Washington county) under Capts. Evan Shelby and Harbert. These three latter companies were
part of the forces to be led on by Col. Christian, who was likewise to join the two main divisions
of the army at Point Pleasant, so soon as the other companies of his regiment could be assembled.
The force under Gen. Lewis, having been thus augmented to eleven hundred men, commenced its
march for the mouth of Kenhawa on the 11th of September 1774.[5]

From Camp Union to the point proposed for the junction of the northern and southern divisions
of the army, a distance of one hundred and sixty miles, the intermediate country was a trackless
forest, so rugged and mountainous as to render the progress of the army, at once, tedious and
laborious. Under the guidance of Capt. Matthew Arbuckle, they however, succeeded in reaching
the Ohio river after a march of nineteen days; and fixed their encampment on the point of land
immediately between that river and the Big Kenhawa.[6] The provisions and ammunition, transported
on packhorses, and the beeves in droves, arrived soon after.

When the army was preparing to leave Camp Union, there was for a while some reluctance manifested
on the part of Col. Field to submit to the command of Gen. Lewis. This proceeded from the fact,
that in a former military service, he had been the senior of Gen. Lewis; and from the circumstance
that the company led on by him were Independent Volunteers, not raised in pursuance of the
orders of Governor Dunmore, but brought into the field by his own exertions, after his escape
from the Indians at Kelly's. These circumstances induced him to separate his men from the main
body of the army on its march, and to take a different way from the one pursued by it,--depending
on his own knowledge of the country to lead them a practicable route to the river.[7]

While thus detached from the forces under Gen. Lewis, two of his men (Clay and Coward) who
were out hunting and at some little distance from each other, came near to where two Indians
were concealed. Seeing Clay only, and supposing him to be alone, one of them fired at him;
and running up to scalp him as he fell, was himself shot by Coward, who was then about 100
yards off. The other Indian ran off unarmed, and made his escape. A bundle of ropes found where
Clay was killed, induced the belief that it was the object of these Indians to steal horses;--it
is not however improbable, that they had been observing the progress of the army, and endeavoring
to ascertain its numbers. Col. Field, fearing that he might [126] encounter a party of the
enemy in ambush, redoubled his vigilance 'till he again joined General Lewis; and the utmost
concert and harmony then prevailed in the whole army.[8]

When the Southern division arrived at Point Pleasant, Governor Dunmore with the forces under
his command, had not reached there; and unable to account for his failure to form the preconcerted
junction at that place, it was deemed advisable to await that event; as by so doing, a better
opportunity would be afforded to Col. Christian of coming up, with that portion of the army,
which was then with him.[9] Meanwhile General Lewis, to learn the cause of the delay of the
Northern division, despatched runners by land, in the direction of Port Pitt, to obtain tidings
of Lord Dunmore, and to communicate them to him immediately. In their absence, however, advices
were received from his Lordship, that he had determined on proceeding across the country, directly
to the Shawanee towns; and ordering General Lewis to cross the river, march forward and form
a junction with him, near to them. These advices were received on the 9th of October, and preparations
were immediately begun to be made for the transportation of the troops over the Ohio river.[10]

Early on the morning of Monday the tenth of that month, two soldiers[11] left the camp, and
proceeded up the Ohio river, in quest of deer. The main part of the army was immediately ordered
out under Colonels Charles Lewis,[12] and William Fleming; and having formed into two lines,
[127] they proceeded about four hundred yards, when they met the Indians, and the action commenced.

At the first onset, Colonel Charles Lewis having fallen, and Colonel Fleming being wounded,
both lines gave way and were retreating briskly towards the camp, when they were met by a reinforcement
under Colonel Field,[13] and rallied. The engagement then became general, and was sustained
with the most obstinate fury on both sides. The Indians perceiving that the "tug of war" had
come, and determined on affording the Colonial army no chance of escape, if victory should
declare for them, formed a line extending across the point, from the Ohio to the Kenhawa, and
protected in front, by logs and fallen timber. In this situation they maintained the contest
with unabated vigor, from sunrise 'till towards the close of evening; bravely and successfully
resisting every charge which was made on them; and withstanding the impetuosity of every onset,
with the most invincible firmness, until a fortunate movement on the part of the Virginia troops,
decided the day.

Some short distance above the entrance of the Kenhawa river into Ohio, there is a stream, called
Crooked creek, emptying into the former of these, from the North east,[14] whose banks are
tolerably high, and were then covered with a thick and luxuriant growth of weeds. Seeing the
impracticability of dislodging the Indians, by the most vigorous attack, and sensible of the
great danger, which must arise to his army, if the contest were not decided before night, General
Lewis detached the three companies which were commanded by Captains Isaac Shelby, George Matthews,
and John Stuart, with orders to proceed up the Kenhawa river, and Crooked creek under cover
of the banks and weeds, 'till they should [128] pass some distance beyond the enemy; when they
were to emerge from their covert, march downward towards the point and attack the Indians in
their rear.[15] The manoeuvre thus planned, was promptly executed, and gave a decided victory
to the Colonial army. The Indians finding themselves suddenly and unexpectedly encompassed
between two armies, & not doubting but that in their rear, was the looked for reinforcement
under Colonel Christian, soon gave way, and about sun down, commenced a precipitate retreat
across the Ohio, to their towns on the Scioto.

Some short time after the battle had ended, Colonel Christian arrived with the troops which
he had collected in the settlements on the Holstein, and relieved the anxiety of many who were
disposed to believe the retreat of the Indians to be only a feint;[16] and that an attack would
be again speedily made by them, strengthened and reinforced by those of the enemy who had been
observed during the engagement, on the opposite side of the Ohio and Kenhawa rivers. But these
had been most probably stationed there, in anticipation of victory, to prevent the Virginia
troops from effecting a retreat across those rivers, (the only possible chance of escape, had
they been overpowered by the enemy in their front;) and the loss sustained by the Indians was
too great, and the prospect of a better fortune, too gloomy and unpromising, for them to enter
again into an engagement. Dispirited by the bloody repulse with which they had met, they hastened
to their towns, better disposed to purchase security from farther hostilities by negotiation,
than risk another battle with an army whose strength and prowess, they had already tested;
and found superior to their own. The victory indeed, was decisive, and many advantages were
obtained by it; but they were not cheaply bought. The Virginia army sustained, in this engagement,
a loss of seventy-five killed, and one hundred and forty wounded.--About one fifth of the entire
number of the troops.

Among the slain were Colonels Lewis and Field; Captains Buford, Morrow, Wood, Cundiff, Wilson,
and Robert McClannahan; and Lieutenants Allen, Goldsby and Dillon, with some other subalterns.
The loss of the enemy could not be ascertained. On the morning after the action, Colonel Christian
marched his men over the battle ground and found twenty-one of the Indians lying dead; and
twelve others [129] were afterwards discovered, where they had been attempted to be concealed
under some old logs and brush.[17]

From the great facility with which the Indians either carry off or conceal their dead, it is
always difficult to ascertain the number of their slain; and hence arises, in some measure,
the disparity between their known loss and that sustained by their opponents in battle. Other
reasons for this disparity, are to be found in their peculiar mode of warfare, and in the fact,
that they rarely continue a contest, when it has to be maintained with the loss of their warriors.
It would not be easy otherwise to account for the circumstance, that even when signally vanquished,
the list of their slain does not, frequently, appear more than half as great, as that of the
victors. In this particular instance, many of the dead were certainly thrown into the river.

Nor could the number of the enemy engaged, be ever ascertained. Their army is known to have
been composed of warriors from the different nations, north of the Ohio; and to have comprised
the flower of the Shawanee, Delaware, Mingo, Wyandotte and Cayuga tribes; led on by men, whose
names were not unknown to fame,[18] and at the head of whom was Cornstalk, Sachem of the Shawanees,
and King of the Northern Confederacy.[19]

This distinguished chief and consummate warrior, proved himself on that day, to be justly entitled
to the prominent station which he occupied. His plan of alternate retreat & attack, was well
conceived, and occasioned the principal loss sustained by the writes. If at any time his warriors
were believed to waver, his voice could be heard above the din of arms, exclaiming in his native
tongue, "Be strong! Be strong;" and when one near him, by trepidation and reluctance to proceed
to the charge, evinced a dastardly disposition, fearing the example might have a pernicious
influence, with one blow of the tomahawk he severed his skull. It was perhaps a solitary instance
in which terror predominated. Never did men exhibit a more conclusive evidence of bravery,
in making a charge, and fortitude in withstanding an onset, than did these undisciplined soldiers
of the forest, in the [130] field at Point Pleasant. Such too was the good conduct of those
who composed the army of Virginia, on that occasion; and such the noble bravery of many, that
high expectations were entertained of their future distinction. Nor were those expectations
disappointed. In the various scenes through which they subsequently passed, the pledge of after
eminence then given, was fully redeemed; and the names of Shelby, Campbell, Matthews, Fleming,
Moore, and others, their compatriots in arms on the memorable tenth of October, 1774, have
been inscribed in brilliant characters on the roll of fame.[20]

Having buried the dead, and made every arrangement of which their situation admitted, for the
comfort of the wounded, entrenchments were thrown up, and the army commenced its march to form
a junction with the northern division, under Lord Dunmore. Proceeding by the way of the Salt
Licks, General Lewis pressed forward with astonishing rapidity (considering that the march
was through a trackless desert); but before he had gone far, an express arrived from Dunmore,
with orders to return immediately to the mouth of the Big Kenhawa. Suspecting the integrity
of his Lordship's motives, and urged by the advice of his officers generally, General [131]
Lewis refused to obey these orders; and continued to advance 'till he was met, (at Kilkenny
creek, and in sight of an Indian village, which its inhabitants had just fired and deserted,)
by the Governor, (accompanied by White Eyes,) who informed him, that he was negotiating a treaty
of peace which would supersede the necessity of the further movement of the Southern division,
and repeating the order for its retreat.

The army under General Lewis had endured many privations and suffered many hardships. They
had encountered a savage enemy in great force, and purchased a victory with the blood of their
friends. When arrived near to the goal of their anxious wishes, and with nothing to prevent
the accomplishment of the object of the campaign; they received those orders with evident chagrin;
and did not obey them without murmuring. Having, at his own request, been introduced severally
to the officers of that division; complimenting them for their gallantry and good conduct in
the late engagement, and assuring them of his high esteem, Lord Dunmore returned to his camp;
and General Lewis commenced his retreat.[21]

If before the opening of this campaign, the belief was prevalent, that to the conduct of emissaries
from Great Britain, because of the contest then waging between her and her American colonies,
the Indian depredations of that year, were mainly attributable; that belief had become more
general, and had received strong confirmation, from the more portentous aspect which that contest
had assumed, prior to the battle at Point Pleasant. The destruction of the tea at Boston had
taken place in the March preceding. The Boston Port Bill, the signal for actual conflict between
the colonies and mother country, had been received early in May. In consequence of this recommendation
and its accompanying resolutions, the Governor had dissolved the Assembly. The Legislature
of Massachusetts had likewise passed declaratory resolutions, expressive of their sense of
the state of public affairs and the designs of Parliament; and which led [132] to their dissolution
also. In fine, the various elements of that tempest, which soon after overspread the thirteen
united colonies, had been already developed, and were rapidly concentrating, before the orders
for the retreat of the Southern division of the army, were issued by Lord Dunmore. How far
these were dictated by a spirit of hostility to the cause of the colonies, and of subservience
to the interests of Great Britain, in the approaching contest, may be inferred from his conduct
during the whole campaign; and the course pursued by him, on his return to the seat of government.
If indeed there existed (as has been supposed,) between the Indians and the Governor from the
time of his arrival with the Northern Division of the army at Fort Pitt, a secret and friendly
understanding, looking to the almost certain result of the commotions which were agitating
America, then was the battle at Point Pleasant, virtually the first in the series of those
brilliant achievements which burst the bonds of British tyranny; and the blood of Virginia,
there nobly shed, was the first blood spilled in the sacred cause of American liberty.[22]

It has been already seen that Lord Dunmore failed to form a junction with General Lewis, at
the mouth of the Great Kenhawa, agreeably to the plan for the campaign, as concerted at Williamsburg
by the commanding officer of each division. No reason for changing the direction of his march,
appears to have been assigned by him; and others were left to infer his motives, altogether
from circumstances.

While at Fort Pitt Lord Dunmore was joined by the notorious Simon Girty,[23] who accompanied
him from thence 'till the close of the expedition. The subsequent conduct of this man, his
attachment to the side of Great Britain, in her [133] attempts to fasten the yoke of slavery
upon the necks of the American people,--his withdrawal from the garrison at Fort Pitt while
commissioners were there for the purpose of concluding a treaty with the Indians, as was stipulated
in the agreement made with them by Dunmore,--the exerting of his influence over them, to prevent
the chiefs from attending there, and to win them to the cause of England,--his ultimate joining
the savages in the war which (very much from his instigation,) they waged against the border
settlements, soon after,--the horrid cruelties, and fiendish tortures inflicted on unfortunate
white captives by his orders and connivance;--all combined to form an exact counterpart to
the subsequent conduct of Lord Dunmore when exciting the negroes to join the British standard;--plundering
the property of those who were attached to the cause of liberty,--and applying the brand of
conflagration to the most flourishing town in Virginia.

At Wheeling, as they were descending the river, the army delayed some days; and while proceeding
from thence to form a junction with the division under general Lewis, was joined, near the
mouth of the Little Kenhawa, by the noted John Connoly, of great fame as a tory.

Of this man, Lord Dunmore thence forward became an intimate associate; and while encamped at
the mouth of Hock Hocking--seemed to make him his confidential adviser. It was here too, only
seventy miles distant from the head quarters of General Lewis, that it was determined to leave
the boats and canoes and proceed by land to the Chilicothe towns.[24]

The messengers, despatched by Lord Dunmore to apprize the lower army of this change of determination,
were Indian traders; one of whom being asked, if he supposed the Indians would venture to give
battle to the superior force of the whites, replied that they certainly would, and that Lewis'
division would soon see his prediction verified.[25] This was on the day previous to the engagement.
On the return of these men, on the evening of the same day, they must have seen the Indian
army which made the attack on the next morning; and the belief was general on the day of battle,
that they had communicated to the Indians, the present strength and expected reinforcement
of the southern division. It has also been said that on the evening of the 10th of October,
while [134] Dunmore, Connoly and one or two others were walking together, his Lordship remarked
"by this time General Lewis has warm work."[26]

The acquaintance formed by the Governor with Connoly, in the ensuing summer was further continued,
and at length ripened into one of the most iniquitous conspiracies, that ever disgraced civilized
man.

In July, 1775, Connoly presented himself to Lord Dunmore with proposals, well calculated to
gain the favor of the exasperated Governor, and between them a plan was soon formed, which
seemed to promise the most certain success. Assurances of ample rewards from Lord Dunmore,
were transmitted to such officers of the militia on the frontiers of Virginia, as were believed
to be friendly to the royal cause, on putting themselves under the command of Connoly; whose
influence with the Indians, was to ensure their co-operation against the friends of America.
To perfect this scheme, it was necessary to communicate with General Gage; and about the middle
of September, Connoly, with despatches from Dunmore, set off for Boston, and in the course
of a few weeks returned, with instructions from the Governor of Massachusetts, which developed
their whole plan. Connoly was invested with the rank of Colonel of a regiment, (to be raised
among those on the frontiers, who favored the cause of Great Britain,) with which he was to
proceed forthwith to Detroit, where he was to receive a considerable reinforcement, and be
supplied with cannon, muskets and ammunition. He was then to visit the different Indian nations,
enlist them in the projected enterprise, and rendezvous his whole force at Fort Pitt. From
thence he was to cross the Alleghany mountain, and marching through Virginia join Lord Dunmore,
on the 20th of the ensuing April, at Alexandria.

This scheme, (the execution of which, would at once, have laid waste a considerable portion
of Virginia, and ultimately perhaps, nearly the whole state,) was frustrated by the taking
of Connoly, and all the particulars of it, made known. This development, served to shew the
villainous connexion existing between Dunmore and Connoly, and to corroborate the suspicion
of General Lewis and many of his officers, that the conduct of the former, during the campaign
of 1774, was [135] dictated by any thing else than the interest and well being of the colony
of Virginia.

This suspicion was farther strengthened by the readiness with which Lord Dunmore embraced the
overtures of peace, and the terms on which a treaty was concluded with them; while the encamping
of his army, without entrenchments, in the heart of the Indian country, and in the immediate
adjacency of the combined forces of the Indian nations of Ohio, would indicate, that there
must have been a friendly understanding between him and them. To have relied solely on the
bravery and good conduct of his troops, would have been the height of imprudence. His army
was less than that, which had been scarcely delivered from the fury of a body of savages inferior
in number, to the one with which he would have had to contend; and it would have been folly
in him to suppose, that he could achieve with a smaller force, what required the utmost exertions
of General Lewis and his brave officers, to effect with a greater one.[27]

When the Northern division of the army resumed its march for Chilicothe, it left the greater
part of its provisions in a block house which had been erected during its stay at the mouth
of the Hockhocking, under the care of Captain Froman with a small party of troops to garrison
it. On the third day after it left Fort Gore (the block house at the mouth of Hockhocking)
a white man by the name of Elliott came to Governor Dunmore, with a request from the Indians
that he would withdraw the army from their country, and appoint commissioners to meet their
chiefs at Pittsburg to confer about the terms of a treaty. To this request a reply was given,
that the Governor was well inclined to make peace, and was willing that hostilities should
cease; but as he was then so near their towns, and all the chiefs of the different nations
were at that time with the army, it would be more convenient to negotiate then, than at a future
period. He then named a place at which he would encamp, and listen to their proposals; and
immediately despatched a courier to General Lewis with orders for his return.[28]

The Indian spies reporting that General Lewis had disregarded these orders, and was still marching
rapidly towards their towns, the Indians became apprehensive of the result; and one of their
chiefs (the White Eyes) waited on Lord Dunmore in person, and complained that the "Long Knives"
[136] were coming upon them and would destroy all their towns. Dunmore then, in company with
White Eyes, visited the camp of General Lewis, and prevailed with him, as we have seen, to
return across the Ohio.

In a few days after this, the Northern division of the army approached within eight miles of
Chilicothe, and encamped on the plain, at the place appointed for the chiefs to meet without
entrenchments or breast works, or any protection, save the vigilance of the sentinels and the
bravery of the troops.[29] On the third day from the halting of the army eight chiefs, with
Cornstalk at their head, came into camp; and when the interpreters made known who Cornstalk
was, Lord Dunmore addressed them, and from a written memorandum, recited the various infractions,
on the part of the Indians, of former treaties, and different murders, unprovokedly committed
by them. To all this Cornstalk replied, mixing a good deal of recrimination with the defence
of his red brethren; and when he had concluded, a time was specified when the chiefs of the
different nations should come in, and proceed to the negotiation of a treaty.

Before the arrival of that period, Cornstalk came alone to the camp, and acquainted the Governor
that none of the Mingoes would attend; and that he was apprehensive there could not a full
council be convened. Dunmore then requested that he would convoke as many chiefs of the other
nations as he could, and bring them to the council fire without delay, as he was anxious to
close the war at once; and that if this could not be effected peaceably, he should be forced
to resume hostilities. Meantime two interpreters were despatched to Logan,[30] by Lord Dunmore,
requesting his attendance;--but Logan replied, that "he was a warrior, not a councillor, and
would not come."[31]

On the night after the return of the interpreters to camp [137] Charlotte (the name of Dunmore's
encampment,) Major William Crawford, with three hundred men, left the main army about midnight,
on an excursion against a small Mingo village, not far off. Arriving there before day, the
detachment surrounded the town; and on the first coming out of the Indians from their huts,
there was some little firing on the part of the whites, by which one squaw and a man were killed--the
others about 20 in number were all made prisoners and taken to the camp; where they remained
until the conclusion of a treaty. Every thing about the village, indicated an intention of
their speedily deserting it.[32]

Shortly after Cornstalk and two other chiefs, made their appearance at camp Charlotte, and
entered into a negotiation which soon terminated in an agreement to forbear all farther hostilities
against each other,--to give up the prisoners then held by them, and to attend at Pittsburgh,
with as many of the Indian chiefs as could be prevailed on to meet the commissioners from Virginia,
in the ensuing summer, where a treaty was to be concluded and ratified--Dunmore requiring hostages,
to guarantee the performance of those stipulations, on the part of the Indians.

If in the battle at Point Pleasant, Cornstalk manifested the bravery and generalship of a mighty
captain; in the negotiations at camp Charlotte, he displayed the skill of a statesman, joined
to powers of oratory, rarely, if ever surpassed. With the most patriotic devotion to his country,
and in a strain of most commanding eloquence, he recapitulated the accumulated wrongs, which
had oppressed their fathers, and which were oppressing them. Sketching in lively colours, the
once happy and powerful condition of the Indians, he placed in striking contrast, their present
fallen fortunes and unhappy destiny. Exclaiming against the perfidiousness of the whites, and
the dishonesty of the traders, he proposed as the basis of a treaty, that no persons should
be permitted to carry on a commerce with the Natives, for individual profit; but that [138]
their white brother should send them such articles as they needed, by the hands of honest men,
who were to exchange them at a fair price, for their skins and furs; and that no spirit of
any kind should be sent among them, as from the "fire water" of the whites, proceeded evil
to the Indians.[33]

This truly great man, is said to have been opposed to the war from its commencement; and to
have proposed on the eve of the battle at Point Pleasant, to send in a flag, and make overtures
for peace; but this proposal was overruled by the general voice of the chiefs. When a council
was first held after the defeat of the Indians, Cornstalk, reminding them of their late ill
success, and that the Long Knives were still pressing on them, asked what should be then done.
But no one answered. Rising again, he proposed that the women and children should be all killed;
and that the warriors should go out and fight, until they too were slain. Still no one answered.
Then, said he, striking his tomahawk into the council post, "I will go and make peace." This
was done, and the war of 1774 concluded.

-----
   [1] He is said to have committed some offence, in the upper
       part of South Carolina, which rendered him obnoxious to the
       laws of that colony, and to evade the punishment for which, he
       had fled to the wilderness and taken up his abode in it.

   [2] Lewis Wetzel, the son of a German settler on Wheeling
       Creek, some fourteen miles above its mouth, was born about
       1764. He and his brothers Martin, Jacob, John, and George
       became famous in border warfare after the close of the
       Revolution; the annals of the frontier abound in tales of their
       hardy achievements. Martin and Lewis were the heroes of most
       remarkable escapes from Indian captivity; John was also famous
       as an Indian fighter; and Jacob's name will ever be connected
       with the exploits of that other great border scout, Simon
       Kenton. But of all the brothers, Lewis achieved the widest
       celebrity, and two biographies of him have been published: by
       Cecil B. Hartley (Phila., 1860), and by R. C. V. Meyers
       (Phila., 1883).--R. G. T.

   [3] Now Shenandoah.

   [4] The northern wing was composed of men from Frederick,
       Berkeley, and Dunmore (afterwards Shenandoah) counties, and
       Col. Adam Stephen was placed in command. With this wing went
       Lord Dunmore and Major John Connolly. Counting the forces
       already in the field under Maj. Angus McDonald and Capt.
       William Crawford, this levy numbered some twelve hundred men.
       Among them, as scouts, were George Roger Clark, Simon Kenton,
       and Michael Cresap.--R. G. T.

   [5] Lewis was colonel of the militia of Botetourt county.
       Camp Union (so called because several bodies of troops met
       there) was on the Big Savannah or Great Levels of Greenbrier
       River; the town of Lewisburg now occupies the site.

       In Dunmore's letter to Andrew Lewis, dated July 12, he directed
       him to raise a sufficient body of men, and proceeding to the
       mouth of the Great Kanawha there erect a fort; if he deemed
       best he was to cross the Ohio, proceed directly to the Indian
       towns, and destroy their crops and supplies; in any event he
       was to keep communication open between Fort Wheeling and Fort
       Dunmore (Pittsburg). It is evident that his lordship then
       contemplated no separate expedition of his own, for he talks of
       sending Major Angus McDonald's party and a new levy to Lewis's
       assistance. But he changed his mind, and August 30 wrote to
       Lewis directing that the latter meet him at the mouth of the
       Little Kanawha. Lewis replied through Col. William Preston that
       it was now too late to change his plans; he should proceed at
       once with the levy just summoned, to the mouth of the Great
       Kanawha, and there await further orders.--R. G. T.

   [6] This cape was called Point Pleasant, and is now occupied
       by the West Virginia town of that name.--R. G. T.

   [7] This is misleading. On September 6, Col. Charles Lewis,
       with his Augusta troops, numbering about six hundred, were
       detached to proceed to the mouth of the Elk, and there make
       canoes for transporting the supplies to the mouth of the Great
       Kanawha. This body had in charge a drove of 108 beef cattle,
       and 400 pack-horses laden with 54,000 lbs. of flour. Field's
       company soon followed this advance.--R. G. T.

   [8] Saturday, the 10th, Clay and Coward were sent out to
       hunt deer for Field's company, on the banks of the Little
       Meadow. Then occurred the incident related by Withers. The
       Indian who escaped, hurried on to the Shawnee towns and gave
       them their first notice of the approach of the army. Alarmed at
       this incident, Field hurried and caught up with the advance
       under Charles Lewis. The text reads as though he had hastened
       back to Andrew Lewis, who had not yet left Camp Union.--R. G.
       T.

   [9] Col. Andrew Lewis marched out of Camp Union the 12th,
       with about 450 men. These consisted of Fleming's Botetourt
       troops, three companies of Fincastle men under Capts. Evan
       Shelby, William Herbert, and William Russell, the Bedford men
       under Thomas Buford, and Dunmore men under Slaughter. They had
       with them 200 pack-horses laden with flour, and the remainder
       of the beeves. Col. William Christian, who arrived at Camp
       Union the day Andrew Lewis left, was ordered, with the rest of
       the Fincastle men, to remain there, to guard the residue of the
       provisions, and when the brigade of horses sent to the mouth of
       the Elk had returned, to hurry every thing forward to the mouth
       of the Great Kanawha. Five weeks were thus consumed in
       transporting the troops and the supplies a distance of 160
       miles through the tangled forest, to Point Pleasant, where the
       main army, upwards of 1,100 strong, had arrived, quite spent
       with exertions, on the 6th of October.

       When Christian left Camp Union for the front, Anthony Bledsoe,
       with a company of Fincastle men, was detailed to remain behind
       with the sick, while the base of supplies at the mouth of the
       Elk was placed in charge of Slaughter. As will be seen,
       Christian arrived too late to engage in the battle of Point
       Pleasant.--R. G. T.

  [10] When Lewis arrived at Point Pleasant (October 6th), he
       found awaiting him in a hollow tree dispatches from Dunmore,
       brought by Simon Kenton and two companions, directing him to
       join his lordship at the mouth of the Big Hockhocking, where
       the governor's northern wing, under Major Crawford, was
       building a stockade. But Lewis's men were spent, and pens had
       to be built for the cattle, and shelter for the stores, so no
       move was made. On Saturday, the 8th, came a further message
       from the governor, who was still at the Big Hockhocking. Lewis
       replied that he would join him there as soon as the troops,
       food supply, and powder had all reached Point Pleasant. His men
       were angry at Dunmore's interference, and argued with Lewis
       that it was sixty miles by river and over half that by land, to
       Dunmore's camp, whereas it was less than either to the hostile
       towns which they had started out to attack; and to turn aside
       from this purpose was to leave open for the hostiles the
       back-door to the frontier settlements of Virginia. The 9th was
       Sunday, and these sturdy Scotch-Irish Presbyterians spent the
       day in religious exercises, listening to a stout sermon from
       their chaplain. On the morrow, they were surprised by the
       Indians, as the sequel relates.--R. G. T.

  [11] James Mooney, of Russell's company, and Joseph
       Hughey, of Shelby's. They were surprised at the mouth of Old
       Town Creek, three miles distant. Hughey was killed by a shot
       fired by Tavenor Ross, a white renegade in Cornstalk's
       party.--R. G. T.

  [12] Few officers were ever more, or more deservedly,
       endeared to those under their command than Col. Charles Lewis.
       In the many skirmishes, which it was his fortune to have, with
       the Indians he was uncommonly successful; and in the various
       scenes of life, thro' which he passed, his conduct was
       invariably marked by the distinguishing characteristicks of a
       mind, of no ordinary stamp. His early fall on this bloody
       field, was severely felt during the whole engagement; and to it
       has been attributed the partial advantages gained by the Indian
       army near the commencement of the action. When the [127] fatal
       ball struck him, he fell at the root of a tree; from whence he
       was carried to his tent, against his wish, by Capt. Wm. Morrow
       and a Mr. Bailey, of Captain Paul's company, and died in a few
       hours afterwards. In remembrance of his great worth, the
       legislature named the county of Lewis after him.

  [13] An active, enterprising and meritorious officer, who had
       been in service in Braddock's war, and profited by his
       experience of the Indian mode of fighting. His death checked
       for a time the ardor of his troops, and spread a gloom over the
       countenances of those, who had accompanied him on this
       campaign.

  [14] A half-mile up the Big Kanawha.--R. G. T.

  [15] From MS. journals and letters in possession of the
       Wisconsin Historical Society, it appears that the conduct of
       the battle was as follows: Andrew Lewis, who as yet thought the
       enemy to be but a scouting party, and not an army equal in size
       to his own, had the drums beat to arms, for many of his men
       were asleep in their tents; and while still smoking his pipe,
       ordered a detachment from each of the Augusta companies, to
       form 150 strong under Col. Charles Lewis, with John Dickinson,
       Benjamin Harrison, and John Skidmore as the captains. Another
       party of like size was formed under Col. Fleming, with Captains
       Shelby, Russell, Buford, and Philip Love. Lewis's party marched
       to the right, near the foot of the hills skirting the east side
       of Crooked Creek. Fleming's party marched to the left, 200
       yards apart from the other. A quarter of a mile from camp, and
       half a mile from the point of the cape, the right-going party
       met the enemy lurking behind trees and fallen logs at the base
       of the hill, and there Charles Lewis was mortally wounded.
       Fleming marched to a pond three-quarters of a mile from camp,
       and fifty rods inland from the Ohio--this pond being one of the
       sources of Crooked Creek. The hostile line was found to extend
       from this pond along Crooked Creek, half way to its mouth. The
       Indians, under Cornstalk, thought by rushes to drive the whites
       into the two rivers, "like so many bullocks," as the chief
       later explained; and indeed both lines had frequently to fall
       back, but they were skillfully reinforced each time, and by
       dusk the savages placed Old Town Creek between them and the
       whites. This movement was hastened, a half hour before sunset,
       by a movement which Withers confounds with the main tactics.
       Captains Matthews, Arbuckle, Shelby, and Stuart were sent with
       a detachment up Crooked creek under cover of the bank, with a
       view to securing a ridge in the rear of the enemy, from which
       their line could be enfiladed. They were discovered in the act,
       but Cornstalk supposed that this party was Christian's advance,
       and in alarm hurried his people to the other side of Old Town
       Creek. The battle was, by dark, really a drawn game; but
       Cornstalk had had enough, and fled during the night.--R. G. T.

  [16] During the day, a messenger had been dispatched to hurry
       on Christian, who with 250 men was convoying cattle and powder.
       In the early evening, fifteen miles from Point Pleasant, this
       rear party was found, toiling painfully over the wilderness
       trail. Christian at once left his property in charge of a small
       party, and arrived in camp by midnight.--R. G. T.

  [17] Most of the killed and wounded, on both sides, were shot
       in the head or breast, which indicates good marksmanship. The
       Indians, though skillful marksmen, did not exhibit sufficient
       mechanical knowledge to enable them properly to clean their
       guns, and thus were at some disadvantage.

       The statistician was at work in those days, as now, for we
       learn from an old diary that at Old Town Creek were found by
       the white victors, 78 rafts with which the Indians had crossed
       the Ohio to the attack, the night of October 9-10; and on the
       battlefield during the 10th and 12th, were collected 23 guns,
       27 tomahawks, 80 blankets, and great numbers of war-clubs,
       shot-pouches, powder-horns, match-coats, deer-skins, "and
       other articles," all of which were put up at auction by the
       careful commissary, and brought nearly £100 to the army
       chest.--R. G. T.

  [18] Such were Redhawk, a Delaware chief,--Scoppathus, a
       Mingo,--Ellinipsico, a Shawanee, and son to Cornstalk,--Chiyawee, a
       Wyandotte, and Logan, a Cayuga.

  [19] The first recorded foray of Cornstalk was on October
       10, 1759, against the Gilmore family and others, on Carr's
       Creek, in what is now Rockbridge county, Va. "The Carr's
       Creek massacre" was long remembered on the border as one of
       the most daring and cruel on record. He was again heard of
       during the Pontiac conspiracy, in 1763, when he led a large
       war-party from the Scioto towns against the Virginia
       frontier. Both at Muddy Creek, and the Clendenning farm
       near Lewisburg, on the Levels of the Greenbrier, the
       marauders pretended to be friendly with the settlers, and
       in an unguarded moment fell upon and slew them. Other
       massacres, in connection with the same foray, were at Carr's
       Creek, Keeney's Knob, and Jackson's River. The story of the
       captivity of Mrs. Clendenning and her children, who were
       taken to the Shawnee towns on the Scioto, is one of the
       most heartrendering in Western history. In 1764, Bouquet
       raided these towns, and Cornstalk was one of the hostages
       sent to Fort Pitt in fulfillment of the terms of the treaty,
       but later he effected his escape. Nothing more is heard of
       this warrior until 1774, when he became famous as leader of the
       Indians at the battle of Point Pleasant. Cornstalk's
       intelligence was far above that of the average Shawnee. He
       had, before the Dunmore War, strongly counseled his people
       to observe the peace, as their only salvation; but when
       defeated in council, he with great valor led the tribesmen to
       war. After the treaty of Fort Charlotte, he renewed his peace
       policy, and was almost alone in refusing to join the
       Shawnee uprising in 1777. Late in September, that year, he
       visited his white friends at Fort Randolph (Point Pleasant),
       and was retained as one of several hostages for the tribe.
       Infuriated at some murders in the vicinity, the private
       soldiers in the fort turned upon the Indian prisoners and
       basely killed them, Cornstalk among the number. Governor
       Patrick Henry and General Hand--the latter then organizing his
       futile expedition against the Shawnees--wished to punish
       the murderers; but in the prevalent state of public opinion on
       the border, it was easy for them to escape prosecution.--R.
       G. T.

  [20] The following gentlemen, with others of high reputation
       in private life, were officers in the battle at Point Pleasant.
       Gen. Isaac Shelby, the first governor of Kentucky, and
       afterwards, secretary of war;--Gen. William Campbell and Col.
       John Campbell, heroes of King's mountain and Long Island;--Gen.
       Evan Shelby, one of the most favored citizens of Tennessee,
       often honored with the confidence of that state;--Col. William
       Fleming, an active governor of Virginia during the revolutionary
       war;--Gen. Andrew Moore of Rockbridge, the only man ever
       elected by Virginia, from the country west of the Blue ridge, to
       the senate of the United States;--Col. John Stuart, of
       Greenbrier;--Gen. Tate, of Washington county, Virginia;--Col.
       William McKee, of Lincoln county, Kentucky;--Col. John Steele,
       since a governor of Mississippi territory;--Col. Charles
       Cameron, of Bath;--Gen. Bazaleel Wells, of Ohio; and Gen.
       George Matthews, a distinguished officer in the war of the
       revolution, the hero of Brandywine, Germantown, and of
       Guilford;--a governor of Georgia, and a senator from that
       state in the congress of the United States. The salvation of
       the American army at Germantown, is ascribed, in Johnston's
       life of Gen. Green, to the bravery and good conduct of two
       regiments, one of which was commanded by General, then Col.
       Matthews.

  [21] In order to get a clearer view of the situation, a
       few more details are essential here. For several days after the
       battle of Point Pleasant, Lewis was busy in burying the dead,
       caring for the wounded, collecting the scattered cattle, and
       building a store-house and small stockade fort. Early on
       the morning of October 13th, messengers who had been sent on to
       Dunmore, advising him of the battle, returned with orders to
       Lewis to march at once with all his available force,
       against the Shawnee towns, and when within twenty-five
       miles of Chillicothe to write to his lordship. The next day,
       the last rear guard, with the remaining beeves, arrived
       from the mouth of the Elk, and while work on the defenses at
       the Point was hurried, preparations were made for the march.
       By evening of the 17th, Lewis, with 1,150 men in good
       condition, had crossed the Ohio and gone into camp on the north
       side. Each man had ten days' supply of flour, a half pound of
       powder, and a pound and a half of bullets; while to each
       company was assigned a pack-horse for the tents. Point
       Pleasant was left in command of Col. Fleming,--who had been
       severely wounded in the battle,--Captains Dickinson,
       Lockridge, Herbert, and Slaughter, and 278 men, few of whom
       were fit for service. On the 18th, Lewis, with Captain
       Arbuckle as guide, advanced towards the Shawnee towns, eighty
       miles distant in a straight line, and probably a hundred and
       twenty-five by the circuitous Indian trails. The army marched
       about eleven miles a day, frequently seeing hostile parties
       but engaging none. Reaching the salt licks near the head of
       the south branch of Salt Creek (in the present Lick township,
       Jackson county, O.), they descended that valley to the
       Scioto, and thence to a prairie on Kinnikinnick (not Kilkenny)
       Creek, where was the freshly-deserted Indian village
       referred to above, by Withers. This was thirteen miles south of
       Chillicothe (now Westfall). Here they were met, early on the
       24th, by a messenger from his lordship, ordering them to
       halt, as a treaty was nearly concluded at Camp Charlotte. But
       Lewis's army had been fired on that morning, and the place was
       untenable for a camp in a hostile country, so he concluded to
       seek better ground. A few hours later another messenger came,
       again peremptorily ordering a halt, as the Shawnees had
       practically come to terms. Lewis now concluded to join the
       northern division in force, at Camp Charlotte, not liking to
       have the two armies separated in the face of a treacherous
       enemy; but his guide mistook the trail, and took one leading
       directly to the Grenadier Squaw's Town. Lewis camped that
       night on the west bank of Congo Creek, two miles above its
       mouth, and five and a quarter miles from Chillicothe, with
       the Indian town half-way between. The Shawnees were now
       greatly alarmed and angered, and Dunmore himself, accompanied
       by the Delaware chief White Eyes, a trader, John Gibson, and
       fifty volunteers, rode over in hot haste that evening to stop
       Lewis, and reprimand him. His lordship was mollified by Lewis's
       explanations, but the latter's men, and indeed Dunmore's, were
       furious over being stopped when within sight of their hated
       quarry, and tradition has it that it was necessary to
       treble the guards during the night to prevent Dunmore and White
       Eyes from being killed. The following morning (the 25th), his
       lordship met and courteously thanked Lewis's officers for
       their valiant service; but said that now the Shawnees had
       acceded to his wishes, the further presence of the southern
       division might engender bad blood. Thus dismissed, Lewis led
       his army back to Point Pleasant, which was reached on the
       28th. He left there a garrison of fifty men under Captain
       Russell, and then by companies the volunteers marched
       through the wilderness to their respective homes, where they
       disbanded early in November.--R. G. T.

  [22] This is not the view of students in our own day, coolly
       looking at the affair from the distance of a hundred and twenty
       years. There now seems no room to doubt that Dunmore was
       thoroughly in earnest, that he prosecuted the war with vigor,
       and knew when to stop in order to secure the best possible
       terms. Our author wrote at a time when many heroes of Point
       Pleasant were still alive, and his neighbors; he reflected
       their views, and the passions of the day. That it was, in view
       of the events then transpiring, the best policy to turn back
       the southern army, after the great battle, and not insist too
       closely on following up the advantage gained, seems now
       incontrovertible.--R. G. T.

  [23] Butterfield's History of the Girtys (Cincinnati,
       1890) is a valuable contribution to Western history. Simon,
       James, and George Girty were notorious renegade whites, who
       aided the Indians against the borderers from 1778 to 1783;
       Simon and George were similarly active in the Indian war of
       1790-95.--R. G. T.

  [24] Upon leaving Pittsburg,--where the governor held a
       council with several Delaware and Mingo chiefs, to whom he
       recited the outrages perpetrated by the Shawnees since
       Bouquet's treaty of 1764--the northern division divided into
       two wings. One, 700 strong, under Dunmore, descended the river
       in boats; the other 500 went across the "pan-handle" by land,
       with the cattle, and both rendezvoused, September 30th, at
       Wheeling, 91 miles below Pittsburg. Next day, Crawford resumed
       his march along the south bank of the Ohio, to a point opposite
       the mouth of Big Hockhocking, 107 miles farther down. Here the
       men, the 200 bullocks, and the 50 pack-horses swam the Ohio,
       and just above the Big Hockhocking (the site of the present
       Hockingport) erected a blockhouse and stockade, which they
       called Fort Gower, in honor of the English earl of that name. A
       part of the earthwork can still (1894) be seen in the garden of
       a Hockingport residence. Dunmore's party, in 100 canoes and
       pirogues, arrived a few days later. While at Fort Gower, he was
       joined by the Delaware chiefs, White Eyes and John Montour, the
       former of whom was utilized as an agent to negotiate with the
       Shawnees--R. G. T.

  [25] This was William McCulloch.--R. G. T.

  [26] The authority for this is Stuart's Indian Wars, p.
       56. Abraham Thomas, in his Sketches, relates that the
       governor, placing his ear at the surface of the river, said
       he thought he heard the firing of guns; and Thomas, then a
       young militiaman, was asked to do likewise, and reported that
       it was the rattle of musketry. The distance across country
       to Point Pleasant was but twenty-eight miles, but by the river
       windings was sixty-six. These anecdotes have been related as
       proof that Dunmore desired Lewis beaten. White Eyes had
       notified the governor that a conflict was expected, though
       he had reported a much smaller Indian army than Lewis's;
       hence his lordship had no fear of the result. Had he known
       that the opposing forces were equal in number, and that the
       whites had been surprised, he doubtless would have sent
       relief. Knowing the Shawnee warriors were away from home,
       fighting Lewis, whom he had reason to suppose was very well
       able to handle them, he determined to advance inland to the
       deserted towns on the Scioto and destroy their houses and
       crops. He was upon this errand when met and stopped by the
       messengers of peace.--R. G. T.

  [27] The two wings of the white army had about the same
       strength--1100 under Dunmore, and 1150 (after leaving Point
       Pleasant) under Lewis. The fighting quality was also the same,
       in both. It is to be remembered that in the army under Dunmore
       there was very little discontent at the issue, and at the close
       of the campaign the men heartily thanked his lordship for his
       valuable services in behalf of the people. They did this, too,
       at a time when they knew from Eastern news received in camp,
       that the Revolution was near at hand, and Dunmore must soon be
       fighting against them in behalf of his royal master.--R. G. T.

  [28] Dunmore had, through White Eyes, summoned the Shawnee
       chiefs to treat with him at Fort Gower (not Gore), but they had
       declined to come in. He then set out, October 11th, to waste
       their towns on the Scioto, as previously noted, leaving the
       fort in charge of Captain Kuykendall (not Froman), with whom
       remained the disabled and the beeves. Each man on the
       expedition carried flour for sixteen days. Just after the Point
       Pleasant battle, Lewis had dispatched a messenger to his
       lordship with news of the affair; Dunmore's messenger to Lewis,
       with instructions to the latter to join him en route, crossed
       Lewis's express on the way. The messenger from Lewis found that
       his lordship had marched up the Big Hockhocking valley for the
       Scioto, and hurried after him. The governor was overtaken at
       the third camp out (west of the present Nelsonville, Athens
       county, O.), and the good news caused great joy among the
       soldiers. October 17th, Dunmore arrived at what he styled Camp
       Charlotte (on the northern bank of Sippo Creek, Pickaway
       county, eight miles east of Chillicothe, in view of Pickaway
       Plains), and here the treaty of peace was concluded.--R. G. T.

  [29] Doddridge's Notes says that the camp was surrounded by
       a breastwork of fallen trees, and an entrenchment, and
       Roosevelt's Winning of the West follows him. But Dr. Draper
       was distinctly told (in 1846-51) by two survivors of the
       campaign, Samuel Murphy and John Grim, that Withers's account
       is correct; and this is confirmed in Whittlesey's Fugitive
       Essays. In the center of the field, a building of poles was
       erected, in which to hold the council; around this, the army
       encamped. A large white oak having been peeled, Dunmore wrote
       upon it in red chalk, "Camp Charlotte," thus honoring the then
       English queen.--R. G. T.

  [30] Logan was the Mingo chief, the massacre of whose family
       at Baker's Bottom, the previous April, has already been
       described. He had just returned (October 21) from a foray on
       the Holston border, bringing several scalps and three
       prisoners, when the trader Gibson and the scout Simon Girty
       were sent to him by his lordship.--R. G. T.

  [31] Colonel Benjamin Wilson, Sen. (then an officer in
       Dunmore's army, and whose narrative of the campaign furnished
       the facts which are here detailed) says that he conversed
       freely with one of the interpreters (Nicholson) in regard to
       the mission to Logan, and that neither from the interpreter,
       nor any other one during the campaign, did he hear of the
       charge preferred in Logan's speech against Captain Cresap, as
       being engaged in the affair at Yellow creek.--Captain Cresap
       was an officer in the division of the army under Lord Dunmore;
       and it would seem strange indeed, if Logan's speech had been
       made public, at camp Charlotte, and neither he, (who was so
       materially interested in it, and could at once have proved the
       falsehood of the allegation which it contained,) nor Colonel
       Wilson, (who was present during the whole conference between
       Lord Dunmore and the Indian chiefs, and at the time when the
       speeches were delivered sat immediately behind and close to
       Dunmore,) should have heard nothing of it until years after.

       ------

       Comment by R. G. T.--Withers thus shortly disposes of the
       famous speech by Logan, which schoolboys have been reciting for
       nearly a hundred years as one of the best specimens extant, of
       Indian eloquence. The evidence in regard to the speech, which
       was undoubtedly recited to Gibson, and by him written out for
       Lord Dunmore's perusal, and later "improved" by Jefferson, is
       clearly stated in Roosevelt's Winning of the West, I., app.
       iii.

  [32] The reason for the attack was, that the Mingoes were
       implacable, and Dunmore had learned that instead of coming into
       the treaty they purposed retreating to the Great Lakes with
       their prisoners and stolen horses. This Mingo village was
       Seekonk (sometimes called the Hill Town), 30 or 40 miles up the
       Scioto. Crawford left Camp Charlotte the night of the 25th, and
       surprised the town early in the morning of the 27th. Six were
       killed, several wounded, and fourteen captured; the rest
       escaping into the forest.

[139] CHAPTER VIII.

Upon the close of the campaign of 1774, there succeeded a short period of perfect quiet, and
of undisturbed repose from savage invasion, along the borders of North Western Virginia. The
decisive battle of the 10th of October, repressed incursion for a time, and taught those implacable
enemies of her citizens, their utter inability, alone and unaided, to maintain a contest of
arms, against the superior power of Virginia. They saw that in any future conflict with this
colony, her belligerent operations would no longer be confined to the mere purposes of defence;
but that war would be waged in their own country, and their own towns become the theatre of
its action. Had the leading objects of the Dunmore campaign been fully accomplished,--had the
contemplated junction of the different divisions of the army taken place;--had its combined
forces extended their march into the Indian territory, and effected the proposed reduction
of the Chilicothe, and other towns on the Scioto and Sandusky, it would have been long indeed,
before the frontier settlements, became exposed to savage inroad. A failure to effect these
things however, left the Indians comparatively at liberty, and prepared to renew invasion,
and revive their cruel and bloody deeds, whenever a savage thirst for vengeance should incite
them to action, and the prospect of achieving them with impunity, be open before them. In the
then situation of our country, this prospect was soon presented to them.

The contest between Great Britain and her American colonies, which had been for some time carried
on with increasing warmth, was ripening rapidly into war. The events of every day, more and
more confirmed the belief, that the "unconditional submission" of the colonies, was the object
of the parent state; and that to accomplish this, she was [140] prepared to desolate the country
by a civil war, and imbrue her hands in the blood of its citizens. This state of things the
Indians knew, would favor the consummation of their hopes. Virginia, having to apply her physical
strength to the repulsion of other enemies, could not be expected to extend her protecting
ægis over the remote and isolated settlements on her borders. These would have to depend on
themselves alone, for resistance to ruthless irruption, and exemption from total annihilation.
The Indians well knew the weakness of those settlements, and their consequent incapacity to
vie in open conflict with the overwhelming force of their savage foes; and their heriditary
resentment to the whites prompted them to take advantage of that weakness, to wreak this resentment,
and involve them once more in hostilities.

Other circumstances too, combined in their operation, to produce this result. The plan of Lord
Dunmore and others, to induce the Indians to co-operate with the English in reducing Virginia
to subjection, and defeated by the detection and apprehension of Connoly, was soon after resumed
on a more extensive scale. British agents were busily engaged from Canada to the Gulph of Mexico,
in endeavoring by immediate presents and the promise of future reward, to excite the savages
to a war upon the western frontiers. To accomplish this object, no means which were likely
to be of any avail, were neglected to be used. Gratified resentment and the certainty of plunder,
were held up to view as present consequences of this measure; and the expulsion of the whites,
and the repossession, by the Natives, of the country from which their fathers had been ejected,
as its ultimate result.--Less cogent motives might have enlisted them on the side of Great
Britain. These were too strong to be resisted by them, and too powerful to be counteracted
by any course of conduct, which the colonies could observe towards them; and they became ensnared
by the delusive bait, and the insidious promises which accompanied it.

There were in the colonies too, many persons, who from principle or fear, were still attached
to the cause of Great Britain; and who not only, did not sanction the opposition of their country
to the supremacy of Parliament, but were willing in any wise to lend their aid to the royal
cause. Some of those disaffected Americans, (as they were at first denominated) who resided
on the frontiers, foreseeing the [141] attachment of the Indians to the side of Britain, and
apprehensive that in their inroads, the friends as well as the enemies of that country, might,
from the difficulty of discriminating, be exposed to savage fury; and at the same time, sensible
that they had become obnoxious to a majority of their neighbors, who were perhaps, too much
inclined to practice summary modes of punishment, sought a refuge among the Indians, from those
impending evils. In some instances, these persons were under the influence of the most rancorous
and vindictive passions, and when once with the savages, strove to infuse those passions into
their breasts, and stimulate them to the repetition of those enormities, which had previously,
so terribly annoyed the inhabitants of the different frontiers.[1] Thus wrought upon, their
inculcated enmity to the Anglo-Americans generally, roused them to action, and the dissonant
notes of the war song, resounded in their villages. For a while indeed, they refrained from
hostilities against North Western Virginia. It was however, but to observe the progress of
passing events, that they might act against the mountain borders, simultaneously with the British
on the Atlantic coast; as a premature movement on their part, might, while Virginia was yet
at liberty to bear down upon them with concentrated forces, bring upon their towns the destruction
which had so appallingly threatened them after the battle at Point Pleasant.

But though the inhabitants on the Virginia frontiers, enjoyed a momentary respite from savage
warfare; yet were the Indians not wholly unemployed in deeds of aggression. The first attempt
to occupy Kentucky, had been the signal of hostilities in 1774; and the renewed endeavors to
form establishments in it, in 1775, induced their continuance, and brought on those who were
engaged in effecting them, all the horrors of savage warfare.

Upon the close of the campaign under Lord Dunmore, Kentucky became more generally known. James
Harrod, with those who had associated themselves with him in making a settlement in that country
and aided in the erection of the fort at Harrodsburg, joined the army of General Lewis at Point
Pleasant; and when, after the treaty of Camp Charlotte, the army was disbanded, many of the
soldiers and some of the officers, enticed by the description given of it by Harrod, returned
to south Western Virginia, through that country.[2] The result of their examination of it,
induced many to migrate thither immediately; and in 1775, families began to take up their residence
in it.

At that time, the only white persons residing in Kentucky, were those at Harrod's fort; and
for a while, emigrants to that country [142] established themselves in its immediate vicinity,
that they might derive protection from its walls, from the marauding irruptions of Indians.
Two other establishments were, however, soon made, and became, as well as Harrod's, rallying
points for land adventurers, and for many of those, whose enterprising spirits led them, to
make their home in that wilderness. The first of these was that at Boonesborough, and which
was made, under the superintendence of Daniel Boone.

The prospect of amassing great wealth, by the purchase of a large body of land from the Indians,
for a comparatively trifling consideration, induced some gentlemen in North Carolina, to form
a company, and endeavor by negotiation to effect such purpose. This association was known under
the title of Henderson and company; and its object was, the acquisition of a considerable portion
of Kentucky.[3] The first step, necessary towards the accomplishment of this object, was, to
convene a council of the Indians; and as the territory sought to be acquired, did not belong,
in individual property to any one nation of them, it was deemed advisable to convoke the chiefs
of the different nations south of the Ohio river. A time was then appointed at which these
were to assemble; and it became necessary to engage an agent, possessing the requisite qualifications,
to attend the council, on behalf of Henderson and company, and to transact the business for
them. The fame of Daniel Boone which had reached them, recommended him, as one eminently qualified
to discharge the duties devolving on an agent; and he was employed in that capacity. At the
appointed period, the council was held, and a negotiation commenced, which resulted in the
transfer, to Henderson and company, of the title of the southern Indians to the land lying
south of the Kentucky river, and north of the Tennessee.[4]

Boone was then placed at the head of a party of enterprising men, sent to open a road from
the Holstein settlement, through the wilderness, to the Kentucky river, and to take possession
of the company's purchase. When within fifteen miles of the termination of their journey, they
were attacked by a body of northern Indians, who killed two of Boone's comrades, and wounded
two others.

Two days after, they were again attacked by them, and had two more of their party killed and
three wounded.[5] From this time they experienced no farther molestation until they had arrived
within the limits of the purchase, and erected a fort, at a lick near the southern bank of
the Kentucky river--the site of the present town of Boonesborough. Enfeebled by the loss sustained
in the attacks made on them by the Indians; and worn down by the continued labor of opening
a road through an almost impervious wilderness, it was some time before they could so far complete
the fort, so as to render it secure against anticipated assaults of the savages, and justify
a detachment being sent from the garrison, to escort the family of Boone to his new situation.
When it was thus far completed, an office [143] was opened for the sale of the company's land;[6]
and Boone and some others returned to Holstein, and from thence, guarded the family of Boone,
through the wilderness, to the newly erected fort. Mrs. Boone and her daughter, are believed
to be the first white females who ever stood on the banks of the Kentucky river.[7]

[143] In 1775 Benjamin Logan, who had been with Lord Dunmore at Camp Charlotte, visited Kentucky
and selected a spot for his future residence, near to the present village of Stamford, erected
thereon a fort; and in the following year moved his family thither.

These were the only settlements then begun to be made within the limits of the now state of
Kentucky. As the tide of emigration flowed into the country, those three forts afforded an
asylum, from the Indian hostility to which the whites were incessantly subjected; and never
perhaps lived three men better qualified by nature and habit, to resist that hostility, and
preserve the settlers from captivity and death, than James Harrod, Daniel Boone, and Benjamin
Logan. Reared in the lap of danger, and early inured to the hardships and sufferings of a wilderness
life, they were habitually acquainted with those arts which were necessary to detect and defeat
the one, and to lessen and alleviate the others. Intrepid and fearless, yet cautious and prudent,
there was united in each of them, the sly, circumventive powers of the Indian, with the bold
defiance, and open daring of the whites. Quick, almost to intuition, in the perception of impending
dangers, instant in determining, and prompt in action; to see, to resolve, and to execute,
were with them the work of the same moment. Rife in expedients, the most perplexing difficulties
rarely found them at a loss. Possessed of these qualities, they were placed at the head of
the little colonies planted around them; not by ambition, but by the universal voice of the
people; from a deep and thorough conviction, that they only were adequate to the exigencies
of their situation. The conviction was not ill founded. Their intellectual and physical resources
were powerfully and constantly exerted for the preservation and security of the settlements;
and frequently, with astonishing success, under the most inauspicious circumstances. Had they
indeed, by nature, been supine and passive, their isolated situation, and the constantly repeated
attempts of the Indians, at their extermination, would have aroused them, as it did others,
to activity and energy, and brought their every [144] nerve into action. For them, there were
no "weak, piping times of peace,"--no respite from danger. The indefatigable vigilance and
persevering hostility of an unrelenting foe, required countervailing exertions on their part;
and kept alive the life, which they delighted to live.

From the instant those establishments were made, and emigrants placed themselves in their vicinity,
the Savages commenced their usual mode of warfare; and marauding parties were ever in readiness,
to seize upon, those, whose misfortune it was to become exposed to their vigilance. In the
prosecution of these hostilities, incidents of the most lively and harrowing interest, though
limited in their consequences, were constantly recurring; before a systematic course of operations,
was undertaken for the destruction of the settlers.

The Indians, seeing that they had to contend with persons, as well skilled in their peculiar
mode of warfare, as themselves, and as likely to detect them, while lying in wait for an opportunity
to strike the deadly blow, as they were to strike it with impunity, they entirely changed their
plans of annoyance. Instead of longer endeavoring to cut off the whites in detail, they brought
into the country a force, sufficiently numerous and powerful to act simultaneously against
all the settlements. The consequence of this was, much individual suffering and several horrid
massacres. Husbandmen, toiling to secure the product of the summer's labor, for their sustenance
another season, were frequently attacked, and murdered.--Hunters, engaged in procuring meat
for immediate and pressing use, were obliged to practise the utmost wariness to evade the ambushed
Indian, and make sure their return to the fort. Springs and other watering places, and the
paths leading to them, were constantly guarded by the savages; who would lie near them day
and night, until forced to leave their covert, in quest of food to satisfy their extreme hunger;
and who, when this end was attained, would return to their hiding places, with renovated strength,
and increased watchfulness. The cattle belonging to the garrisons were either driven off, or
killed, so that no supplies could be derived from them. This state of things continued, without
intermission, 'till the severity of winter forced the Indians to depart for their towns; and
then succeeded, of necessity, a truce, which had become extremely desirable to the different
settlements.

When we reflect on the dangers, the difficulties, the complicated distresses, to which the
inhabitants were then exposed, it is really matter of astonishment that they did not abandon
the country, and seek elsewhere an exemption from those evils. How women, with all the feminine
weakness of the sex, could be prevailed upon to remain during the winter, and encounter with
the returning spring, the returning horrors of savage warfare, is truly surprising. The frequent
recurrence of danger, does indeed, produce a comparative insensibility and indifference to
it; but it is difficult to conceive, [145] that familiarity with the tragic scenes which were
daily exhibited there, could reconcile persons to a life of constant exposure to them. Yet
such was the fact; and not only did the few, who were first to venture on them, continue in
the country, but others, equally adventurous, moved to it; encountering many hardships and
braving every danger, to aid in maintaining possession of the modern Canaan, and to obtain
a home in that land of milk and honey. If for a while, they flattered themselves with the hope,
that the ravages which had been checked by winter, would not be repeated on the return of spring,
they were sadly disappointed. Hostilities were resumed, as soon as the abatement of cold, suffered
the Indians to take the field; and were carried on with renovated ardor, and on an enlarged
scale.[8]

Feeling the hopelessness of extirpating the settlements, so long as the forts remained to afford
a safe retreat to the inhabitants; and having learned, by the experience of the preceding season,
that the whites were but little, if at all, inferior to them in their own arts, and were competent
to combat them, in their own mode of warfare, the Indians resolved on bringing into the country
a larger force, and to direct their united energies to the demolition of the different forts.
To prevent any aid being afforded by the other garrisons, while operations were leveled against
one, they resolved on detaching from their main body, such a number of men as was deemed sufficient
to keep watch around the other forts, and awe their inmates from attempting to leave them,
on any occasion. This was a course of excellent policy. It was calculated not only to prevent
the marching of any auxiliary forces from one to the other of the fortresses, but at the same
time by preventing hunting parties from ranging the woods, cut off the principal source, from
which their supplies were derived; and thus tended to render their fall, the more certain and easy.

Accordingly in March 1777, they entered Kentucky with a force of upwards of two hundred warriors;
and sending some of their most expert and active men to watch around Boone's and Logan's forts,
marched with the chief part of their army to attack Harrodsburg. On the 14th of March three
persons (who were engaged in clearing some land) not far from Harrod's fort, discovered the
Indians proceeding through the woods, and sought to escape observation and convey the intelligence
to the garrison. But they too, were discovered and pursued; and one of them was killed, another
taken prisoner, and the third (James, afterwards Gen. Ray, then a mere youth) reached Harrodsburg
alone in safety.[9] Aware that the place had become alarmed, and that they had then no chance
of operating on it, by surprise, they encamped near to it on that evening; and early on the
morning of the 15th commenced a furious and animated attack.

Apprized of the near approach of the enemy, the garrison had made every preparation for defense,
of which their situation admitted; and when the assailants rushed to the assault, not intimidated
by their horrible and unnatural yells, nor yet dispirited by the [146] presence of a force
so far superior to their own, they received them with a fire so steady and well directed, as
forced them to recoil; leaving one of their slain on the field of attack. This alone, argued
a great discomfiture of the Indians; as it is well known to be their invariable custom, to
remove, if practicable, those of their warriors who fall in battle. Their subsequent movements,
satisfied the inmates of the fort, that there had been indeed a discomfiture; and that they
had but little to apprehend from a renewed assault on their little fortress. After reconnoitering
for a while, at a prudent distance from the garrison, the Indians kindled their fires for the
night; and in the following day, leaving a small party for the purpose of annoyance, decamped
with the main body of their army, and marched towards Boonesborough.[10] In consequence however,
of a severe spell of March weather, they were forced to remain inactive for a time; and did
not make their appearance there, until the middle of April.

In the assault on Boone's fort, the Indians soon, became satisfied that it was impregnable
against them; and although their repulse was not as signal here, as it had been at Harrodsburg,
yet they soon withdrew from the contest, and marched towards Logan's fort,--having killed one
and wounded four, of the whites.[11]

Several causes combined to render an attack on the fort at Logan's station, an event of most
fearful consequence.[12] Its inmates had been but a short time in the country, and were not
provided with an ample supply either of provisions or ammunition. They were few in number;
and though of determined spirit and undaunted fortitude, yet such was the disparity between
thirteen and two hundred--the force of the garrison and the force of the assailants, joined
to their otherwise destitute situation, that hope itself, could scarcely live in so perilous
a situation. Had this been the first point, against which the enemy levelled their operations
when they arrived in the country, it must have fallen before them. But by deferring the attack
on it, 'till they had been repulsed at the two other forts, the garrison was allowed time;
and availing themselves of it, to fortify their position more strongly, the issue was truly,
most fortunate, though unexpected.

On the night preceding the commencement of the attack on the fort, the Indians had approached
near to it unperceived, and secreted themselves in a cane brake, which had been suffered to
remain around the cabins.

Early in the morning the women, went out to milk, guarded by most of the garrison; and before
they were aware of impending danger, the concealed Indians opened a general fire, which killed
three of the men, and drove the others, hastily within the fort.[13] A most affecting spectacle
was then presented to view, well calculated to excite the sympathies of human nature, and arouse
to action a man possessed of the generous sensibility and noble daring, which animated the
bosom of Logan.

One of the men who had fallen on the first fire of the Indians and had been supposed by his
comrades to be dead, was in truth though [147] badly wounded, yet still alive; and was observed
feebly struggling to crawl towards the fort. The fear of laceration and mangling from the horrid
scalping knife, and of tortures from more barbarous instruments, seemed to abate his exertions
in dragging his wounded body along, lest he should be discovered and borne off by some infuriated
and unfeeling savage. It was doubtful too, whether his strength would endure long enough to
enable him to reach the gate, even if unmolested by any apprehension of danger. The magnanimous
and intrepid Logan resolved on making an effort to save him. He endeavored to raise volunteers,
to accompany him without the fort, and bring in their poor wounded companion. It seemed as
if courting the quick embrace of death, and even his adventurous associates for an instant,
shrunk from the danger. At length a man by the name of Martin, who plumed himself on rash and
daring deeds, consented to aid in the enterprise; and the two proceeded towards the gate. Here
the spirit of Martin forsook him, and he recoiled from the hazardous adventure. Logan was then
alone. He beheld the feeble, but wary exertions of his unfortunate comrade, entirely subside;
and he could not hesitate. He rushed quickly through the gate, caught the unhappy victim in
his arms, and bore him triumphantly into the fort, amid a shower of bullets aimed at him; and
some of which buried themselves in the pallisades close by his head. A most noble and disinterested
achievement, and worthy of all commendation.[14]

[148] The siege being maintained by the Indians, the animation of the garrison was nearly exhausted,
in repelling the frequent assaults made on the fort; and it was apparent, that the enemy did
not intend speedily to withdraw their forces. Parties of Indians were frequently detached from
the main body, as well to obtain a supply of provisions by hunting, as to intercept and cut
off any [147] aid, which might be sent to St. Asaph's[15] from the other forts. In this posture
of affairs, it was impossible that the garrison could long hold out, unless its military stores
could be replenished; and to effect this, under existing circumstances, appeared to be almost
impossible. Harrodsburg and Boonesborough were not themselves amply provided with stores; and
had it been otherwise, so closely was the intermediate country between them and St. Asaph's,
guarded by the savages, that no communication could be carried from one to the other of them.
The settlement on the Holstein was the nearest point, from which it could be practicable to
derive a supply of ammunition, and the distance to that neighborhood, was considerable.

Logan knew the danger which must result to the garrison, from being weakened as much as it
must be, by sending a portion of it on this hazardous enterprise; but he also knew, that the
fort could not be preserved from falling, unless its magazine was soon replenished. Prefering
the doubtful prospect of succeeding in its relief, by adopting the plan of sending to Holstein,
he proposed the measure to his companions, and they eagerly embraced it. It remained then to
select the party, which was to venture on this high enterprise. Important as the presence of
Logan, was known to be, in the fort, yet as the lives of all within, depended on the success
of the expedition and as to effect this, required the exercise of qualities rarely possessed
in so great degree by any other individual, he was unanimously chosen to conduct the enterprise.

Accompanied by four of the garrison, Logan, as slyly as possible, slipped from the fort, and
commenced his tedious journey.[16] To lessen the chance of coming in contact [148] with straggling
bands of Indians, he avoided the pack road which had been opened by Boone; and pursuing an
untrodden route, reached the settlement in safety. The requisite supplies were soon engaged;
and while they were being prepared for transportation, Logan was actively engaged in endeavoring
to prevail on the inhabitants, to form a company as expeditiously as possible and march to
their relief. With a faint promise of assistance, and with the assurance that their situation
should be immediately made known to the executive authority of the state, he set off on his
return. Confiding the ammunition which he had obtained, to the care of his companions, and
prudently advising and instructing them in the course best to be pursued, he left them, and
hastened to make his way alone, back to St. Asaph. In ten days after his departure from the
fort, he returned to it again; and his [149] presence contributed much to revive and encourage
the garrison; 'till then in almost utter despair of obtaining relief. In a few days after,
the party arrived with the ammunition, and succeeded in entering the fort unperceived; though
it was still surrounded by the Indians. With so much secrecy and caution had the enterprise
been conducted, that the enemy never knew it had been undertaken, until it was happily accomplished.

For some time after this the garrison continued in high expectation of seeing the besiegers
depart, despairing of making any impression on the fort. But they were mistaken in this expectation.
Each returning day shewed the continued investiture of the fort, and exhibited the Indians
as pertinaciously intent on its reduction by assault or famine, as they were on the day of
their arrival before it. Weeks elapsed, and there was no appearance of the succours which had
been promised to Logan, when in the settlement on Holstein. And although the besieged were
still successful in repelling every assault on the garrison, yet their stock of provisions
was almost entirely exhausted; and there was no chance of obtaining a farther supply, but from
the woods around them. To depend on the success of hunting parties, to relieve their necessities
and prevent their actual starvation or surrender, seemed indeed, but a slender reed on which
to rely; and the gloom of despondency overshadowed their hitherto sanguine countenances. But
as they were resigning themselves to despair, and yielding up the last hope of being able to
escape from savage fury and savage vengeance, Colonel Bowman arrived to their relief, and forced
the Indians to raise the siege. It was not however, without some loss on his part. A detachment
of his men, which had preceded the advance of the main army, was unfortunately unable to reach
the fort, undiscovered by the besiegers; who attacked and killed them before they could enter
the garrison. On the body of one of these men, was left a proclamation, issued by the Governor
of Detroit promising protection and reward to those who would renounce the cause of the American
colonies, and espouse that of Great Britain; and denouncing those who would not. When this
proclamation was carried to Logan, he carefully kept secret its contents, lest it might produce
an unfavorable effect on the minds of some of his men; worn down, exhausted, and discouraged
as they then were.[17]

[150] After the arrival of Colonel Bowman in the country, there was for a time, a good deal
of skirmishing between his forces, aided by individuals from the different forts, and those
Indians. In all of them, the superiority of the whites in the use of the rifle, became apparent
to the savages; and as the feat of Captain Gibson with the sword, had previously acquired for
the Virginians, the appellation of the Long Knives,[18] the fatal certainty, with which Bowman's
men and the inhabitants of the various settlements in Kentucky, then aimed their shots, might
have added to that title, the forcible epithet of sharp-shooters. They were as skilful and
successful, too, in the practice of those arts, by which one is enabled to steal unaware upon
his enemy, as the Natives themselves; and were equally as sure to execute the purposes, for
which those arts were put in requisition, as these were. The consequence was, that the Indians
were not only more shy in approaching the garrison, than they had been; but they likewise became,
more cautious and circumspect, in their woods operations, than formerly.

The frequent success of Colonel Bowman's men, in scouring the surrounding country, gave to
the inhabitants of all the settlements, an opportunity of cultivating their little fields,
and of laying in such a stock of provisions and military stores, as would suffice in the hour
of need; when that force should be withdrawn from the country, and the Indians consequently
be again enabled to overrun it. All that the inhabitants, by reason of the paucity of their
numbers, could yet do, was to shut themselves in forts, and preserve these from falling into
the hands of the enemy. When the term of those, who had so opportunely came to their relief,
expired, and they returned to their homes, there were at Boonesborough only twenty-two, at
Harrodsburg sixty-five, and at St. Asaph's fifteen men. Emigrants however, flocked to the country
during the ensuing season, in great numbers; and their united strength enabled them the better
to resist aggression, and conduct the various operations of husbandry and hunting--then the
only occupations of the men.

While these things were transacting in Kentucky, North Western Virginia enjoyed a repose undisturbed,
save by the conviction of the moral certainty, that it would be again involved in all the horrors
of savage warfare; and that too, at no distant period: The machinations of British agents,
to [151] produce this result, were well known to be gaining advocates daily, among the savages;
and the hereditary resentments of these, were known to be too deeply seated, for the victory
of Point Pleasant to have produced their eradication, and to have created in their stead, a
void, to become the future receptacle of kindlier feelings, towards their Virginia neighbors.
A coalition of the many tribes north west of the Ohio river, had been some time forming, and
the assent of the Shawanees, alone, was wanting to its perfection. The distinguished Sachem
at the head of that nation, was opposed to an alliance with the British, and anxious to preserve
a friendly intercourse with the colonists. All his influence, with all his energy, was exerted,
to prevent his brethren from again involving themselves, in a war with the whites. But it was
likely to be in vain. Many of his warriors had fallen at the mouth of the Kenhawa, and his
people had suffered severely during the continuance of that war; they were therefore, too intent
on retaliation, to listen to the sage counsel of their chief. In this posture of affairs, Cornstalk,
in the spring of 1777, visited the fort, which had been erected at Point Pleasant after the
campaign of 1774, in company with the Red Hawk, and another Indian. Captain Matthew Arbuckle
was then commandant of the garrison; and when Cornstalk communicated to him the hostile preparations
of the Indians,--that the Shawanees alone were wanting to render a confederacy complete,--that,
as the "current set so strongly against the colonies, even they would float with the stream
in despite of his endeavors to stem it," and that hostilities would commence immediately, he
deemed it prudent to detain him and his companions as hostages, for the peace and neutrality
of the different tribes of Indians in Ohio. He at the same time acquainted the newly organized
government of Virginia, with the information which he had received from Cornstalk, and the
course which he had taken with that chief, and the others who accompanied him to the garrison.

Upon the receipt of this intelligence, it was resolved, if volunteers could be had for this
purpose, to march an army into the Indian country and effectually accomplish the objects, which
had been proposed to be achieved in the campaign of Lord Dunmore in 1774. The volunteers in
Augusta and Bottetourt, were to rendezvous as early as possible, at the mouth of the Big Kenhawa,
where they would be joined by [152] other troops under General Hand,[19] who would then assume
the command of the whole expedition.

In pursuance of this resolve, three or four companies only, were raised in the counties of
Bottetourt and Augusta; and these immediately commenced their march, to the place of general
rendezvous, under the command of Colonel George Skillern. In the Greenbrier country, great
exertions were made by the militia officers there, to obtain volunteers, but with little effect.
One company only was formed, consisting of thirty men, and the officers, laying aside all distinctions
of rank, placed themselves in the line as common soldiers, and proceeded to Point Pleasant
with the troops led on by Colonel Skillern. Upon their arrival at that place, nothing had been
heard of General Hand, or of the forces which it was expected would accompany him from Fort
Pitt; and the volunteers halted, to await some intelligence from him.

The provisions, for the support of the army in its projected invasion of the Indian country,
were expected to be brought down the river, from Fort Pitt; and the troops under Colonel Skillern
had only taken with them, what was deemed sufficient for their subsistence on their march to
the place of rendezvous. This stock was nearly exhausted, and the garrison was too illy supplied,
to admit of their drawing on its stores.--While thus situated, and anxiously awaiting the arrival
of General Hand with his army and provisions, the officers held frequent conversations with
Cornstalk, who seemed to take pleasure in acquainting them with the geography of the country
west of the Ohio river generally, and more particularly with that section of it lying between
the Mississippi and Missouri rivers. One afternoon while he was engaged in delineating on the
floor a map of that territory, with the various water courses emptying into those two mighty
streams, and describing the face of the country, its soil and climate, a voice was heard hallooing
from the opposite shore of the Ohio, which he immediately recognised to be that of his son
Ellinipsico, and who coming over at the instance of Cornstalk, embraced him most affectionately.
Uneasy at the long absence of his father, and fearing that some unforseen evil might have befallen
him, he had come to learn some tidings of him here; knowing that it was the place, to go to
which he had left the nation. His visit was prompted by feelings [153] which do honor to human
nature--anxious solicitude for a father,--but it was closed by a most terrible catastrophe.

On the day after the arrival of Ellinipsico, and while he was yet in the garrison, two men,
from Captain Hall's company of Rockbridge volunteers, crossed the Kenhawa river on a hunting
excursion. As they were returning to the canoe for the purpose of recrossing to the Fort, after
the termination of the hunt, Gilmore was espied by two Indians, concealed near the bank, who
fired at, killed and scalped him. At that instant, Captains Arbuckle and Stuart (the latter
having accompanied the Greenbrier volunteers as a private soldier) were standing on the point
opposite to where lay the canoe in which Hamilton and Gilmore had crossed the river; and expressed
some astonishment that the men should be so indiscreet as to be shooting near to the encampment,
contrary to commands. They had scarcely time to express their disapprobation at the supposed
violation of orders, when Hamilton was seen running down the bank of the river, and heard to
exclaim, that Gilmore was killed. A party of Captain Hall's men immediately sprang into a canoe
and went over to relieve Hamilton from danger, and to bring the body of Gilmore to the encampment.
Before they relanded with the bloody corpse of Gilmore, a cry arose, "let us go and kill the
Indians in the fort;" and pale with rage they ascended the bank, with captain Hall at their
head, to execute their horrid purpose. It was vain to remonstrate. To the interference of Captains
Arbuckle and Stuart to prevent the fulfilling of this determination, they responded, by cocking
their guns, and threatening instant death to any one who should dare to oppose them.

The interpreter's wife, (who had lately returned from Indian captivity, and seemed to entertain
a feeling of affection for Cornstalk and his companions) seeing their danger, ran to their
cabin to apprise them of it, and told them that Ellinipsico was charged with having brought
with him the Indians who had killed Gilmore. This however he positively denied, averring that
he came alone, and with the sole object of learning something of his father. In this time Captain
Hall and his men had arrived within hearing, and Ellinipsico appeared much agitated. Cornstalk
however, encouraged him to meet his fate composedly, saying, "my son, the Great Spirit has
seen fit that we should die together, and has sent you here to that [154] end. It is his will
and let us submit;--it is all for the best;" and turning to meet his murderers at the door,
received seven bullets in his body and fell without a groan.

Thus perished the mighty Cornstalk, Sachem of the Shawanees, and king of the northern confederacy
in 1774: A chief remarkable for many great and good qualities. He was disposed to be at all
times the friend of white men; as he ever was, the advocate of honorable peace. But when his
country's wrongs "called aloud to battle," he became the thunderbolt of war; and made her oppressors
feel the weight of his uplifted arm. He sought not to pluck the scalp from the head of the
innocent, nor to war against the unprotected and defenceless; choosing rather to encounter
his enemies, girded for battle, and in open conflict.

When the father fell, Ellinipsico continued still and passive; not even raising himself from
the seat, which he had occupied before they received notice, that some infuriated whites were
loudly demanding their immolation. He met death in that position, with the utmost composure
and calmness. The trepidation which first seized upon him, was of but momentary duration, and
was succeeded by a most dignified sedateness and stoical apathy. It was not so with the young
Red Hawk. He endeavored to conceal himself up the chimney of the cabin, in which they were;
but without success. He was soon discovered and killed. The remaining Indian was murdered by
piece-meal; and with almost all those circumstances of cruelty and horror, which characterize
the savage, in wreaking vengeance upon an enemy.

Cornstalk is said to have had a presentiment of his approaching fate. On the day preceding
his death, a council of officers was convoked, in consequence of the continued absence of General
Hand, and their entire ignorance of his [155] force or movements, to consult and determine
on what would be the course for them to pursue under existing circumstances. Cornstalk was
admitted to the council; and in the course of some remarks, with which he addressed it, said,
"When I was young and went to war, I often thought, each might be my last adventure, and I
should return no more. I still lived. Now I am in the midst of you, and if you choose, may
kill me. I can die but once. It is alike to me, whether now or hereafter." Little did those
who were listening with delight to the eloquence of his address, and deriving knowledge from
his instruction, think to see him so quickly and inhumanly, driven from the theatre of life.
It was a fearful deed; and dearly was it expiated by others. The Shawanees were a warlike people,
and became henceforward the most deadly foe, to the inhabitants on the frontiers.

In a few days after the perpetration of this diabolical outrage upon all propriety, General
Hand arrived from Pittsburg without an army, and without provisions for those who had been
awaiting his coming. It was then determined to abandon the expedition; and the volunteers returned
to their homes.[20]

-----
   [1] Chief among the fomenters of disorder were the
       renegades Simon Girty, Matthew Elliott, and Alexander
       McKee. The dastardly deeds of this trio are fully set forth
       in Butterfield's History of the Girtys, an important work
       to all students of the annals of the West during the
       Revolutionary War.--R. G. T.

   [2] James Harrod's father emigrated from England to
       Virginia, about 1734, and was one of the first settlers on the
       Shenandoah, in the Valley of Virginia. One of his sons, Samuel,
       accompanied Michael Stoner on his famous Western hunting and
       exploring trip, in 1767; another, William, born at the new
       family seat, at Big Cove, in what is now Bedford County, Pa.,
       served with distinction under George Rogers Clark. James, born
       in 1742, was twelve years old when his father died, leaving a
       large family on an exposed frontier, at the opening of the
       French and Indian War. In November, 1755, a raid was made on
       the Big Cove settlement, by the Delaware chief Shingiss (p. 45,
       note), but the Harrods were among the few families who
       escaped unharmed to Fort Littleton. When James was sixteen
       years of age he served with his brother William on Forbes's
       campaign, and very likely saw further service during that war.
       In 1772, when he had attained wide celebrity on the border as
       an adept in woodcraft, he helped William settle on Ten Mile
       Creek, a tributary of the Monongahela; and in 1773 he and
       several other explored Kentucky, returning home by way of
       Greenbrier River. We have seen (p. 152, note) that he was
       surveying the site of Harrodsburg in 1774, when warned by Boone
       and Stoner. Retiring with his men to the Holston, he and they
       joined Col. Christian's regiment, but arrived at Point Pleasant
       a few hours after the battle of October 10. Returning to his
       abandoned Kentucky settlement March 18, 1775, a fortnight
       before Boonesborough was founded, he was chosen a delegate to
       the Transylvania convention, and became a man of great
       prominence in the Kentucky colony. In 1779 he commanded a
       company on Bowman's campaign, and the year following was a
       captain on Clark's Indian campaign; declining a majorship, he
       served as a private on Clark's campaign of 1782. He was a
       member of the Kentucky convention (at Danville) of December,
       1784, and at one time represented Kentucky in the Virginia
       legislature. In February, 1792, having made his will, he set
       out from Washington, Ky., with two men, in search of a silver
       mine reported to be at the Three Forks of the Kentucky. No more
       was heard of him or his companions, and it is still the belief
       of the family that the latter murdered him. He was survived by
       his wife and a daughter, and left a large landed estate.
       Harrod, although unlettered, was a man of fine presence and
       many sterling qualities, and made a strong impress on his
       generation. He is still remembered in Kentucky as one of the
       worthiest pioneers of that state.--R. G. T.

   [3] The company--successively called The Louisa Company,
       Henderson & Co., and The Transylvania Company--was composed of
       Col. Richard Henderson, Col. John Williams, Thomas Hart, Col.
       David Hart, Capt. Nathaniel Hart, Col. John Luttsell, James
       Hogg, William Johnston, and Leonard Henley Bullock.

       Henderson's paternal great-grandfather was a Scottish
       immigrant, and one of his grandmothers was Welsh. The family
       settled in Hanover County, Va., where Richard, son of Samuel
       Henderson, was born April 20, 1735. Samuel moved with his
       family to North Carolina, in 1745, and became sheriff of
       Granville County. Richard had the education of a rural youth of
       good station, and became a lawyer. In 1767 he was appointed one
       of the two associate justices of the superior court of the
       colony, and served with great credit for six years, when the
       court was abolished. During professional visits to Salisbury,
       Henderson heard frequently--chiefly through the brothers
       Hart--of the exploits of Boone, and the latter's glowing
       reports of the beauty and fertility of Kentucky. Relying
       implicitly on Boone's statements, these four men energetically
       resolved to settle the country. In the autumn of 1774,
       Henderson and Nathaniel Hart visited the Cherokees to ascertain
       if they would sell their claims to Kentucky, and receiving a
       favorable reply agreed to meet the Indians in treaty council at
       the Sycamore Shoals, on Watauga River. On their return home,
       they were accompanied by a wise old Indian (Little Carpenter),
       and a young buck and his squaw, delegates to see that proper
       goods were purchased for the proposed barter. These goods were
       bought in December at Cross Creek, now Fayetteville, N. C., and
       forwarded by wagons to Watauga.

       Boone was then sent out to collect the Indians, and when the
       council opened (March 14, 1775) had twelve hundred assembled at
       the Sycamore Shoals--half of them warriors. The council
       proceeded slowly, with much characteristic vacillating on the
       part of the Indians; but on the third day (March 17) the deed
       of sale was signed to what came to be known as "the great
       grant:" The tract from the mouth of the Kentucky (or Louisa)
       River to the head spring of its most northerly fork; thence
       northeasterly to the top of Powell's Mountain; thence westerly
       and then northwesterly to the head spring of the most southerly
       branch of the Cumberland; thence down that stream, including
       all its waters, to the Ohio, and thence up the Ohio to the
       mouth of the Kentucky. The Indians were conscious that they had
       sold what did not belong to them; and Dragging Canoe and other
       chiefs were outspoken in their opinion that the whites would
       have difficulty in settling the tract. The Indians were much
       dissatisfied with the division of the goods. These "filled a
       house" and cost £10,000 sterling, yet when distributed among so
       many greedy savages each had but a small share. One warrior,
       who received but a shirt for his portion, said he "could have
       shot more game in one day on the land ceded, than would pay for
       so slight a garment."

       Governors Martin, of North Carolina, and Dunmore, of Virginia,
       issued proclamations against the purchase, as contrary to the
       royal proclamation of 1763. But those who were present at the
       treaty--among them such prominent borderers as Daniel Boone,
       James Robertson, John Sevier, Isaac Shelby, Felix Walker, the
       Bledsoes, Richard Callaway, William Twitty, William Cocke, and
       Nathaniel Henderson--were heedless of such proclamations, and
       eager to become settlers under the company's liberal offer made
       to them on the spot: for each man who assisted in the first
       settlement, and went out and raised a crop of corn that year, a
       grant of 500 acres for £5 sterling, clear of all charges.

       Boone, as the company's agent, started out at once (March 10)
       with twenty men, soon reinforced to thirty; with their hatchets
       they blazed a bridle path over Cumberland Gap, and across
       Cumberland, Laurel, and Rockcastle rivers, to the banks of the
       Kentucky, where, after a running fight with the Indians, they
       arrived April 1, and founded Boonesborough. Henderson, at the
       head of thirty men conveying the wagons and supplies, arrived
       at Boonesborough April 20; with him were Luttsell and Nathaniel
       Hart. May 23, there met at Boonesborough the Legislature of
       Transylvania, in which sat eighteen delegates from the little
       group of four frontier forts, all established at about this
       time--Harrodsburg, Boiling Springs, and St. Asaph's (or Logan's
       Station), lying some thirty or more miles southwest of
       Boonesborough, the capital of this little western colony.
       Withers does not mention this first legislative assembly held
       in the Mississippi Valley. It is an interesting and suggestive
       episode in American commonwealth-building, and deserves careful
       study. Roosevelt gives it admirable treatment, in his Winning
       of the West. The journal of the convention is given at length
       in the appendix to the second edition of Butler's Kentucky;
       Hall's Sketches of the West, i., pp. 264, 265; Louisville
       Literary News-Letter, June 6, 1840; and Hazard's U. S.
       Register, iii., pp. 25-28. Henderson's MS. Journal is in the
       possession of the Wisconsin Historical Society, and has never
       yet been published.

       Virginia and North Carolina did not favor an independent
       government in Kentucky, and annulled the title of the Henderson
       company--but Virginia (1795) granted the proprietors in
       recompense 200,000 acres on Powell's and Clinch rivers.

       We hear little more of Richard Henderson, in pioneer history.
       In 1779, he was one of the North Carolina commissioners to
       extend the western boundary between that State and Virginia.
       During the winter of 1789-90 he was at the French Lick on
       Cumberland, where he opened a land office. His last public
       service was in 1781, when a member of the North Carolina house
       of commons. He died at his country seat in Granville County, N.
       C., January 30, 1785, in his fiftieth year. Two of his sons,
       Archibald and Leonard, attained eminence at the bar of their
       native State.--R. G. T.

   [4] Among Dr. Draper's manuscripts I find this succinct
       review of the aboriginal claims to Kentucky: "There is some
       reason to suppose that the Catawbas may once have dwelt upon
       the Kentucky River; that stream, on some of the ancient maps
       published a hundred years ago, was called the 'Cuttawa or
       Cawtaba River.' But that tribe of Indians, so far as we know,
       never laid any claim to the territory.

       "It would appear from the historical evidences extant, that the
       Shawanoes were the earliest occupants of Kentucky of whom we
       have any certain knowledge. Colden, the primitive historian of
       the Iroquois Confederacy, informs us, that when the French
       commenced the first settlement of Canada in 1603, the Five
       Nations, who then resided near the present locality of
       Montreal, were at war with the powerful Adirondacks, who at
       that time lived three hundred miles above the Three Rivers, in
       Canada. The Iroquois found it difficult to withstand the
       vigorous attacks of their enemies, whose superior hardihood was
       to be attributed to their constant devotion to the chase, while
       the Iroquois had been chiefly engaged in the more peaceful
       occupation of planting corn. Compelled to give way before their
       haughty foes, the confederates had recourse to the exercise of
       arms, in order, if possible, to retrieve their martial
       character and prowess. To raise the spirits of their people,
       the Iroquois leaders turned their warriors against the Satanas
       or Shawanoes, 'who then,' says Colden, 'lived on the banks of
       the lakes,'--or, as other historians assert, in Western New
       York, and south of Lake Erie,--and soon subdued and drove them
       out of the country. The Shawanoes then retired to the Ohio,
       along which and its tributaries they planted numerous
       settlements. Some of them, however, when driven from Western
       New York, seem to have located somewhere on the Delaware, for
       De Laet, in 1624, speaks of Sawanoos residing on that river.

       "The Jesuit Relations of 1661-62, allude to their residence
       in the West under the name of Ontouagannha or Chaoüanons; they
       seem to have been the same as were called Tongorias, Erighecks,
       Erieehonons, Eries, or Cats, by the early missionaries and
       historians; and the same, moreover, known in the traditions of
       the Senecas as Gah-kwahs, who resided on Eighteen Mile Creek, a
       few miles southwest of Buffalo, in Western New York, which the
       Senecas still call Gah-kwah-gig-a-ah Creek, which means the
       place where the Gah-kwahs lived. In 1672, the Shawanoes and
       their confederates in the Ohio Valley met with a disastrous
       overthrow by the Five Nations at Sandy Island, just below the
       Falls of Ohio, where large numbers of human bones were still to
       be seen at the first settlement of the country. The surviving
       Shawanoes must then have retired still farther down the Ohio,
       and settled probably in the western part of Kentucky; and
       Marquette, in 1673, speaks of their having twenty-three
       villages in one district, and fifteen in another, all lying
       quite near each other: At length the Shawanoes departed from
       Kentucky, and seem to have gone to the upper part of the
       Carolinas, and to the coast of Florida, and ever after proved a
       migratory people. They were evidently 'subdued,' as Colden,
       Evans, and Pownall inform us, and the decisive battle was
       fought at Sandy Island, where a vital blow was given to the
       balance of power on the Ohio, which decided finally the fall of
       Kentucky with its ancient inhabitants.

       "It was this conquest that gave to the powerful Iroquois all
       the title they ever acquired to Kentucky. At the peace of
       Ryswick, in 1697, their right to their western conquests was
       fully acknowledged; and at the treaty of Lancaster, in
       Pennsylvania, in 1744, they ceded to Virginia all their lands
       west of that colony. In 1752, the Shawanoes and other western
       tribes, at Logstown on the Ohio, confirmed the Lancaster
       treaty, and sold their claim to the country south of the Ohio;
       and, at the treaty of Fort Stanwix, in 1768, the Six Nations
       made a new cession of their claim to Kentucky as low as the
       Cherokee or Tennessee River. Up to this period, the Cherokees
       never so much as thought of contesting with the Iroquois their
       claim to the Kentucky country; for some of the visiting
       Cherokees, while on their route to attend the Fort Stanwix
       treaty, killed game for their subsistence, and on their arrival
       at Fort Stanwix, tendered the skins to the Six Nations, saying,
       'They are yours, we killed them after passing the Big River,'
       the name by which they had always designated the Tennessee. But
       probably discovering that other Indian nations were driving a
       good business by disposing of their distant land rights, the
       Cherokees managed to hatch up some sort of claim, which they,
       in part, relinquished to Virginia, at the treaty of Lochaber in
       1770; and when Col. Donelson ran the line the following year,
       the boundary was fixed, at the suggestion of the Cherokee
       deputies, on the Kentucky River as the south-western line, as
       they delighted, they said, in natural landmarks. This
       considerably enlarged the cession, for which they received an
       additional compensation.

       "In 1772, the Shawanoes made no claim to Kentucky; and at the
       treaty of Camp Charlotte, in October, 1774, they tacitly
       confirmed their old sale of that country in 1752, by agreeing
       not even to hunt south of the Ohio. Thus, then, we see that the
       Iroquois had twice ceded their right to Kentucky as low as the
       Tennessee River, and twice received their pay; the Shawanoes
       had disposed of their claim, such as it was, and received
       for it a valuable consideration; and the Cherokees, finding
       it profitable to lay claim to some valuable unoccupied
       region, sold their newly assumed right to the country south
       and east of Kentucky River. Their claim, if indeed it rises to
       the dignity of a claim, south and west of the Kentucky, was
       fairly purchased by Henderson and Company, and thus with the
       subsequent purchase by treaty, of the Chickasaws, of the
       strip between the Tennessee and Mississippi, the Indian
       title to the whole Kentucky country was fully and fairly
       extinguished."--R. G. T.

   [5] The first attack occurred the morning of March 25, when
       the party were encamped near the head of Taylor's Fork of
       Silver Creek. Capt. Twitty and Felix Walker were severely
       wounded, and a negro servant killed; Twitty subsequently died
       from his wound. The other attack was on an outlying company,
       probably on Tate's Creek; this occurred the 27th, and "Thomas
       McDowell and Jeremiah McFeeters were," Boone wrote to
       Henderson, "killed and sculped."--R. G. T.

   [6] The purchase of Henderson and company, was subsequently
       declared by the legislature of Virginia, to be null and void,
       so far as the purchasers were concerned; but effectual as to
       the extinguishment of the Indian title, to the territory thus
       bought of them. To indemnify the purchasers for any advancement
       of money or other things which they had made to the Indians,
       the assembly granted to them 200,000 acres of land, lying at
       the mouth of Green river, and known generally as Henderson's
       grant.

   [7] Boone set out from Boonesborough, June 13, 1775. He left
       the settlement in a state approaching anarchy; there were
       several good men in the district, but the majority were
       shiftless wanderers who would brook no exercise of authority.
       The buffalo were fast moving westward, and all game was now
       getting scarce--"hunt or starve" was the motto of the hour. A
       diarist (Capt. Floyd) estimated that there were then a total of
       300 people in all the Kentucky settlements--not reckoning "a
       great many land-jobbers from towards Pittsburg, who go about on
       the north side of Kentucky, in companies, and build forty or
       fifty cabins a piece on lands where no surveying has yet been
       done." Among the best of the numerous arrivals, were George
       Rogers Clark, Simon Kenton, Benjamin Logan, and Whitley, who
       came to be very prominent characters in Kentucky history.
       Boone, with his wife and daughters, and twenty-one men, arrived
       at Boonesborough September 6 or 7. "My wife and daughters,"
       writes Boone, "were the first women that ever stood on the
       banks of Kentucky river." Mrs. McGary, Mrs. Hogan, and Mrs.
       Denton arrived at Harrodsburg the 8th of September, and were
       the first white women in that settlement. With the arrival of
       these families, and fresh fighting men, the Kentucky colony
       began to take on a permanent air, and thenceforward there was
       better order.--R. G. T.

   [8] In the winter of 1776-77, McClelland's Station and
       Logan's Station, (indifferently styled Fort or Station) were
       abandoned because of Indian attacks, and the settlers huddled
       into Boonesborough and Harrodsburg--although possibly Price's
       settlement, on the Cumberland, maintained a separate existence
       throughout the winter. There were at this time not to exceed a
       hundred and fifty white men in the country, available for
       active militia duty. As during January and February, 1777, the
       Indians were quiet, confidence was restored in some degree, and
       during the latter month, Logan, with his own and some half
       dozen other families, left Harrodsburg and re-occupied Logan's
       Station. Thus far, each settlement had chosen its own military
       leader, and discipline was practically unknown. March 5, under
       order and commissions from Virginia, the militia of Kentucky
       county were assembled and organized at Boonesborough,
       Harrodsburg, and Logan's Station, with George Rogers Clark as
       major, and Daniel Boone, James Harrod, John Todd, and Benjamin
       Logan as captains.--R. G. T.

   [9] This foray took place March 6--not the 14th, as in the
       text--at Shawnee Springs, four miles north-east of Harrodsburg.
       The whites--James Ray, William Ray, Thomas Shores, and William
       Coomes--were sugar-making, when attacked by about seventy
       Shawnees, under Black Fish. William Ray was killed, and Shores
       taken prisoner. James Ray outran his pursuers and gave the
       alarm. The unsuccessful attack on the incomplete fort of
       Harrodsburg occurred early the following morning, the 7th.
       Other brief attacks on Harrodsburg, were on March 18 and
       28.--R. G. T.

  [10] A small detachment from Black Fish's party made a dash
       on workers in the Boonesborough fields, the day after the
       Harrodsburg fight--killing a negro, and wounding several
       whites.--R. G. T.

  [11] This assault on Boonesborough occurred the morning of
       Thursday, April 24. The Indians numbered about one hundred.
       Boone was wounded, and very nearly lost his life, in a sortie.
       The story of the fight abounds with instances of heroism on the
       part of both women and men.--R. G. T.

  [12] It occurred throughout Friday, May 30. The Indians are
       reported to have numbered fifty-seven.--R. G. T.

  [13] Those who went out early in the morning to milk the
       cows, were Mrs. Ann Logan, Mrs. Whitley, and a negro woman.
       They were guarded only by William Hudson, Burr Harrison, John
       Kennedy, and James Craig. The women and Craig escaped into the
       fort unharmed; Kennedy, with four balls in his body, contrived
       also to escape; Hudson was killed outright, and Harrison fell
       wounded. He was supposed by friend and foe to have been killed.
       The story of his final rescue by Logan, is related by Withers
       below. As told to Dr. Draper, by Capt. Benjamin Biggs, and as
       recorded in Whitley's MS. Narrative, in possession of the
       Wisconsin Historical Society, the story in Withers is
       substantially correct. It is said that Logan rolled a bag of
       wool before him, and thus approached Harrison under cover; then
       making a rush towards the latter, he picked him up in his arms
       and dashed successfully into the fort. These accounts make no
       mention of Martin's intervention. Harrison died of his wounds,
       June 13.--R. G. T.

  [14] Benjamin Logan was by birth a Virginian; and at the age
       of fourteen was left by the death of his father, to provide for
       his mother and her other children, and with the other cares of
       a family upon his infant hands. He discharged the duties thus
       devolving on him, with the utmost fidelity; and having provided
       amply for the support of his mother, and placed the other
       members of her household in eligible situations, he removed to
       the Holstein, married, purchased land, and commenced making
       improvements. From thence he went to Kentucky, where he spent
       the balance of his life, in the discharge of every social and
       relative duty, with credit to himself and advantage to the
       community. He was a delegate to the Virginia legislature from
       the county of Kentucky in 1780; was soon after commissioned
       county Lieutenant, (then the highest military title in the
       militia of a county) and in the various battles, as well as in
       the many skirmishes, which he fought with the Indians, his
       conduct and bearing were such, as fully established for him the
       reputation of a brave, skilful, prudent and meritorious
       officer. In private life, and in his intercourse with his
       fellow men, his whole course was distinguished by the most
       uncompromising honor, and expanded philanthrophy. The heroic
       adventure, by which he saved his wounded comrade, from the
       tomahawk, the scalping knife, and from fire, was but one of
       many such exploits, whereby he achieved good to others, at the
       most imminent hazard of his own life.

  [15] This was the name given to the station of Logan.

  [16] Whitley's MS. Narrative and Cowan's MS. Diary, in the
       Wisconsin Historical Society's library, say that Logan left
       alone during the night of June 6. Logan returned to his fort on
       the 23d, having travelled almost incessantly, and brought news
       that relief would soon come. Soon after Logan's expedition to
       the Holston, other messengers were sent to the East, clamoring
       for help--McGary and Hoggin to Fort Pitt, and Smith to the
       Yadkin; and twice Harrod vainly went forth to meet expected
       troops. But the Continental army was hard pressed in those
       days, and despite the rumor on the coast that Kentucky was in a
       sad way, it was long before relief could be sent.--R. G. T.

  [17] Bowman arrived at Boonesborough the first of August,
       with two companies from Virginia, under Capts. Henry Pauling
       and John Dunkin--the latter being soon succeeded by Isaac
       Ruddell. The force numbered 100 men. August 25, while six of
       Bowman's men were on their way to Logan's, they were attacked
       by Indians, two being killed and one wounded. Before escaping,
       the Indians left on the body of one of the men, several copies
       of a proclamation addressed to Clark and Logan in person, by
       Lieut.-Gov. Henry Hamilton, at the head of the British forces
       at Detroit, offering immunity to repentant rebels.--R. G. T.

  [18] See pp. 79, 80, note, for origin of the term "Long
       Knives."--R. G. T.

  [19] Edward Hand was born in Ireland. He came to America in
       1774 as a surgeon's mate in the Eighth (Royal Irish) Regiment,
       and soon settled in Pennsylvania as a physician. When the
       Revolution broke out he joined a Pennsylvania regiment as
       lieutenant colonel, and served in the siege of Boston. In
       April, 1777, he was appointed brigadier-general in the
       Continental army, and the first of June assumed command of Fort
       Pitt. Lieut.-Gov. Henry Hamilton, of Detroit, under orders from
       London, was actively engaged in stirring up the Northwest
       Indians to forays on the Virginia and Pennsylvania borders,
       thus harrying the Americans in the rear. Hand, in whose charge
       was the frontier from Kittanning to the Great Kanawha,
       determined on an aggressive policy, and in February, 1778,
       undertook a campaign against the savages. An open winter, with
       heavy rains, prevented the force of about 500 men--chiefly from
       Westmoreland county--making satisfactory headway. Finally, the
       expedition was abandoned when it had proceeded no farther than
       Mahoning Creek. From the fact that this first American movement
       against the savages, during the Revolution, resulted only in
       the capture of non-combatants, in the almost deserted villages,
       it was long known as "the squaw campaign." Hand was a competent
       officer, but was much pestered, at Fort Pitt, with the
       machinations of tories, who were numerous among the borderers.
       Succeeded at Fort Pitt in 1778, by Brig.-Gen. Lachlan McIntosh,
       Hand in turn succeeded Stark in command at Albany. We find him,
       in 1779, actively engaged on Sullivan's campaign against the
       New York Indians, and in 1780 he became adjutant general. A
       member of congress in 1784-85, he was in 1790 a member of the
       constitutional convention of Pennsylvania, and died at
       Rockford, Lancaster County, Pa., September 3, 1802--R. G. T.

  [20] See p. 172, note 2, for sketch of life and death of
       Cornstalk.--R. G. T.

[156] CHAPTER IX.

While Cornstalk was detained at Point Pleasant, as surety for the peace and neutrality of the
Shawanees, Indians, of the tribes already attached to the side of Great Britain, were invading
the more defenceless and unprotected settlements. Emerging, as Virginia then was, from a state
of vassalage and subjection, to independence and self-government--contending in fearful inferiority
of strength and the munitions of war with a mighty and warlike nation--limited in resources,
and wanting in means, essential for supporting the unequal conflict, she could not be expected
to afford protection and security from savage inroad, to a frontier so extensive as hers; and
still less was she able to spare from the contest which she was waging with that colossal power,
a force sufficient to maintain a war in the Indian country and awe the savages into quiet.
It had not entered into the policy of this state to enlist the tomahawk and scalping knife
in her behalf; or to make allies of savages, in a war with Christians and civilized men. She
sought by the force of reason and the conviction of propriety, to prevail on them to observe
neutrality--not to become her auxiliaries. "To send forth the merciless cannibal, thirsting
for blood, against protestant brethren," was a refinement in war to which she had not attained.
That the enemy, with whom she was struggling for liberty and life as a nation, with all the
lights of religion and philosophy to illumine her course, should have made of them allies,
and "let loose those horrible hell-hounds of war against their countrymen in America, endeared
to them by every tie which should sanctify human nature," was a most lamentable circumstance--in
its consequences, blighting and desolating the fairest portions of the country, and covering
the face of [157] its border settlements, with the gloomy mantle of sorrow and woe.

There is in the Indian bosom an hereditary sense of injury, which naturally enough prompts
to deeds of revengeful cruelty towards the whites, without the aid of adventitious stimulants.
When these are superadded, they become indeed, the most ruthless and infuriated enemy--"thirsting
for blood," and causing it literally to flow, alike from the hearts of helpless infancy and
hoary age--from the timorous breast of weak woman, and the undaunted bosom of the stout warrior.
Leagued with Great Britain, the Indians were enabled more fully and effectually, to glut their
vengeance on our citizens, and gratify their entailed resentment towards them.

In the commencement of Indian depredations on North Western Virginia, during this war, the
only places of refuge for the inhabitants, besides private forts and block-houses, were at
Pittsburg, Redstone, Wheeling and Point Pleasant. Garrisons had been maintained at Fort Pitt
and Redstone, ever after their establishment; and fortresses were erected at the two latter
places in 1774. They all seemed to afford an asylum to many, when the Indians were known to
be in the country; but none of them had garrisons, strong enough to admit of detachments being
sent, to act offensively against the invaders. All that they could effect, was the repulsion
of assaults made on them, and the expulsion from their immediate neighborhoods, of small marauding
parties of the savage enemy. When Captain Arbuckle communicated to the Governor the information
derived from Cornstalk, that extensive preparations were making by the Indians, for war, and
the probability of its early commencement, such measures were immediately adopted, to prevent
its success, as the then situation of the country would justify. A proclamation was issued,
advising the inhabitants of the frontier, to retire into the interior as soon as practicable;
and that they might be enabled the better to protect themselves from savage fury, some ammunition
was forwarded to settlements on the Ohio river, remote from the state forts, and more immediately
exposed to danger from incursion. General Hand too, then stationed at Fort Pitt, sent an express
to the different settlements, recommending that they should be immediately abandoned, and the
individuals composing them, should forthwith seek shelter in some contiguous fortress, or retire
east of the [158] mountain. All were apprized of the impending danger, and that it was impracticable
in the pressing condition of affairs, for the newly organized government to extend to them
any effective protection.

Thus situated, the greater part of those who had taken up their abode on the western waters,
continued to reside in the country. Others, deeming the means of defence inadequate to security,
and unwilling to encounter the horrors of an Indian war, no better provided than they were,
pursued the advice of government, and withdrew from the presence of danger. Those who remained,
sensible of dependence on their individual resources, commenced making preparations for the
approaching crisis. The positions which had been selected as places of security and defence
in the war of 1774, were fortified anew, and other block-houses and forts were erected by their
unaided exertion, into which they would retire on the approach of danger. Nor was it long before
this state of things was brought about.

In June 1777,[1] a party of Indians came to the house of Charles Grigsby on Rooting creek,
a branch of the West Fork, and in the county of Harrison. Mr. Grigsby being from home, the
Indians plundered the house of every thing considered valuable by them, and which they could
readily carry with them; and destroying many other articles, departed, taking with them Mrs.
Grigsby and her two children as prisoners. Returning home soon after, seeing the desolation
which had been done in his short absence, and unable to find his wife and children, Mr. Grigsby
collected some of his neighbors and set out in pursuit of those, by whom the mischief had been
effected,--hoping that he might overtake and reclaim from them the partner of his bosom, and
the pledges of her affection. His hopes were of but momentary existence.

Following in the trail of the fugitive, when they had arrived near to Loss creek, a distance
of but six miles, they found the body of Mrs. Grigsby and of her younger child, where they
had recently been killed and scalped. The situation of this unfortunate woman (being near the
hour of confinement,) and the entire helplessness of the child, were hindrances to a rapid
retreat; and fearing pursuit, the Indians thus inhumanly rid themselves of those incumbrances
to their flight and left them to accidental discovery, or to become food for the beasts of
the forest.

[159] Stimulated to more ardent exertions by the distressing scene just witnessed, the pursuers
pushed forward, with increased expectation of speedily overtaking and punishing, the authors
of this bloody deed; leaving two of their party to perform the sepulture of the unfortunate
mother, and her murdered infant. But before the whites were aware of their nearness to the
Indians, these had become apprized of their approach, and separated, so as to leave no trail
by which they could be farther traced. They had of course to give over the pursuit; and returned
home, to provide more effectually against the perpetration of similar acts of atrocity and
darkness.

A short time after this, two Indians came on the West Fork, and concealed themselves near to
Coon's fort, awaiting an opportunity of effecting some mischief. While thus lying in ambush,
a daughter of Mr. Coon came out for the purpose of lifting some hemp in a field near to the
fort, and by the side of the road. Being engaged in performing this business, Thomas Cunningham
and Enoch James passing along, and seeing her, entered into conversation with her, and after
a while proceeded on their road. But before they had gone far, alarmed by the report of a gun,
they looked back and saw an Indian run up to the girl, tomahawk and scalp her. The people of
the fort were quickly apprised of what had been done, and immediately turned out in pursuit;
but could not trace the course taken by the savages. It afterwards appeared that the Indians
had been for some time waiting for the girl to come near enough for them to catch and make
her prisoner, before she could alarm the fort, or get within reach of its guns; but when one
of them crossed the fence for this purpose, she espied him and ran directly towards the fort.--Fearing
that he would not be able to overtake her, without approaching the fort so as to involve himself
in some danger, he shot her as she ran; and going up to her he tomahawked and scalped her.
In endeavoring then to secure himself by flight, he was shot at by James, but at so great distance
as to prevent the doing of execution.

In the neighborhood of Wheeling, some mischief of this kind was done about the same time, and
by Indians who acted so warily, as to avoid being discovered and punished. A man by the name
of Thomas Ryan was killed in a field some distance from the house, and a negro fellow at work
with him, [160] taken prisoner and carried off. No invasion however, of that country, had been
as yet, of sufficient importance to induce the people to forsake their homes and go into the
forts.--Scouting parties were constantly traversing the woods in every direction, and so successfully
did they, observe every avenue to the settlements, that the approach of Indians was generally
discovered and made known, before any evil resulted from it. But in August the whole country
bordering on the Ohio, from Fort Pitt to Wheeling, became justly alarmed for its fate; and
the most serious apprehensions for the safety of its inhabitants, were excited in the bosoms
of all. Intelligence was conveyed to General Hand at Fort Pitt,[2] by some friendly Indians
from the Moravian towns, that a large army of the north western confederacy, had come as far
as those villages, and might soon be expected to strike an awful blow on some part of the Ohio
settlements. The Indian force was represented as being so great, as to preclude all idea of
purchasing safety, by open conflict; and the inhabitants along the river, generally retired
into forts, as soon as they received information of their danger, and made every preparation
to repel an assault on them. They did not however, remain long in suspense, as to the point
against which the enemy would direct its operations.

Wheeling Fort, although it had been erected by the proper authorities of the government, and
was supplied with arms and ammunition from the public arsenal, was not at this time garrisoned,
as were the other state forts on the Ohio, by a regular soldiery; but was left to be defended
solely by the heroism and bravery of those, who might seek shelter within its walls.[3] The
settlement around it was flourishing, and had grown with a rapidity truly astonishing, when
its situation, and the circumstances of the border country generally, are taken into consideration.
A little village, of twenty-five or thirty houses, had sprung up, where but a few years before,
the foot of civilized man had never trod; and where the beasts of the forest had lately ranged
undisturbedly, were to be seen lowing herds and bleating flocks, at once, the means of sustenance,
and the promise of future wealth to their owners.--In the enjoyment of this, comparatively,
prosperous condition of things, the inhabitants little dreamed, how quickly those smiling prospects
were to be blighted, their future hopes blasted, and they deprived of almost every necessary
of life. They [161] were not insensible to the danger which in time of war was ever impending
over them; but relying on the vigilance of their scouts, to ascertain and apprize them of its
approach, and on the proximity of a fort into which they could retire upon a minute's warning,
they did not shut themselves up within its walls, until advised of the immediate necessity
of doing so, from the actual presence of the enemy.

On the night of the first of September, Captain Ogal, who with a party of twelve men, had been
for some days engaged in watching the paths to the settlement and endeavoring to ascertain
the approach of danger,[4] came into Wheeling with the assurance that the enemy were not at
hand. In the course of that night, however, the Indian army, consisting of three hundred and
eighty-nine warriors,[5] came near to the village, and believing from the lights in the fort,
that the inhabitants were on their guard, and that more might be effected by an ambuscade in
the morning, than by an immediate and direct attack, posted themselves advantageously for that
purpose. Two lines were formed, at some distance from each, extending from the river across
the point to the creek, with a cornfield to afford them concealment. In the centre between
these lines, near a road leading through the field to the fort, and in a situation easily exposing
them to observation, six Indians were stationed, for the purpose of decoying within the lines,
any force which might discover, and come out to molest them.

Early in the morning of the second, two men, going to a field for horses, passed the first
line, and came near to the Indians in the centre, before they were aware of danger.[6]--Perceiving
the six savages near them, they endeavored to escape by flight. A single shot brought one of
them to the ground: the other was permitted to escape that he might give the alarm. Captain
Mason (who, with Captain Ogal and his party, and a few other men had occupied the fort the
preceding night) hearing that there were but six of the enemy, marched with fourteen men, to
the place where they had been seen. He had not proceeded far from the fort, before he came
in view of them; and leading his men briskly towards where they were, soon found themselves
enclosed by a body of Indians, who 'till then had remained concealed.--Seeing the impossibility
of maintaining a conflict with them, he endeavored to retreat with his men, to the fort; but
in [162] vain. They were intercepted by the Indians, and nearly all literally, cut to pieces.[7]
Captain Mason however, and his sergeant succeeded in passing the front line, but being observed
by some of the enemy, were pursued, and fired at, as they began to rise the hill. The sergeant
was so wounded by the ball aimed at him, that he fell, unable again to get up; but seeing his
Captain pass near without a gun and so crippled that he moved but slowly in advance of his
pursuers, he handed him his, and calmly surrendered himself to his fate.

Captain Mason had been twice wounded, and was then so enfeebled by the loss of blood, and faint
from fatigue that he almost despaired of ever reaching the fort; yet he pressed forward with
all his powers. He was sensible that the Indian was near him, and expecting every instant,
that the tomahawk would sever his skull, he for a while forgot that his gun was yet charged.
The recollection of this, inspiring him with fresh hopes, he wheeled to fire at his pursuer,
but found him so close that he could not bring his gun to bear on him. Having greatly the advantage
of ground, he thrust him back with his hand. The uplifted tomahawk descended to the earth with
force; and before the Indian could so far regain his footing as to hurl the fatal weapon from
his grasp, or rush forward to close in deadly struggle with his antagonist, the ball from Captain
Mason's gun had done its errand, and the savage fell lifeless to the earth. Captain Mason was
able to proceed only a few paces farther; but concealing himself by the side of a large fallen
tree, he remained unobserved while the Indians continued about the fort.

The shrieks of Captain Mason's men, and the discharge of the guns, induced Capt. Ogal to advance
with his twelve scouts, to their relief. Being some distance in the rear of his men, the Indians,
in closing round them, fortunately left him without the circle, and he concealed himself amid
some briers in the corner of the fence; where he lay until the next day. The same fate awaited
his men, which had befallen Capt. Mason's. Of the twenty six who were led out by these two
officers, only three escaped death, and two of these were badly wounded: a striking evidence
of the fact, that the ambuscade was judiciously planned, and the expectations of its success,
well founded.[8]

While these things were doing, the inhabitants of the village were busily employed in removing
to the fort and preparing for its defense. A single glance at the situation of the parties
led on by Mason and Ogal, convinced them of the overwhelming force of the [163] Indians, and
the impossibility of maintaining an open contest with them. And so quick had been the happening
of the events which have been narrated, that the gates of the fort were scarcely closed, before
the Indian army appeared under its walls, with a view to its reduction by storm.[9] But before
the assault was begun to be made, the attention of the garrison was directed to a summons for
its surrender, made by that infamous renegado, Simon Girty.[10]

This worse than savage wretch, appeared at the end window of a house not far from the fort,
and told them, that he had come with a large army to escort to Detroit, such of the Inhabitants
along the frontier, as were willing to accept the terms offered by Governor Hamilton, to those
who would renounce the cause of the colonies and attach themselves to the interest of Great
Britain; calling upon them to remember their fealty to their sovereign; assuring them of protection,
if they would join his standard, and denouncing upon them, all the woes which spring from the
uncurbed indulgence of savage vengeance, if they dared to resist, or fire one gun to the annoyance
of his men. He then read to them, Gov. Hamilton's proclamation; and told them, he could allow
only fifteen minutes to consider of his proposition. It was enough. In love with liberty, attached
to their country, and without faith in his proffered protection, they required but little time
to "deliberate, which of the two to choose, slavery or death." Col. Zane replied to him, "that
they had consulted their wives and children, and that all were resolved to perish, sooner than
place themselves under the protection of a savage army with him at its head, or abjure the
cause of liberty and of the colonies." Girty then represented to them the great force of the
Indians,--the impossibility that the fort could withstand the assault,--the certainty of protection
if they acceded to his propositions, and the difficulty of restraining the assailants, if enraged
and roused to vengeance by opposition and resistance. A shot discharged at him from the fort,
caused him to withdraw from the window and the Indians commenced the assault.

There were then in the fort but thirty-three men, to defend it against the attack of upwards
of three hundred and eighty Indians; and bravely did they maintain their situation against
the superior force of the enemy, and all that art and fury could effect to accomplish their
destruction. For twenty-three hours, all was life, and energy, and activity within the walls.
Every individual had particular duties to perform; and promptly and faithfully were they discharged.
The more expert of the women, took stations by the side of the men; and handling their guns
with soldier like readiness, aided in the repulse, with fearless intrepidity.[11] Some were
engaged in moulding bullets; others in loading and supplying the [164] men with guns already
charged; while the less robust were employed in cooking, and in furnishing to the combatants,
provisions and water, during the continuance of the attack. It seemed indeed, as if each individual
were sensible, that the safety of all depended on his lone exertions; and that the slightest
relaxation of these, would involve them all in one common ruin.

Finding that they could make no impression on the fort, and fearing to remain longer before
it, lest their retreat might be cut off, by reinforcements from the surrounding country, the
assailants fired all the houses without the walls; killed all the stock, which could be found;
and destroying every thing on which they could lay their hands, retired about day light, and
left the garrison in possession of the fortress, but deprived of almost every thing else. The
alarm of the presence of Indians having been given after day light, and the attack on the fort
commencing before sun rise, but little time was afforded them, for securing their moveable
property. The greater part had taken with them nothing but their clothes, while some had left
their homes with their night apparel only. Few were left the enjoyment of a bed, or the humble
gratification of the coarse repast of bread and milk. Their distress was consequently great;
and their situation for some time, not much more enviable, than when pent within the fort,
and straining every nerve to repel its savage assailants.

Before this, the Governor had sent to Col. Andrew Swearingen, a quantity of ammunition for
the defence of those who remained in the country above Wheeling. By his exertions, and under
his superintendence, Bolling's and Holliday's old forts were repaired, and the latter made
strong enough to serve as a magazine. In it was collected, all the inhabitants from its neighborhood;
and it was generally regarded, as a strong position, and able, occasionally, to detach part
of its garrison, for the aid of other portions of the country. Soon after the attack was begun
to be made on Wheeling, the alarm reached Shepherd's fort, and a runner was despatched from
thence to Holliday's fort with the intelligence, and the apprehension that if speedy relief
were not afforded, the garrison at Wheeling must fall. No expectation, of being able to collect
a force sufficient to cope with the assailants, was entertained. All that was expected was,
to throw succours into the fort, and thus enable the garrison the more successfully to repel
assaults, and preserve it from the violence of the Indian onsets. For this purpose, Col. Swearingen
left Holliday's with fourteen men, who nobly volunteered to accompany him in this hazardous
enterprise, to the regret of those who remained, from an apprehension that thus weakened, if
Holliday's fort were attacked it must fall easily into the hands of the enemy. These men got
into a large continental canoe, and plied their paddles industriously, to arrive in time to
be of service to the besieged. But the night being dark, and a dense fog hanging over the river,
they toiled to great disadvantage, frequently coming in contact with the banks; until [165]
at length it was thought advisable to cease rowing and float with the current, lest they might,
unknowingly, pass Wheeling, and at the appearance of day be obliged to contend with the force
of the stream, to regain that point. Floating slowly, they at length descried the light which
proceeded from the burning of the houses at Wheeling, and with all their exertion could not
then attain their destination before the return of day. Could they have realized their expectation
of arriving before day, they might from, the river bank, in the darkness of the night, have
gained admission into the fort; but being frustrated in this, they landed some of the men near
above Wheeling, to reconnoiter and ascertain the situation of things: it being doubtful to
them, from the smoke and fog, whether the fort and all, were not a heap of ruins. Col. Swearingen,
Cap. Bilderbock and William Boshears, volunteered for this service, and proceeding cautiously
soon reached the fort.

When arrived there, it was still questionable whether the Indians had abandoned the attack,
or were only lying concealed in the cornfield, in order to fall on any, who might come out
from the fort, under the impression that danger was removed from them. Fearing that the latter
was the case, it was thought prudent, not to give the preconcerted signal for the remainder
of Col. Swearingen's party to come on, lest it might excite the Indians to greater vigilance
and they intercept the men on their way to the fort. To obviate the difficulty arising from
this apprehension, Col. Swearingen, Capt. Bilderbock and William Boshears, taking a circuitous
route to avoid passing near the cornfield, returned to their companions, and escorted them
to Wheeling. It then remained to ascertain whether the Indians had really withdrawn, or were
only lying in ambush. A council, consisting of Col. Zane, Col. Shepherd, Doctor McMahon and
Col. Swearingen, being requested to devise some expedient by which to be assured of the fact,
recommended that two of their most active and vigilant men, should go out openly from the fort,
and carelessly, but surely, examine the cornfield near to the palisade. Upon their return,
twenty others, under the guidance of Col. Zane, marched round at some distance from the field,
and approaching it more nearly on their return, became assured that the Indians had indeed
despaired of success, and were withdrawn from the field. About this time Major M'Cullough arrived
with forty-five men, and they all proceeded to view the battle ground.

Here was indeed a pitiable sight. Twenty-three of the men who had accompanied Capts. Mason
and Ogal in the preceding morning, were lying dead; few of them had been shot, but the greater
part, most inhumanly and barbarously butchered with the tomahawk and scalping knife. Upwards
of three hundred head of cattle, horses, and hogs, wantonly killed by the savages, were seen
lying about the field, and all the houses, with every thing which they contained, and which
could not be conveniently taken off by the enemy, were but heaps of ashes. It was long indeed,
before the [166] inhabitants of that neighborhood regained the comforts, of which that night's
desolation had deprived them.

Soon after the happening of these events a company of militia under the command of Capt. Foreman,
arrived from east of the Alleghany, to afford protection to the settlements around Wheeling,
and occupy the fort at this place. While stationed in it, it was known that parties of Indians
were still lurking about, seeking opportunities of doing mischief, and to prevent which, detachments
were frequently sent on scouting expeditions. On the 26th of September, Capt. Foreman with
forty five men, went about twelve miles below Wheeling and encamped for the night. He was ignorant
of the practices of the Indians, and seemed rather indisposed to take council of those, who
were conversant with them. After building fires for the night, he remained with his men close
around them, contrary to the advice of one of the settlers, by the name of Lynn, who had accompanied
him as a spy. Lynn however, would not consent to remain there himself, but taking with him
those of the frontiers men who were in company, retired some distance from the fires, and spent
the night. Before it was yet light, Lynn, being awake, thought he heard such a noise, as would
be probably produced by the launching of rafts on the river, above the position occupied by
Capt. Foreman. In the morning he communicated his suspicion that an Indian force was near them,
and advised the Captain to return to Wheeling along the hill sides and avoid the bottoms. His
advice was rejected; but Lynn, with the caution of one used to such a condition of things,
prudently kept on the hill side with four others, while they, who belonged to the command of
Capt. Foreman, continued along the level at the base of the hill.

In marching along the Grave creek narrows, one of the soldiers saw a parcel of Indian ornaments
lying in the path; and picking them up, soon drew around him the greater part of the company.
While thus crowded together inspecting the trinkets, a galling fire was opened on them by a
party of Indians who lay in ambush, and which threw them into great confusion. The fire was
continued with deadly effect, for some minutes; and must eventually have caused the loss of
the whole party, but that Lynn, with his few comrades rushed from the hill discharging their
guns, and shouting so boisterously, as induced the Indians to believe that a reinforcement
was at hand, and they precipitately retreated.

In this fatal ambuscade there were twenty-one of Captain Foreman's party killed, and several
much wounded; among the slain were the Captain and his two sons.

It appeared that the Indians had dropped their ornaments, purposely to attract the attention
of the whites; while they themselves were lying concealed in two parties; the one to the right
of the path, in a sink-hole on the bottom, and the other to the left, under covert of the river
bank. From these advantageous positions, they [167] fired securely on our men; while they were
altogether exempt from danger 'till the party in the sink hole was descried by Lynn. His firing
was not known to have taken effect; but to his good conduct is justly attributable the saving
of the remnant of the detachment. The Indian force was never ascertained. It was supposed to
have been small; not exceeding twenty warriors.

On the ensuing day, the inhabitants of the neighborhood of Wheeling under the direction and
guidance of Colonel Zane, proceeded to Grave Creek and buried those who had fallen.[12]

At the time of the happening of those occurrences the belief was general, that the army which
had been led to Wheeling by Girty, had been ordered on, for the purpose of conducting the tories
from the settlements to Detroit; and that detachments from that army continued to hover about
the frontiers for some time, to effect that object. There was then, unfortunately for the repose
and tranquility of many neighborhoods, a considerable number of those misguided and deluded
wretches, who, disaffected to the cause of the colonies, were willing to advance the interest
of Britain, by the sacrifice of every social relation, and the abandonment of every consideration,
save that of loyalty to the king. So far did their opposition, to those who espoused the cause
of American liberty, blunt every finer and more noble feeling, that many of them were willing
to imbrue their hands in the blood of their neighbors, in the most sly and secret manner, and
in the hour of midnight darkness, for no offence but attachment to the independence of the
colonies. A conspiracy for the murder of the whigs and for accepting the terms, offered by
the Governor of Canada to those who would renounce their allegiance to the United States and
repair to Detroit, by the relenting of one individual, was prevented being carried into effect;
and many were consequently saved from horrors, equalling, if not transcending in enormity,
the outrages of the savages themselves. Scenes of licentiousness and fury, followed upon the
discovery of the plot.--Exasperated at its heinousness, and under the influence of resentful
feelings, the whigs retaliated upon the tories, some of the evils which these had conspired
to inflict upon them. In the then infuriated state of their minds, and the little restraint
at that time imposed on the passions by the operation of the laws, it is really matter of admiration
that they did not proceed farther, and requite upon those deluded wretches, the full measure
of their premeditated wrongs. The head only of this fiendish league, lost his life; but many
depredations were committed, on the property of its members.

A court, for the trial of the conspirants, was held at Redstone Fort; and many of them were
arraigned at its bar. But as their object had been defeated by its discovery, and as no farther
danger was apprehended from them, they were released, after having been required to take the
oath of allegiance to the United States and to bear with the injuries which had [168] been
done their property. Those who were suspected for the murder of the chief conspirator, were
likewise arraigned for that offence, but were acquitted.

Hitherto the inhabitants of Tygart's Valley had escaped the ill effects of savage enmity; Indian
hostility not having prompted an incursion into that country, since its permanent settlement
was effected previous to the war of 1774. This however had not the effect to lull them into
confident security. Ascribing their fortunate exemption from irruptions of the enemy, to other
causes than a willingness on the part of the Indians, to leave them in quiet and repose, they
exercised the utmost vigilance to discover their approach, and used every precaution to ensure
them safety, if the enemy should appear among them. Spies were regularly employed in watching
the warriors paths beyond the settlements, to detect their advance and to apprize the inhabitants
of it.

In September of this year (1777) Leonard Petro and Wm. White, being engaged in watching the
path leading up the Little Kenhawa, killed an Elk late in the evening; and taking part of it
with them, withdrew a short distance for the purpose of eating their suppers and spending the
night. About midnight, White, awaking from sleep, discovered by the light of the moon, that
there were several Indians near, who had been drawn in quest of them by the report of the gun
in the evening. He saw at a glance, the impossibility of escaping by flight; and preferring
captivity to death, he whispered to Petro to lie still, lest any movement of his, might lead
to this result. In a few minutes the Indians sprang on them; and White raising himself as one
lay hold on him, aimed a furious blow, with his tomahawk, hoping to wound the Indian by whom
he was beset, and then make his escape. Missing his aim he affected to have been ignorant of
the fact that he was encountered by Indians, professed great joy at meeting with them, and
declared that he was then on his way to their towns. They were not deceived by the artifice;
for although he assumed an air of pleasantness and gaity, calculated to win upon their confidence,
yet the woful countenance and rueful expression of poor Petro, convinced them that White's
conduct was feigned, that he might lull them into inattention, and they be enabled to effect
an escape. They were both tied for the night; and in the morning White being painted red, and
Petro black, they were forced to proceed to the Indian towns. When approaching a [169] village,
the whoop of success brought several to meet them; and on their arrival at it, they found that
every preparation was made for their running the gauntlet; in going through which ceremony
both were much bruised. White did not however remain long in captivity. Eluding their vigilance,
he took one of their guns and began his flight homeward.--Before he had travelled far, he met
an Indian on horseback, whom he succeeded in shooting; and mounting the horse from which he
fell, his return to the Valley was much facilitated. Petro was never heard of afterwards. The
painting of him black, had indicated their intention of killing him; and the escape of White
probably hastened his doom.

During this time, and after the return of White among them, the inhabitants of Tygart's Valley
practiced their accustomed watchfulness 'till about the twentieth of November; when there was
a considerable fall of snow. This circumstance induced them to believe, that the savages would
not attempt an irruption among them until the return of spring; and they became consequently,
inattentive to their safety.

Generally, the settlements enjoyed perfect quiet from the first appearance of winter, until
the return of spring. In this interval of time, the Indians are usually deterred from penetrating
into them, as well because of their great exposure to discovery and observation in consequence
of the nakedness of the woods and the increased facility of pursuing their trail in the snows
which then usually covered the earth, as of the suffering produced by their lying in wait and
travelling, in their partially unclothed condition, in this season of intense cold. Instances
of their being troublesome during the winter were rare indeed; and never occurred, but under
very peculiar circumstances: the inhabitants, were therefore, not culpably remiss, when they
relaxed in their vigilance, and became exposed to savage inroad.

A party of twenty Indians, designing to commit some depredations during the fall, had nearly
reached the upper end of Tygart's Valley, when the snow, which had inspired the inhabitants
with confidence in their security, commenced falling. Fearful of laying themselves open to
detection, if they ventured to proceed farther at that time, and anxious to effect some mischief
before they returned home, they remained concealed about ten miles from the settlements, until
the snow disappeared. On the 15th of December, they came to the [170] house of Darby Connoly,
at the upper extremity of the Valley, and killed him, his wife and several of the children,
and took three others prisoners. Proceeding to the next house, killed John Stewart, his wife
and child, and took Miss Hamilton (sister-in-law to Stewart) into captivity. They then immediately
changed their direction, and with great dispatch, entered upon their journey home; with the
captives and plunder, taken at those two places.

In the course of the evening after these outrages were committed, John Hadden passing by the
House of Connoly saw a tame elk belonging there, lying dead in the yard. This, and the death-like
silence which reigned around, excited his fears that all was not right; and entering into the
house, he saw the awful desolation which had been committed. Seeing that the work of blood
had been but recently done, he hastened to alarm the neighborhood, and sent an express to Capt.
Benjamin Wilson, living about twenty miles lower in the Valley, with the melancholy intelligence.
With great promptitude, Capt. Wilson went through the settlement, exerting himself to procure
as many volunteers, as would justify going in pursuit of the aggressors; and so indefatigable
was he in accomplishing his purpose, that, on the day after the murders were perpetrated, he
appeared on the theatre of their exhibition with thirty men, prepared to take the trail and
push forward in pursuit of the savages. For five days they followed through cold and wet, without
perceiving that they had gained upon them. At this time many of the men expressed a determination
to return. They had suffered much, travelled far, and yet saw no prospect of overtaking the
enemy. It is not wonderful that they became dispirited. In order to expedite their progress,
the numerous water courses which lay across their path, swollen to an unusual height and width,
were passed without any preparation to avoid getting wet; the consequence was that after wading
one of them, they would have to travel with icicles hanging from their clothes the greater
part of a day, before an opportunity could be allowed of drying them. They suffered much too
for the want of provisions. The short time afforded for preparation, had not admitted of their
taking with them as much as they expected would be required, as they had already been on the
chase longer than was anticipated. Under these circumstances it was with great difficulty,
Captain Wilson could prevail [171] on them to continue the pursuit one day longer; hoping the
Indians would have to halt, in order to hunt for food. Not yet being sensible that they gained
upon them, the men positively refused going farther; and they returned to their several homes.

This was the last outrage committed by the savages on North Western Virginia, in this year.
And although there was not as much mischief effected by them in this season, as had been in
others, yet the year 1777, has become memorable in the annals of Border Warfare. The murder
of Cornstalk and his companions,--the attack on Wheeling Fort,--the loss of lives and destruction
of property which then took place, together with the fatal ambuscade at Grave Creek Narrows,
all conspired to render it a period of much interest, and to impress its incidents deeply on
the minds of those who were actors in these scenes.

-----
   [1] This "year of the three sevens," as it was called, was
       long known as "the bloody year" of border history.--R. G. T.

   [2] General Hand was commandant, and George Morgan Indian
       agent, at Fort Pitt. Runners from the Moravian towns on the
       Tuscarawas and Muskingum rivers, in Ohio, frequently came into
       the fort during the summer, with dispatches for either of
       these officials. The Delawares, as a nation, were friendly
       throughout the year. The hostiles were chiefly composed of
       Wyandots and Mingoes, but with them were a few Shawnees and
       Delawares.--R. G. T.

   [3] The first fort at Wheeling was built in the summer of
       1774, by order of Lord Dunmore, under direction of Majors
       William Crawford and Angus McDonald. It stood upon the Ohio
       bank about a quarter of a mile above the entrance of Wheeling
       Creek. Standing in open ground, it was a parallelogram of
       square pickets pointed at top, with bastions and sentry boxes
       at the angles, and enclosed over half an acre. It ranked in
       strength and importance, next to Fort Pitt. Within the fort
       were log barracks, an officers' house, a storehouse, a well,
       and cabins for families. A steep hill rises not far inland;
       between the fort and the base of this hill the forest had been
       leveled, and a few log cabins were nestled in the open. Such
       was Wheeling in 1777. At first the fort had been called
       Fincastle, for the Ohio Valley settlements were then in
       Fincastle County, Va.; but upon the opening of the Revolution
       the post, now in Ohio County, was named Fort Henry, in honor of
       the first state governor of Virginia.--R. G. T.

   [4] News came to Fort Pitt, early in August, that an Indian
       attack in force, on Wheeling, might be expected at any time.
       Says the Shane MSS., "White Eyes came to Fort Pitt and told
       them the Indians were going to take Wheeling home." August
       2d, Gen. Hand wrote to David Shepherd, lieutenant of Ohio
       County, warning him of the perilous situation, and ordering
       him to leave his own fort, six miles from Fort Henry, and
       to rally at the latter all the militia between the Ohio and
       Monongahela,--the "pan-handle." Shepherd did this, and by
       the close of the month Fort Henry was, as he said, "Indian
       proof." But the non-arrival of the foe caused a relaxation of
       vigilance. Nine companies were allowed to go home, and by
       the last day of August only two companies remained in the
       fort, those of Capts. Joseph Ogle and Samuel Mason.--R. G. T.

   [5] Shepherd to Hand, Sept. 15, 1777: "By the best judges
       here ... it is thought their numbers must have been not less
       than between two and three hundred." The Shepherd, Hand, Shane,
       and Doddridge MSS., in the library of the Wisconsin Historical
       Society, throw much light on this episode.--R. G. T.

   [6] The Indians made their appearance on the night of August
       31st--not September 1st, as in the text. The incident here
       related occurred at about sunrise of September 1st. Andrew
       Zane, young John Boyd, Samuel Tomlinson, and a negro, set out
       to hunt for the horses of Dr. James McMechen, because the
       latter wished that day to return to the older settlements,
       either on the Monongahela, or east of the mountains. Boyd was
       killed, but his companions escaped--Zane, by leaping from a
       cliff, the height of which local tradition places at seventy
       feet.--R. G. T.

   [7] De Hass, in his History of the Early Settlement and
       Indian Wars of West Virginia,--a conscientious work, which
       depends, however, too closely on traditions,--says (p. 225),
       "out of the fourteen, but two escaped."--R. G. T.

   [8] Among the survivors was Ogle who, like Mason, hid
       himself in the bushes until nightfall enabled him to return to
       the fort.--R. G. T.

   [9] As a matter of fact, the Indians made no attack on the
       fort at this time, being content with the success of their
       ambuscade. After throwing up some rude earth-works and blinds,
       scalping the dead whites, killing all the live stock within
       reach, and setting fire to the outlying cabins, they retired
       across the Ohio in the night, and dispersed. Their loss was one
       killed and nine wounded; the whites lost fifteen killed and
       five wounded. The next day (September 2), the whites buried
       their dead, and unavailingly scoured the country for Indians.

       Tradition has made sad havoc with the records, in regard to
       this first "siege" of Wheeling. Some of the deeds of heroism
       related below, by Withers, were incidents of the second
       siege--September 11, 1782, seven years later; but most of them
       are purely mythical, or belong to other localities. Perhaps no
       events in Western history have been so badly mutilated by
       tradition, as these two sieges.--R. G. T.

  [10] This statement of Withers, that Simon Girty was at the
       siege of Wheeling, was long accepted as fact by Western
       historians. But it is now established beyond doubt, that
       neither Simon nor his brothers were present at that affair,
       being at the time in the employ of Indian Agent Morgan, at Fort
       Pitt. For details of the evidence, consult Butterfield's
       History of the Girtys, passim.--R. G. T.

  [11] [163] The notes furnished the compiler, mention
       particularly a Mrs. Glum and Betsy Wheat, as performing all the
       duties of soldiers with firmness and alacrity.

       ------

       Comment by R. G. T.--Withers derived his information from
       traditional notes in the possession of Noah Zane, son of
       Ebenezer.

  [12] After the affair at Wheeling, September 1, the Indians
       returned home. But soon thereafter, Half King, head chief of
       the Wyandots, set out with forty of that tribe to again harry
       the Wheeling country. On the morning of the 26th, Capts.
       William Foreman with twenty-four men, Ogle with ten men, and
       William Linn with nine, started from Fort Henry on a scout.
       Linn was ranking officer, although there was little discipline.
       Foreman was a new arrival from Hampshire County, enlisted to go
       on Hand's intended expedition. They intended crossing the Ohio
       at Grave Creek, 12 miles below, and proceeding 8 miles farther
       down to Captina. At Grave, however, they found that the
       Tomlinson settlement (nucleus of the present Mound City, W.
       Va.) had been abandoned, and sacked by Indians, and no canoes
       were to be had. They camped for the night, and the next morning
       (the 27th) started to return along the river bank, to Wheeling.
       Linn, apprehensive of Indians, marched along the hill crest,
       but Ogle and Foreman kept to the trail along the bottom. At a
       point where the bottom narrows because of the close approach of
       the hills to the river--a defile then known as McMechen's (or
       McMahon's) Narrows--they were set upon by Half King's party,
       awaiting them in ambush. Foreman and twenty others were killed,
       and one captured. The story about Linn's gallant attack on the
       Indians from his vantage point on the hilltop, is without
       foundation. His party helped to secrete a wounded man who
       escaped in the melee, and then put off in hot haste for home.
       It was not until four days later, when reinforcements had
       arrived from Fort Pitt, that Colonel Shepherd ventured from the
       fort to bury the dead. In 1835, an inscribed stone was set up
       at the Narrows, to commemorate the slain.--R. G. T.

[172] CHAPTER X.

After the winter became so severe as to prevent the Indians from penetrating the country and
committing farther aggression, the inhabitants became assured of safety, and devoted much of
their time to the erection of new forts, the strengthening of those which had been formerly
established, and the making of other preparations, deemed necessary to prevent the repetition
of those distressing occurrences, which had spread gloom and sorrow over almost every part
of North Western Virginia. That the savages would early renew their exertions to destroy the
frontier settlements, and harrass their citizens, could not for an instant be doubted.--Revenge
for the murder of Cornstalk, and the other chiefs killed in the fort by the whites, had operated
to unite the warlike nation of the Shawanees in a league with the other Indians, against them;
and every circumstance seemed to promise increased exertions on their part, to accomplish their
purposes of blood and devastation.

Notwithstanding all which had been suffered during the preceding season; and all, which it
was confidently anticipated, would have to be undergone after the return of spring, yet did
the whole frontier increase in population, and in capacity to defend itself against the encroachments
of a savage enemy, aided by British emissaries, and led on by American tories. The accession
to its strength, caused by the number of emigrants, who came into the different settlements,
was indeed considerable; yet it was insufficient, to enable the inhabitants to purchase by
offensive operations, exemption from [173] invasion, or security from the tomahawk and scalping
knife. Assured of this, Virginia extended to them farther assistance; and a small body of regular
troops, under the command of General McIntosh, was appropriated to their defence.

In the spring of 1778, General McIntosh,[1] with the regulars and some militiamen, attached
to his command, descended the Ohio river from Fort Pitt, to the mouth of Big Beaver--a creek
discharging itself into that river from the north-west.[2] This was a favorable position, at
which to station his troops to effect the partial security of the frontier, by intercepting
parties of Indians on their way to the settlements on the opposite side of the river, and by
pursuing and punishing them while engaged, either in committing havoc, or in retreating to
their towns, after the consummation of their horrid purposes. Fort McIntosh was accordingly
erected here, and garrisoned; a six pounder mounted for its defence.

From Wheeling to Point Pleasant, a distance of one hundred and eighty-six miles,[3] there was
then no obstacle whatever, presented to the advance of Indian war parties, into the settlements
on the East and West Forks of the Monongahela, and their branches. The consequences of this
exposure had been always severely felt; and never more so than after the establishment of Fort
McIntosh. Every impediment to their invasion of one part of the country, caused more frequent
irruptions into others, where no difficulties were interposed to check their progress, and
brought heavier woes on them.--This had been already experienced, in the settlements on the
upper branches of the Monongahela, and as they were the last to feel the effects of savage
enmity in 1777, so were they first to become sacrificed to its fury in 1778.

Anticipating the commencement of hostilities at an earlier period of the season, than usual,
several families retired into Harbert's block-house, on Ten Mile (a branch of the West Fork,)
in the month of February. And notwithstanding the prudent caution manifested by them in the
step thus taken; yet, the state of the weather lulling them into false security, they did not
afterwards exercise the vigilance and provident care, which were necessary to ensure their
future safety. On the third of March, some children, playing with a crippled crow, at a short
distance from the yard, espied a number of Indians proceeding towards them; and running briskly
to the house, told "that a number of red men were close by."--[174] John Murphey stepped to
the door to see if danger had really approached, when one of the Indians, turning the corner
of the house, fired at him. The ball took effect, and Murphey fell back into the house. The
Indian springing directly in, was grappled by Harbert, and thrown on the floor. A shot from
without, wounded Harbert, yet he continued to maintain his advantage over the prostrate savage,
striking him as effectually as he could with his tomahawk, when another gun was fired at him
from without the house. The ball passed through his head, and he fell lifeless. His antagonist
then slipped out at the door, sorely wounded in the encounter.

Just after the first Indian had entered, an active young warrior, holding in his hand a tomahawk
with a long spike at the end, also came in. Edward Cunningham instantly drew up his gun to
shoot him; but it flashed, and they closed in doubtful strife. Both were active and athletic;
and sensible of the high prize for which they were contending, each put forth his utmost strength,
and strained his every nerve, to gain the ascendency. For a while, the issue seemed doubtful.
At length, by great exertion, Cunningham wrenched the tomahawk from the hand of the Indian,
and buried the spike end to the handle, in his back. Mrs. Cunningham closed the contest. Seeing
her husband struggling closely with the savage, she struck at him with an axe. The edge wounding
his face severely, he loosened his hold, and made his way out of the house.

The third Indian, which had entered before the door was closed, presented an appearance almost
as frightful as the object which he had in view. He wore a cap made of the unshorn front of
a buffalo, with the ears and horns still attached to it, and which hanging loosely about his
head, gave to him a most hideous aspect. On entering the room, this infernal monster, aimed
a blow with his tomahawk at a Miss Reece, which alighting on her head, wounded her severely.
The mother of this girl, seeing the uplifted arm about to descend on her daughter, seized the
monster by the horns; but his false head coming readily off, she did not succeed in changing
the direction of the weapon. The father then caught hold of him; but far inferior in strength
and agility, he was soon thrown on the floor, and must have been killed, but for the timely
interference of Cunningham. Having [175] succeeded in ridding the room of one Indian, he wheeled,
and sunk a tomahawk into the head of the other.

During all this time the door was kept by the women, tho' not without great exertion. The Indians
from without endeavored several times to force it open and gain admittance; and would at one
time have succeeded, but that, as it was yielding to their effort to open it, the Indian, who
had been wounded by Cunningham and his wife, squeezing out at the aperture which had been made,
caused a momentary relaxation of the exertions of those without, and enabled the women again
to close it, and prevent the entrance of others.--These were not however, unemployed. They
were engaged in securing such of the children in the yard, as were capable of being carried
away as prisoners, and in killing and scalping the others; and when they had effected this,
despairing of being able to do farther mischief, they retreated to their towns.

Of the whites in the house, one only was killed and four were wounded; and seven or eight children
in the yard, were killed or taken prisoners. One Indian was killed, and two badly wounded.
Had Reece engaged sooner in the conflict, the other two who had entered the house, would no
doubt have been likewise killed; but being a quaker, he looked on, without participating in
the conflict, until his daughter was wounded. Having then to contend singly, with superior
prowess, he was indebted for the preservation of his life, to the assistance of those whom
he refused to aid in pressing need.

On the eleventh of April, some Indians visited the house of Wm. Morgan, at the Dunkard bottom
of Cheat river. They there killed a young man by the name of Brain, Mrs. Morgan, (the mother
of William) and her grand daughter, and Mrs. Dillon and her two children; and took Mrs. Morgan
(the wife) and her child prisoners. When, on their way home, they came near to Pricket's fort,
they bound Mrs. Morgan to a bush, and went in quest of a horse for her to ride, leaving her
child with her. She succeeded in untying with her teeth, the bands which confined her, and
wandered the balance of that day and part of the next before she came in sight of the fort.
Here she was kindly treated and in a few days sent home. Some men going out from Pricket's
fort some short time after, found at the spot where Mrs. Morgan had [176] been left by the
Indians, a fine mare stabbed to the heart.--Exasperated at the escape of Mrs. Morgan, they
had no doubt vented their rage on the animal which they had destined to bear her weight.

In the last of April, a party of about twenty Indians came to the neighborhoods of Hacker's
creek and the West Fork. At this time the inhabitants of those neighborhoods had removed to
West's fort, on the creek, and to Richards' fort on the river; and leaving the women and children
in them during the day, under the protection of a few men, the others were in the habit of
performing the usual labors of their farms in companies, so as to preserve them from attacks
of the Indians. A company of men, being thus engaged, the first week of May, in a field, now
owned by Minter Bailey, on Hacker's creek, and being a good deal dispersed in various occupations,
some fencing, others clearing, and a few ploughing, they were unexpectedly fired upon by the
Indians, and Thomas Hughes and Jonathan Lowther shot down: the others being incautiously without
arms fled for safety. Two of the company, having the Indians rather between them and West's
fort, ran directly to Richards', as well for their own security as to give the alarm there.
But they had been already apprized that the enemy was at hand. Isaac Washburn, who had been
to mill on Hacker's creek the day before, on his return to Richards' fort and near to where
Clement's mill now stands, was shot from his horse, tomahawked and scalped. The finding of
his body, thus cruelly mangled, had given them the alarm, and they were already on their guard,
before the two men from Hacker's creek arrived with the intelligence of what had been done
there. The Indians then left the neighborhood without effecting more havoc; and the whites
were too weak to go in pursuit, and molest them.

The determination of the Shawanees to revenge the death of their Sachem, had hitherto been
productive of no very serious consequences. A while after his murder, a small band of them
made their appearance near the fort at Point Pleasant; and Lieutenant Moore was dispatched
from the garrison, with some men, to drive them off. Upon his advance, they commenced retreating;
and the officer commanding the detachment, fearing they would escape, ordered a quick pursuit.
He did not proceed far before he fell into an ambuscade. He and three of his men were killed
at the first [177] fire;--the rest of the party saved themselves by a precipitate flight to
the fort.

In the May following this transaction, a few Indians again came in sight of the fort. But as
the garrison had been very much reduced by the removal of Captain Arbuckle's company, and the
experience of the last season had taught them prudence, Captain McKee forbore to detach any
of his men in pursuit of them. Disappointed, in their expectations of enticing others to destruction,
as they had Lieutenant Moore in the winter, the Indians suddenly rose from their covert, and
presented an unbroken line, extending from the Ohio to the Kanawha river in front of the fort.
A demand for the surrender of the garrison, was then made; and Captain McKee asked 'till the
next morning to consider of it. In the course of the night, the men were busily employed in
bringing water from the river, expecting that the Indians would continue before the fort for
some time.

In the morning, Captain McKee sent his answer by the grenadier squaw, (sister to Cornstalk,
and who, notwithstanding the murder of her brother and nephew, was still attached to the whites,
and was remaining at the fort in the capacity of interpreter)[4] that he could not comply with
their demand.--The Indians immediately began the attack, and for one week kept the garrison
closely besieged. Finding however, that they made no impression on the fort, they collected
the cattle about it and instead of returning towards their own country with the plunder, proceeded
up the Kanawha river towards the Greenbrier settlement.

Believing their object to be the destruction of that settlement, and knowing from their great
force that they would certainly accomplish it, if the inhabitants were unadvised of their approach,
Captain McKee despatched two men to Col. Andrew Donnelly's, (then the frontier house,) with
the intelligence. These men soon came in view of the Indians; but finding that they were advancing
in detached groups, and dispersed in hunting parties, through the woods, they despaired of
being able to pass them, and returned to the fort. Captain McKee then made an appeal to the
chivalry of the garrison, and asked, "who would risk his life to save the people of Greenbrier."
John Pryor and Philip Hammond, at once stepped forward, and replied "WE WILL." They were then
habited after the Indian manner, and painted in Indian style by the Grenadier Squaw, and departed
on their hazardous, but noble and generous undertaking. Travelling, night and day, with great
rapidity, they [178] passed the Indians at Meadow river, and arrived, about sunset of that
day at Donnelly's fort, twenty miles farther on.

As soon as the intelligence of the approach of the Indians, was communicated by these men,
Col. Donnelly had the neighbors all advised of it; and in the course of the night, they collected
at his house. He also dispatched a messenger to Capt. John Stuart, to acquaint him with the
fact; and made every preparation to resist attack and ensure their safety, of which his situation
admitted. Pryor and Hammond told them how, by the precaution of Captain McKee, the garrison
at Point Pleasant had been saved from suffering by the want of water; and advised them to lay
in a plentiful supply, of that necessary article. A hogshead was accordingly filled and rolled
behind the door of the kitchen, which adjoined the dwelling house.

Early next morning, John Pritchet (a servant to Col. Donnelly) went out for some firewood,
and while thus engaged, was fired at and killed. The Indians then ran into the yard, and endeavored
to force open the kitchen door; but Hammond and Dick Pointer (a negro belonging to Col. Donnelly)
who were the only persons within, aided by the hogshead of water, prevented their accomplishing
this object. They next proceeded to cut it in pieces, with their tomahawks. Hammond seeing
that they would soon succeed in this way, with the assistance of Dick, rolled the hogshead
to one side, and letting the door suddenly fly open, killed the Indian at the threshold, and
the others who were near gave way. Dick then fired among them, with a musket heavily charged
with swan shot, and no doubt with effect, as the yard was crowded with the enemy; a war club
with a swan shot in it, was afterwards picked up near the door.

The men in the house, who were asleep at the commencement of the attack, being awakened at
the firing of Hammond and Dick, now opened a galling fire upon the Indians. Being chiefly up
stairs they were enabled to do greater execution, and fired with such effect that, about one
o'clock, the enemy retired a small distance from the house. Before they retired however, some
of them succeeded in getting under the floor, when they were aided by the whites below in raising
some of the puncheons of which it was made. It was to their advantage to do this; and well
did they profit by it. Several of the Indians were killed in this attempt to gain admittance,
while only one of the whites received a wound, which but slightly injured his hand.

When intelligence was conveyed to Capt. Stuart of the approach of so large a body of savages,
Col. Samuel Lewis was with him; and they both exerted themselves to save the settlement from
destruction, by collecting the inhabitants at a fort where Lewisburg now stands. Having succeeded
in this, they sent two men to Donnelly's to learn whether the Indians had advanced that far.
As they approached, the firing became distinctly audible, and they returned [179] with the
tidings. Capt. Stuart and Col. Lewis proposed marching to the relief of Donnelly's fort, with
as many men as were willing to accompany them; and in a brief space of time, commenced their
march at the head of sixty-six men. Pursuing the most direct route without regarding the road,
they approached the house on the back side; and thus escaped an ambuscade of Indians placed
near the road to intercept and cut off any assistance which might be sent from the upper settlements.

Adjoining the yard, there was a field of well grown rye, into which the relief from Lewisburg,
entered about two o'clock; but as the Indians had withdrawn to a distance from the house, there
was no firing heard. They soon however, discovered the savages in the field, looking intently
towards Donnoly's; and it was resolved to pass them. Capt. Stuart and Charles Gatliff fired
at them, and the whole party rushed forward into the yard, amid a heavy discharge of balls
from the savage forces. The people in the fort hearing the firing in the rear of the house,
soon presented themselves at the port holes, to resist, what they supposed, was a fresh attack
on them; but quickly discovering the real cause, they opened the gates, and all the party led
on by Stuart and Lewis, safely entered.

The Indians then resumed the attack, and maintained a constant fire at the house, until near
dark, when one of them approached, and in broken English called out, "we want peace." He was
told to come in and he should have it; but he declined the invitation to enter, and they all
retreated, dragging off those of their slain, who lay not too near the fort.

Of the whites, four only were killed by the enemy. Pritchet, before the attack commenced,--James
Burns and Alexander Ochiltree, as they were coming to the house early in the morning,--and
James Graham while in the fort. It was impossible to ascertain the entire loss of the Indians.
Seventeen lay dead in the yard; and they were known to carry off others of their slain. Perhaps
the disparity of the killed, equalled, if it did not exceed the disparity of the number engaged.
There were twenty-one men at Donnoly's fort, before the arrival of the reinforcement under
Stuart and Lewis; and the brunt of the battle was over before they came. The Indian force exceeded
two hundred men.

It was believed, that the invasion of the Greenbrier country had been projected, some time
before it actually was made. During the preceding season, an Indian calling himself John Hollis,
had been very much through the settlement; and was known to take particular notice of the different
forts, which he entered under the garb of friendship. He was with the Indians in the attack
on Donnoly's fort; and was recognized as one of those who were left dead in the yard.

On the morning after the Indians departed, Capt. Hamilton went in pursuit of them with seventy
men; but following two days, without [180] perceiving that he gained on them, he abandoned
the chase and returned.

About the middle of June, three women went out from West's fort, to gather greens in a field
adjoining; and while thus engaged were attacked by four Indians, lying in wait. One gun only
was fired, and the ball from it, passed through the bonnet of Mrs. Hackor, who screamed aloud
and ran with the others towards the fort. An Indian, having in his hand a long staff, with
a spear in one end, pursuing closely after them, thrust it at Mrs. Freeman with such violence
that, entering her back just below the shoulder, it came out at her left breast. With his tomahawk,
he cleft the upper part of her head, and carried it off to save the scalp.

The screams of the women alarmed the men in the fort; and seizing their guns, they ran out,
just as Mrs. Freeman fell. Several guns were fired at the Indian while he was getting her scalp,
but with no effect. They served however, to warn the men who went out, that danger was at hand;
and they quickly came in.

Jesse Hughs[5] and John Schoolcraft (who were out) in making their way to the fort, came very
near two Indians standing by the fence looking towards the men at West's, so intently, that
they did not perceive any one near them. They however, were observed by Hughs and Schoolcraft,
who, avoiding them, made their way in, safely, Hughs immediately took up his gun, and learning
the fate of Mrs. Freeman, went with some others to bring in the corpse. While there, he proposed
to go and shew them, how near he had approached the Indians after the alarm had been given,
before he saw them. Charles and Alexander West, Chas. Hughs, James Brown and John Steeth, went
with him. Before they had arrived at the place, one of the Indians was heard to howl like a
wolf; and the men with Hughs moved on in the direction from which the sound proceeded. Supposing
that they were then near the spot, Jesse Hughs howled in like manner, and being instantly answered,
they ran to a point of the hill and looking over it, saw two Indians coming towards them. Hughs
fired and one of them fell. The other took to flight. Being pursued by the whites, he sought
shelter in a thicket of brush; and while they were proceeding to intercept him at his coming
out, he returned by the way he had entered, and made his escape. The wounded Indian likewise
got off. When the whites were in pursuit of the one who took to flight, they passed near to
him who had fallen, and one of the men was for stopping and finishing him; but Hughs called
to him, "he is safe--let us have the other," and they all pressed forward. On their return,
however, he was gone; and although his free bleeding enabled them to pursue his track readily
for a while, yet a heavy shower of rain soon falling, all trace of him was quickly lost and
could not be afterwards regained.

On the 16th of June as Capt. James Booth and Nathaniel Cochran, were at work in a field on
Booth's creek, they were fired at by [181] the Indians. Booth fell, but Cochran, being very
slightly wounded, took to flight. He was however, overtaken, and carried into captivity to
their towns. From thence he was taken to Detroit, where he remained some time; and endeavoring
to escape from that place, unfortunately took a path which led him immediately to the Maumee
old towns. Here he was detained a while, & then sent back to Detroit, where he was exchanged,
and from whence he made his way home, after having had to endure much suffering and many hardships.
The loss of Booth was severely felt by the inhabitants in that settlement. He was not only
an active and enterprising man, but was endowed with superior talents, and a better education
than most of those who had settled in the country; and on these accounts was very much missed.

In a few days after this transaction, Benjamin Shinn, Wm. Grundy, and Benjamin Washburn, returning
from a lick on the head of Booth's creek, were fired on by the Indians, when near to Baxter's
run. Washburn and Shinn escaped unhurt, but Grundy was killed: he was brother to Felix Grundy
of Tennessee, whose father was then residing at Simpson's creek, at a farm afterwards owned
by Colonel Benjamin Wilson, senior.

This party of Indians continued for some days, to prowl about the neighborhood, seeking opportunities
of committing murder on the inhabitants; fortunately however, with but little success. James
Owens, a youth of sixteen years of age, was the only one whom they succeeded in killing after
the murder of Grundy. Going from Powers' fort on Simpson's creek, to Booth's creek, his saddle
girth gave way, and while he was down mending it, a ball was discharged at him, which killed
both him and the horse.

Seeing that the whites, in that neighborhood, had all retired to the fort; and being too weak,
openly to attack it, they crossed over to Bartlett's run, and came to the house of Gilbert
Hustead, who was then alone, and engaged in fixing his gun lock. Hearing a noise in the yard,
for which he was unable to account, he slipped to the door, to ascertain from whence it proceeded.
The Indians were immediately round it, and there was no chance for his escape. Walking out
with an air of the utmost pleasantry, he held forth his hand to the one nearest him, and asked
them all to walk in. While in the house he affected great cheerfulness, and by his tale [182]
won their confidence and friendship. He told them that he was a King's man and unwilling to
live among the rebels; for which reason, when others retired into the fort, he preferred staying
at his own house, anxiously hoping for the arrival of some of the British Indians, to afford
him an opportunity of getting among English friends. Learning upon enquiry, that they would
be glad to have something to eat, he asked one of them to shoot a fat hog which was in the
yard, that they might regale on it that night, and have some on which to subsist while travelling
to their towns. In the morning, still farther to maintain the deception he was practising,
he broke his furniture to pieces, saying "the rebels shall never have the good of you." He
then accompanied them to their towns, acting in the same, apparently, contented and cheerful
manner, 'till his sincerity was believed by all, and he obtained leave to return for his family.
He succeeded in making his way home, where he remained, sore at the destruction of his property,
but exulting in the success of his artifice.

While this party of Indians were thus engaged, on Booth's creek and in the circumjacent country,
a more numerous body had invaded the settlements lower down, and were employed in the work
of destruction there. They penetrated to Coburn's creek unperceived, and were making their
way (as was generally supposed) to a fort not far from Morgantown, when they fell in with a
party of whites, returning from the labors of the cornfield, and then about a mile from Coburn's
fort. The Indians had placed themselves on each side of the road leading to the fort, and from
their covert fired on the whites, before they were aware of danger. John Woodfin being on horseback,
had his thigh broken by a ball; which killed his horse and enabled them to catch him easily.--Jacob
Miller was shot through the abdomen, and soon overtaken, tomahawked and scalped.--The others
escaped to the fort.

Woodfin was afterwards found on a considerable eminence overlooking the fort, tomahawked and
scalped. The Indians had, most probably, taken him there, that he might point out to them the
least impregnable part of the fortress, and in other respects give them such information, as
would tend to ensure success to their meditated attack on it; but when they heard its strength
and the force with which it was garrisoned, despairing of being able to reduce it, in a fit
of disappointed fury, they murdered him on the spot.

[183] They next made their appearance on Dunkard creek, and near to Stradler's fort. Here,
as on Coburn's creek, they lay in ambush on the road side, awaiting the return of the men who
were engaged at work, in some of the neighboring fields. Towards evening the men came on, carrying
with them some hogs which they had killed for the use of the fort people, and on approaching
where the Indians lay concealed, were fired on and several fell. Those who escaped injury from
the first fire, returned the shot, and a severe action ensued. But so many of the whites had
been killed before the savages exposed themselves to view, that the remainder were unable long
to sustain the unequal contest. Overpowered by numbers, the few, who were still unhurt, fled
precipitately to the fort, leaving eighteen of their companions dead in the road. These were
scalped and mangled by the Indians in a most shocking manner, and lay some time, before the
men in the fort, assured of the departure of the enemy, went out and buried them.

Weakened by the severe loss sustained in this bloody skirmish, had the Indians pushed forward
to attack the fort, in all human probability, it would have fallen before them. There were
at that day very few settlements which could have maintained possession of a garrison for any
length of time, after having suffered so great a diminution of the number of their inhabitants,
against the onsets of one hundred savages, exercising their wonted energy: and still less would
they be able to leave their strong holds, and cope with such superior force, in open battle.
Nor were the settlements, as yet, sufficiently contiguous to each other, to admit of their
acting in concert, and combining their strength, to operate effectively against their invaders.
When alarmed by the approach of the foe, all that they could generally do, was, retire to a
fort, and endeavor to defend it from assault. If the savages, coming in numbers, succeeded
in committing any outrage, it usually went unpunished. Sensible of their want of strength,
the inhabitants rarely ventured in pursuit, to harrass or molest the retiring foe. When, however,
they would hazard to hang on their retreat, the many precautions which they were compelled
to exercise, to prevent falling into ambuscades and to escape the entangling artifices of their
wily enemies, frequently rendered their enterprises abortive, and their exertions inefficient.

[184] The frequent visits paid by the Indians to the country on the West Fork, and the mischief
which they would effect at these times, led several of the inhabitants to resolve on leaving
a place so full of dangers, as soon as they could make the necessary preparations. A family
of Washburns particularly, having several times very narrowly escaped destruction, commenced
making arrangements and fitting up for their departure. But while two of them were engaged
in procuring pine knots, from which to make wax for shoemaking, they were discovered, and shot
at by the Indians. Stephen fell dead, and James was taken prisoner and carried to their towns.--He
was there forced to undergo repeated and intense suffering before death closed the scene of
his miseries.

According to the account given by Nathaniel Cochran on his return from captivity, Washburn
was most severely beaten, on the first evening of his arrival at their village, while running
the gauntlet; and although he succeeded in getting into the council house, where Cochran was,
yet he was so disfigured and mutilated, that he could not be recognised by his old acquaintance;
and so stunned and stupified, that he remained nearly all night in a state of insensibility.
Being somewhat revived in the morning, he walked to where Cochran sat by the fire, and being
asked if he were not James Washburn, replied with a smile--as if a period had been put to his
sufferings by the sympathetic tone in which the question was proposed--that he was. The gleam
of hope which flashed over his countenance, was transient and momentary. In a few minutes he
was again led forth, that the barbarities which had been suspended by the interposition of
night, might be revived; and he made to endure a repetition of their cruelties. He was now
feeble and too much exhausted to save himself from the clubs and sticks, even of the aged of
both sexes. The old men and the old women, who followed him, had strength and activity enough
to keep pace with his fleetest progress, and inflict on him their severest blows. Frequently
he was beaten to the ground, and as frequently, as if invigorated by the extremity of anguish,
he rose to his feet. Hobbling before his tormentors, with no hope but in death, an old savage
passed a knife across his ham, which cutting the tendons, disabled him from proceeding farther.
Still they repeated their unmerciful blows with all their energy. He was next scalped, though
alive, and struggling to regain his feet. [185] Even this did not operate to suppress their
cruelty. They continued to beat him, until in the height of suffering he again exhibited symptoms
of life and exerted himself to move. His head was then severed from his shoulders, attached
to a pole, and placed in the most public situation in the village.

After the attack on the Washburns, there were but two other outrages committed in the upper
country during that season. The cessation on the part of the savages, of hostile incursions,
induced an abandonment of the forts, and the people returned to their several homes, and respective
occupations. But aggression was only suspended for a time. In October, two Indians appeared
near the house of Conrad Richards, and finding in the yard a little girl at play, with an infant
in her arms, they scalped her and rushed to the door. For some time they endeavored to force
it open; but it was so securely fastened within, that Richards was at liberty to use his gun
for its defence. A fortunate aim wounded one of the assailants severely, and the other retreated,
helping off his companion. The girl who had been scalped in the yard, as soon as she observed
the Indians going away, ran, with the infant still in her arms and uninjured, and entered the
house--a spectacle of most heart-rending wretchedness.

Soon after, David Edwards, returning from Winchester with salt, was shot near the Valley river,
tomahawked and scalped; in which situation he lay for some time before he was discovered. He
was the last person who fell a victim to savage vengeance, in North Western Virginia in the
year 1778.

The repeated irruptions of the Indians during the summer of the year;[6] and the frequent murders
and great devastation committed by them, induced Government to undertake two expeditions into
the Indian country. One thousand men were placed under the command of General McIntosh, some
time in the fall, and he received orders to proceed forthwith against the Sandusky towns. Between
two and three hundred soldiers were likewise placed under Colonel Clarke, to operate against
the Canadian settlements in Illinois. It was well known that the Governor of those settlements
was an indefatigable agent of British cruelty, stimulating the savages to aggression, and paying
them well for scalps, torn alike from the heads of the aged matron and the helpless infant.[7]
[186] The settlements in Kentucky, were constantly the theatre of outrage and murder; and to
preserve these from entire destruction, it was necessary that a blow should be aimed, at the
hives from which the savages swarmed, and if possible, that those holds, into which they would
retire to reap the rewards of their cruelties and receive the price of blood, should be utterly
broken up. The success of those two expeditions could not fail to check savage encroachments,
and give quiet and security to the frontier; and although the armies destined to achieve it,
were not altogether adequate to the service required, yet the known activity and enterprise
of the commanding officers, joined to their prudence and good conduct, and the bravery and
indefatigable perseverance and hardiness of the troops, gave promise of a happy result.

The success of the expedition under Colonel Clarke,[8] fully realized the most sanguine expectations
of those, who were acquainted with the adventurous and enterprising spirit of its commander;
and was productive of essential benefit to the state, as well as of comparative security to
the border settlements. Descending the Ohio river, from Fort Pitt to the Falls, he there landed
his troops, and concealing his boats, marched directly towards Kaskaskias. Their provisions,
which were carried on their backs, were soon exhausted; and for two days, the army subsisted
entirely on roots. This was the only circumstance, which occurred during their march, calculated
to damp the ardor of the troops. No band of savage warriors, had interposed to check their
progress,--no straggling Indian, had discovered their approach. These fortunate omens inspired
them with flattering hopes; and they pushed forward, with augmented energy. Arriving before
Kaskaskias in the night, they entered it, unseen and unheard, and took possession of the town
and fort, without opposition. Relying on the thick and wide extended forests which interposed
between them and the American settlements, the inhabitants had been lulled to repose by fancied
security, and were unconscious of danger until it had become too late to be avoided. Not a
single individual escaped, to spread the alarm in the adjacent settlements.

But there still remained other towns, higher up the Mississippi, which, if unconquered, would
still afford shelter to the savages and furnish them the means of annoyance and of ravage.
Against these, Colonel Clarke immediately directed [187] operations. Mounting a detachment
of men, on horses found at Kaskaskias, and sending them forward, three other towns were reduced
with equal success. The obnoxious governor at Kaskaskias was sent directly to Virginia, with
the written instructions which he had received from Quebec, Detroit and Michillimacinac, for
exciting the Indians to war, and remunerating them for the blood which they might shed.

Although the country within which Colonel Clarke had so successfully carried on operations,
was considered to be within the limits of Virginia; yet as it was occupied by savages and those
who were but little, if any, less hostile than they; and being so remote from her settlements,
Virginia had as yet exercised no act of jurisdiction over it. But as it now belonged to her,
by conquest as well as charter, the General Assembly created it into a distinct county, to
be called Illinois; a temporary government was likewise established in it, and a regiment of
infantry and a troop of cavalry, ordered to be enlisted for its defence, and placed under the
command of its intrepid and enterprising conqueror.

The expedition directed under General McIntosh, was not equally successful. The difficulty
of raising, equipping, and organizing, so large a force as was placed under his command, at
so great a distance from the populous district of the state, caused the consumption of so much
time, that the season for carrying on effective operations had well nigh passed before he was
prepared to commence his march. Anxious however, to achieve as much as could then be effected
for the security of the frontier, he penetrated the enemy's country, as far as Tuscarawa, when
it was resolved to build and garrison a fort, and delay farther operations 'till the ensuing
spring. Fort Laurens was accordingly erected on the banks of the Tuscarawa, a garrison of one
hundred and fifty men, under the command of Colonel John Gibson, left for its preservation,
and the main army returned to Fort Pitt.

-----
   [1] Lachlan McIntosh was born near Inverness, Scotland,
       March 17, 1725. With his father, and 100 others of the Clan
       McIntosh, he emigrated to Georgia in 1736, in the train of
       Oglethorpe. The party founded New Inverness, in McIntosh
       County. Lachlan entered the Colonial army at the opening of
       the Revolution, and rose to be brigadier-general. In a duel
       with Button Gwinnett, a signer of the Declaration of
       Independence, he killed the latter. General McIntosh was at the
       siege of Savannah in 1779, was a prisoner of war in 1780, a
       member congress in 1784, and in 1785 a commissioner to treat
       with the Southern Indians. He died at Savannah, February 20,
       1806.--R. G. T.

   [2] The distance below Pittsburg is 26 miles. See p.
       45, note, for notice of Shingiss Old Town, at this
       point.--R. G. T.

   [3] The distance, according to the shore meanderings of the
       U. S. Corps of Engineers, is 263 miles; the mileage of the
       channel would be somewhat greater.--R. G. T.

   [4] See p. 176, note, for notice of Grenadier Squaw's
       Town, near Chillicothe.--R. G. T.

   [5] See p. 137, note, for notice of Jesse Hughes; also,
       Peyton's History of Augusta County, p. 353.--R. G. T.

   [6] These war parties largely emanated from the Detroit
       region. Lieutenant-Governor Hamilton, the British commander at
       Detroit, writing to his superior, General Haldimand, September
       16, 1778, mentions incidentally that he sent out small parties
       of Miamis and Chippewas, August 5, and September 5 and 9; these
       were but three of dozens of such forays which he incited
       against the Virginia and Pennsylvania borders, during that
       year.--R. G. T.

   [7] This reference is to Lieut.-Governor Hamilton, whom
       George Rogers Clark called "the hair-buying general."--R. G. T.

   [8] Gen. George Rogers Clark was born November 19, 1752,
       near Monticello, Albemarle County, Va. At the age of twenty he
       was practicing his profession as a surveyor on the upper Ohio,
       and took up a claim at the mouth of Fish Creek. In 1774, he
       participated as a captain in Dunmore's campaign against the
       Shawnees and Mingoes. Early in 1775, Clark went as a surveyor
       to Kentucky, where he acquired marked popularity, and in 1776
       was elected as "a delegate to the Virginia convention, to urge
       upon the state authorities the claims of the colony for
       government and defense." He secured the formation of the new
       county of Kentucky, and a supply of ammunition for the defense
       of the border. In 1777, Clark, now a major of militia, repelled
       the Indian attacks on Harrodsburg, and proceeded on foot to
       Virginia to lay before the state authorities his plan for
       capturing the Illinois country and repressing the Indian forays
       from that quarter. His scheme being approved, he was made a
       lieutenant-colonel, and at once set out to raise for the
       expedition a small force of hardy frontiersmen. He rendezvoused
       and drilled his little army of a hundred and fifty on Corn
       Island in the Ohio river, at the head of the Falls (or rapids),
       opposite the present city of Louisville. June 24, 1778, he
       started in boats down the Ohio, and landed near the deserted
       Fort Massac, which was on the north bank, ten miles below the
       mouth of the Tennessee; thence marching across country, much
       pressed for food, he reached Kaskaskia in six days. The
       inhabitants there were surprised and coerced during the night
       of July 4-5, without the firing of a gun. Cahokia and Vincennes
       soon quietly succumbed to his influence. Lieut.-Governor
       Hamilton, on hearing of this loss of the Illinois country and
       the partial defection to the Americans of the tribes west and
       southwest of Lake Michigan, at once set out to organize an
       army, chiefly composed of Indians, to retake the Illinois. He
       proceeded via the Wabash and Maumee, with eight hundred men,
       and recaptured Vincennes, December 17.

       The intelligence of this movement of Hamilton was not long in
       reaching Clark at Kaskaskia, and he at once set out for
       Vincennes to recapture it. The march thither was one of the
       most heroic in American military annals. Hamilton surrendered
       to him, February 25, and was forwarded to Virginia as a
       prisoner. Early in 1780 he established Fort Jefferson, just
       below the mouth of the Ohio, and later in the season aided in
       repelling a body of British and Indians who had come to regain
       the Illinois country and attack the Spaniards at St. Louis.
       Leaving Colonel Montgomery to pursue the enemy up the
       Mississippi, Clark, with what force could be spared, hastened
       to Kentucky, where he quickly raised a thousand men, and
       invaded and laid waste the Shawnee villages, in retaliation for
       Capt. Henry Bird's invasion (see p. 262, note).

       Later, he was engaged in some minor forays, and was appointed a
       brigadier-general; but his favorite scheme of an expedition to
       conquer Detroit miscarried, owing to the poverty of Virginia
       and the activity of the enemy under Brant, McKee, Girty, and
       other border leaders. In 1782 Clark led a thousand men in a
       successful campaign against the Indians on the Great Miami.
       This was his last important service, his subsequent expeditions
       proving failures. His later years were spent in poverty and
       seclusion, and his social habits became none of the best. In
       1793 he imprudently accepted a commission as major-general from
       Genet, the French diplomatic agent, and essayed to raise a
       French revolutionary legion in the West to overcome the Spanish
       settlements on the Mississippi; upon Genet's recall, Clark's
       commission was canceled. Later, he sought to secure employment
       under the Spanish (see p. 130, note.) He died February 18,
       1818, at Locust Grove, near Louisville, and lies buried at Cave
       Hill, in the Louisville suburbs. In his article on Clark, in
       Appleton's Cyclop. of Amer. Biog., i., pp. 626, 627, Dr.
       Draper says: "Clark was tall and commanding, brave and full of
       resources, possessing the affection and confidence of his men.
       All that rich domain northwest of the Ohio was secured to the
       republic, at the peace of 1783, in consequence of his prowess."
       Cf. William F. Poole, in Winsor's Narr. and Crit. Hist.
       Amer., vi., pp. 710-742. While due credit should be given to
       Clark for his daring and successful undertaking, we must not
       forget that England's jealousy of Spain, and shrewd diplomacy
       on the part of America's peace plenipotentiaries, were factors
       even more potent in winning the Northwest for the United
       States.--R. G. T.

[188] CHAPTER XI.

No sooner had the adventurous advance of Col. Clarke, and the success with which it was crowned,
become known at Detroit, than preparations were made to expel him from Kaskaskias, or capture
his little army, and thus rid the country of this obstacle to the unmolested passage of the
savages, to the frontier of Virginia. An army of six hundred men, principally Indians, led
on by Hamilton, the governor of Detroit--a man at once bold and active, yet blood-thirsty and
cruel, and well known as a chief instigator of the savages to war, and as a stay and prop of
tories--left Detroit and proceeded towards the theatre of Clarke's renown. With this force,
he calculated on being able to effect his purpose as regarded Col. Clarke and his little band
of bold and daring adventurers, and to spread devastation and death along the frontier, from
Kentucky to Pennsylvania. Arriving at Fort St. Vincent,[1] on the Wabash, about the middle
of December, and deeming it too late to advance towards Kaskaskias, he repaired its battlements
and converting it into a repository for warlike implements of every description, he detached
the greater part of his force in marauding parties to operate against the settlements on the
Ohio river, reserving for the security of his head quarters only one company of men.

While these alarming preparations were being made, Col. Clarke was actively engaged in acquiring
an ascendency over the neighboring tribes of Indians; and in endeavors to attach them to the
cause of the United States, from principle or fear. The aid which had been voted him, fell
far short of [189] the contemplated assistance, and had not yet arrived; but his genius and
activity amply compensated for the deficiency. In the heart of an Indian country,--remote from
every succour,--and in the vicinity of powerful and hostile tribes, he yet not only maintained
his conquest and averted injury, but carried terror and dismay into the very strongholds of
the savages. Intelligence of the movement of Hamilton at length reached him, and hostile parties
of Indians soon hovered around Kaskaskias. Undismayed by the tempest which was gathering over
him, he concentrated his forces, withdrawing garrisons from the other towns to strengthen this,
and made every preparation to enable him to endure a siege, and withstand the assault of a
powerful army. The idea of abandoning the country never occurred to him. He did not despair
of being able to maintain his position, and he and his gallant band resolved that they would
do it, or perish in the attempt. In this fearful juncture, all was activity and industry, when
the arrival of a Spanish merchant who had been at St. Vincents brought information of the reduced
state of Hamilton's army.[2] Convinced that a crisis had now arrived, Clarke resolved by one
bold stroke to change the aspect of affairs, and instead of farther preparing to resist attack,
himself to become the assailant. For this purpose, a galley, mounting two four pounders and
four swivels, and having on board a company of men, was despatched, with orders to the commanding
officer, to ascend the Wabash and station himself a few miles below St. Vincents, allowing
no one to pass him until the arrival of the main army. Garrisoning Kaskaskias, with militia,
and embodying the inhabitants for the protection of the other towns, Colonel Clarke set forward
on his march across the country, on the 7th of February, 1779, at the head of one hundred and
thirty brave and intrepid men.[3]

Such was the inclemency of the weather, and so many and great the obstacles which interposed,
that in despite of the ardor, perseverance and energy of the troops, they could yet advance
very slowly towards the point of destination. They were five days in crossing the drowned lands
of the Wabash, and for five miles had to wade through water and ice, frequently up to their
breasts. They overcame every difficulty and arrived before St. Vincents on the evening of the
twenty-third of February and almost simultaneously with the galley.

Thus far fortune seemed to favor the expedition. The army had not been discovered on its march,
and the garrison was totally ignorant of its approach. Much however yet remained to be done.
They had arrived within view of the enemy, but the battle was yet to be fought.

Sensible of the advantage to be derived from commencing the attack, while the enemy was ignorant
of his approach, at seven o'clock he marched to the assault. The inhabitants instead of offering
opposition, received the troops with gladness, and surrendering [190] the town, engaged with
alacrity in the siege of the fort. For eighteen hours the garrison resisted the repeated onsets
of the assailants; but during the night succeeding the commencement of the attack, Colonel
Clarke had an entrenchment thrown up within rifle shot of the enemy's strongest battery, and
in the morning, from this position, poured upon it such a well-directed shower of balls, that
in fifteen minutes he silenced two pieces of cannon without sustaining any loss whatever. The
advantages thus gained, induced Hamilton to demand a parley, intimating an intention of surrendering.
The terms were soon arranged. The governor and garrison became prisoners of war, and a considerable
quantity of military stores fell into the hands of the conqueror. [4]

During the continuance of the siege, Colonel Clarke received information that a party of Indians
which had been detached by Hamilton to harrass the frontiers, was returning and then near to
St. Vincents with two prisoners. He immediately ordered a detachment of his men to march out
and give them battle--nine Indians were taken and the two prisoners released.

History records but few enterprises, which display as strikingly the prominent features of
military greatness, and evince so much of the genius and daring which are necessary to their
successful termination, as this; while the motives which led to its delineation, were such,
as must excite universal admiration. Bold and daring, yet generous and disinterested, Colonel
Clarke sought not his individual advancement in the projection or execution of this campaign.
It was not to gratify the longings of ambition, or an inordinate love of fame, that prompted
him to penetrate the Indian country to the Kaskaskias, nor that tempted him forth from thence,
to war with the garrison at St. Vincent. He was not one of

    "Those worshippers of glory,
        Who bathe the earth in blood,
    And launch proud names for an after age,
        Upon the crimson flood."

The distress and sufferings of the frontier of Virginia required that a period should speedily
be put to them, to preserve the country from ravage and its inhabitants from butchery. Clarke
had seen and participated in that distress and those sufferings, and put in requisition every
faculty of his mind and all the energies of his body, to alleviate and prevent them. Providence
smiled on his undertaking, and his exertions were crowned with complete success. The plan which
had been concerted for the ensuing campaign against the frontier of Virginia, threatening to
involve the whole country west of the Alleghany mountains in destruction and death, was thus
happily frustrated; and he, who had been mainly instrumental in impelling the savages to war,
and in permitting, if not instigating them to the commission of the most atrocious barbarities,
was a prisoner in the hands of the enemy. So justly obnoxious had he [191] rendered himself
by his conduct, that a more than ordinary rigor was practised upon him; and by the orders of
the governor of Virginia, the governor of Detroit was manacled with irons, and confined in jail.[5]

Far different was the termination of the enterprise entrusted to the conduct of General McIntosh.
It has been already seen that the approach of winter forced the main army to retire to the
settlements into winter quarters, before they were able to accomplish any thing, but the erection
of Fort Laurens.[6] Colonel Gibson, the commandant of the garrison, though a brave and enterprising
officer, was so situated, that the preservation of the fort, was all which he could accomplish;
and this was no little hazard of failure, from the very superior force of the enemy, and the
scarcity of provisions for the subsistance of the garrison. So soon as the Indians became acquainted
with the existence of a fort so far in their country, they put in practice those arts which
enable them, so successfully to annoy their enemies.

Early in January, a considerable body of savages approached Fort Laurens unperceived and before
the garrison was apprised that an Indian knew of its erection.[7] In the course of the night
they succeeded in catching the horses outside of the fort; and taking off their bells, carried
them into the woods, some distance off. They then concealed themselves in the prairie grass,
along a path leading from the fort, and in the morning commenced rattling the bells, at the
farther extremity of the line of ambushment, so as to induce the belief that the horses was
there to be found. The stratagem succeeded. Sixteen men were sent out to bring in the horses.
Allured by the sound of the bells, they kept the path, along which the Indians lay concealed,
until they found themselves unexpectedly in the presence of an enemy, who opened upon them
a destructive fire from front and rear. Fourteen were killed on the spot, and the remaining
two were taken prisoners.

On the evening of the day on which this unfortunate surprise took place, the Indian army, consisting
of eight hundred and forty-seven warriors, painted and equipped for war, marched in single
file through a prairie near the fort and in full view of the garrison, and encamped on an adjacent
elevation on the opposite side of the river. From this situation, frequent conversations were
held by them with the whites, in which they deprecated the longer continuance of hostilities,
but yet protested against the encroachment made upon their territory by the whites, the erection
of a fort and the garrisoning soldiers within their country, not only unpermitted by them,
but for some time before they knew any thing of it. For these infringements on their rights,
they were determined on prosecuting the war, and continued the investure of the fort, for six
weeks. In this time they became straitened for provisions, and aware that without a fresh supply
of them, they would be forced to abandon the siege, they sent word to the commander of the
garrison, by a Delaware [192] Indian, calling himself John Thompson, (who, though with the
whites in the fort, was permitted by both parties to go in and out, as he choose) that they
were desirous of peace, and were willing to enter into a negotiation, if he would send them
a barrel of flour and some tobacco. Scarce as these articles had actually become in the garrison,
yet Col. Gibson complied with their request, hoping that they might be induced to make peace,
or withdraw from the fort, and hopeless of timely succours from the settlements. Upon the receipt
of those presents, the Indians raised the siege and marched their army off, much to the relief
of the garrison, although they did not fulfil their promise of entering into a treaty.

During the time the Indians remained about the fort, there was much sickness in the garrison;
and when they were believed to have retired, the commandant detached Col. Clarke, of the Pennsylvania
line,[8] with a party of fifteen men, to escort the invalids to Fort McIntosh. They proceeded
but a small distance from the gate, where they were attacked by some Indians, who had been
left concealed near the fort, for the purpose of effecting farther mischief. A skirmish ensued;
but overpowered by numbers and much galled by the first fire, Col. Clarke could not maintain
the conflict. With much difficulty, he and three others reached the fort in safety: the rest
of the party were all killed.

Col. Gibson immediately marched out at the head of the greater part of the garrison, but the
Indians had retreated as soon as they succeeded in cutting off the detachment under Col. Clarke,
and prudence forbade to proceed in pursuit of them, as the main army was believed to be yet
in the neighborhood. The dead were however brought in, and buried with the honors of war, in
front of the fort gate.

In a few days after this, Gen. McIntosh arrived with a considerable body of troops and a supply
of provisions for the garrison. While the savages were continuing the siege, a friendly Indian,
had been despatched by Col. Gibson to acquaint Gen. McIntosh with the situation at Fort Laurens,
and that without the speedy arrival of a reinforcement of men and an accession to their stock
of provisions, the garrison would have to surrender; or seek a doubtful safety, by evacuating
the fort and endeavoring to regain the Ohio river, in the presence of an overwhelming body
of the enemy. With great promptitude the settlers flocked to the standard of Gen. McIntosh,
and loading pack horses, with abundance of provisions for the supply of the garrison at Fort
Laurens, commenced a rapid march to their relief. Before their arrival, they had been relieved
from the most pressing danger, by the withdrawal of the Indian army; and were only suffering
from the want of flour and meat. A manifestation of the great joy felt upon the arrival of
Gen. McIntosh, had well nigh deprived them of the benefit to be derived from the provisions
brought for them. When the relief army approached the fort, a salute was fired by the garrison,
which, alarming the pack horses, caused them [193] to break loose and scatter the greater part
of the flour in every direction through the woods, so that it was impossible to be again collected.

The remains of those, who had unfortunately fallen into the ambuscade in January, and which
had lain out until then, were gathered together and buried;[9] and a fresh detachment, under
Major Vernon, being left to garrison the fort, in the room of that which had been stationed
there during winter, Gen. McIntosh, withdrew from the country and returned to Fort McIntosh.
In the ensuing fall, Fort Laurens was entirely evacuated; the garrison having been almost reduced
to starvation, and it being found very difficult to supply them with provisions at so great
a distance from the settlements and in the heart of the Indian country.

During the year 1778, Kentucky was the theatre of many outrages. In January, a party of thirty
men, among whom was Daniel Boone, repaired to the "Lower Blue Licks" for the purpose of making
salt; and on the 7th of February, while Boone was alone in the woods, on a hunt to supply the
salt makers with meat, he was encountered by a party of one hundred and two Indians and two
Canadians, and made prisoner. The savages advanced to the Licks, and made prisoners of twenty-seven
of those engaged in making salt.[10] Their object in this incursion, was [193] the destruction
of Boonesborough; and had they continued their march thither, there is no doubt but that place,
weakened as it was by the loss of so many of its men and not expecting an attack at that inclement
season, would have fallen into their hands; but elated with their success, the Indians marched
directly back with their prisoners to Chillicothe. The extreme suffering of the prisoners,
during this march, inspired the savages with pity, and induced them to exercise an unusual
lenity towards their captives. In March, Boone was carried to Detroit, where the Indians refused
to liberate him, though an hundred pounds were offered for his ransom, and from which place
he accompanied them back to Chillicothe in the latter part of April. In the first of June,
he went with them to the Scioto salt springs, and on his return found one hundred and fifty
choice warriors of the Shawanee nation, painting, arming, and otherwise equipping themselves
to proceed again to the attack of Boonesborough.

[194] Hitherto Boone had enjoyed as much satisfaction, as was consistent with his situation,
and more than would have been experienced by the most of men, in captivity to the Indians;
but when he found such great preparations making for an attack on the place which contained
all that he held most dear, his love of family, his attachment to the village reared under
his superintending hand, and to its inhabitants protected by his fostering care, determined
him to attempt an immediate escape. Early on the morning of the 16th of June, he went forth
as usual to hunt. He had secreted as much food as would serve him for one meal, and with this
scanty supply, he resolved on finding his way home. On the 20th, having travelled a distance
of one hundred and sixty miles, crossed the Ohio and other rivers, and with no sustenance,
save what he had taken with him from Chillicothe, he arrived at Boonesborough. The fort was
quickly repaired, and every preparation made to enable it to withstand a siege.

In a few days after, another, of those who had been taken prisoners at the Blue Licks, escaped,
and brought intelligence that in consequence of the flight of Boone, the Indians had agreed
to postpone their meditated irruption, for three weeks.[11] This intelligence determined Boone
to invade the Indian country, and at the head of only ten men he went forth on an expedition
against Paint creek town. Near to this place, he met with a party of Indians going to join
the main army, then on its march to Boonesborough, whom he attacked and dispersed without sustaining
any loss on his part. The enemy had one killed and two severely wounded in this skirmish; and
lost their horses and baggage. On their return, they passed the Indian army on the 6th of August,
and on the next day entered Boonesborough.[12]

On the 8th of August, the Indian army, consisting of four hundred and fifty men, and commanded
by Capt. Du Quesne, eleven other Frenchmen, and their own chiefs, appeared before the Fort
and demanded its surrender.[13] In order to gain time, Boone requested two days' consideration,
and at the expiration of that period, returned for answer, that the garrison had resolved on
defending it, while one individual remained alive within its walls.

Capt. Du Quesne then made known, that he was charged by Gov. Hamilton, to make prisoners of
the garrison, but not to treat them harshly; and that if nine of their principal men would
come out, and negotiate a treaty, based on a renunciation of allegiance to the United States,
and on a renewal of their fealty to the king, the Indian army should be instantly withdrawn.
Boone did not confide in the sincerity of the Frenchman, but he determined to gain the advantage
of farther preparation for resistance, by delaying the attack. He consented to negotiate on
the terms proposed; but suspecting treachery, insisted that the conference should be held near
the fort walls. The garrison were on the alert, while the negotiation continued, and did not
fail to remark that many of the Indians, not [195] concerned in making the treaty, were stalking
about, under very suspicious circumstances. The terms on which the savage army was to retire
were at length agreed upon, and the articles signed, when the whites were told that it was
an Indian custom, in ratification of compacts, that two of their chiefs should shake hands
with one white man. Boone and his associates, consenting to conform to this custom, not without
suspicion of a sinister design, were endeavored to be dragged off as prisoners by the savages;
but strong and active, they bounded from their grasp, and entered the gate, amid a heavy shower
of balls--one only of the nine, was slightly wounded. The Indians then commenced a furious
assault on the fort, but were repulsed with some loss on their part; and every renewed attempt
to carry it by storm, was in like manner, frustrated by the intrepidity and gallantry of its
inmates.[14]

Disappointed in their expectation of succeeding in this way, the savages next attempted to
undermine the fort, commencing at the water mark of the Kentucky river, only sixty yards from
the walls. This course was no doubt dictated to them by their French commanders, as they are
ignorant of the practice of war, farther than depends on the use of the gun, and tomahawk,
and the exercise of stratagem and cunning. The vigilance of the besieged however, soon led
to a discovery of the attempt--the water below, was colored by the clay thrown out from the
excavation, while above it retained its usual transparency; and here again they were foiled
by the active exertion of the garrison. A countermine was begun by them, the earth from which
being thrown over the wall, manifested the nature of their operations, and led the enemy to
raise the siege, and retire from the country.[15]

In the various assaults made on the fort by this savage army, two only, of the garrison, were
killed, and four wounded. The loss of the enemy, as usual, could not be properly ascertained:
thirty-seven were left dead on the field, and many, were no doubt wounded.[16]

So signally was the savage army repulsed, in their repeated attacks on Boonesborough, that
they never afterwards made any great effort to effect its reduction. The heroism and intrepidity
of Boone and his assistants rendered it impregnable to their combined exertions to demolish
it; while the vigilance and caution of the inhabitants, convinced them, that it would be fruitless
and unavailing to devise plans for gaining admission into the fort, by stratagem or wile. Still
however, they kept up a war of ravage and murder, against such as were unfortunately found
defenceless and unprotected; and levelled combined operations against other and weaker positions.

[196] The success of the expedition under Col. Clarke, though productive of many and great
advantages to the [195] frontier inhabitants, did not achieve for them, an unmolested security.
Their property was still liable to plunder, and families newly arrived among them, to be murdered
or taken prisoners. Combined efforts were required, to put a period to savage aggression; and
a meeting of the settlers was held at Harrodsburg, to concert measures to effect that object.
Their consultation resulted in a determination, to carry the war into the enemy's country;
and as the Shawanees had been most efficient in waging hostilities, it was resolved to commence
operations, against their most considerable town. Two hundred volunteers were accordingly raised,
and when rendezvoused at Harrodsburg, were placed under the command of Col. Bowman, and proceeded
against Chillicothe.[17]

The expedition thus fitted out, arrived, by forced marches, near to Chillicothe in the evening
towards the latter end of July, 1779; and on deliberation, it was agreed to defer the attack
'till next morning. Before dawn the army was drawn up and arranged in order of battle. The
right wing led on by Col. Bowman, was to assume a position on one side of the town, and the
left, under Capt. Logan, was to occupy the ground on the opposite side; and at a given signal,
both were to develope to the right and left, so as to encircle and attack it in concert.[18]
The party, led on by Logan, repaired to the point assigned, and was waiting in anxious, but
vain expectation for the signal of attack to be given, when the attention of the Indians was
directed towards him by the barking of their dogs. At this instant a gun was discharged by
one of Bowman's men, and the whole village alarmed. The squaws and children were hurried into
the woods, along a path not yet occupied by the assailants, and the warriors collected in a
strong cabin.[19] Logan, being near enough to perceive every movement of the enemy, ordered
his men quietly to occupy the deserted huts, as a momentary shelter from the Indian fires,
until Col. Bowman should march forward. It was now light; and the savages began a regular discharge
of shot at his men, as they advanced to the deserted cabins. This determined him to move directly
to the attack of the cabin, in which the warriors were assembled; and ordering his men to tear
off the doors and hold them in front, as a shield, while advancing to the assault, he was already
marching on the foe, when he was overtaken by an order from Col. Bowman, to retreat.

Confounded by this command, Capt. Logan was for a time reluctant to obey it; a retreat was
however, directed; and each individual, sensible of his great exposure while retiring from
the towns, sought to escape from danger, in the manner directed by his own judgment; and fled
to the woods at his utmost speed. There they rallied, and resumed more of order, though still
too much terrified to stand a contest, when the Indians sallied out to give battle. Intimidated
by the apprehension of danger, which they had not seen, [197] but supposed to be great from
the retreating order of Col. Bowman, they continued to fly before the savages, led on by their
chief, the Black Fish. At length they were brought to a halt, and opened a brisk, though inefficient
fire, upon their pursuers. Protected by bushes, the Indians maintained their ground, 'till
Capts. Logan and Harrod, with some of the men under their immediate command, mounted on pack
horses, charged them with great spirit, and dislodged them from their covert. Exposed in turn
to the fire of the whites, and seeing their chief fall, the savages took to flight, and Col.
Bowman continued his retreat homeward, free from farther interruption.[20]

In this illy conducted expedition, Col. Bowman had nine of his men killed and one wounded.
The Indian loss was no doubt less: only two or three were known to be killed. Had the commanding
officer, instead of ordering a retreat when Logan's men were rushing bravely to the conflict,
marched with the right wing of the army to their aid, far different would have been the result.
The enemy, only thirty strong, could not long have held out, against the bravery and impetuosity
of two hundred backwoodsmen, stimulated to exertion by repeated suffering, and nerved by the
reflection, that they were requiting it upon its principal authors. Col. Bowman doubtless believed
that he was pursuing a proper course. The gallantry and intrepidity, displayed by him on many
occasions, forbid the supposition that he was under the influence of any unmilitary feeling,
and prompted to that course by a disposition to shrink from ordinary dangers. His motives were
certainly pure, and his subsequent exertions to rally his men and bring them to face the foe,
were as great as could have been made by any one; but disheartened by the fear of unreal danger,
and in the trepidation of a flight, deemed to be absolutely necessary for their safety, they
could not be readily brought to bear the brunt of battle. The efforts of a few cool and collected
individuals, drove back the pursuers, and thus prevented an harrassed retreat.

Notwithstanding the frequent irruptions of the Indians, and the constant exposure of the settlers
to suffering and danger, Kentucky increased rapidly in population. From the influx of emigrants
during the fall and winter months, the number of its inhabitants were annually doubled for
some years; and new establishments were made in various parts of the country. In April 1779,
a block house was erected on the present site of Lexington,[21] and several stations were selected
in its vicinity, and in the neighborhood of the present town of Danville. Settlements were
also made, in that year, on the waters of Bear Grass, Green and Licking rivers, and parts of
the country began to be distinguished by their interior and frontier situation.

-----
   [1] Called by the English, Fort Sackville.--R. G. T.

   [2] From Clark's Journal: "January 29.--M. Vigo, a Spanish
       subject who had been at Post St. Vincents on his lawful
       business, arrived and gave us intelligence that Governor
       Hamilton, with thirty regulars and fifty volunteers and about
       400 Indians, had arrived in November and taken that post with
       Capt. Helms and such other Americans who were there with arms,
       and disarmed the settlers and inhabitants."--R. G. T.

   [3] Forty-six men, under Lieut. John Rogers, went with the
       artillery and stores, in a large galley or batteau, called the
       "Willing." The distance to Vincennes by land, was a hundred and
       fifty miles.--R. G. T.

   [4] The originals of the correspondence between Clark and Hamilton
       are, with much other MS. material relative to the movements of
       Clark, in possession of the Wisconsin Historical Society.
       "Feb^y. 24^th. 1779--Fort Sackville--"

       Clark's gruff reply, in rugged, but not unclerical chirography, was
       as follows:

       "Colonel Clark's Compliments to M^r. Hamilton and begs leave to
       inform him that Co^l. Clark will not agree to any Other Terms than
       that of M^r. Hamilton's Surrendering himself and Garrison, Prisoners
       at Discretion--

       "If M^r. Hamilton is Desirous of a Conferance with Co^l. Clark he
       will meet him at the Church with Capt^n. Helms--

       "Feb^y. 24^th., 1779.                      G. R. CLARK."--R. G. T.

   [5] Hamilton, in a letter of July 6, 1781, contained in the
       Haldimand Papers, in the British Museum, gives what he calls "a
       brief account" of his ill-starred expedition. See Roosevelt's
       Winning of the West, passim.--R. G. T.

   [6] On the Tuscarawas River, about ten miles north of the
       present New Philadelphia, O., and a mile south of what is now
       Bolivar, Tuscarawas County. At the time Withers alludes to, it
       was garrisoned by 150 men under Col. John Gibson.--R. G. T.

   [7] Simon Girty and seventeen Indians, mostly Mingoes.
       Withers confounds this raid with the more formidable siege in
       February and March. In the January assault, Girty's band
       ambushed Capt. John Clark, a sergeant, and fourteen men,
       returning to Fort Pitt from convoying provisions to Fort
       Laurens. Two whites were killed, four wounded, and one taken
       prisoner. In February, came an attacking party of a hundred
       and twenty Indians (mostly Wyandots and Mingoes), led by
       Capt. Henry Bird, of the Eighth (or King's) Regiment; with
       him were Simon Girty and ten soldiers. The enemy arrived
       February 22, but remained in hiding. The next day Gibson sent
       out a guard of eighteen men, despite warnings of the enemy's
       presence, to assist the wagoner in collecting the horses of
       the fort. All the party were killed and scalped, within
       sight of the fort, save two, who were made prisoners. The fort
       was then openly invested until March 20, when the besiegers
       withdrew, torn with dissensions and short of supplies. See
       Butterfield's Washington-Irvine Correspondence for further
       details.--R. G. T.

   [8] Not to be confounded with George Rogers Clark, of
       Kentucky.--R. G. T.

   [9] The bodies of these men were found to have been much
       devoured by the wolves, and bearing the appearance of having
       been recently torn by them. With a view of taking revenge on
       these animals for devouring their companions, the fatigue party
       sent to bury their remains, after digging a grave sufficiently
       capacious to contain all, and having deposited them in it, they
       covered the pit with slender sticks, bark and rotten wood, too
       weak to bear the weight of a wolf, and placed a piece of meat
       on the top and near the center of this covering, as a bait. In
       the morning seven wolves were found in the pit, and killed and
       the grave then filled up.

  [10] Boone had left Boonesborough January 8, in charge of
       thirty men, to make salt at the Lower Blue Licks, on
       Licking River. They carried with them, on horses, several
       large boiling pans, given to the settlement by the government
       of Virginia. So weak was the water there, that 840 gallons
       were necessary to make a bushel of salt, against ninety at the
       Kanawha salines, and forty at Onondaga. While the salt-makers
       were at work, two or three others of the party served as
       scouts and hunters; generally, Boone was one of these. This
       day (Saturday, February 7) Boone started out alone with his
       pack-horse for a supply of game, which usually was plenty in
       the neighborhood of the salt licks; Thomas Brooks and
       Flanders Callaway, his fellow scouts, were taking another
       circuit. Having killed a buffalo, Boone was on his way home
       in the afternoon, with the choicest of the meat packed upon
       his horse. Snow was falling fast, and he was ten miles from
       camp, when discovered by four Indians, outlying members of a
       large party of Shawnees under Munseka and Black Fish, who
       had taken the war-path to avenge the murder of Cornstalk
       (see p. 172, note. 2). Benumbed by cold, and unable easily
       to untie or cut the frozen thongs which bound on the pack,
       Boone could not unload and mount the horse, and after a sharp
       skirmish was captured, and led to the main Indian encampment, a
       few miles away. Boone induced his fellow salt-makers to
       surrender peaceably the following day (February 8); the number
       of prisoners was, including Boone, twenty-seven--two scouts
       and two salt-packers being absent. After a ten days'
       "uncomfortable journey, in very severe weather," says Boone,
       in which they "received as good treatment as prisoners could
       expect from savages," the party arrived at Little Chillicothe,
       on Little Miami--so called in contradistinction to Old
       Chillicothe, on the Scioto. Boone's strong, compact build
       caused the Indians to call him Big Turtle, and under that name
       he was adopted as the son of Black Fish, who took a fancy
       to him; sixteen of his companions were also adopted by other
       warriors. The ten who were not adopted were, with Boone, taken
       on a trip to Detroit (starting March 10), guarded by forty
       Indians under Black Fish. The ten were sold to Lieut.
       Governor Hamilton and citizens of Detroit, for £20 each,
       the usual price for American prisoners. Boone remained in
       Detroit until April 10, during which he was treated with
       great courtesy by Hamilton, who offered Black Fish £100 for
       him, but the latter declined and took the great pioneer home
       with him; but Boone himself was given by Hamilton a horse and
       trappings, with silver trinkets to give to the Indians. At
       Little Chillicothe, Boone was kindly treated by Black Fish,
       and little by little his liberty was extended. June 16,
       while the family were making salt on the Scioto, preparatory
       to another expedition against Boonesborough, Boone escaped
       on the horse given him by Hamilton. After many curious
       adventures, in the course of which he swam the Ohio, he
       safely reached Boonesborough, June 20, having traveled, he
       estimated, a hundred and sixty miles in four days. Boone's
       wife and family, supposing him dead, had returned to their
       old home in North Carolina, but Boone himself remained to
       assist in the defense of Boonesborough against the impending
       attack, of which he had brought intelligence.--R. G. T.

  [11] This was William Hancock, who had, like Boone, been
       adopted into an Indian family. Not so expert a woodsman as
       Boone, he had consumed twelve days in the journey from
       Chillicothe to Boonesborough, and suffered great hardships. He
       arrived at the fort July 17. In consequence of Boone's escape,
       he reported, the Indians had postponed their intended attack
       for three weeks. The next day (July 18), Boone wrote to Arthur
       Campbell, lieutenant of Washington County, Va. (the Holston
       settlements, 200 miles away), that he expected the enemy in
       twelve days, and that the fort was prepared for a siege of
       three or four weeks; but relief would then be of infinite
       service.--R. G. T.

  [12] At the close of six weeks after Hancock's arrival, Boone
       had become weary of waiting for the enemy, hence his expedition
       with nineteen men--not ten, as in the text--against the Shawnee
       town on Paint Creek, during the last week of August. It was the
       5th of September when, undiscovered, he passed the Indian force
       encamped at Lower Blue Licks, and the next day arrived at
       Boonesborough.--R. G. T.

  [13] About 10 A. M. of Monday, September 7,--Withers places
       it a month, less a day, too early,--the hostiles crossed the
       Kentucky a mile and a half above Boonesborough, at a point
       since known as Black Fish's Ford, and soon made their
       appearance marching single file, some of them mounted, along
       the ridge south of the fort. They numbered about 400, and
       displayed English and French flags. The strength of the force
       has been variously estimated, from 330 Indians and 8 Frenchmen
       (Col. John Bowman), to 444 Indians and 12 Frenchmen (Boone's
       Narrative, by Filson). The English Indian department was
       represented by Capt. Isidore Chêne, who had with him several
       other French-Canadians; there was also a negro named Pompey,
       who had long lived with the Indians, and served them as
       interpreter; the principal chiefs were, Black Fish, Moluntha,
       Black Hoof, and Black Beard.--R. G. T.

  [14] The garrison numbered, old and young, white and black,
       sixty persons capable of bearing arms; only forty, however,
       were really effective. Women and children, dressed and armed as
       men, frequently appeared upon the walls, to give an appearance
       of greater strength.--R. G. T.

  [15] This ruse of the Indians was discovered on Friday, the
       11th. The garrison commenced its countermine immediately, and
       prosecuted the work for several days. The rival parties could
       hear each other at work underground. When the Indians had
       proceeded about forty yards, two-thirds of the distance from
       the river bank, successive rainstorms had so saturated the
       earth that sections of their tunnel caved in, and this it was
       that frustrated their scheme.--R. G. T.

  [16] When the Indians retired from before Boonesboro, one
       hundred and twenty-five pounds weight of bullets were picked up
       by the garrison, besides many that stuck in the logs of the
       fort. A conclusive proof that the Indians were not idle, during
       the continuance of the siege.

  [17] John Bowman, of Harrodsburgh, was lieutenant of
       Kentucky County, and colonel of its militia. During the
       spring of 1779, there was a general desire to raid the
       unsuspecting Shawnees, in retaliation for their invasions of
       Kentucky, and Bowman decided to command in person this "first
       regular enterprise to attack, in force, the Indians beyond the
       Ohio, ever planned in Kentucky." The company of volunteers of
       the interior rendezvoused in May at Harrodsburgh, and under
       Capts. Benjamin Logan and Silas Harlan marched to Lexington,
       where they met the Boonesborough company under Capt. John
       Holder, and another party under Capt. Levi Todd. At the mouth
       of the Licking (site of Covington, Ky.), the general
       rendezvous agreed on, they found a company from the Falls
       of the Ohio (site of Louisville), under Capt. William
       Harrod. Also in the little army, which finally mustered 297
       men, including officers, were frontiersmen from Redstone Old
       Fort, and other settlements in the valleys of the Ohio and
       Monongahela. The Redstone men were on their way home, when
       they heard of the expedition, and joined it at the Licking;
       they had been on a visit to Big Bone Lick, and had a
       canoe-load of relics therefrom, which they were transporting
       up river. The force crossed the Ohio, May 28, just below the
       mouth of the Licking; 32 men remained behind in charge of the
       boats, leaving 265 to set out for the Shawnee town of Little
       Chillicothe, on the Little Miami, distant about sixty-five
       miles northeast. George Clark and William Whitley were pilots,
       and George M. Bedinger adjutant and quartermaster.--R. G. T.

  [18] Without having seen an Indian, the expedition arrived in
       sight of Little Chillicothe, at dusk of May 29--Withers places
       the date two months ahead of the actual time. Capt. Logan had
       charge of the left wing, Harrod of the right, and Holder of the
       center. The white force now numbered 263--two men having
       returned to the boats, disabled; the Indians numbered about 100
       warriors and 200 squaws and children. Black Fish was the
       principal village chief, and subordinate to him were Black Hoof
       and Black Beard.--R. G. T.

  [19] This was the council house, which was so stoutly
       defended that the white assailants were glad to take
       refuge in a neighboring hut, from which they escaped with
       difficulty.--R. G. T.

  [20] The chief cause of alarm, and the consequent disorder,
       was a false report started among the whites, that Simon Girty
       and a hundred Shawnees from the Indian village of Piqua, twelve
       miles distant, were marching to the relief of Black Fish. Order
       was soon restored, and when, fourteen miles out upon the
       homeward trail, Indians were discovered upon their rear, the
       enemy were met with vigor, and thereafter the retreat was
       unhampered. The force reached the Ohio, just above the mouth of
       the Little Miami, early on June 1. The "pack-horses" alluded to
       by Withers, were 163 Indian ponies captured in the Chillicothe
       woods; the other plunder was considerable, being chiefly silver
       ornaments and clothing. After crossing the Ohio in boats--the
       horses swimming--there was an auction of the booty, which was
       appraised at £32,000, continental money, each man getting goods
       or horses to the value of about £110. The Indian loss was five
       killed at the town, and many wounded; the whites had seven men
       killed. Little Chillicothe had been for the most part destroyed
       by fire, and its crops destroyed. The newspapers of the day
       regarded the expedition as an undoubted success.--R. G. T.

  [21] George W. Ranck: "April 1. Robert Patterson, at the head
       of twenty-five men, commenced a block house where Lexington now
       stands."--R. G. T.

[198] CHAPTER XII.

In North Western Virginia, the frequent inroads of small parties of savages in 1778, led to
greater preparations for security, from renewed hostilities after the winter should have passed
away; and many settlements received a considerable accession to their strength, from the number
of persons emigrating to them. In some neighborhoods, the sufferings of the preceding season
and the inability of the inhabitants, from the paucity of their numbers, to protect themselves
from invasion, led to a total abandonment of their homes. The settlement on Hacker's creek
was entirely broken up in the spring of 1779,--some of its inhabitants forsaking the country
and retiring east of the mountains; while the others went to the fort on Buchannon, and to
Nutter's fort, near Clarksburg, to aid in resisting the foe and in maintaining possession of
the country. When the campaign of that year opened, the whole frontier was better prepared
to protect itself from invasion and to shield its occupants from the wrath of the savage enemy,
than it had ever been, since it became the abode of white men. There were forts in every settlement,
into which the people could retire when danger threatened, and which were capable of withstanding
the assaults of savages, however furious they might be, if having to depend for success, on
the use of small arms only. It was fortunate for the country, that this was their dependence.
A few well directed shots even from small cannon, would have demolished [199] their strongest
fortress, and left them no hope from death, but captivity.

In the neighborhood of Pricket's fort, the inhabitants were early alarmed, by circumstances
which induced a belief that the Indians were near, and they accordingly entered that garrison.
It was soon evident that their fears were groundless, but as the season was fast approaching,
when the savages might be expected to commence depredations, they determined on remaining in
the fort, of a night, and yet prosecute the business of their farms as usual during the day.
Among those who were at this time in the fort, was David Morgan, (a relation of General Daniel
Morgan,) then upwards of sixty years of age. Early in April, being himself unwell, he sent
his two children--Stephen, a youth of sixteen, and Sarah, a girl of fourteen--to feed the cattle
at his farm, about a mile off. The children, thinking to remain all day and spend the time
in preparing ground for water melons, unknown to their father took with them some bread and
meat. Having fed the stock, Stephen set himself to work, and while he was engaged in grubbing,
his sister would remove the brush, and otherwise aid him in the labor of clearing the ground;
occasionally going to the house to wet some linen which she had spread out to bleach. Morgan,
after the children had been gone some time, betook himself to bed, and soon falling asleep,
dreamed that he saw Stephen and Sarah walking about the fort yard, scalped. Aroused from slumber
by the harrowing spectacle presented to his sleeping view, he enquired if the children had
returned, and upon learning they had not, he set out to see what detained them, taking with
him his gun. As he approached the house, still impressed with the horrible fear that he should
find his dream realized, he ascended an eminence, from which he could distinctly see over his
plantation, and descrying from thence the objects of his anxious solicitude, he proceeded directly
to them, and seated himself on an old log, near at hand. He had been here but a few minutes,
before he saw two Indians come out from the house and make toward the children. Fearing to
alarm them too much, and thus deprive them of the power of exerting themselves ably to make
an escape, he apprized them in a careless manner, of their danger, and told them to run towards
the fort--himself still maintaining his seat on the log. The Indians then raised a hideous
yell and ran in pursuit; but the old [200] gentleman shewing himself at that instant, caused
them to forbear the chase, and shelter themselves behind trees. He then endeavored to effect
an escape, by flight, and the Indians followed after him. Age and consequent infirmity, rendered
him unable long to continue out of their reach; and aware that they were gaining considerably
on him, he wheeled to shoot. Both instantly sprang behind trees, and Morgan seeking shelter
in the same manner, got behind a sugar, which was so small as to leave part of his body exposed.
Looking round, he saw a large oak about twenty yards farther, and he made to it. Just as he
reached it, the foremost Indian sought security behind the sugar sapling, which he had found
insufficient for his protection. The Indian, sensible that it would not shelter him, threw
himself down by the side of a log which lay at the root of the sapling. But this did not afford
him sufficient cover, and Morgan, seeing him exposed to a shot, fired at him. The ball took
effect, and the savage, rolling over on his back, stabbed himself twice in the breast.

Having thus succeeded in killing one of his pursuers, Morgan again took to flight, and the
remaining Indian after him. It was now that trees could afford him no security--His gun was
unloaded, and his pursuer could approach him safely.--The unequal race was continued about
sixty yards, when looking over his shoulder, he saw the savage within a few paces of him, and
with his gun raised. Morgan sprang to one side, and the ball whizzed harmlessly by him. The
odds was now not great, and both advanced to closer combat, sensible of the prize for which
they had to contend, and each determined, to deal death to his adversary. Morgan aimed a blow
with his gun; but the Indian hurled a tomahawk at him, which cutting the little finger of his
left hand entirely off, and injuring the one next it very much, knocked the gun out of his
grasp, and they closed. Being a good wrestler, Morgan succeeded in throwing the Indian; but
soon found himself overturned, and the savage upon him, feeling for his knife and sending forth
a most horrifick yell, as is their custom when they consider victory as secure. A woman's apron,
which he had taken from the house and fastened round him above his knife, so hindered him in
getting at it quickly, that Morgan, getting one of his fingers in his mouth, deprived him of
the use of that hand, and disconcerted him very much by continuing to grind it between his
teeth. At length the [201] Indian got hold of his knife, but so far towards the blade, that
Morgan too got a small hold on the extremity of the handle; and as the Indian drew it from
the scabbard, Morgan, biting his finger with all his might, and thus causing him somewhat to
relax his grasp, drew it through his hand, gashing it most severely.

By this time both had gained their feet, and the Indian, sensible of the great advantage gained
over him, endeavored to disengage himself; but Morgan held fast to the finger, until he succeeded
in giving him a fatal stab, and felt the almost lifeless body sinking in his arms. He then
loosened his hold and departed for the fort.

On his way he met with his daughter, who not being able to keep pace with her brother, had
followed his footsteps to the river bank where he had plunged in, and was then making her way
to the canoe. Assured thus far of the safety of his children, he accompanied his daughter to
the fort, and then, in company with a party of the men, returned to his farm, to see if there
were any appearance of other Indians being about there. On arriving at the spot where the desperate
struggle had been, the wounded Indian was not to be seen; but trailing him by the blood which
flowed profusely from his side, they found him concealed in the branches of a fallen tree.--He
had taken the knife from his body, bound up the wound with the apron, and on their approaching
him, accosted them familiarly, with the salutation "How do do broder, how do broder." Alas!
poor fellow! their brotherhood extended no farther than to the gratification of a vengeful
feeling. He was tomahawked and scalped; and, as if this would not fill the measure of their
vindictive passions, both he and his companion were flayed, their skins tanned and converted
into saddle seats, shot pouches and belts--A striking instance of the barbarities, which a
revengeful spirit will lead its possessors to perpetrate.[1]

The alarm which had caused the people in the neighborhood of Pricket's fort, to move into it
for safety, induced two or three families on Dunkard creek to collect at the house of Mr. Bozarth,
thinking they would be more exempt from danger when together, than if remaining at their several
homes. About the first of April, when only Mr. Bozarth and two men were in the house, the children,
who had been out at play, came running into the yard, exclaiming that there were [202] "ugly
red men coming." Upon hearing this, one of the two men in the house, going to the door to see
if Indians really were approaching, received a glancing shot on his breast, which caused him
to fall back. The Indian who had shot him, sprang in immediately after, and grappling with
the other white man, was quickly thrown on the bed. His antagonist having no weapon with which
to do him any injury called to Mrs. Bozarth for a knife. Not finding one at hand, she siezed
an axe, and at one blow, let out the brains of the prostrate savage. At that instant a second
Indian entering the door, shot dead the man engaged with his companion on the bed. Mrs. Bozarth
turned on him, and with a well directed blow, let out his entrails and caused him to bawl out
for help. Upon this, others of his party, who had been engaged with the children in the yard,
came to his relief. The first who thrust his head in at the door, had it cleft by the axe of
Mrs. Bozarth and fell lifeless on the ground. Another, catching hold of his wounded, bawling
companion, drew him out of the house, when Mrs. Bozarth, with the aid of the white man who
had been first shot and was then somewhat recovered, succeeded in closing and making fast the
door. The children in the yard were all killed, but the heroism and exertions of Mrs. Bozarth
and the wounded white man, enabled them to resist the repeated attempts of the Indians, to
force open the door, and to maintain possession of the house, until they were relieved by a
party from the neighboring settlement.--The time occupied in this bloody affair, from the first
alarm by the children to the shutting of the door, did not exceed three minutes. And in this
brief space, Mrs. Bozarth, with infinite self possession, coolness and intrepidity, succeeded
in killing three Indians.

On the eleventh of the same month, five Indians came to a house on Snowy creek, (in the, now,
county of Preston,) in which lived James Brain and Richard Powell, and remained in ambush during
the night, close around it. In the morning early, the appearance of some ten or twelve men,
issuing from the house with guns, for the purpose of amusing themselves in shooting at a mark,
deterred the Indians from making their meditated attack. The men seen by them, were travellers,
who had associated for mutual security, and who, after partaking of a morning's repast, resumed
their journey, unknown to the savages; when Mr. Brain and the sons of Mr. Powell [203] went
to their day's work. Being engaged in carrying clap-boards for covering a cabin, at some distance
from the house, they were soon heard by the Indians, who, despairing of succeeding in an attack
on the house, changed their position, & concealed themselves by the side of the path, along
which those engaged at work had to go. Mr. Brain and one of his sons being at a little distance
in front of them, they fired and Brain fell. He was then tomahawked and scalped, while another
of the party followed and caught the son as he was attempting to escape by flight.

Three other boys were then some distance behind and out of sight, and hearing the report of
the gun which killed Brain, for an instant supposed that it proceeded from the rifle of some
hunter in quest of deer. They were soon satisfied that this supposition was unfounded. Three
Indians came running towards them, bearing their guns in one hand, and tomahawks in the other.
One of the boys stupefied by terror,--and unable to stir from the spot, was immediately made
prisoner. Another, the son of Powell, was also soon caught; but the third, finding himself
out of sight of his pursuer, ran to one side and concealed himself in a bunch of alders, where
he remained until the Indian passed the spot where he lay, when he arose, and taking a different
direction, ran with all his speed, and effected an escape. The little prisoners were then brought
together; and one of Mr. Powell's sons, being discovered to have but one eye, was stripped
naked, had a tomahawk sunk into his head, a spear ran through his body, and the scalp then
removed from his bleeding head.

The little Powell who had escaped from the savages, being forced to go a direction opposite
to the house, proceeded to a station about eight miles off, & communicated intelligence of
what had been done at Brain's. A party of men equipped themselves and went immediately to the
scene of action; but the Indians had hastened homeward, as soon as they perpetrated their horrid
cruelties. One of their little captives, (Benjamin Brain) being asked by them, "how many men
were at the house," replied "twelve." To the question, "how far from thence was the nearest
fort," he answered "two miles." Yet he well knew that there was no fort, nearer than eight
miles, and that there was not a man at the house,--Mr. Powell being from home, and the twelve
travellers having departed, before his father and he had gone out to [204] work. His object
was to save his mother and the other women and children, from captivity or death, by inducing
them to believe that it would be extremely dangerous to venture near the house. He succeeded
in the attainment of his object. Deterred by the prospect of being discovered, and perhaps
defeated by the superior force of the white men, represented to be at Mr. Brain's, they departed
in the greatest hurry, taking with them their two little prisoners, Benjamin and Isaac Brain.

So stilly had the whole affair been conducted (the report of a gun being too commonly heard
to excite any suspicion of what was doing,) and so expeditiously had the little boy who escaped,
and the men who accompanied him back, moved in their course, that the first intimation given
Mrs. Brain of the fate of her husband, was given by the men who came in pursuit.

Soon after the happening of this affair, a party of Indians came into the Buchannon settlement,
and made prisoner Leonard Schoolcraft, a youth of about sixteen, who had been sent from the
fort on some business.--When arrived at their towns and arrangements being made for his running
the gauntlet, he was told that he might defend himself against the blows of the young Indians
who were to pursue him to the council house. Being active and athletic, he availed himself
of this privilege, so as to save himself from the beating which he would otherwise have received,
and laying about him with well timed blows, frequently knocked down those who came near to
him--much to the amusement of the warriors, according to the account given by others, who were
then prisoners and present. This was the last certain information which was ever had concerning
him. He was believed however, to have been afterwards in his old neighborhood in the capacity
of guide to the Indians, and aiding them, by his knowledge of the country, in making successful
incursions into it.

In the month of June, at Martin's fort on Crooked Run, another murderous scene was exhibited
by the savages. The greater part of the men having gone forth early to their farms, and those
who remained, being unapprehensive of immediate danger, and consequently supine and careless,
the fort was necessarily, easily accessible, and the vigilance of the savages who were lying
hid around it, discovering its exposed and [205] weakened situation, seized the favorable moment
to attack those who were without. The women were engaged in milking the cows outside the gate,
and the men who had been left behind were loitering around. The Indians rushed forward, and
killed and made prisoners of ten of them. James Stuart, James Smally and Peter Crouse, were
the only persons who fell, and John Shiver and his wife, two sons of Stuart, two sons of Smally
and a son of Crouse, were carried into captivity. According to their statement upon their return,
there were thirteen Indians in the party which surprised them, and emboldened by success, instead
of retreating with their prisoners, remained at a little distance from the fort 'till night,
when they put the captives in a waste house near, under custody of two of the savages, while
the remaining eleven, went to see if they could not succeed in forcing an entrance at the gate.
But the disaster of the morning had taught the inhabitants the necessity of greater watchfulness.
The dogs were shut out at night, and the approach of the Indians exciting them to bark freely,
gave notice of impending danger, in time for them to avert it. The attempt to take the fort
being thus frustrated, the savages returned to the house in which the prisoners were confined,
and moved off with them to their towns.

In August, two daughters of Captain David Scott living at the mouth of Pike run, going to the
meadow with dinner for the mowers, were taken by some Indians who were watching the path. The
younger was killed on the spot; but the latter being taken some distance farther, and every
search for her proving unavailing, her father fondly hoped that she had been carried into captivity,
and that be might redeem her. For this purpose he visited Pittsburg and engaged the service
of a friendly Indian to ascertain where she was and endeavour to prevail on them to ransom
her. Before his return from Fort Pitt, some of his neighbors directed to the spot by the buzzards
hovering over it, found her half eaten and mutilated body.

In September, Nathaniel Davisson and his brother, being on a hunting expedition up Ten Mile,
left their camp early on the morning of the day on which they intended to return home; and
naming an hour at which they would be back, proceeded through the woods in different directions.
At the appointed time, Josiah went to the camp, and after waiting there in vain for the arrival
of his brother, and becoming uneasy lest [206] some unlucky accident had befallen him, he set
out in search of him. Unable to see or hear anything of him he returned home, and prevailed
on several of his neighbors to aid in endeavouring to ascertain his fate. Their search was
likewise unavailing; but in the following March, he was found by John Read, while hunting in
that neighborhood. He had been shot and scalped; and notwithstanding he had lain out nearly
six months, yet he was but little torn by wild beasts, and was easily recognized.

During this year too, Tygarts Valley, which had escaped being visited by the Indians in 1778
again heard their harrowing yells; and although but little mischief was done by them while
there, yet its inhabitants were awhile, kept in fearful apprehension that greater ills would
betide them. In October of this year, a party of them lying in ambush near the road, fired
several shots at Lieut. John White, riding by, but with no other effect than by wounding the
horse to cause him to throw his rider. This was fatal to White. Being left on foot and on open
ground, he was soon shot, tomahawked and scalped.

As soon as this event was made known, Capt. Benjamin Wilson, with his wonted promptitude and
energy, raised a company of volunteers, and proceeding by forced marches to the Indian crossing
at the mouth of the Sandy fork of Little Kenhawa, he remained there nearly three days with
a view to intercept the retreat of the savages. They however, returned by another way and his
scheme, of cutting them off while crossing the river, consequently failed.

Some time after this several families in the Buchannon settlement, left the fort and returned
to their homes, under the belief that the season had advanced too far, for the Indians again
to come among them. But they were sorely disappointed. The men being all assembled at the fort
for the purpose of electing a Captain, some Indians fell upon the family of John Schoolcraft,
and killed the women and eight children,--two little boys only were taken prisoners. A small
girl, who had been scalped and tomahawked 'till a portion of her brains was forced from her
head, was found the next day yet alive, and continued to live for several days, the brains
still oozing from the fracture of her skull.

The last mischief that was done this fall, was perpetrated at the house of Samuel Cottrail
near to the present town of Clarksburg.--During the night considerable fear was excited, both
at Cottrial's and at Sotha Hickman's on the opposite side of Elk creek, by the continued barking
of the dogs, that Indians were lurking near, and in consequence of this apprehension Cottrial,
on going to bed, secured well the doors and directed that no one should stir out in the morning
until it was ascertained that there was no danger threatening. A while before day, Cottrial
being fast asleep, Moses Coleman, who lived with him, got up, shelled some corn, and giving
a few ears to Cottrial's nephew with directions to feed the pigs around [207] the yard, went
to the hand mill in an out house, and commenced grinding. The little boy, being squatted down
shelling the corn to the pigs, found himself suddenly drawn on his back and an Indian standing
over him, ordering him to lie there. The savage then turned toward the house in which Coleman
was, fired, and as Coleman fell ran up to scalp him. Thinking this a favorable time for him
to reach the dwelling house, the little boy sprang to his feet, and running to the door, it
was opened and he admitted. Scarcely was it closed after him, when one of the Indians with
his tomahawk endeavored to break it open. Cottrail fired through the door at him, and he went
off. In order to see if others were about, and to have a better opportunity of shooting with
effect, Cottrail ascended the loft, and looking through a crevice saw them hastening away through
the field and at too great distance for him to shoot with the expectation of injuring them.
Yet he continued to fire and halloo; to give notice of danger to those who lived near him.

The severity of the following winter put a momentary stop to savage inroad, and gave to the
inhabitants on the frontier an interval of quiet and repose extremely desirable to them, after
the dangers and confinement of the preceding season. Hostilities were however, resumed upon
the first appearance of spring, and acts of murder and devastation, which had, of necessity,
been suspended for a time, were begun to be committed, with a firm determination on the part
of the savages, utterly to exterminate the inhabitants of the western country. To effect this
object, an expedition was concerted between the British commandant at Detroit and the Indian
Chiefs north west of the Ohio to be carried on by their united forces against Kentucky, while
an Indian army alone, was to penetrate North Western Virginia, and spread desolation over its
surface. No means which could avail to ensure success and which lay within their reach, were
left unemployed. The army destined to operate against Kentucky, was to consist of six hundred
Indians and Canadians, to be commanded by Col. Byrd (a British officer) and furnished with
every implement of destruction, from the war club of the savages, to the cannon of their allies.[2]
Happily for North Western Virginia, its situation exempted its inhabitants from having to contend
against these instruments of war; the want of roads prevented the transportation of cannon
through the intermediate forests, and the difficulty and labor of propelling them up the Ohio
river, forbade the attempt in that way.

While the troops were collecting for these expeditions, and other preparations were making
for carrying them on, the settlements of North Western Virginia were not free from invasion.
Small parties of Indians would enter them at unguarded moments, and kill and plunder, whenever
opportunities occurred of their being done with impunity, and then retreat to their villages.
Early in March (1780) Thomas Lackey discovered some mocason tracks near the upper extremity
of Tygarts Valley, and thought he heard a voice saying in [208] an under tone, "let him alone,
he will go and bring more." Alarmed by these circumstances, he proceeded to Hadden's fort and
told there what he had seen, and what he believed, he had heard. Being so early in the season
and the weather yet far from mild, none heeded his tale, and but few believed it. On the next
day however, as Jacob Warwick, William Warwick and some others from Greenbrier were about leaving
the fort on their return home, it was agreed that a company of men should accompany them some
distance on the road. Unapprehensive of danger, in spite of the warning of Lackey, they were
proceeding carelessly on their way, when they were suddenly attacked by some Indians lying
in ambush, near to the place, where the mocason tracks had been seen on the preceding day.
The men on horse back, all got safely off; but those on foot were less fortunate. The Indians
having occupied the pass both above and below, the footmen had no chance of escape but in crossing
the river and ascending a steep bluff, on its opposite side. In attempting this several lost
their lives. John McLain was killed about thirty yards from the brow of the hill.--James Ralston,
when a little farther up it, and James Crouch was wounded after having nearly reached its summit,
yet he got safely off and returned to the fort on the next day. John Nelson, after crossing
over, endeavored to escape down the river; but being there met by a stout warrior, he too was
killed, after a severe struggle. His shattered gun breech, the uptorn earth, and the locks
of Indian hair in his yet clenched hands, showed that the victory over him had not been easily won.

Soon after this, the family of John Gibson were surprised at their sugar camp, on a branch
of the Valley river, and made prisoners. Mrs. Gibson, being incapable of supporting the fatigue
of walking so far and fast, was tomahawked and scalped in the presence of her children.

West's fort on Hacker's creek, was also visited by the savages, early in this year.[3] The
frequent incursions of the Indians into this settlement, in the year 1778, had caused the inhabitants
to desert their homes the next year, and shelter themselves in places of greater security;
but being unwilling to give up the improvements which they had already made and commence anew
in the woods, some few families returned to it during the winter, & on the approach of spring,
moved into the fort. They had not been long here, before the savages made their appearance,
and continued to invest the fort for some time. Too weak to sally out and give them battle,
and not knowing when to expect relief, the inhabitants were almost reduced to despair, when
Jesse Hughs resolved at his own hazard, to try to obtain assistance to drive off the enemy.
Leaving the fort at night, he broke by their sentinels and ran with speed to the Buchannon
fort. Here he prevailed on a party of the men to accompany him to West's, and relieve those
who had been so long confined there. They arrived before day, and it was thought advisable
to abandon the place once more, and remove to Buchannon. On their way, the [209] Indians used
every artifice to separate the party, so as to gain an advantageous opportunity of attacking
them; but in vain. They exercised so much caution, and kept so well together, that every stratagem
was frustrated, and they all reached the fort in safety.

Two days after this, as Jeremiah Curl, Henry Fink and Edmund West, who were old men, and Alexander
West,[4] Peter Cutright, and Simon Schoolcraft, were returning to the fort with some of their
neighbor's property, they were fired at by the Indians who were lying concealed along a run
bank. Curl was slightly wounded under the chin, but disdaining to fly without making a stand
he called to his companions, "stand your ground, for we are able to whip them." At this instant
a lusty warrior drew a tomahawk from his belt and rushed towards him. Nothing daunted by the
danger which seemed to threaten him, Curl raised his gun; but the powder being damped by the
blood from his wound, it did not fire. He instantly picked up West's gun (which he had been
carrying to relieve West of part of his burden) and discharging it at his assailant, brought
him to the ground.

