When there was a rumour of war with France a while ago, I met a poor Sligo woman, a soldier's
widow, that I know, and I read her a sentence out of a letter I had just had from London: "The
people here are mad for war, but France seems inclined to take things peacefully," or some
like sentence. Her mind ran a good deal on war, which she imagined partly from what she had
heard from soldiers, and partly from tradition of the rebellion of '98, but the word London
doubled her interest, for she knew there were a great many people in London, and she herself
had once lived in "a congested district." "There are too many over one another in London. They
are getting tired of the world. It is killed they want to be. It will be no matter; but sure
the French want nothing but peace and quietness. The people here don't mind the war coming.
They could not be worse than they are. They may as well die soldierly before God. Sure they
will get quarters in heaven." Then she began to say that it would be a hard thing to see children
tossed about on bayonets, and I knew her mind was running on traditions of the great rebellion.
She said presently, "I never knew a man that was in a battle that liked to speak of it after.
They'd sooner be throwing hay down from a hayrick." She told me how she and her neighbours
used to be sitting over the fire when she was a girl, talking of the war that was coming, and
now she was afraid it was coming again, for she had dreamed that all the bay was "stranded
and covered with seaweed." I asked her if it was in the Fenian times that she had been so much
afraid of war coming. But she cried out, "Never had I such fun and pleasure as in the Fenian
times. I was in a house where some of the officers used to be staying, and in the daytime I
would be walking after the soldiers' band, and at night I'd be going down to the end of the
garden watching a soldier, with his red coat on him, drilling the Fenians in the field behind
the house. One night the boys tied the liver of an old horse, that had been dead three weeks,
to the knocker, and I found it when I opened the door in the morning." And presently our talk
of war shifted, as it had a way of doing, to the battle of the Black Pig, which seems to her
a battle between Ireland and England, but to me an Armageddon which shall quench all things
in the Ancestral Darkness again, and from this to sayings about war and vengeance. "Do you
know," she said, "what the curse of the Four Fathers is? They put the man-child on the spear,
and somebody said to them, 'You will be cursed in the fourth generation after you,' and that
is why disease or anything always comes in the fourth generation."

1902.

THE QUEEN AND THE FOOL

I have heard one Hearne, a witch-doctor, who is on the border of Clare and Galway, say that
in "every household" of faery "there is a queen and a fool," and that if you are "touched"
by either you never recover, though you may from the touch of any other in faery. He said of
the fool that he was "maybe the wisest of all," and spoke of him as dressed like one of the
"mummers that used to be going about the country." Since then a friend has gathered me some
few stories of him, and I have heard that he is known, too, in the highlands. I remember seeing
a long, lank, ragged man sitting by the hearth in the cottage of an old miller not far from
where I am now writing, and being told that he was a fool; and I find from the stories that
my friend has gathered that he is believed to go to faery in his sleep; but whether he becomes
an Amadan-na-Breena, a fool of the forth, and is attached to a household there, I cannot tell.
It was an old woman that I know well, and who has been in faery herself, that spoke of him.