A day or two afterward I recrossed the Gulf to New Orleans, and then, being called from my
headquarters to the interior of Texas, a fortnight passed before I heard anything from Brownsville.
In the meanwhile Major Young had come to New Orleans, and organized there a band of men to
act as a body-guard for Caravajal, the old wretch having induced him to accept the proposition
by representing that it had my concurrence.  I at once condemned the whole business, but Young,
having been furnished with seven thousand dollars to recruit the men and buy their arms, had
already secured both, and was so deeply involved in the transaction, he said, that he could
not withdraw without dishonor, and with tears in his eyes he besought me to help him.  He told
me he had entered upon the adventure in the firm belief that I would countenance it; that the
men and their equipment were on his hands; that he must make good his word at all hazards;
and that while I need not approve, yet I must go far enough to consent to the departure of
the men, and to loan him the money necessary to provision his party and hire a schooner to
carry them to Brazos.  It was hard in deed to resist the appeals of this man, who had served
me so long and so well, and the result of his pleading was that I gave him permission to sail,
and also loaned him the sum asked for; but I have never ceased to regret my consent, for misfortune
fell upon the enterprise almost from its inception.

By the time the party got across the Gulf and over to Brownsville, Caravajal had been deposed
by Canales, and the latter would not accept their services.  This left Young with about fifty
men to whom he was accountable, and as he had no money to procure them subsistence, they were
in a bad fix.  The only thing left to do was to tender their services to General Escobedo,
and with this in view the party set out to reach the General's camp, marching up the Rio Grande
on the American side, intending to cross near Ringgold Bar racks.  In advance of them, however,
had spread far and wide the tidings of who they were, what they proposed to do, and where they
were going, and before they could cross into Mexico they were attacked by a party of ex-Confederates
and  renegade Mexican rancheros.  Being on American soil, Young forbade his men to return the
fire, and bent all his efforts to getting them over the river; but in this attempt they were
broken up, and became completely demoralized.  A number of the men were drowned while swimming
the river, Young himself was shot and killed, a few were captured, and those who escaped--about
twenty in all--finally joined Escobedo, but in such a  plight as to be of little use.  With
this distressing affair came to an end pretty much all open participation of American sympathizers
with the Liberal cause, but the moral support afforded by the presence of our forces continued,
and this was frequently supplemented with material aid in the shape of munitions of war, which
we liberally supplied, though constrained to do so by the most secret methods.

The term of office of Juarez as President of the Mexican Republic expired in December, 1865,
but to meet existing exigencies he had continued himself in office by proclamation, a course
rendered necessary by the fact that no elections could be held on account of the Imperial occupation
of most of the country.  The official who, by the Mexican Constitution, is designated for the
succession in such an emergency, is the President of the Supreme Court, and the person then
eligible under this provision was General Ortega, but in the interest of the Imperialists he
had absented himself from Mexico, hence the patriotic course of Juarez in continuing himself
at the head of affairs was a necessity of the situation.  This action of the President gave
the Imperialists little concern at first, but with the revival of the Liberal cause they availed
themselves of every means to divide its supporters, and Ortega, who had been lying low in the
United States, now came forward to claim the Presidency.  Though ridiculously late for such
a step, his first act was to issue a manifesto protesting against the assumption of the executive
authority by Juarez.  The protest had little effect, however, and his next proceeding was to
come to New Orleans, get into correspondence with other disaffected Mexicans, and thus perfect
his plans.  When he thought his intrigue ripe enough for action, he sailed for Brazos, intending
to cross the Rio Grande and assert his claims with arms. While he was scheming in New Orleans,
however, I had learned what he was up to, and in advance of his departure had sent instructions
to have him arrested on American soil.  Colonel Sedgwick, commanding at Brownsville, was now
temporary master of Matamoras also, by reason of having stationed some American troops there
for the protection of neutral merchants, so when Ortega appeared at Brazos, Sedgwick quietly
arrested him and held him till the city of Matamoras was turned over to General Escobedo, the
authorized representative of Juarez; then Escobedo took charge, of Ortega, and with ease prevented
his further machinations.

During the winter and spring of 1866 we continued covertly supplying arms and ammunition to
the Liberals--sending as many as 30,000 muskets from Baton Rouge Arsenal alone--and by mid-summer
Juarez, having organized a pretty good sized army, was in possession of the whole line of the
Rio Grande, and, in fact, of nearly the whole of Mexico down to San Louis Potosi.  Then thick
and fast came rumors pointing to the tottering condition of Maximilian's Empire-first, that
Orizaba and Vera Cruz were being fortified; then, that the French were to be withdrawn; and
later came the intelligence that the Empress Carlotta had gone home to beg assistance from
Napoleon, the author of all of her husband's troubles.  But the situation forced Napoleon to
turn a deaf ear to Carlotta's prayers.  The brokenhearted woman besought him on her knees,
but his fear of losing an army made all pleadings vain.  In fact, as I ascertained by the following
cablegram which came into my hands, Napoleon's instructions for the French evacuation were
in Mexico at the very time of this pathetic scene between him and Carlotta.  The despatch was
in cipher when I received it, but was translated by the telegraph operator at my headquarters,
who long before had mastered the key of the French cipher:

"PARIS, January 10, 1867.  FRENCH CONSUL, New Orleans, La.

"To GENERAL CASTELNAU, at Mexico.

"Received your despatch of the 9th December.  Do not compel the Emperor to abdicate, but do
not delay the departure of the troops; bring back all those who will not remain there.  Most
of the fleet has left.

"NAPOLEON."

