The writer told them plainly that he was now working on the side of the management, and that
he proposed to do whatever he could to get a fair day's work out of the lathes. This immediately
started a war; in most cases a friendly war, because the men who were under him were his personal
friends, but none the less a war, which as time went on grew more and more bitter. The writer
used every expedient to make them do a fair day's work, such as discharging or lowering the
wages of the more stubborn men who refused to make any improvement, and such as lowering the
piece-work price, hiring green men, and personally teaching them bow to do the work, with the
promise from them that when they had learned how, they would then do a fair day's work. While
the men constantly brought such pressure to bear (both inside and outside the works) upon all
those who started to increase their output that they were finally compelled to do about as
the rest did, or else quit. No one who has not had this experience can have an idea of the
bitterness which is gradually developed in such a struggle. In a war of this kind the workmen
have one expedient which is usually effective. They use their ingenuity to contrive various
ways in which the machines which they are running are broken or damaged--apparently by accident,
or in the regular course of work--and this they always lay at the door of the foreman, who
has forced them to drive the machine so hard that it is overstrained and is being ruined. And
there are few foremen indeed who are able to stand up against the combined pressure of all
of the men in the shop. In this case the problem was complicated by the fact that the shop
ran both day and night.

The writer had two advantages, however, which are not possessed by the ordinary foreman, and
these came, curiously enough, from the fact that he was not the son of a working man.

First, owing to the fact that he happened not to be of working parents, the owners of the company
believed that he had the interest of the works more at heart than the other workmen, and they
therefore had more confidence in his word than they did in that of the machinists who were
under him. So that, when the machinists reported to the Superintendent that the machines were
being smashed up because an incompetent foreman was overstraining them, the Superintendent
accepted the word of the writer when he said that these men were deliberately breaking their
machines as a part of the piece-work war which was going on, and he also allowed the writer
to make the only effective answer to this Vandalism on the part of the men, namely: "There
will be no more accidents to the machines in this shop. If any part of a machine is broken
the man in charge of it must pay at least a part of the cost of its repair, and the fines collected
in this way will all be handed over to the mutual beneficial association to help care for sick
workmen." This soon stopped the willful breaking of machines.

Second. If the writer had been one of the workmen, and had lived where they lived, they would
have brought such social pressure to bear upon him that it would have been impossible to have
stood out against them. He would have been called "scab" and other foul names every time he
appeared on the street, his wife would have been abused, and his children would have been stoned.
Once or twice he was begged by some of his friends among the workmen not to walk home, about
two and a half miles along the lonely path by the side of the railway. He was told that if
he continued to do this it would be at the risk of his life. In all such cases, however, a
display of timidity is apt to increase rather than diminish the risk, so the writer told these
men to say to the other men in the shop that he proposed to walk home every night right up
that railway track; that he never had carried and never would carry any weapon of any kind,
and that they could shoot and be d------.

After about three years of this kind of struggling, the output of the machines had been materially
increased, in many cases doubled, and as a result the writer had been promoted from one gang-boss-ship
to another until he became foreman of the shop. For any right-minded man, however, this success
is in no sense a recompense for the bitter relations which he is forced to maintain with all
of those around him. At times it is excellent in style and in conception, and evidently flowing from
springs pure, copious, and active, and giving promise of great future eminence. At other times
the marks of haste, of exhaustion, and being run out of breath, are perceptible to an eye so
sensitive as mine is on this subject. I see no reason why you should not become a great writer
and one of the teachers of your country-folk, if you will resolve never to write except from a full
mind--which is just as essential to literary success as it is to
success in singing never to sing but out of well inflated lungs.'
He ends by the practical application of an entreaty to make use of
the family purse.

The reference to a law-book is explained by a correspondence which is going on at the same
period in regard to various literary proposals. My father sketches several plans; he disapproves
of a technical treatise, in which he thinks that Fitzjames would
be at a disadvantage from the inevitable comparison with his uncle,
the serjeant; but he advises some kind of legal history, resembling
Hallam's history inverted.

In the proposed book the legal aspect should be in the foreground and the political in the
background. He expounds at length a scheme which has not been executed, and which would, I think,
be exceedingly valuable. It was suggested by his own lectures on French history, though it must
be 'six times longer and sixty times more exact and complete.' It is to be a history of the
English administrative system from feudal times downwards, giving an account of the development
of the machinery for justice, revenue, ecclesiastical affairs, war, trade, colonies, police,
and so forth.

Each chapter should expound the actual state of things, and trace the historical development of one
department, and would involve a variety of parenthetical inquiries, which should be carefully subordinated
to the main purpose. Various hints are given as to the course of
investigation that will be necessary.

Fitzjames began to work upon this scheme; and his opening chapters fill two or three large
manuscript books. The plan was abandoned for one more suitable to his powers. Meanwhile, the
literary activity which had alarmed his father was not abated, and, indeed, before very long,
was increased.

IV. EDUCATION COMMISSION AND RECORDERSHIP

Another employment for
a time gave him work, outside both of his professional and his literary
career, though it remained something of a parenthesis. Two classes of experiments had been made: one by physiologists who were studying
the endurance of the human animal, and the other by engineers who wished to determine what
fraction of a horse-power a man-power was. These experiments had been made largely upon men
who were lifting loads by means of turning the crank of a winch from which weights were suspended,
and others who were engaged in walking, running, and lifting weights in various ways. However,
the records of these investigations were so meager that no law of any value could be deduced
from them. We therefore started a series of experiments of our own.

Two first-class laborers were selected, men who had proved themselves to be physically powerful
and who were also good steady workers. These men were paid double wages during the experiments,
and were told that they must work to the best of their ability at all times, and that we should
make certain tests with them from time to time to find whether they were "soldiering" or not,
and that the moment either one of them started to try to deceive us he would be discharged.
They worked to the best of their ability throughout the time that they were being observed.

Now it must be clearly understood that in these experiments we were not trying to find the
maximum work that a man could do on a short spurt or for a few days, but that our endeavor
was to learn what really constituted a full day's work for a first-class man; the best day's
work that a man could properly do, year in and year out, and still thrive under. These men
were given all kinds of tasks, which were carried out each day under the close observation
of the young college man who was conducting the experiments, and who at the same time noted
with a stop-watch the proper time for all of the motions that were made by the men. Every element
in any way connected with the work which we believed could have a bearing on the result was
carefully studied and recorded. What we hoped ultimately to determine was what fraction of
a horse-power a man was able to exert, that is, how many foot-pounds of work a man could do
in a day.

After completing this series of experiments, therefore, each man's work for each day was translated
into foot-pounds of energy, and to our surprise we found that there was no constant or uniform
relation between the foot-pounds of energy which the man exerted during a day and the tiring
effect of his work. On some kinds of work the man would be tired out when doing perhaps not
more than one-eighth of a horse-power, while in others he would be tired to no greater extent
by doing half a horse-power of work.

We failed, therefore, to find any law which was an accurate guide to the maximum day's work
for a first-class workman.

A large amount of very valuable data had been obtained, which enabled us to know, for many
kinds of labor, what was a proper day's work. It did not seem wise, however, at this time to
spend any more money in trying to find the exact law which we were after. Some years later,
when more money was available for this purpose, a second series of experiments was made, similar
to the first, but some what more thorough.

This, however, resulted as the first experiments, in obtaining valuable information but not
in the development of a law. Again, some years later, a third series of experiments was made,
and this time no trouble was spared in our endeavor to make the work thorough. Every minute
element which could in anyway affect the problem was carefully noted and studied, and two college
men devoted about three months to the experiments. After this data was again translated into
foot-pounds of energy exerted for each man each day, it became perfectly clear that there is
no direct relation between the horse-power which a man exerts (that is, his foot-pounds of
energy per day) and the tiring effect of the work on the man. The writer, however, was quite
as firmly convinced as ever that some definite, clear-cut law existed as to what constitutes
a full day's work for a first-class laborer, and our data had been so carefully collected and
recorded that he felt sure that the necessary information was included somewhere in the records.
The problem of developing this law from the accumulated facts was therefore handed over to
Mr. Carl G. Barth, who is a better mathematician than any of the rest of us, and we decided
to investigate the problem in a new way, by graphically representing each element of the work
through plotting curves, which should give us, as it were, a bird's-eye view of every element.
In a comparatively short time Mr. Barth had discovered the law governing the tiring effect
of heavy labor on a first-class man. And it is so simple in its nature that it is truly remarkable
that it should not have been discovered and clearly understood years before. The law which
was developed is as follows:

The law is confined to that class of work in which the limit of a man's capacity is reached
because he is tired out. It is the law of heavy laboring, corresponding to the work of the
cart horse, rather than that of the trotter. Practically all such work consists of a heavy
pull or a push on the man's arms, that is, the man's strength is exerted by either lifting
or pushing something which he grasps in his hands. And the law is that for each given pull
or push on the man's arms it is possible for the workman to be under load for only a definite
percentage of the day. For example, when pig iron is being handled (each pig weighing 92 pounds),
a first-class workman can only be under load 43 per cent of the day. He must be entirely free
from load during 57 per cent of the day. And as the load becomes lighter, the percentage of
the day under which the man can remain under load increases. So that, if the workman is handling
a half-pig, weighing 46 pounds, he can then be under load 58 per cent of the day, and only
has to rest during 42 per cent. As the weight grows lighter the man can remain under load during
a larger and larger percentage of the day, until finally a load is reached which he can carry
in his hands all day long without being tired out. When that point has been arrived at this
law ceases to be useful as a guide to a laborer's endurance, and some other law must be found
which indicates the man's capacity for work.

When a laborer is carrying a piece of pig iron weighing 92 pounds in his hands, it tires him
about as much to stand still under the load as it does to walk with it, since his arm muscles
are under the same severe tension whether he is moving or not. A man, however, who stands still
under a load is exerting no horse-power whatever, and this accounts for the fact that no constant
relation could be traced in various kinds of heavy laboring work between the foot-pounds of
energy exerted and the tiring effect of the work on the man. It will also be clear that in
all work of this kind it is necessary for the arms of the workman to be completely free from
load (that is, for the workman to rest) at frequent intervals. Throughout the time that the
man is under a heavy load the tissues of his arm muscles are in process of degeneration, and
frequent periods of rest are required in order that the blood may have a chance to restore
these tissues to their normal condition.

To return now to our pig-iron handlers at the Bethlehem Steel Company. If Schmidt had been
allowed to attack the pile of 47 tons of pig iron without the guidance or direction of a man
who understood the art, or science, of handling pig iron, in his desire to earn his high wages
he would probably have tired himself out by 11 or 12 o'clock in the day. He would have kept
so steadily at work that his muscles would not have had the proper periods of rest absolutely
needed for recuperation, and he would have been completely exhausted early in the day. By having
a man, however, who understood this law, stand over him and direct his work, day after day,
until he acquired the habit of resting at proper intervals, he was able to work at an even
gait all day long without unduly tiring himself.

Now one of the very first requirements for a man who is fit to handle pig iron as a regular
occupation that he shall be so stupid and so phlegmatic that he more nearly resembles in his
mental make-up the ox than any other type. The man who is mentally alert and intelligent is
for this very reason entirely unsuited to what would, for him, be the grinding monotony of
work of this character. Therefore the workman who is best suited to handling pig iron is unable
to understand the real science of doing this class of work. He is so stupid that the word "percentage"
has no meaning to him, and he must consequently be trained by a man more intelligent than himself
into the habit of working in accordance with the laws of this science before he can be successful.

The writer trusts that it is now clear that even in the case of the most elementary form of
labor that is known, there is a science, and that when the man best suited to this class of
work has been carefully selected, when the science of doing the work has been developed, and
when the carefully selected man has been trained to work in accordance with this science, the
results obtained must of necessity be overwhelmingly greater than those which are possible
under the plan of "initiative and incentive."

Let us, however, again turn to the case of these pig-iron handlers, and see whether, under
the ordinary type of management, it would not have been possible to obtain practically the
same results.

The writer has put the problem before many good managers, and asked them whether, under premium
work, piece work, or any of the ordinary plans of management, they would be likely even to
approximate 47 tons* per man per day, and not a man has suggested that an output of over 18
to 25 tons could be attained by any of the ordinary expedients. It will be remembered that
the Bethlehem men were loading only 12 1/2 tons per man.

[*Footnote: Many people have questioned the accuracy of the statement that first-class workmen
can load 47 1/2 tons of pig iron from the ground on to a car in a day. For those who are skeptical,
therefore, the following data relating to this work are given:

First. That our experiments indicated the existence of the following law: that a first-class
laborer, suited to such work as handling pig iron, could be under load only 42 per cent of
the day and must be free from load 58 per cent of the day.

Second. That a man in loading pig iron from piles placed on the ground in an open field on
to a car which stood on a track adjoining these piles, ought to handle (and that they did handle
regularly) 47 1/2 long tons (2240 pounds per ton) per day.

That the price paid for loading this pig iron was 3.9 cents per ton, and that the men working
at it averaged $1.85 per day, whereas, in the past, they had been paid only $1.15 per day.

In addition to these facts, the following are given:

  47 1/2 long tons equal 106,400 pounds of pig iron per day.
  At 92 pounds per pig, equals 1156 pigs per day.
  42 per cent. of a day under load equals 600 minutes; multiplied by
  0.42 equals 252 minutes under load.
  252 minutes divided by 1156 pigs equals 0.22 minutes per pig under
  load.

A pig-iron handler walks on the level at the rate of one foot in 0.006 minutes. The average
distance of the piles of pig iron from the car was 36 feet. It is a fact, however, that many
of the pig-iron handlers ran with their pig as soon as they reached the inclined plank. Many
of them also would run down the plank after loading the car. So that when the actual loading
went on, many of them moved at a faster rate than is indicated by the above figures. Practically
the men were made to take a rest, generally by sitting down, after loading ten to twenty pigs.
This rest was in addition to the time which it took them to walk back from the car to the pile.
It is likely that many of those who are skeptical about the possibility of loading this amount
of pig iron do not realize that while these men were walking back they were entirely free from
load, and that therefore their muscles had, during that time, the opportunity for recuperation.
It will be noted that with an average distance of 36 feet of the pig iron from the car, these
men walked about eight miles under load each day and eight miles free from load. 

That is Macaulay's pre-eminent gift.' He goes on to apply this in detail. It may be useful
to point out faults now; though his criticisms upon anything which
Fitzjames may publish in 1890 shall be 'all saccharine.'

In a letter
of April 27, 1856, he shows an alarm which was certainly not unnatural.

Fitzjames has been writing in the 'Saturday Review,' in 'Fraser,' the 'National Review,' and
elsewhere, besides having on hand a projected law-book. Is he not undertaking too much?
 Now the one man in eight who
was able to do this work was in no sense superior to the other men who were working on the
gang. He merely happened to be a man of the type of the ox,--no rare specimen of humanity,
difficult to find and therefore very highly prized. On the contrary, he was a man so stupid
that he was unfitted to do most kinds of laboring work, even. The selection of the man, then,
does not involve finding some extraordinary individual, but merely picking out from among very
ordinary men the few who are especially suited to this type of work. Although in this particular
gang only one man in eight was suited to doing the work, we had not the slightest difficulty
in getting all the men who were needed--some of them from inside of the works and others from
the neighboring country--who were exactly suited to the job.

Under the management of "initiative and incentive" the attitude of the management is that of
"putting the work up to the workmen." What likelihood would there be, then, under the old type
of management, of these men properly selecting themselves for pig-iron handling? Would they
be likely to get rid of seven men out of eight from their own gang and retain only the eighth
man? No! And no expedient could be devised which would make these men properly select themselves.
Even if they fully realized the necessity of doing so in order to obtain high wages (and they
are not sufficiently intelligent properly to grasp this necessity), the fact that their friends
or their brothers who were working right alongside of them would temporarily be thrown out
of a job because they were not suited to this kind of work would entirely prevent them from
properly selecting themselves, that is, from removing the seven out of eight men on the gang
who were unsuited to pig-iron handling.

As to the possibility, under the old type of management, of inducing these pig-iron handlers
(after they had been properly selected) to work in accordance with the science of doing heavy
laboring, namely, having proper scientifically determined periods of rest in close sequence
to periods of work. As has been indicated before, the essential idea of the ordinary types
of management is that each workman has become more skilled in his own trade than it is possible
for any one in the management to be, and that, therefore, the details of how the work shall
best be done must be left to him. The idea, then, of taking one man after another and training
him under a competent teacher into new working habits until he continually and habitually works
in accordance with scientific laws, which have been developed by some one else, is directly
antagonistic to the old idea that each workman can best regulate his own way of doing the work.
And besides this, the man suited to handling pig iron is too stupid properly to train himself. Mr.
Thwaite of course understood that the family had been averse to this marriage,--naturally very
averse. Now, however, they were prepared to yield.
The tailor interrupted the attorney at this period of his speech.
"We don't want anybody to yield, Mr. Goffe. And
this because the philosophy of the old management puts the entire responsibility upon the workmen,
while the philosophy of the new places a great part of it upon the management.

