They passed out of the grounds across a lane thickly shaded by trees, whose foliage was beginning
to change its summer hue for the gorgeous varieties of autumnal colouring.  Then they followed
a winding path that skirted a wide sea of wheat, which rose and fell in rustling waves, disclosing
now and again bright dazzling gleams of the scarlet poppy. At the end of this field was a stile
leading into the highroad to Hopeworth.  Here they paused, and were just about to part, when
the sound of a horse's feet in rapid but very irregular motion arrested their attention.  The
animal and his rider soon came into view, the latter evidently keeping his seat with difficulty.
There was plainly a struggle of some kind going on between the brute and the rational being
who was mounted on him, and while drawing the reins tight with one hand, was belabouring the
poor creature about the head most unmercifully with a heavy hunting whip. I give like
him all the wages which were maidens, and even a loaf of bread each week to do so because
the child is worth it to me. You have the advantage that you will not be taken. It's fast,
it can, when closing time is home to you.

Mr Tankardew's indignation was kindled in a moment.

"The wretch!  The drunken beast!" he cried; "serve him right if his horse pitches him head
foremost into the first ditch with any dirty water in it."

On came the contending pair, the man swaying from side to side, but nevertheless marvellously
retaining his seat.  At the sight of the ladies, or at a sudden movement forward of Mr Tankardew,
the animal swerved and almost unseated his tormentor, who, however, recovered himself, but
in doing so lost his hat, as the poor beast again plunged forward with his almost unconscious
burden.  The horseman took no notice of his loss, nor did he see who were the spectators of
his sinful degradation, but to them he was fully revealed: it was Mark Rothwell. Another minute
and he was out of sight.

Mary sank, with a bitter cry, into her mother's arms, while Mr Tankardew sprang forward to
support them both.  In a moment or two, however, the ladies had recovered themselves, and turned
homewards.  The old man saw that they would prefer to be alone, so, with a kind and courteous
farewell, he made his way with slow strides towards the town.

"Humph!" he muttered to himself; "`Good entertainment for man and beast,' that's what they
put over some of these alcohol shops.  I'd like to know which was the beast just now.  Entertainment!
Ay, very entertaining, such a sight to the devil and his angels.  O miserable drink!  Haven't
you drowned souls enough yet?"

Two days after this disgraceful exposure of himself, Mark Rothwell made an early call at "The
Shrubbery."  He was utterly ignorant of his having been seen in his drunkenness by Mrs Franklin
and her daughter, and was scrupulously sober on the present occasion, and full of good resolutions,
as habitual drunkards very commonly are after an outbreak of more than usual violence.  He
was quite convinced--at least he was enjoying a good deal of cheerful self-congratulation on
the supposed conviction--that he never would exceed again; so in the strength of this conviction,
he entered the room where Mary and her mother were sitting, with a confident step, though he
could not quite keep down every feeling of misgiving.  Still, it never occurred to him that
Mary could possibly refuse him.  He had too high an opinion of himself: he was such a general
favourite and so popular, that he felt sure any young lady of his acquaintance would esteem
herself honoured by the offer of his hand. He was well aware, it is true, that Mary had a horror
of drunkenness; but he flattered himself, first, that he could persuade her that he meant to
be sober for the future, and a total abstainer too if she required it; and then, that he had
got a sufficient hold upon her heart, or at any rate regard, to make her willing to accept
him without any stipulations rather than lose him.  Strong in these impressions, he had now
come over to make a formal proposal.  The manner, however, of mother and daughter disturbed
him; something he saw was amiss; there was a sadness and constraint in the words of both which
distressed and embarrassed him.  After a brief conversation on commonplace topics Mary rose
hastily and left the room.  Mark hesitated, but feeling that he must seize the opportunity,
he at once asked Mrs Franklin's permission to avow his attachment to her daughter.

A long and painful pause: broken, at last, by Mrs Franklin's reply, that she could not advise
her daughter to encourage his addresses.

Mark was thunderstruck!  For several minutes surprise and mortification kept him silent.  At
last he exclaimed:

"But what does Mary wish herself?  We've known each other so long; she knows I love her, she
must know it.  I'm sure she would not refuse me; may I not see her?  May I not have `yes,'
or `no,' from her own lips?"

"I will ask her," was the reply; and poor Mark was left for half an hour to his own not very
agreeable reflections. Why could I not be born into a town
that has beautiful houses? Even the name is so ugly. There are beautiful towns: Babylon, Baghdad, or
Palmyra.

His childish longing made his steps faster and bigger.  She sends you this letter instead; do not read it now," for Mark was
tearing it open, "but wait till you can give it your calm and full attention."

Mark would have remonstrated, but Mrs Franklin's quiet decision restrained him; he flung himself
out of the house, and on reaching the highway, burst open the envelope and read as follows:--

  "Dear Mark,--We have always been friends, and I hope shall remain so;
  but we can never be anything more to one another.  I have solemnly
  resolved in God's sight that I will never marry a drunkard, and I
  never will.  I was witness to your ill-usage of your poor horse the
  other day, when you were intoxicated; I cannot forget it; my mind is
  made up, I cannot alter it, and my dear mother entirely approves of my
  decision.  I thank you for your offer, and pray that you may have
  grace given you to forsake the sin which has made it impossible that
  there can ever be more than a feeling of sincere interest and
  kindliness towards yourself, from yours truly,--

  "Mary Franklin."

Mark Rothwell tore the letter, when he had glanced through it, into bits, dashed them on the
ground, and, with loud imprecations, stamped on them.  There was a fire in his heart, a mad
desire for revenge; he was, what drunkards must be, essentially selfish.  Wounded vanity, disappointed
affection, bitter jealousy, were the fuel to that fire.  He had no thought now of remonstrance
with Mary: he had no wish to remonstrate: his one great burning desire was to be revenged.
He rushed home, but found little to cheer him there.  For months past a cloud had hung over
"The Firs," which had become denser and darker every day.  And now it was come abroad that
Mr Rothwell was bankrupt.  It was too true: the reckless expenditure of Mark, and the incautious
good nature of Mr Rothwell, which had led him, under the influence of free living, to engage
in disastrous speculations, had brought ruin on the miserable family.  A few more weeks and
"The Firs" was untenanted.

But, in the midst of all this darkness, there shone forth a ray of heavenly light.

It was near midnight of the day when the sale of Mr Rothwell's effects had taken place at "The
Firs."  A candle twinkled still in the cottage of Mrs Forbes, for there was work to be sent
home early on the morrow, and neither lateness nor weariness might suspend their anxious toil.
Lame Sally and her mother had been talking over, what was in everyone's mouth and thoughts,
the sad downfall of the Rothwells.  They saw God's hand in it, but they did not rejoice; they
had found their Saviour true to His word, and enjoyed a peace in casting their care on Him
which they knew all the wealth of the world could not have given them.  Only one thing they
still prayed for which the Lord had not yet granted: Jim, poor Jim! 

About Trini face was a joyful smile. It had heard the woman but still that it had not done that,
a city which was his heart. It came by piece, the woman's hand to reach out. "What do you mean?"
"continued the woman," How did you feel with me in the yard, you wanted good to work with me?
"

The Trini always looked astonished at the woman again and again to the Grandmother. This could
not be silent in their joy, "Trineli, just think, just think how it is now comes, "she exclaimed,"
you do not come into the Reuss valley, thou shalt not leave me. Every day you may distribute
to the good woman down on the home Goldaepfelhof and again in the
evening.

Ah! what is a relief from the big concern. Thanks to her, Trineli, thanks to her! "

"So I work very much. And I will love you for what you want is," said the Trini, which knew only
now appreciating the offer of the farmer's wife.

"That's right," concluded the farmer, "the matter is settled.

The Beer Read now an end, and the apple and pear reading begins. This is just the right time
to tune in I begin with the work. On Monday you send me the child, Katherine, and give him
Your blessings. And now, goodbye. "

Once the door is closed behind the farmer's wife, began the Grandmother to praise loudly and
give thanks that God had transformed all their concern in such joy and help. The Trini shouted
loudly: "Hurrah, now I have never been away from you, Grandmother
I will! been able to work, then I certainly reserves the woman all
her life.

"

Now it had to but the golden apples still look from the neighborhood.

At one time it said: "Grandmother, may I not bring the swift nor the half Maneli? I now have
always shared with him. "

"Yes, yes," nodded approvingly the old woman, that was her just right, that even the poor neighbor
some of their great luck, will benefit. "Running just the same, Trineli, and take more than
half. There are so many who will enjoy the apples, go fast! "
Trini rushed, and a huge cry of joy broke out in the crowd of children,
as It hinschuettete the apples on the table. They rolled here and
there and the sweet aroma of apples perfused the whole room.

On Monday,
when the Trini under the trees of the Goldaepfelhofes already busy
with his work was joined by a cousin of the old Kaethe. Now she had
no more terror. You told him where the child was at work and that
it will stay there. But as soon to let the cousin stuck to his plan
because he had been before, take the child.  And so it was felt by all that, in time, John
Randolph and Mary Franklin would be drawn together by a closer bond than that of esteem and
respect, but no one as yet gave outspoken expression to this conviction.

Things were thus hanging in no unpleasing suspense, when, in the twilight of an October evening,
two men of rather suspicious appearance might have been seen climbing the paling fence at the
back of "The Shrubbery."  Scarcely had one of them reached the top, when a third person approached,
at first hastily; then he suddenly checked himself, and cautiously crept along, so as to keep
himself out of the sight of the two others who were climbing into the grounds.  This third
person was John Randolph, who had lately left "The Shrubbery," and had come round by the road
at the back, to call, by Mrs Franklin's request, on a poor sick cottager in the village.  The
road in this part was lonely, and the trespassers evidently imagined themselves unobserved.
The first who scaled the palings was a stoutish, middle-aged man: but who was the other?  Randolph's
heart beat violently with a terrible suspicion.  Did he know this second figure?  He could
not be quite sure, for he was afraid to approach too near; but he was almost convinced that
he had seen him before.  When fairly over the fence, both men crept along as quietly as possible
under the shelter of a large bank of evergreens.  He who had climbed over last led the way,
and was plainly well acquainted with the grounds; he was a much younger man than his companion,
and seemed scarcely sober, yet without having lost self-possession and the knowledge of what
he was doing.  John waited till they were fairly out of hearing, and then himself rapidly and
noiselessly followed them towards the house under cover of the laurels.  It was now getting
very dusk, but he could manage to track them till they had reached some outhouses, along the
wall of which they crawled, crouching down.  And now they had arrived at the rear of the house,
and stood in shadow opposite a back passage window.  Randolph crept silently up and squeezed
himself behind a huge water-butt, where he was perfectly concealed, and could overhear part
of the conversation now hurriedly held between the two burglars, if such they were.

"You're sure the man does not sleep in the house?" asked the elder man.

"Sure," replied the second, in a husky whisper.  John Randolph felt pretty certain that he
knew the voice, but he hardly dared think it.

"Where's the plate chest?"

"Don't know: most likely in the pantry."

John was now confident that he knew the speaker.

"Hush!" whispered the elder man, fiercely, "this passage window 'll do: it won't take much
to prise it open: you'll look after the women."

"Trust me for that," muttered the other; and Randolph thought he heard a click, as of the cocking
of a pistol.

"Hush, you fool!" growled the older burglar, with an oath: then there was a few moments' silence,
and the two crept back.  They sat down under the shelter of some large shrubs, with their backs
to John, who could only just make them out from his hiding-place, for it was now getting quite
dark.  A little while, and they rose, and passed very near their unsuspected watcher, who could
just catch the words "Two o'clock," as they made their way back to the fence.  A few moments
more, and they were clear of the grounds.

John Randolph's mind was made up in a moment what to do.  Having cautiously followed the two
men into the road, and ascertained that they were not lurking anywhere about "The Shrubbery,"
he hurried off at once to Hopeworth, and communicated what he had seen and heard to the police.
He was very anxious that no unnecessary alarm should be given to Mrs Franklin or Mary, and
that they should be kept, if possible, in ignorance of the whole matter till the danger was
over; so he resolved to accompany the constables, who, with the superintendent, were preparing
to encounter the housebreakers.  It was presumed, from what he had overheard, that an attempt
was to be made on "The Shrubbery" that very night, and that the two men seen by John Randolph
were only part of a larger gang.  Help was therefore procured, and about one o'clock a party
of a dozen, including John, all disguised in labourers' clothes, had noiselessly scaled the
fence in different parts by two and two, and, recognising one another by a password previously
agreed upon, were soon clustered together under some dense shrubs not far from the passage
window before mentioned.  It was a tranquil morning, but very cloudy. All was deep stillness
in the house.  Little did Mrs Franklin and her daughter think, as they read together before
parting for the night those comforting words, "The angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear Him, and delivereth them," that such foes and such protectors were so close
at hand.  But they laid them down in perfect peace, and their heavenly Father's loving power
was as a wall of fire about them. Patiently did the watchers listen from their hiding-place
to every sound.  Two o'clock, at last, rang out clear from the great timepiece on the stairs;
they could hear it distinctly outside.  What was that sound? Only the distant barking of a
fox.  But now there are other sounds. One, two, three, at length six men in all have crept
to the part of the yard opposite the back door.  All paused and looked carefully round: everything
seemed safe.

"Well," said one who appeared to be a leader, "it does not seem as if we need be over particular:
there's neither dog nor man about, and the women won't do much.  Where's the crowbar?"

"Here."

Just at this moment a bright ray of light flashed out along the passage, and a female figure
could be seen crossing the landing.  The housebreakers shrunk back.

"It will not do," said the leader, half aloud; "they've got scent of us somehow: pr'aps they've
some men inside to help them, we'd better be off."

"Fools!  Cowards!" exclaimed a younger man, in a fierce whisper, as the others began to slink
away; "are you afraid of a parcel of women?  But I'll not be baffled: she's there:" and he
raised a pistol, and pointed it towards the figure which had descended close to the passage
window with the light in her hand, and was trying to peer into the darkness outside.  His companion
pulled down his arm with a savage imprecation. All was still for a few minutes, and the female
retired to the landing and then disappeared.  The burglars hesitated, when, just at the moment
of their indecision, one of the police imitated the low growling of a dog close at hand.  Instantly
the whole gang took to their heels, closely followed by the constables.  No shout had been
raised, no word had been spoken, for John Randolph had been most anxious that the thieves should
be captured without alarming the ladies.  And now in the darkness, pursuers and pursued were
scattered in different directions. John sprang after the young man who had raised the pistol,
and succeeded in grappling with him before he could mount the fence.  The clouds were now dispersed,
and there was light enough for one to recognise another. Randolph could not doubt; the intended
murderer was Mark Rothwell. Fiercely did the two young men strive together, and at last both
fell, Mark undermost; and, relaxing his hold, John was rising to his feet, when the other drew
a pistol, but before he could fire his adversary had turned it aside; it went off, wounding
the unhappy young man who held it.  Randolph drew back in dismay, hearing the injured man's
involuntary groan, but in another instant Mark had drawn a second pistol and fired. The ball
grazed the other's forehead, and he staggered back stupefied. When he recovered himself Mark
had disappeared, and never from that night was heard of or seen in Hopeworth or its neighbourhood.
Near the part of the fence where the scuffle took place were afterwards found marks of a horse's
hoofs, and traces of blood.  The miserable young man contrived to get clear away: the rest
of the gang were all captured by the police.

The day after this adventure old Mr Tankardew and John Randolph paid a visit together to "The
Shrubbery."  Of course the wildest tales were in circulation, the central point in most being
the murder of Mrs Franklin and her daughter.  "I trust," said the old man to Mary and her mother,
"that you have suffered nothing but a little fright.  All's well that ends well, and I'm thankful
that my young friend here was able to be of some service; you see, God can take care of His own."

"It has been so, indeed," replied Mrs Franklin; "Mary could not sleep, she cannot tell why;
she felt restless and uneasy, and just about two o'clock she was crossing to my room, when
she thought she heard some unusual sounds in the yard.  She looked out of the passage window,
but could see nothing; then she heard a sort of scuffle, and, after that, all was still; and,
though we were rather alarmed, we heard nothing more.  But this morning has brought us strange
tidings, and I find that we are again indebted to our kind young friend here for help in time
of need, and that, too, I fear, at his own imminent risk."

"Don't mention this," said the young man; "it has been a privilege to me to have been able
to render this assistance.  I am only too thankful that I was put in the way of discovering
what might have otherwise been a very serious business.  But we must see that you are better
protected for the future."

"True, true, John," interrupted Mr Tankardew, smiling; "I see I must put in a word.  My dear
child, Miss Franklin seems more willing than able to speak just now.  Yes; let me make a clean
breast of it.  Let me introduce our young friend in a new character, John Randolph Tankardew,
my only son, my only surviving child."  His voice trembled, and then he added, "He has twice
been the protector of my dear adopted daughter, let me join their hands together as a pledge
that he may shortly obtain a better title to be her protector while life shall last."

And so, placing the half-shrinking hand of Mary in the young man's stronger grasp, he held
them together with a fervent blessing.

"And now," he added, as they sat in a loving group, too full of tearful peace to wish to break
the charmed silence by hasty words, "now let me tell my story, and unravel the little tangle
which has made me a mystery to my neighbours, and a burden to my friends.  But all that is
past; there are brighter days before us now."

CHAPTER ELEVEN.

MR. TANKARDEW'S STORY BEGUN.

"You must know, dear friends," began the old man sadly, "that I'm a wiser man now than I was
once.  Not that there's much wisdom to boast of now; only I have learnt by experience, and
he is a sharp schoolmaster.

"I was born to trust others; it was misery to me to live in distrust and suspicion; I couldn't
do it.  People told me I was a fool; it was true, I knew it, but I went on trusting.  David
said in his haste, `all men are liars.'  I said in my haste, or rather my folly, `all men are
true.' They might lie to others, but I thought they couldn't, or wouldn't, or didn't lie to
me.  At any rate I'd trust them; it was so sad to think that a being made in God's image could
go about wilfully deceiving others.  I'd take a brighter view of my fellow-men and women. 
I never could abide your shrewd, knowing people, who seemed to be always living with a wink
in their eyes, and a grin on their lips, as if they believed in nobody and nothing but their
own sharpness.  I loathed them, and I loathe them still.  But I wasn't wise.  I had to smart
for it.  I had plenty of money when I came of age, and I had plenty of friends, or rather acquaintances,
who knew it.  But I was shy, and not over fond of many companions; my weakness wasn't in that
direction.  I had sense enough to see through your common gold-hunters.  I was never over fond
of sugar-candy; coarse flattery made me sick, and I had no taste for patching up the holes
in the purses of profligates and spendthrifts.  I never was a worshipper of money, but I knew
its value, and wasn't disposed to make ducks and drakes of it, nor partridges and pheasants
either.  So the summer flies, after buzzing about me a little, flew off to sunnier spots; all
except one.  He puzzled me a bit at first, but I blamed myself for having a shadow of suspicion
of him.  All seemed so open about him, open hands, open eyes, open brow; he wound himself round
my heart before I knew where I was.  Mine was a fair estate (it will be yours one day, Mary,
my child, I trust; John's and yours together).  I'd lived away from home many years before
I came into it, for both my parents died while I was young, and when I came of age, my nearest
relations were only distant.  I never had brother nor sister.  When I came to reside on my
property the neighbours called, and I returned their calls, and it didn't go much beyond that.
They thought me cold and unfeeling, but they were mistaken.  But I must go back and take up
my dropped thread.  I said there was one man who got hold of my heart. I had a good stout fence
of prejudices, and an inner paling of reserve about that heart of mine, but he contrived to
climb over both, and get inside.  I could have done anything for him, but he did not seem to
want anything but my affection; so I thought.  He had a sister: well, what shall I say?  I'm
a poor, weak, old fool; it is all past and gone now. I must go straight on; but it is like
ploughing up my heart into a thousand deep furrows with my own hand.  But; well, he had a sister;
I'll not tell you her name, nor his either: at least not now.  He brought her with him to call
on me one day.  She had never been in the neighbourhood before, for her brother was only a
recent settler in the place.  I was charmed with her; the more so because she was so like her
brother, so bright and so open; so thoroughly transparent.  She beamed upon me like a flood
of sunshine, and gilded my cloudy reserve with her own radiance, so that I shone out myself
in her company; so they told me, and I believed it.  I was young then, you'll remember.  I
wasn't the wrinkled old pilgrim that I am now.  We got attached to one another, it would seem,
at once; others may fall in love; we leapt into it; I never thought to ask myself whether she
loved God.  I was content to know that she loved me.  I was aware that I had a heart, but at
that time I hadn't learnt that I had a soul.  Well, my friend (shall I drop the `r,' and call
him `fiend'?  'Twould be truer); he did all he could to hasten on our marriage.  He did it
very quietly, so openly, too.  He was so radiant with joy at the thoughts of my coming happiness.
`She was such a sister,' he said, `she would be such a wife to me.'  I never had any misgivings
but once, and then the shadow was but as the passing of a white cloud before summer's noonday
sunshine.  I was going from home for a week, but unexpected business detained me for another
day.  I walked over to my future brother-in-law's in the afternoon.  It was summer time.  I
went in, as was my habit, by the garden door, and was crossing the lawn, when I heard sounds
of wild laughter proceeding from a little summer-house; they were sounds of boisterous and
almost idiotic mirth.  There was a duet of merriment, in which a male and female each took
a part.  I hardly knew what I was doing, or whether to go back or advance.  As I hesitated,
all was hushed.  I saw a female figure dart like lightning into the house, and then my friend
(I must call him so for want of a better title) came forward, and holding out both his hands
to me, said `Welcome, welcome, this is an unexpected pleasure.  I thought you were far away
on your journey before now; my sister and I have been almost dying with laughter over a book
lent to us by a friend. I do think I never read anything so irresistibly ludicrous in all my
life.'  I hardly knew what to say in reply, I was so completely taken aback.  I was turning,
however, towards the summer-house in which I just caught a glance of a table with a bottle
and glasses on it, when my companion, catching my arm in his, hurried me away to another part
of the garden, where, he said, he was going to make some improvements, about which he must
have my judgment and suggestions.  As we afterwards went into the house, we again passed the
summer-house, but the glasses and bottle were gone.  We entered into one of the sitting-rooms,
and the servant came to tell us that her mistress had just been sent for to see a poor sick
cottager, who wanted her immediately.  This led her brother to break out into raptures about
his sister's benevolence, self-denial, and charity!  Indeed, I never heard him so eloquent
on any subject before.  I left, however, in a little while, for he seemed unnaturally restless
and excited during my stay, and a cloud lowered upon me all the way home, but it had melted
away by the next morning.  But I must hasten on.  We were married soon after this, and I settled
a handsome allowance on my wife for her own private use.  She had no parents living, but had
kept house for another brother before she came to reside in our neighbourhood.  I wished to
suppose myself happy as a married man, but, somehow or other, I was not.  My wife made large
professions of affection, but, spite of myself, I mistrusted them.  Her brother, too, seldom
came now to see me, unless he had some private business with his sister; and they were often
closeted together alone for an hour or more. Then she would come out to me, radiant with smiles,
and full of excitement; and her brother would rattle on, hurrying from one topic to another,
so as to leave me no power to collect my thoughts, or shape any questions which I was anxious
to ask him.  I am given to trust, as I have told you, and ever shall be, if I live to be a
dozen centuries old. Still, I couldn't help having my doubts, my grievous doubts.  Well, one
morning, my brother-in-law called; he seemed agitated, and in much distress, saying that he
must give up his house and join his brother, with whom he was in partnership; as he found his
presence was required for the investigation, and, he feared it might be, the winding-up of
their affairs.  I pitied him, and offered him help.  He refused it almost with indignation,
but I pressed it, and he accepted a loan, merely as a loan, he said, of a thousand pounds,
for which I gave him a cheque on the spot.  With tears in his eyes, and a warm pressure of
the hand, he was gone.  I never saw him again.  A few mornings after this; it was about six
months after we were married; my wife and I were sitting at breakfast when she threw a paper
to me across the table, saying, `I suppose you'll see to that.'  It was a bill for a considerable
amount, contracted by herself before our marriage, and for articles which were certainly no
part of a lady's toilet or wardrobe, nor could be of any possible use to one of her sex.  I
was astonished; but she treated the matter very coolly, or appeared to do so.  When I asked
for an explanation, she avoided my eye, and turned the matter off; and when I pressed her on
the subject, she said, `Well, it is no use my entering into explanations now; you'll find it
all right.'  I was greatly disturbed, for there was something in her manner that showed me
she was ill at ease, though she endeavoured to wear a nonchalant air. There was a wild light,
too, in her eyes, which distressed and almost alarmed me, and a suspicion came over me which
almost made me faint. She left the breakfast table abruptly, and I saw no more of her till
luncheon time; but when I went to my library, I found a packet on my table which I had not
noticed there before.  I opened it; it was full of unpaid bills, all made out to my wife in
her maiden name, and most, indeed nearly all of them, for articles unsuited for female use.
A horrible suspicion flashed across my mind.  Could it possibly be that these were her brother's
debts: that he had got these articles in her name, and had had the bills sent in to her?  And
could it be that brother and sister had been in league together, and that he with all his assumption
of openness and candour and large-heartedness, had entrapped me into this marriage that I might
liquidate the debts of an abandoned and reckless profligate?  And could it be, farther, (madden
ing thought!) that the whole extravagance was not his, and that numerous unpaid accounts for
wine and spirits were, partly, for what she had taken as well as her brother?  Then I thought
of the scene in the garden, of the wild laughter, of her sudden disappearance, of the signs
of drinking in the summer-house.  Oh!  My heart turned sick; was I tricked, deceived, ruined
in my peace for ever?  I paced up and down my library, more like a lunatic than a sane man.
Luncheon time came: we met: she threw herself into my arms, and wept and laughed and implored;
but I felt that a drunkard was embracing me, and I flung her from me, and rushed out of the
house.  O misery!  Whither should I go, what should I do?  It was all too true: her brother
was the basest of men: she did love him, I believe, it was the only unselfish thing about her.
Well, I had to go back home; home!  Vilest of names to me then! `home, bitter home!'  And yet
I loved that poor guilty, fallen creature.  There was a terrible light in her eyes as we sat
opposite one another at dinner.  We had to play a part before the footman.  Oh!  What a dreadful
meal that was!  I seemed to be feeding on ashes, and drinking wormwood.  I felt as if every
morsel would choke me.  We spoke to one another in measured terms.  Would the miserable farce
of a dinner never be over?  It came to an end at last.  And then she came to me trembling and
penitent, and, laying her head on my shoulder, wept till tears would fall no longer.  She was
sober then; she had taken nothing but water at dinner.  She unburdened her heart to me (so
I thought), and confessed all.  She told me how she and her brother had been brought up, as
children, in habits of self-indulgence, especially in having free access to the wine and spirits.
She told me that she and her unworthy brother had been all in all to one another, that gambling
and drink had brought him into difficulties, and that she had allowed him to run up accounts
in her name.  She declared that he really loved and valued me, and that the thought of hurrying
on our marriage for any selfish object, was quite a recent idea, suggested by distress under
pecuniary embarrassment.  She asserted passionately that she truly loved me; she implored me
to overlook the past, and promised, with solemn appeal to Heaven, that she would renounce the
drink from that hour, and give me no more uneasiness.  Ay, she promised; a drunkard's promise!
Lighter than the lightest gossamer; brittle as the ice of an April morning.  I believed her:
did she believe herself?  I fear not.  But the worst was to come, the shadows were deepening,
the storm was gathering.  A year had passed over our wedded life, when a little girl was given
to us. Every cord of my heart that had been untwined or slackened of late wound itself fast
round that blessed little one."

CHAPTER TWELVE.

MR. TANKARDEW'S STORY FINISHED.

"All was joy for a time.  We called our little one Mary; it was a name I loved.  I had not
lived as a total abstainer; though, as I told you once, my mother, whom I can only recollect
as a widow, had banished all intoxicants from our table.  But I was young when she died, and
I became, and continued for many years a moderate drinker.  But now when our little girl was
born, I had swept the house clear of all alcoholic drinks; we hadn't a drop in the place from
cellar to attics, so I thought.  And my wife agreed with me that our little one should never
know the taste of the strong drink.  We had not many friends, for I was shy and reserved still,
and my home was my world and society; at least I wished it to be so.  Sometimes I thought my
wife strangely excited, it looked very like the old misery, but she solemnly declared that
she never tasted anything intoxicating.  I hoped she spoke the truth, even against the evidence
of my senses.  After a while she persuaded me that I wanted change, that I was rusting out
in my loneliness.  She would have me accept an invitation to a friend's house now and then:
it would do me good.  She was happy in her home, she said, only she should be happier still
if she could see me gaining spirits by occasional intercourse with like-minded friends.  Not
that she wished me to leave her; it was for my own good she said it, and she should be delighting
in the thoughts of the good it would do me, and should find abundance to cheer her in my absence,
in the care of our darling child.  She said all this so openly, so artlessly, that I believed
her.  I thought she might be right; so I went now and then from home for a few days, and, by
degrees, more and more frequently.  And my wife encouraged it.  She said it did me so much
good, and the benefit I reaped in improved health, spirits, and intelligence quite reconciled
her to the separation.  We went on so till our Mary was five years old; I could not say that
my wife was ever manifestly intemperate, but painful suspicions hung like a black cloud over
me.  At last one summer's day, one miserable day: I can never forget it: I set out to pay a
week's visit to a friend, who lived some ten miles distant from my home. I have
grain and fruit growing on the farm, and there's milk in the house. I bring home a sack of flour
and a bottle of milk for the child every Sunday as well. You can be certain that there's much
more available throughout the year.  Away went my horse
at the top of his speed, and soon landed me in a ditch, and broke away, leaving the carriage
with a fractured shaft behind him.  I was not hurt myself, so I got assistance from the nearest
cottage; and, having caught my horse, and found someone to whom I could trust the repairing
of my vehicle, I walked home.  It was afternoon when I arrived.  I walked straight in through
the back of the premises, and entered the dining-room; there was no one there.  I was going
to ring for one of the servants, when the door opened, and little Mary toddled (I ought rather
to say tottered) up to me.  Her mother was close behind her, but, at the sight of me, she uttered
a wild cry, shut the door violently, and rushed upstairs.  I had seen enough in her face: too
much, too much!  And the little child, our darling little Mary, what was amiss with her?  Could
it be?  Had that cruel woman dared to do such a thing?  Yes: it was so indeed: the little child
was under the influence of strong drink; I drew the horrible truth from her by degrees.  The
mother had taught that little babe to like the exciting cup; she had sweetened and made it
specially palatable.  She had done this to make the child a willing partaker in her sin, to
bribe her to secrecy, and to use her as a tool for the gratifying of her own vile appetite.
Thus was she deliberately poisoning the body and soul of her child, and training her in deceit,
that she might league that little one, as she grew up, with herself in procuring the forbidden
stimulant, and in deceiving her own father.  O accursed drink, which can thus turn a mother
into the tempter and destroyer of her own guileless and unsuspecting child!  I rushed out of
the room, and was about to hurry upstairs, but I shrank back shivering and heart-sick.  Then
I went up slowly and heavily: my bedroom door was bolted; so was the door of my wife's dressing-room;
I came downstairs again, and, taking Mary by the hand, went into my library.  There the storm
of trouble did its work, for it drove me down upon my knees.