This house where Melanctha had always lived with her mother was a little red brick, two story
house. They had not much furniture to fill it and some of the windows were broken and not mended.
Melanctha did not have much money to use now on the house, but with a colored woman, who was
their neighbor and good natured and who had always helped them, Melanctha managed to take care
of her mother and to keep the house fairly clean and neat.

Melanctha's mother was in bed in a room upstairs, and the steps from below led right up into
it. There were just two rooms on this upstairs floor. Melanctha and Dr. Campbell sat down on
the steps, that night they watched together, so that they could hear and see Melanctha's mother
and yet the light would be shaded, and they could sit and read, if they wanted to, and talk
low some, and yet not disturb 'Mis' Herbert.

Dr. Campbell was always very fond of reading. Dr. Campbell had not brought a book with him
that night. He had just forgotten it. He had meant to put something in his pocket to read,
so that he could amuse himself, while he was sitting there and watching. When he was through
with taking care of 'Mis' Herbert, he came and sat down on the steps just above where Melanctha
was sitting. He spoke about how he had forgotten to bring his book with him. Melanctha said
there were some old papers in the house, perhaps Dr. Campbell could find something in them
that would help pass the time for a while for him. All right, Dr. Campbell said, that would
be better than just sitting there with nothing. Dr. Campbell began to read through the old
papers that Melanctha gave him. When anything amused him in them, he read it out to Melanctha.
Melanctha was now pretty silent, with him. Dr. Campbell began to feel a little, about how she
responded to him. Dr. Campbell began to see a little that perhaps Melanctha had a good mind.
Dr. Campbell was not sure yet that she had a good mind, but he began to think a little that
perhaps she might have one.

Jefferson Campbell always liked to talk to everybody about the things he worked at and about
his thinking about what he could do for the colored people. Melanctha Herbert never thought
about these things the way that he did. Melanctha had never said much to Dr. Campbell about
what she thought about them. Melanctha did not feel the same as he did about being good and
regular in life, and not having excitements all the time, which was the way that Jefferson
Campbell wanted that everybody should be, so that everybody would be wise and yet be happy.
Melanctha always had strong the sense for real experience. Melanctha Herbert did not think
much of this way of coming to real wisdom.

Dr. Campbell soon got through with his reading, in the old newspapers, and then somehow he
began to talk along about the things he was always thinking. Dr. Campbell said he wanted to
work so that he could understand what troubled people, and not to just have excitements, and
he believed you ought to love your father and your mother and to be regular in all your life,
and not to be always wanting new things and excitements, and to always know where you were,
and what you wanted, and to always tell everything just as you meant it. That's the only kind
of life he knew or believed in, Jeff Campbell repeated. "No I ain't got any use for all the
time being in excitements and wanting to have all kinds of experience all the time. I got plenty
of experience just living regular and quiet and with my family, and doing my work, and taking
care of people, and trying to understand it. I don't believe much in this running around business
and I. don't want to see the colored people do it. I am a colored man and I ain't sorry, and
I want to see the colored people like what is good and what I want them to have, and that's
to live regular and work hard and understand things, and that's enough to keep any decent man
excited." Jeff Campbell spoke now with some anger. Not to Melanctha, he did not think of her
at all when he was talking. It was the life he wanted that he spoke to, and the way he wanted
things to be with the colored people.

But Melanctha Herbert had listened to him say all this. She knew he meant it, but it did not
mean much to her, and she was sure some day he would find out, that it was not all, of real
wisdom. Melanctha knew very well what it was to have real wisdom. "But how about Jane Harden?"
said Melanctha to Jeff Campbell, "seems to me Dr. Campbell you find her to have something in
her, and you go there very often, and you talk to her much more than you do to the nice girls
that stay at home with their people, the kind you say you are really wanting. It don't seem
to me Dr. Campbell, that what you say and what you do seem to have much to do with each other.
And about your being so good Dr. Campbell," went on Melanctha, "You don't care about going
to church much yourself, and yet you always are saying you believe so much in things like that,
for people. It seems to me, Dr. Campbell you want to have a good time just like all us others,
and then you just keep on saying that it's right to be good and you ought not to have excitements,
and yet you really don't want to do it Dr. Campbell, no more than me or Jane Harden. No, Dr.
Campbell, it certainly does seem to me you don't know very well yourself, what you mean, when
you are talking."

Jefferson had been talking right along, the way he always did when he got started, and now
Melanctha's answer only made him talk a little harder. He laughed a little, too, but very low,
so as not to disturb 'Mis' Herbert who was sleeping very nicely, and he looked brightly at
Melanctha to enjoy her, and then he settled himself down to answer.

"Yes," he began, "it certainly does sound a little like I didn't know very well what I do mean,
when you put it like that to me, Miss Melanctha, but that's just because you don't understand
enough about what I meant, by what I was just saying to you. I don't say, never, I don't want
to know all kinds of people, Miss Melanctha, and I don't say there ain't many kinds of people,
and I don't say ever, that I don't find some like Jane Harden very good to know and talk to,
but it's the strong things I like in Jane Harden, not all her excitements. I don't admire the
bad things she does, Miss Melanctha, but Jane Harden is a strong woman and I always respect
that in her. No I know you don't believe what I say, Miss Melanctha, but I mean it, and it's
all just because you don't understand it when I say it. And as for religion, that just ain't
my way of being good, Miss Melanctha, but it's a good way for many people to be good and regular
in their way of living, and if they believe it, it helps them to be good, and if they're honest
in it, I like to see them have it. No, what I don't like, Miss Melanctha, is this what I see
so much with the colored people, their always wanting new things just to get excited."

Jefferson Campbell here stopped himself in this talking. Melanctha Herbert did not make any
answer. They both sat there very quiet.

Jeff Campbell then began again on the old papers. He sat there on the steps just above where
Melanctha was sitting, and he went on with his reading, and his head went moving up and down,
and sometimes he was reading, and sometimes he was thinking about all the things he wanted
to be doing, and then he would rub the back of his dark hand over his mouth, and in between
he would be frowning with his thinking, and sometimes he would be rubbing his head hard to
help his thinking. And Melanctha just sat still and watched the lamp burning, and sometimes
she turned it down a little, when the wind caught it and it would begin to get to smoking.

And so Jeff Campbell and Melanctha Herbert sat there on the steps, very quiet, a long time,
and they didn't seem to think much, that they were together. They sat there so, for about an
hour, and then it came to Jefferson very slowly and as a strong feeling that he was sitting
there on the steps, alone, with Melanctha. He did not know if Melanctha Herbert was feeling
very much about their being there alone together. Jefferson began to wonder about it a little.
Slowly he felt that surely they must both have this feeling. It was so important that he knew
that she must have it. They both sat there, very quiet, a long time.

At last Jefferson began to talk about how the lamp was smelling. Jefferson began to explain
what it is that makes a lamp get to smelling. Melanctha let him talk. She did not answer, and
then he stopped in his talking. Soon Melanctha began to sit up straighter and then she started
in to question.

"About what you was just saying Dr. Campbell about living regular and all that, I certainly
don't understand what you meant by what you was just saying. You ain't a bit like good people
Dr. Campbell, like the good people you are always saying are just like you. I know good people
Dr. Campbell, and you ain't a bit like men who are good and got religion. You are just as free
and easy as any man can be Dr. Campbell, and you always like to be with Jane Harden, and she
is a pretty bad one and you don't look down on her and you never tell her she is a bad one.
I know you like her just like a friend Dr. Campbell, and so I certainly don't understand just
what it is you mean by all that you was just saying to me. I know you mean honest Dr. Campbell,
and I am always trying to believe you, but I can't say as I see just what you mean when you
say you want to be good and real pious, because I am very certain Dr. Campbell that you ain't
that kind of a man at all, and you ain't never ashamed to be with queer folks Dr. Campbell,
and you seem to be thinking what you are doing is just like what you are always saying, and
Dr. Campbell, I certainly don't just see what you mean by what you say."

Dr. Campbell almost laughed loud enough to wake 'Mis' Herbert. He did enjoy the way Melanctha
said these things to him. He began to feel very strongly about it that perhaps Melanctha really
had a good mind. He was very free now in his laughing, but not so as to make Melanctha angry.
He was very friendly with her in his laughing, and then he made his face get serious, and he
rubbed his head to help him in his thinking.

"I know Miss Melanctha" he began, "It ain't very easy for you to understand what I was meaning
by what I was just saying to you, and perhaps some of the good people I like so wouldn't think
very much, any more than you do, Miss Melanctha, about the ways I have to be good. But that's
no matter Miss Melanctha. What I mean Miss Melanctha by what I was just saying to you is, that
I don't, no, never, believe in doing things just to get excited. You see Miss Melanctha I mean
the way so many of the colored people do it. Instead of just working hard and caring about
their working and living regular with their families and saving up all their money, so they
will have some to bring up their children better, instead of living regular and doing like
that and getting all their new ways from just decent living, the colored people just keep running
around and perhaps drinking and doing everything bad they can ever think of, and not just because
they like all those bad things that they are always doing, but only just because they want
to get excited. No Miss Melanctha, you see I am a colored man myself and I ain't sorry, and
I want to see the colored people being good and careful and always honest and living always
just as regular as can be, and I am sure Miss Melanctha, that that way everybody can have a
good time, and be happy and keep right and be busy, and not always have to be doing bad things
for new ways to get excited. Yes Miss Melanctha, I certainly do like everything to be good,
and quiet, and I certainly do think that is the best way for all us colored people. No, Miss
Melanctha too, I don't mean this except only just the way I say it. I ain't got any other meaning
Miss Melanctha, and it's that what I mean when I am saying about being really good. It ain't
Miss Melanctha to be pious and not liking every kind of people, and I don't say ever Miss Melanctha
that when other kind of people come regular into your life you shouldn't want to know them
always. What I mean Miss Melanctha by what I am always saying is, you shouldn't try to know
everybody just to run around and get excited. It's that kind of way of doing that I hate so
always Miss Melanctha, and that is so bad for all us colored people. I don't know as you understand
now any better what I mean by what I was just saying to you. But you certainly do know now
Miss Melanctha, that I always mean it what I say when I am talking."

"Yes I certainly do understand you when you talk so Dr. Campbell. I certainly do understand
now what you mean by what you was always saying to me. I certainly do understand Dr. Campbell
that you mean you don't believe it's right to love anybody." "Why sure no, yes I do Miss Melanctha,
I certainly do believe strong in loving, and in being good to everybody, and trying to understand
what they all need, to help them." "Oh I know all about that way of doing Dr. Campbell, but
that certainly ain't the kind of love I mean when I am talking. I mean real, strong, hot love
Dr. Campbell, that makes you do anything for somebody that loves you." "I don't know much about
that kind of love yet Miss Melanctha. You see it's this way with me always Miss Melanctha.
I am always so busy with my thinking about my work I am doing and so I don't have time for
just fooling, and then too, you see Miss Melanctha, I really certainly don't ever like to get
excited, and that kind of loving hard does seem always to mean just getting all the time excited.
That certainly is what I always think from what I see of them that have it bad Miss Melanctha,
and that certainly would never suit a man like me. You see Miss Melanctha I am a very quiet
kind of fellow, and I believe in a quiet life for all the colored people. No Miss Melanctha
I certainly never have mixed myself up in that kind of trouble."

"Yes I certainly do see that very clear Dr. Campbell," said Melanctha, "I see that's certainly
what it is always made me not know right about you and that's certainly what it is that makes
you really mean what you was always saying. You certainly are just too scared Dr. Campbell
to really feel things way down in you. All you are always wanting Dr. Campbell, is just to
talk about being good, and to play with people just to have a good time, and yet always to
certainly keep yourself out of trouble. It don't seem to me Dr. Campbell that I admire that
way to do things very much. It certainly ain't really to me being very good. It certainly ain't
any more to me Dr. Campbell, but that you certainly are awful scared about really feeling things
way down in you, and that's certainly the only way Dr. Campbell I can see that you can mean,
by what it is that you are always saying to me."

"I don't know about that Miss Melanctha, I certainly don't think I can't feel things very deep
in me, though I do say I certainly do like to have things nice and quiet, but I don't see harm
in keeping out of danger Miss Melanctha, when a man knows he certainly don't want to get killed
in it, and I don't know anything that's more awful dangerous Miss Melanctha than being strong
in love with somebody. I don't mind sickness or real trouble Miss Melanctha, and I don't want
to be talking about what I can do in real trouble, but you know something about that Miss Melanctha,
but I certainly don't see much in mixing up just to get excited, in that awful kind of danger.
No Miss Melanctha I certainly do only know just two kinds of ways of loving. One kind of loving
seems to me, is like one has a good quiet feeling in a family when one does his work, and is
always living good and being regular, and then the other way of loving is just like having
it like any animal that's low in the streets together, and that don't seem to me very good
Miss Melanctha, though I don't say ever that it's not all right when anybody likes it, and
that's all the kinds of love I know Miss Melanctha, and I certainly don't care very much to
get mixed up in that kind of a way just to be in trouble."

Jefferson stopped and Melanctha thought a little.

"That certainly does explain to me Dr. Campbell what I been thinking about you this long time.
I certainly did wonder how you could be so live, and knowing everything, and everybody, and
talking so big always about everything, and everybody always liking you so much, and you always
looking as if you was thinking, and yet you really was never knowing about anybody and certainly
not being really very understanding. It certainly is all Dr. Campbell because you is so afraid
you will be losing being good so easy, and it certainly do seem to me Dr. Campbell that it
certainly don't amount to very much that kind of goodness."

"Perhaps you are right Miss Melanctha," Jefferson answered. "I don't say never, perhaps you
ain't right Miss Melanctha. Perhaps I ought to know more about such ways Miss Melanctha. Perhaps
it would help me some, taking care of the colored people, Miss Melanctha. I don't say, no,
never, but perhaps I could learn a whole lot about women the right way, if I had a real good
teacher."

'Mis' Herbert just then stirred a little in her sleep. Melanctha went up the steps to the bed
to attend her. Dr. Campbell got up too and went to help her. 'Mis' Herbert woke up and was
a little better. Now it was morning and Dr. Campbell gave his directions to Melanctha, and
then left her.

Melanctha Herbert all her life long, loved and wanted good, kind and considerate people. Jefferson
Campbell was all the things that Melanctha had ever wanted. Jefferson was a strong, well built,
good looking, cheery, intelligent and good mulatto. And then at first he had not cared to know
Melanctha, and when he did begin to know her he had not liked her very well, and he had not
thought that she would ever come to any good. And then Jefferson Campbell was so very gentle.
Jefferson never did some things like other men, things that now were beginning to be ugly,
for Melanctha. And then too Jefferson Campbell did not seem to know very well what it was that
Melanctha really wanted, and all this was making Melanctha feel his power with her always getting
stronger.

Dr. Campbell came in every day to see 'Mis' Herbert. 'Mis' Herbert, after that night they watched
together, did get a little better, but 'Mis' Herbert was really very sick, and soon it was
pretty sure that she would have to die. Melanctha certainly did everything, all the time, that
any woman could. Jefferson never thought much better of Melanctha while she did it. It was
not her being good, he wanted to find in her. He knew very well Jane Harden was right, when
she said Melanctha was always being good to everybody but that that did not make Melanctha
any better for her. Then too, 'Mis' Herbert never liked Melanctha any better, even on the last
day of her living, and so Jefferson really never thought much of Melanctha's always being good
to her mother.

Jefferson and Melanctha now saw each other, very often. They now always liked to be with each
other, and they always now had a good time when they talked to one another. They, mostly in
their talking to each other, still just talked about outside things and what they were thinking.
Except just in little moments, and not those very often, they never said anything about their
feeling. Sometimes Melanctha would tease Jefferson a little just to show she had not forgotten,
but mostly she listened to his talking, for Jefferson still always liked to talk along about
the things he believed in. Melanctha was liking Jefferson Campbell better every day, and Jefferson
was beginning to know that Melanctha certainly had a good mind, and he was beginning to feel
a little her real sweetness. Not in her being good to 'Mis' Herbert, that never seemed to Jefferson
to mean much in her, but there was a strong kind of sweetness in Melanctha's nature that Jefferson
began now to feel when he was with her.

'Mis' Herbert was now always getting sicker. One night again Dr. Campbell felt very certain
that before it was morning she would surely die. Dr. Campbell said he would come back to help
Melanctha watch her, and to do anything he could to make 'Mis' Herbert's dying more easy for
her. Dr. Campbell came back that evening, after he was through with his other patients, and
then he made 'Mis' Herbert easy, and then he came and sat down on the steps just above where
Melanctha was sitting with the lamp, and looking very tired. Dr. Campbell was pretty tired
too, and they both sat there very quiet.

"You look awful tired to-night, Dr. Campbell," Melanctha said at last, with her voice low and
very gentle, "Don't you want to go lie down and sleep a little? You're always being much too
good to everybody, Dr. Campbell. I like to have you stay here watching to-night with me, but
it don't seem right you ought to stay here when you got so much always to do for everybody.
You are certainly very kind to come back, Dr. Campbell, but I can certainly get along to-night
without you. I can get help next door sure if I need it. You just go 'long home to bed, Dr.
Campbell. You certainly do look as if you need it."

Jefferson was silent for some time, and always he was looking very gently at Melanctha.

"I certainly never did think, Miss Melanctha, I would find you to be so sweet and thinking,
with me." "Dr. Campbell" said Melanctha, still more gentle, "I certainly never did think that
you would ever feel it good to like me. I certainly never did think you would want to see for
yourself if I had sweet ways in me."

They both sat there very tired, very gentle, very quiet, a long time. At last Melanctha in
a low, even tone began to talk to Jefferson Campbell.

"You are certainly a very good man, Dr. Campbell, I certainly do feel that more every day I
see you. Dr. Campbell, I sure do want to be friends with a good man like you, now I know you.
You certainly, Dr. Campbell, never do things like other men, that's always ugly for me. Tell
me true, Dr. Campbell, how you feel about being always friends with me. I certainly do know,
Dr. Campbell, you are a good man, and if you say you will be friends with me, you certainly
never will go back on me, the way so many kinds of them do to every girl they ever get to like
them. Tell me for true, Dr. Campbell, will you be friends with me."

"Why, Miss Melanctha," said Campbell slowly, "why you see I just can't say that right out that
way to you. Why sure you know Miss Melanctha, I will be very glad if it comes by and by that
we are always friends together, but you see, Miss Melanctha, I certainly am a very slow-minded
quiet kind of fellow though I do say quick things all the time to everybody, and when I certainly
do want to mean it what I am saying to you, I can't say things like that right out to everybody
till I know really more for certain all about you, and how I like you, and what I really mean
to do better for you. You certainly do see what I mean, Miss Melanctha." "I certainly do admire
you for talking honest to me, Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha. "Oh, I am always honest, Miss
Melanctha. It's easy enough for me always to be honest, Miss Melanctha. All I got to do is
always just to say right out what I am thinking. I certainly never have got any real reason
for not saying it right out like that to anybody."

They sat together, very silent. "I certainly do wonder, Miss Melanctha," at last began Jeff
Campbell, "I certainly do wonder, if we know very right, you and me, what each other is really
thinking. I certainly do wonder, Miss Melanctha, if we know at all really what each other means
by what we are always saying." "That certainly do mean, by what you say, that you think I am
a bad one, Jeff Campbell," flashed out Melanctha. "Why no, Miss Melanctha, why sure I don't
mean any thing like that at all, by what I am saying to you. You know well as I do, Miss Melanctha,
I think better of you every day I see you, and I like to talk with you all the time now, Miss
Melanctha, and I certainly do think we both like it very well when we are together, and it
seems to me always more, you are very good and sweet always to everybody. It only is, I am
really so slow-minded in my ways, Miss Melanctha, for all I talk so quick to everybody, and
I don't like to say to you what I don't know for very sure, and I certainly don't know for
sure I know just all what you mean by what you are always saying to me. And you see, Miss Melanctha,
that's what makes me say what I was just saying to you when you asked me."

"I certainly do thank you again for being honest to me, Dr. Campbell," said Melanctha. "I guess
I leave you now, Dr. Campbell. I think I go in the other room and rest a little. I leave you
here, so perhaps if I ain't here you will maybe sleep and rest yourself a little. This has been
painfully proved too often by those who see a friend suffering unnecessarily, and in the short-sighted
attempt to wrench the emotional microscope from his hand, simply
cause the hold to tighten and the magnifying power to increase.

A careful, steady training of the physique opens the way for a better practice of the wholesome
philosophy, and the microscope drops with the relaxation of the external tension which has helped
to hold it.

Emotions are often not even exaggerated but are from the beginning imaginary; and there are
no more industrious imps of evil than these sham feelings. The imps have no better field for
their destructive work than in various forms of morbid, personal attachment, and in what is
commonly called religion,--but which has no more to do with genuine religion than the abnormal
personal likings have to do with love.

It is a fact worthy of notice that the two powers most helpful, most strengthening, when sincerely
felt and realized, are the ones oftenest perverted and shammed, through morbid states and abnormal
nervous excitement. The sham is often so perfect an image of the reality that even the shammer
is deceived.

To tell one of these pseudo-religious women that the whole attitude of her externally sanctified
life is a sham emotion, would rouse anything but a saintly spirit, and surprise her beyond
measure. Yet the contrast between the true, healthful, religious
feeling and the sham is perfectly marked, even though both classes
follow the same forms and belong to the same charitable societies.
With the one, religion seems to be an accomplishment, with a rivalry
as to who can carry it to the finest point; with the other, it is
a steadily growing power of wholesome use. He did not know what it was right that he should do
about it. He wondered if it was just a little play that they were doing. If it was a play he
did not want to go on playing, but if it was really that he was not very understanding, and
that with Melanctha Herbert he could learn to really understand, then he was very certain he
did not want to be a coward. It was very hard for him to know what he wanted. He thought and
thought, and always he did not seem to know any better what he wanted. At last he gave up this
thinking. He felt sure it was only play with Melanctha. "No, I certainly won't go on fooling
with her any more this way," he said at last out loud to himself, when he was through with
this thinking. "I certainly will stop fooling, and begin to go on with my thinking about my
work and what's the matter with people like 'Mis' Herbert," and Jefferson took out his book
from his pocket, and drew near to the lamp, and began with some hard scientific reading.

Jefferson sat there for about an hour reading, and he had really forgotten all about his trouble
with Melanctha's meaning. Then 'Mis' Herbert had some trouble with her breathing. She woke
up and was gasping. Dr. Campbell went to her and gave her something that would help her. Melanctha
came out from the other room and did things as he told her. They together made 'Mis' Herbert
more comfortable and easy, and soon she was again in her deep sleep.

Dr. Campbell went back to the steps where he had been sitting. Melanctha came and stood a little
while beside him, and then she sat down and watched him reading. By and by they began with
their talking. Jeff Campbell began to feel that perhaps it was all different. Perhaps it was
not just play, with Melanctha. Anyway he liked it very well that she was with him. He began
to tell her about the book he was just reading.

Melanctha was very intelligent always in her questions. Jefferson knew now very well that she
had a good mind. They were having a very good time, talking there together. And then they began
again to get quiet.

"It certainly was very good in you to come back and talk to me Miss Melanctha," Jefferson said
at last to her, for now he was almost certain, it was no game she was playing. Melanctha really
was a good woman, and she had a good mind, and she had a real, strong sweetness, and she could
surely really teach him. "Oh I always like to talk to you Dr. Campbell" said Melanctha, "And
then you was only just honest to me, and I always like it when a man is really honest to me."
Then they were again very silent, sitting there together, with the lamp between them, that
was always smoking. Melanctha began to lean a little more toward Dr. Campbell, where he was
sitting, and then she took his hand between her two and pressed it hard, but she said nothing
to him. She let it go then and leaned a little nearer to him. Jefferson moved a little but
did not do anything in answer. At last, "Well," said Melanctha sharply to him. "I was just
thinking" began Dr. Campbell slowly, "I was just wondering," he was beginning to get ready
to go on with his talking. "Don't you ever stop with your thinking long enough ever to have
any feeling Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha a little sadly. "I don't know," said Jeff Campbell
slowly, "I don't know Miss Melanctha much about that. No, I don't stop thinking much Miss Melanctha
and if I can't ever feel without stopping thinking, I certainly am very much afraid Miss Melanctha
that I never will do much with that kind of feeling. Sure you ain't worried Miss Melanctha,
about my really not feeling very much all the time. I certainly do think I feel some, Miss
Melanctha, even though I always do it without ever knowing how to stop with my thinking." "I
am certainly afraid I don't think much of your kind of feeling Dr. Campbell." "Why I think
you certainly are wrong Miss Melanctha I certainly do think I feel as much for you Miss Melanctha,
as you ever feel about me, sure I do. I don't think you know me right when you talk like that
to me. Tell me just straight out how much do you care about me, Miss Melanctha." "Care about
you Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha slowly. "I certainly do care for you Jeff Campbell less
than you are always thinking and much more than you are ever knowing."

Jeff Campbell paused on this, and he was silent with the power of Melanctha's meaning. They
sat there together very silent, a long time. "Well Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha. "Oh," said
Dr. Campbell and he moved himself a little, and then they were very silent a long time. "Haven't
you got nothing to say to me Jeff Campbell?" said Melanctha. "Why yes, what was it we were
just saying about to one another. You see Miss Melanctha I am a very quiet, slow minded kind
of fellow, and I am never sure I know just exactly what you mean by all that you are always
saying to me. But I do like you very much Miss Melanctha and I am very sure you got very good
things in you all the time. You sure do believe what I am saying to you Miss Melanctha." "Yes
I believe it when you say it to me, Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha, and then she was silent
and there was much sadness in it. "I guess I go in and lie down again Dr. Campbell," said Melanctha.
"Don't go leave me Miss Melanctha," said Jeff Campbell quickly. "Why not, what you want of
me Jeff Campbell?" said Melanctha. "Why," said Jeff Campbell slowly, "I just want to go on
talking with you. I certainly do like talking about all kinds of things with you. You certainly
know that all right, Miss Melanctha." "I guess I go lie down again and leave you here with
your thinking," said Melanctha gently. "I certainly am very tired to night Dr. Campbell. Good
night I hope you rest well Dr. Campbell." Melanctha stooped over him, where he was sitting,
to say this good night, and then, very quick and sudden, she kissed him and then, very quick
again, she went away and left him.

Dr. Campbell sat there very quiet, with only a little thinking and sometimes a beginning feeling,
and he was alone until it began to be morning, and then he went, and Melanctha helped him,
and he made 'Mis' Herbert more easy in her dying. 'Mis' Herbert lingered on till about ten
o'clock the next morning, and then slowly and without much pain she died away. Jeff Campbell
staid till the last moment, with Melanctha, to make her mother's dying easy for her. When it
was over he sent in the colored woman from next door to help Melanctha fix things, and then
he went away to take care of his other patients. He came back very soon to Melanctha. He helped
her to have a funeral for her mother. Melanctha then went to live with the good natured woman,
who had been her neighbor. Melanctha still saw Jeff Campbell very often. Things began to be
very strong between them.

Melanctha now never wandered, unless she was with Jeff Campbell. Sometimes she and he wandered
a good deal together. Jeff Campbell had not got over his way of talking to her all the time
about all the things he was always thinking. Melanctha never talked much, now, when they were
together. Sometimes Jeff Campbell teased her about her not talking to him. "I certainly did
think Melanctha you was a great talker from the way Jane Harden and everybody said things to
me, and from the way I heard you talk so much when I first met you. Tell me true Melanctha,
why don't you talk more now to me, perhaps it is I talk so much I don't give you any chance
to say things to me, or perhaps it is you hear me talk so much you don't think so much now
of a whole lot of talking. Tell me honest Melanctha, why don't you talk more to me." "You know
very well Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha "You certainly do know very well Jeff, you don't think
really much, of my talking. You think a whole lot more about everything than I do Jeff, and
you don't care much what I got to say about it. You know that's true what I am saying Jeff,
if you want to be real honest, the way you always are when I like you so much." Jeff laughed
and looked fondly at her. "I don't say ever I know, you ain't right, when you say things like
that to me, Melanctha. You see you always like to be talking just what you think everybody
wants to be hearing from you, and when you are like that, Melanctha, honest, I certainly don't
care very much to hear you, but sometimes you say something that is what you are really thinking,
and then I like a whole lot to hear you talking." Melanctha smiled, with her strong sweetness,
on him, and she felt her power very deeply. "I certainly never do talk very much when I like
anybody really, Jeff. You see, Jeff, it ain't much use to talk about what a woman is really
feeling in her. You see all that, Jeff, better, by and by, when you get to really feeling.
You won't be so ready then always with your talking. You see, Jeff, if it don't come true what
I am saying." "I don't ever say you ain't always right, Melanctha," said Jeff Campbell. "Perhaps
what I call my thinking ain't really so very understanding. I don't say, no never now any more,
you ain't right, Melanctha, when you really say things to me. Perhaps I see it all to be very
different when I come to really see what you mean by what you are always saying to me." "You
is very sweet and good to me always, Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha. "'Deed I certainly am
not good to you, Melanctha. Don't I bother you all the time with my talking, but I really do
like you a whole lot, Melanctha." "And I like you, Jeff Campbell, and you certainly are mother,
and father, and brother, and sister, and child and everything, always to me. I can't say much
about how good you been to me, Jeff Campbell, I never knew any man who was good and didn't
do things ugly, before I met you to take care of me, Jeff Campbell. Good-by, Jeff, come see
me to-morrow, when you get through with your working." "Sure Melanctha, you know that already,"
said Jeff Campbell, and then he went away and left her.

These months had been an uncertain time for Jeff Campbell. He never knew how much he really
knew about Melanctha. He saw her now for long times and very often. He was beginning always
more and more to like her. But he did not seem to himself to know very much about her. He was
beginning to feel he could almost trust the goodness in her. But then, always, really, he was
not very sure about her. Melanctha always had ways that made him feel uncertain with her, and
yet he was so near, in his feeling for her. He now never thought about all this in real words
any more. He was always letting it fight itself out in him. He was now never taking any part
in this fighting that was always going on inside him.

Jeff always loved now to be with Melanctha and yet he always hated to go to her. Somehow he
was always afraid when he was to go to her, and yet he had made himself very certain that here
he would not be a coward. He never felt any of this being afraid, when he was with her. Then
they always were very true, and near to one another. But always when he was going to her, Jeff
would like anything that could happen that would keep him a little longer from her.

It was a very uncertain time, all these months, for Jeff Campbell. He did not know very well
what it was that he really wanted. He was very certain that he did not know very well what
it was that Melanctha wanted. Jeff Campbell had always all his life loved to be with people,
and he had loved all his life always to be thinking, but he was still only a great boy, was
Jeff Campbell, and he had never before had any of this funny kind of feeling. Now, this evening,
when he was free to go and see Melanctha, he talked to anybody he could find who would detain
him, and so it was very late when at last he came to the house where Melanctha was waiting
to receive him.

Jeff came in to where Melanctha was waiting for him, and he took off his hat and heavy coat,
and then drew up a chair and sat down by the fire. It was very cold that night, and Jeff sat
there, and rubbed his hands and tried to warm them. He had only said "How do you do" to Melanctha,
he had not yet begun to talk to her. Melanctha sat there, by the fire, very quiet. The heat
gave a pretty pink glow to her pale yellow and attractive face. Melanctha sat in a low chair,
her hands, with their long, fluttering fingers, always ready to show her strong feeling, were
lying quiet in her lap. Melanctha was very tired with her waiting for Jeff Campbell. She sat
there very quiet and just watching. Jeff was a robust, dark, healthy, cheery negro. His hands
were firm and kindly and unimpassioned. He touched women always with his big hands, like a
brother. He always had a warm broad glow, like southern sunshine. He never had anything mysterious
in him. He was open, he was pleasant, he was cheery, and always he wanted, as Melanctha once
had wanted, always now he too wanted really to understand.

Jeff sat there this evening in his chair and was silent a long time, warming himself with the
pleasant fire. He did not look at Melanctha who was watching. He sat there and just looked
into the fire. At first his dark, open face was smiling, and he was rubbing the back of his
black-brown hand over his mouth to help him in his smiling. Then he was thinking, and he frowned
and rubbed his head hard, to help him in his thinking. Then he smiled again, but now his smiling
was not very pleasant. His smile was now wavering on the edge of scorning. His smile changed
more and more, and then he had a look as if he were deeply down, all disgusted. Now his face
was darker, and he was bitter in his smiling, and he began, without looking from the fire,
to talk to Melanctha, who was now very tense with her watching.

"Melanctha Herbert", began Jeff Campbell, "I certainly after all this time I know you, I certainly
do know little, real about you. This is indicated by the many remains of temples which local tradition
attribute to his worship, and by the customs of the natives.[1] For instance, at the birth
of a child it was formally offered to him and his protection solicited.
 Sometimes you seem like one kind of a girl to me, and sometimes you are like
a girl that is all different to me, and the two kinds of girls is certainly very different
to each other, and I can't see any way they seem to have much to do, to be together in you.
They certainly don't seem to be made much like as if they could have anything really to do
with each other. Sometimes you are a girl to me I certainly never would be trusting, and you
got a laugh then so hard, it just rattles, and you got ways so bad, I can't believe you mean
them hardly, and yet all that I just been saying is certainly you one way I often see you,
and it's what your mother and Jane Harden always found you, and it's what makes me hate so,
to come near you. And then certainly sometimes, Melanctha, you certainly is all a different
creature, and sometimes then there comes out in you what is certainly a thing, like a real
beauty. I certainly, Melanctha, never can tell just how it is that it comes so lovely. Seems
to me when it comes it's got a real sweetness, that is more wonderful than a pure flower, and
a gentleness, that is more tender than the sunshine, and a kindness, that makes one feel like
summer, and then a way to know, that makes everything all over, and all that, and it does certainly
seem to be real for the little while it's lasting, for the little while that I can surely see
it, and it gives me to feel like I certainly had got real religion. And then when I got rich
with such a feeling, comes all that other girl, and then that seems more likely that that is
really you what's honest, and then I certainly do get awful afraid to come to you, and I certainly
never do feel I could be very trusting with you. And then I certainly don't know anything at
all about you, and I certainly don't know which is a real Melanctha Herbert, and I certainly
don't feel no longer, I ever want to talk to you. Tell me honest, Melanctha, which is the way
that is you really, when you are alone, and real, and all honest. Tell me, Melanctha, for I
certainly do want to know it."

Melanctha did not make him any answer, and Jeff, without looking at her, after a little while,
went on with his talking. "And then, Melanctha, sometimes you certainly do seem sort of cruel,
and not to care about people being hurt or in trouble, something so hard about you it makes
me sometimes real nervous, sometimes somehow like you always, like your being, with 'Mis' Herbert.
You sure did do everything that any woman could, Melanctha, I certainly never did see anybody
do things any better, and yet, I don't know how to say just what I mean, Melanctha, but there
was something awful hard about your feeling, so different from the way I'm always used to see
good people feeling, and so it was the way Jane Harden and 'Mis' Herbert talked when they felt
strong to talk about you, and yet, Melanctha, somehow I feel so really near to you, and you
certainly have got an awful wonderful, strong kind of sweetness. I certainly would like to
know for sure, Melanctha, whether I got really anything to be afraid for. I certainly did think
once, Melanctha, I knew something about all kinds of women. I certainly know now really, how
I don't know anything sure at all about you, Melanctha, though I been with you so long, and
so many times for whole hours with you, and I like so awful much to be with you, and I can
always say anything I am thinking to you. I certainly do awful wish, Melanctha, I really was
more understanding. I certainly do that same, Melanctha."

Jeff stopped now and looked harder than before into the fire. His face changed from his thinking
back into that look that was so like as if he was all through and through him, disgusted with
what he had been thinking. He sat there a long time, very quiet, and then slowly, somehow,
it came strongly to him that Melanctha Herbert, there beside him, was trembling and feeling
it all to be very bitter. "Why, Melanctha," cried Jeff Campbell, and he got up and put his
arm around her like a brother. "I stood it just so long as I could bear it, Jeff," sobbed Melanctha,
and then she gave herself away, to her misery, "I was awful ready, Jeff, to let you say anything
you liked that gave you any pleasure. You could say all about me what you wanted, Jeff, and
I would try to stand it, so as you would be sure to be liking it, Jeff, but you was too cruel
to me. When you do that kind of seeing how much you can make a woman suffer, you ought to give
her a little rest, once sometimes, Jeff. They can't any of us stand it so for always, Jeff.
I certainly did stand it just as long as I could, so you would like it, but I,--oh Jeff, you
went on too long to-night Jeff. I couldn't stand it not a minute longer the way you was doing
of it, Jeff. When you want to be seeing how the way a woman is really made of, Jeff, you shouldn't
never be so cruel, never to be thinking how much she can stand, the strong way you always do
it, Jeff." "Why, Melanctha," cried Jeff Campbell, in his horror, and then he was very tender
to her, and like a good, strong, gentle brother in his soothing of her, "Why Melanctha dear,
I certainly don't now see what it is you mean by what you was just saying to me. Why Melanctha,
you poor little girl, you certainly never did believe I ever knew I was giving you real suffering.
Why, Melanctha, how could you ever like me if you thought I ever could be so like a red Indian?"
"I didn't just know, Jeff," and Melanctha nestled to him, "I certainly never did know just
what it was you wanted to be doing with me, but I certainly wanted you should do anything you
liked, you wanted, to make me more understanding for you. I tried awful hard to stand it, Jeff,
so as you could do anything you wanted with me." "Good Lord and Jesus Christ, Melanctha!" cried
Jeff Campbell. "I certainly never can know anything about you real, Melanctha, you poor little
girl," and Jeff drew her closer to him, "But I certainly do admire and trust you a whole lot
now, Melanctha. I certainly do, for I certainly never did think I was hurting you at all, Melanctha,
by the things I always been saying to you. Melanctha, you poor little, sweet, trembling baby
now, be good, Melanctha. I certainly can't ever tell you how awful sorry I am to hurt you so,
Melanctha. I do anything I can to show you how I never did mean to hurt you, Melanctha." "I
know, I know," murmured Melanctha, clinging to him. "I know you are a good man, Jeff. I always
know that, no matter how much you can hurt me." "I sure don't see how you can think so, Melanctha,
if you certainly did think I was trying so hard just to hurt you." "Hush, you are only a great
big boy, Jeff Campbell, and you don't know nothing yet about real hurting," said Melanctha,
smiling up through her crying, at him. "You see, Jeff, I never knew anybody I could know real
well and yet keep on always respecting, till I came to know you real well, Jeff." "I sure don't
understand that very well, Melanctha. I ain't a bit better than just lots of others of the
colored people. You certainly have been unlucky with the kind you met before me, that's all,
Melanctha. I certainly ain't very good, Melanctha." "Hush, Jeff, you don't know nothing at
all about what you are," said Melanctha. "Perhaps you are right, Melanctha. I don't say ever
any more, you ain't right, when you say things to me, Melanctha," and Jefferson sighed, and
then he smiled, and then they were quiet a long time together, and then after some more kindness,
it was late, and then Jeff left her.

Jeff Campbell, all these months, had never told his good mother anything about Melanctha Herbert.
Somehow he always kept his seeing her so much now, to himself. Melanctha too had never had
any of her other friends meet him. They always acted together, these two, as if their being
so much together was a secret, but really there was no one who would have made it any harder
for them. Jeff Campbell did not really know how it had happened that they were so secret. He
did not know if it was what Melanctha wanted. Jeff had never spoken to her at all about it.
It just seemed as if it were well understood between them that nobody should know that they
were so much together. It was as if it were agreed between them, that they should be alone
by themselves always, and so they would work out together what they meant by what they were
always saying to each other.

Jefferson often spoke to Melanctha about his good mother. He never said anything about whether
Melanctha would want to meet her. Jefferson never quite understood why all this had happened
so, in secret. He never really knew what it was that Melanctha really wanted. In all these
ways he just, by his nature, did, what he sort of felt Melanctha wanted. And so they continued
to be alone and much together, and now it had come to be the spring time, and now they had
all out-doors to wander.

They had many days now when they were very happy. Jeff every day found that he really liked
Melanctha better. Now surely he was beginning to have real, deep feeling in him. And still
he loved to talk himself out to Melanctha, and he loved to tell her how good it all was to
him, and how he always loved to be with her, and to tell her always all about it. One day,
now Jeff arranged, that Sunday they would go out and have a happy, long day in the bright fields,
and they would be all day just alone together. The day before, Jeff was called in to see Jane
Harden.

Jane Harden was very sick almost all day and Jeff Campbell did everything he could to make
her better. After a while Jane became more easy and then she began to talk to Jeff about Melanctha.
Jane did not know how much Jeff was now seeing of Melanctha. Jane these days never saw Melanctha.
Jane began to talk of the time when she first knew Melanctha. Jane began to tell how in these
days Melanctha had very little understanding. She was young then and she had a good mind. Jane
Harden never would say Melanctha never had a good mind, but in those days Melanctha certainly
had not been very understanding. Jane began to explain to Jeff Campbell how in every way, she
Jane, had taught Melanctha. Jane then began to explain how eager Melanctha always had been
for all that kind of learning. Jane Harden began to tell how they had wandered. Jane began
to tell how Melanctha once had loved her, Jane Harden. Jane began to tell Jeff of all the bad
ways Melanctha had used with her. Jane began to tell all she knew of the way Melanctha had
gone on, after she had left her. Jane began to tell all about the different men, white ones
and blacks, Melanctha never was particular about things like that, Jane Harden said in passing,
not that Melanctha was a bad one, and she had a good mind, Jane Harden never would say that
she hadn't, but Melanctha always liked to use all the understanding ways that Jane had taught
her, and so she wanted to know everything, always, that they knew how to teach her.

Jane was beginning to make Jeff Campbell see much clearer. Jane Harden did not know what it
was that she was really doing with all this talking. Jane did not know what Jeff was feeling.
Jane was always honest when she was talking, and now it just happened she had started talking
about her old times with Melanctha Herbert. Jeff understood very well that it was all true
what Jane was saying. Jeff Campbell was beginning now to see very clearly. He was beginning
to feel very sick inside him. He knew now many things Melanctha had not yet taught him. He
felt very sick and his heart was very heavy, and Melanctha certainly did seem very ugly to
him. Jeff was at last beginning to know what it was to have deep feeling. He took care a little
longer of Jane Harden, and then he went to his other patients, and then he went home to his
room, and he sat down and at last he had stopped thinking. He was very sick and his heart was
very heavy in him. He was very tired and all the world was very dreary to him, and he knew
very well now at last, he was really feeling. He knew it now from the way it hurt him. He knew
very well that now at last he was beginning to really have understanding. The next day he had
arranged to spend, long and happy, all alone in the spring fields with Melanctha, wandering.
He wrote her a note and said he could not go, he had a sick patient and would have to stay
home with him. For three days after, he made no sign to Melanctha. He was very sick all these
days, and his heart was very heavy in him, and he knew very well that now at last he had learned
what it was to have deep feeling.

At last one day he got a letter from Melanctha. "I certainly don't rightly understand what
you are doing now to me Jeff Campbell," wrote Melanctha Herbert. "I certainly don't rightly
understand Jeff Campbell why you ain't all these days been near me, but I certainly do suppose
it's just another one of the queer kind of ways you have to be good, and repenting of yourself
all of a sudden. I certainly don't say to you Jeff Campbell I admire very much the way you
take to be good Jeff Campbell. I am sorry Dr. Campbell, but I certainly am afraid I can't stand
it no more from you the way you have been just acting. I certainly can't stand it any more
the way you act when you have been as if you thought I was always good enough for anybody to
have with them, and then you act as if I was a bad one and you always just despise me. I certainly
am afraid Dr. Campbell I can't stand it any more like that. I certainly can't stand it any
more the way you are always changing. I certainly am afraid Dr. Campbell you ain't man enough
to deserve to have anybody care so much to be always with you. I certainly am awful afraid
Dr. Campbell I don't ever any more want to really see you. Good-by Dr. Campbell I wish you
always to be real happy."

Jeff Campbell sat in his room, very quiet, a long time, after he got through reading this letter.
He sat very still and first he was very angry. As if he, too, did not know very badly what
it was to suffer keenly. As if he had not been very strong to stay with Melanctha when he never
knew what it was that she really wanted. He knew he was very right to be angry, he knew he
really had not been a coward. He knew Melanctha had done many things it was very hard for him
to forgive her. He knew very well he had done his best to be kind, and to trust her, and to
be loyal to her, and now;--and then Jeff suddenly remembered how one night Melanctha had been
so strong to suffer, and he felt come back to him the sweetness in her, and then Jeff knew
that really, he always forgave her, and that really, it all was that he was so sorry he had
hurt her, and he wanted to go straight away and be a comfort to her. Jeff knew very well, that
what Jane Harden had told him about Melanctha and her bad ways, had been a true story, and
yet he wanted very badly to be with Melanctha. Perhaps she could teach him to really understand
it better. Perhaps she could teach him how it could be all true, and yet how he could be right
to believe in her and to trust her.

Jeff sat down and began his answer to her. "Dear Melanctha," Jeff wrote to her. "I certainly
don't think you got it all just right in the letter, I just been reading, that you just wrote
me. I certainly don't think you are just fair or very understanding to all I have to suffer
to keep straight on to really always to believe in you and trust you. I certainly don't think
you always are fair to remember right how hard it is for a man, who thinks like I was always
thinking, not to think you do things very bad very often. I certainly don't think, Melanctha,
I ain't right when I was so angry when I got your letter to me. I know very well, Melanctha,
that with you, I never have been a coward. I find it very hard, and I never said it any different,
it is hard to me to be understanding, and to know really what it is you wanted, and what it
is you are meaning by what you are always saying to me. I don't say ever, it ain't very hard
for you to be standing that I ain't very quick to be following whichever way that you are always
leading. You know very well, Melanctha, it hurts me very bad and way inside me when I have
to hurt you, but I always got to be real honest with you. There ain't no other way for me to
be, with you, and I know very well it hurts me too, a whole lot, when I can't follow so quick
as you would have me. I don't like to be a coward to you, Melanctha, and I don't like to say
what I ain't meaning to you. And if you don't want me to do things honest, Melanctha, why I
can't ever talk to you, and you are right when you say, you never again want to see me, but
if you got any real sense of what I always been feeling with you, and if you got any right
sense, Melanctha, of how hard I been trying to think and to feel right for you, I will be very
glad to come and see you, and to begin again with you. I don't say anything now, Melanctha,
about how bad I been this week, since I saw you, Melanctha. It don't ever do any good to talk
such things over. All I know is I do my best, Melanctha, to you, and I don't say, no, never,
I can do any different than just to be honest and come as fast as I think it's right for me
to be going in the ways you teach me to be really understanding. So don't talk any more foolishness,
Melanctha, about my always changing. I don't change, never, and I got to do what I think is
right and honest to me, and I never told you any different, and you always knew it very well
that I always would do just so. If you like me to come and see you to-morrow, and go out with
you, I will be very glad to, Melanctha. Let me know right away, what it is you want me to be
doing for you, Melanctha.

  Very truly yours,
  Jefferson Campbell

"Please come to me, Jeff." Melanctha wrote back for her answer. Jeff went very slowly to Melanctha,
glad as he was, still to be going to her. Melanctha came, very quick, to meet him, when she
saw him from where she had been watching for him. They went into the house together. They were
very glad to be together. They were very good to one another.

"I certainly did think, Melanctha, this time almost really, you never did want me to come to
you at all any more to see you," said Jeff Campbell to her, when they had begun again with
their talking to each other. "You certainly did make me think, perhaps really this time, Melanctha,
it was all over, my being with you ever, and I was very mad, and very sorry, too, Melanctha."

"Well you certainly was very bad to me, Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha, fondly.

"I certainly never do say any more you ain't always right, Melanctha," Jeff answered and he
was very ready now with cheerful laughing, "I certainly never do say that any more, Melanctha,
if I know it, but still, really, Melanctha, honest, I think perhaps I wasn't real bad to you
any more than you just needed from me."

Jeff held Melanctha in his arms and kissed her. He sighed then and was very silent with her.
"Well, Melanctha," he said at last, with some more laughing, "well, Melanctha, any way you
can't say ever it ain't, if we are ever friends good and really, you can't say, no, never,
but that we certainly have worked right hard to get both of us together for it, so we shall
sure deserve it then, if we can ever really get it." "We certainly have worked real hard, Jeff,
I can't say that ain't all right the way you say it," said Melanctha. "I certainly never can
deny it, Jeff, when I feel so worn with all the trouble you been making for me, you bad boy,
Jeff," and then Melanctha smiled and then she sighed, and then she was very silent with him.

At last Jeff was to go away. They stood there on the steps for a long time trying to say good-by
to each other. At last Jeff made himself really say it. At last he made himself, that he went
down the steps and went away.

On the next Sunday they arranged, they were to have the long happy day of wandering that they
had lost last time by Jane Harden's talking. Not that Melanctha Herbert had heard yet of Jane
Harden's talking.

Jeff saw Melanctha every day now. Jeff was a little uncertain all this time inside him, for
he had never yet told to Melanctha what it was that had so nearly made him really want to leave
her. Jeff knew that for him, it was not right he should not tell her. He knew they could only
have real peace between them when he had been honest, and had really told her. On this long
Sunday Jeff was certain that he would really tell her.

They were very happy all that day in their wandering. They had taken things along to eat together.
They sat in the bright fields and they were happy, they wandered in the woods and they were
happy. Jeff always loved in this way to wander. Jeff always loved to watch everything as it
was growing, and he loved all the colors in the trees and on the ground, and the little, new,
bright colored bugs he found in the moist ground and in the grass he loved to lie on and in
which he was always so busy searching. Jeff loved everything that moved and that was still,
and that had color, and beauty, and real being.

Jeff loved very much this day while they were wandering. He almost forgot that he had any trouble
with him still inside him. Jeff loved to be there with Melanctha Herbert. She was always so
sympathetic to him for the way she listened to everything he found and told her, the way she
felt his joy in all this being, the way she never said she wanted anything different from the
way they had it. It was certainly a busy and a happy day, this their first long day of really
wandering.

Later they were tired, and Melanctha sat down on the ground, and Jeff threw himself his full
length beside her. Jeff lay there, very quiet, and then he pressed her hand and kissed it and
murmured to her, "You certainly are very good to me, Melanctha." Melanctha felt it very deep
and did not answer. Jeff lay there a long time, looking up above him. He was counting all the
little leaves he saw above him. He was following all the little clouds with his eyes as they
sailed past him. He watched all the birds that flew high beyond him, and all the time Jeff
knew he must tell to Melanctha what it was he knew now, that which Jane Harden, just a week
ago, had told him. He knew very well that for him it was certain that he had to say it. It
was hard, but for Jeff Campbell the only way to lose it was to say it, the only way to know
Melanctha really, was to tell her all the struggle he had made to know her, to tell her so
she could help him to understand his trouble better, to help him so that never again he could
have any way to doubt her.

Jeff lay there a long time, very quiet, always looking up above him, and yet feeling very close
now to Melanctha. At last he turned a little toward her, took her hands closer in his to make
him feel it stronger, and then very slowly, for the words came very hard for him, slowly he
began his talk to her.

"Melanctha," began Jeff, very slowly, "Melanctha, it ain't right I shouldn't tell you why I
went away last week and almost never got the chance again to see you. Jane Harden was sick,
and I went in to take care of her. She began to tell everything she ever knew about you. She
didn't know how well now I know you. I didn't tell her not to go on talking. I listened while
she told me everything about you. I certainly found it very hard with what she told me. I know
she was talking truth in everything she said about you. I knew you had been free in your ways,
Melanctha, I knew you liked to get excitement the way I always hate to see the colored people
take it. I didn't know, till I heard Jane Harden say it, you had done things so bad, Melanctha.
When Jane Harden told me, I got very sick, Melanctha. I couldn't bear hardly, to think, perhaps
I was just another like them to you, Melanctha. I was wrong not to trust you perhaps, Melanctha,
but it did make things very ugly to me. I try to be honest to you, Melanctha, the way you say
you really want it from me."

Melanctha drew her hands from Jeff Campbell. She sat there, and there was deep scorn in her anger.

"If you wasn't all through just selfish and nothing else, Jeff Campbell, you would take care
you wouldn't have to tell me things like this, Jeff Campbell."

Jeff was silent a little, and he waited before he gave his answer. It was not the power of
Melanctha's words that held him, for, for them, he had his answer, it was the power of the
mood that filled Melanctha, and for that he had no answer. At last he broke through this awe,
with his slow fighting resolution, and he began to give his answer.

"I don't say ever, Melanctha," he began, "it wouldn't have been more right for me to stop Jane
Harden in her talking and to come to you to have you tell me what you were when I never knew
you. I don't say it, no never to you, that that would not have been the right way for me to
do, Melanctha. But I certainly am without any kind of doubting, I certainly do know for sure,
I had a good right to know about what you were and your ways and your trying to use your understanding,
every kind of way you could to get your learning. I certainly did have a right to know things
like that about you, Melanctha. I don't say it ever, Melanctha, and I say it very often, I
don't say ever I shouldn't have stopped Jane Harden in her talking and come to you and asked
you yourself to tell me all about it, but I guess I wanted to keep myself from how much it
would hurt me more, to have you yourself say it to me. Perhaps it was I wanted to keep you
from having it hurt you so much more, having you to have to tell it to me. I don't know, I
don't say it was to help you from being hurt most, or to help me. Perhaps I was a coward to
let Jane Harden tell me 'stead of coming straight to you, to have you tell me, but I certainly
am sure, Melanctha, I certainly had a right to know such things about you. I don't say it ever,
ever, Melanctha, I hadn't the just right to know those things about you." Melanctha laughed
her harsh laugh. "You needn't have been under no kind of worry, Jeff Campbell, about whether
you should have asked me. You could have asked, it wouldn't have hurt nothing. I certainly
never would have told you nothing." "I am not so sure of that, Melanctha," said Jeff Campbell.
"I certainly do think you would have told me. I certainly do think I could make you feel it
right to tell me. I certainly do think all I did wrong was to let Jane Harden tell me. I certainly
do know I never did wrong, to learn what she told me. I certainly know very well, Melanctha,
if I had come here to you, you would have told it all to me, Melanctha."

He was silent, and this struggle lay there, strong, between them. It was a struggle, sure to
be going on always between them. It was a struggle that was as sure always to be going on between
them, as their minds and hearts always were to have different ways of working.

At last Melanctha took his hand, leaned over him and kissed him. "I sure am very fond of you,
Jeff Campbell," Melanctha whispered to him.

Now for a little time there was not any kind of trouble between Jeff Campbell and Melanctha
Herbert. They were always together now for long times, and very often. They got much joy now,
both of them, from being all the time together.

It was summer now, and they had warm sunshine to wander. It was summer now, and Jeff Campbell
had more time to wander, for colored people never get sick so much in the summer. It was summer
now, and there was a lovely silence everywhere, and all the noises, too, that they heard around
them were lovely ones, and added to the joy, in these warm days, they loved so much to be together.

They talked some to each other in these days, did Jeff Campbell and Melanctha Herbert, but
always in these days their talking more and more was like it always is with real lovers. Jeff
did not talk so much now about what he before always had been thinking. Sometimes Jeff would
be, as if he was just waking from himself to be with Melanctha, and then he would find he had
been really all the long time with her, and he had really never needed to be doing any thinking.

It was sometimes pure joy Jeff would be talking to Melanctha, in these warm days he loved so
much to wander with her. Sometimes Jeff would lose all himself in a strong feeling. Very often
now, and always with more joy in his feeling, he would find himself, he did not know how or
what it was he had been thinking. And Melanctha always loved very well to make him feel it.
She always now laughed a little at him, and went back a little in him to his before, always
thinking, and she teased him with his always now being so good with her in his feeling, and
then she would so well and freely, and with her pure, strong ways of reaching, she would give
him all the love she knew now very well, how much he always wanted to be sure he really had it.

And Jeff took it straight now, and he loved it, and he felt, strong, the joy of all this being,
and it swelled out full inside him, and he poured it all out back to her in freedom, in tender
kindness, and in joy, and in gentle brother fondling. And Melanctha loved him for it always,
her Jeff Campbell now, who never did things ugly, for her, like all the men she always knew
before always had been doing to her. And they loved it always, more and more, together, with
this new feeling they had now, in these long summer days so warm; they, always together now,
just these two so dear, more and more to each other always, and the summer evenings when they
wandered, and the noises in the full streets, and the music of the organs, and the dancing,
and the warm smell of the people, and of dogs and of the horses, and all the joy of the strong,
sweet pungent, dirty, moist, warm negro southern summer.

Every day now, Jeff seemed to be coming nearer, to be really loving. Every day now, Melanctha
poured it all out to him, with more freedom. Every day now, they seemed to be having more and
more, both together, of this strong, right feeling. More and more every day now they seemed
to know more really, what it was each other one was always feeling. More and more now every
day Jeff found in himself, he felt more trusting. More and more every day now, he did not think
anything in words about what he was always doing. Every day now more and more Melanctha would
let out to Jeff her real, strong feeling.

One day there had been much joy between them, more than they ever yet had had with their new
feeling. All the day they had lost themselves in warm wandering. Now they were lying there
and resting, with a green, bright, light-flecked world around them.

What was it that now really happened to them? What was it that Melanctha did, that made everything
get all ugly for them? What was it that Melanctha felt then, that made Jeff remember all the
feeling he had had in him when Jane Harden told him how Melanctha had learned to be so very
understanding? Jeff did not know how it was that it had happened to him. It was all green,
and warm, and very lovely to him, and now Melanctha somehow had made it all so ugly for him.
What was it Melanctha was now doing with him? What was it he used to be thinking was the right
way for him and all the colored people to be always trying to make it right, the way they should
be always living? Why was Melanctha Herbert now all so ugly for him?

Melanctha Herbert somehow had made him feel deeply just then, what very more it was that she
wanted from him. Jeff Campbell now felt in him what everybody always had needed to make them
really understanding, to him. Jeff felt a strong disgust inside him; not for Melanctha herself,
to him, not for himself really, in him, not for what it was that everybody wanted, in them;
he only had disgust because he never could know really in him, what it was he wanted, to be
really right in understanding, for him, he only had disgust because he never could know really
what it was really right to him to be always doing, in the things he had before believed in,
the things he before had believed in for himself and for all the colored people, the living
regular, and the never wanting to be always having new things, just to keep on, always being
in excitements. All the old thinking now came up very strong inside him. He sort of turned
away then, and threw Melanctha from him.

Jeff never, even now, knew what it was that moved him. He never, even now, was ever sure, he
really knew what Melanctha was, when she was real herself, and honest. He thought he knew,
and then there came to him some moment, just like this one, when she really woke him up to
be strong in him. Then he really knew he could know nothing. He knew then, he never could know
what it was she really wanted with him. He knew then he never could know really what it was
he felt inside him. It was all so mixed up inside him. All he knew was he wanted very badly
Melanctha should be there beside him, and he wanted very badly, too, always to throw her from
him. What was it really that Melanctha wanted with him? What was it really, he, Jeff Campbell,
wanted she should give him? "I certainly did think now," Jeff Campbell groaned inside him,
"I certainly did think now I really was knowing all right, what I wanted. I certainly did really
think now I was knowing how to be trusting with Melanctha. I certainly did think it was like
that now with me sure, after all I've been through all this time with her. And now I certainly
do know I don't know anything that's very real about her. Oh the good Lord help and keep me!"
and Jeff groaned hard inside him, and he buried his face deep in the green grass underneath
him, and Melanctha Herbert was very silent there beside him.

Then Jeff turned to look and see her. She was lying very still there by him, and the bitter
water on her face was biting. Jeff was so very sorry then, all over and inside him, the way
he always was when Melanctha had been deep hurt by him. "I didn't mean to be so bad again to
you, Melanctha, dear one," and he was very tender to her. "I certainly didn't never mean to
go to be so bad to you, Melanctha, darling. I certainly don't know, Melanctha, darling, what
it is makes me act so to you sometimes, when I certainly ain't meaning anything like I want
to hurt you. I certainly don't mean to be so bad, Melanctha, only it comes so quick on me before
I know what I am acting to you. I certainly am all sorry, hard, to be so bad to you, Melanctha,
darling." "I suppose, Jeff," said Melanctha, very low and bitter, "I suppose you are always
thinking, Jeff, somebody had ought to be ashamed with us two together, and you certainly do
think you don't see any way to it, Jeff, for me to be feeling that way ever, so you certainly
don't see any way to it, only to do it just so often for me. That certainly is the way always
with you, Jeff Campbell, if I understand you right the way you are always acting to me. That
certainly is right the way I am saying it to you now, Jeff Campbell. You certainly didn't anyway
trust me now no more, did you, when you just acted so bad to me. I certainly am right the way
I say it Jeff now to you. I certainly am right when I ask you for it now, to tell me what I
ask you, about not trusting me more then again, Jeff, just like you never really knew me. You
certainly never did trust me just then, Jeff, you hear me?" "Yes, Melanctha," Jeff answered
slowly. Melanctha paused. "I guess I certainly never can forgive you this time, Jeff Campbell,"
she said firmly. Jeff paused too, and thought a little. "I certainly am afraid you never can
no more now again, Melanctha," he said sadly.

They lay there very quiet now a long time, each one thinking very hard on their own trouble.
At last Jeff began again to tell Melanctha what it was he was always thinking with her. "I
certainly do know, Melanctha, you certainly now don't want any more to be hearing me just talking,
but you see, Melanctha, really, it's just like this way always with me. You see, Melanctha,
its like this way now all the time with me. You remember, Melanctha, what I was once telling
to you, when I didn't know you very long together, about how I certainly never did know more
than just two kinds of ways of living, one way the way it is good to be in families and the
other kind of way, like animals are all the time just with each other, and how I didn't ever
like that last kind of way much for any of the colored people. You see Melanctha, it's like
this way with me. I got a new feeling now, you been teaching to me, just like I told you once,
just like a new religion to me, and I see perhaps what really loving is like, like really having
everything together, new things, little pieces all different, like I always before been thinking
was bad to be having, all go together like, to make one good big feeling. You see, Melanctha,
it's certainly like that you make me been seeing, like I never know before any way there was
of all kinds of loving to come together to make one way really truly lovely. I see that now,
sometimes, the way you certainly been teaching me, Melanctha, really, and then I love you those
times, Melanctha, like a real religion, and then it comes over me all sudden, I don't know
anything real about you Melanctha, dear one, and then it comes over me sudden, perhaps I certainly
am wrong now, thinking all this way so lovely, and not thinking now any more the old way I
always before was always thinking, about what was the right way for me, to live regular and
all the colored people, and then I think, perhaps, Melanctha you are really just a bad one,
and I think, perhaps I certainly am doing it so because I just am too anxious to be just having
all the time excitements, like I don't ever like really to be doing when I know it, and then
I always get so bad to you, Melanctha, and I can't help it with myself then, never, for I want
to be always right really in the ways, I have to do them. I certainly do very badly want to
be right, Melanctha, the only way I know is right Melanctha really, and I don't know any way,
Melanctha, to find out really, whether my old way, the way I always used to be thinking, or
the new way, you make so like a real religion to me sometimes, Melanctha, which way certainly
is the real right way for me to be always thinking, and then I certainly am awful good and
sorry, Melanctha, I always give you so much trouble, hurting you with the bad ways I am acting.
Can't you help me to any way, to make it all straight for me, Melanctha, so I know right and
real what it is I should be acting. You see, Melanctha, I don't want always to be a coward
with you, if I only could know certain what was the right way for me to be acting. I certainly
am real sure, Melanctha, that would be the way I would be acting, if I only knew it sure for
certain now, Melanctha. Can't you help me any way to find out real and true, Melanctha, dear
one. I certainly do badly want to know always, the way I should be acting."

"No, Jeff, dear, I certainly can't help you much in that kind of trouble you are always having.
All I can do now, Jeff, is to just keep certainly with my believing you are good always, Jeff,
and though you certainly do hurt me bad, I always got strong faith in you, Jeff, more in you
certainly, than you seem to be having in your acting to me, always so bad, Jeff."

"You certainly are very good to me, Melanctha, dear one," Jeff said, after a long, tender silence.
"You certainly are very good to me, Melanctha, darling, and me so bad to you always, in my
acting. Do you love me good, and right, Melanctha, always?" "Always and always, you be sure
of that now you have me. Oh you Jeff, you always be so stupid." "I certainly never can say
now you ain't right, when you say that to me so, Melanctha," Jeff answered. "Oh, Jeff dear,
I love you always, you know that now, all right, for certain. If you don't know it right now,
Jeff, really, I prove it to you now, for good and always." And they lay there a long time in
their loving, and then Jeff began again with his happy free enjoying.

"I sure am a good boy to be learning all the time the right way you are teaching me, Melanctha,
darling," began Jeff Campbell, laughing, "You can't say no, never, I ain't a good scholar for
you to be teaching now, Melanctha, and I am always so ready to come to you every day, and never
playing hooky ever from you. You can't say ever, Melanctha, now can you, I ain't a real good
boy to be always studying to be learning to be real bright, just like my teacher. You can't
say ever to me, I ain't a good boy to you now, Melanctha." "Not near so good, Jeff Campbell,
as such a good, patient kind of teacher, like me, who never teaches any ways it ain't good
her scholars should be knowing, ought to be really having, Jeff, you hear me? I certainly don't
think I am right for you, to be forgiving always, when you are so bad, and I so patient, with
all this hard teaching always." "But you do forgive me always, sure, Melanctha, always?" "Always
and always, you be sure Jeff, and I certainly am afraid I never can stop with my forgiving,
you always are going to be so bad to me, and I always going to have to be so good with my forgiving."
"Oh! Oh!" cried Jeff Campbell, laughing, "I ain't going to be so bad for always, sure I ain't,
Melanctha, my own darling. And sure you do forgive me really, and sure you love me true and
really, sure, Melanctha?" "Sure, sure, Jeff, boy, sure now and always, sure now you believe
me, sure you do, Jeff, always." "I sure hope I does, with all my heart, Melanctha, darling."
"I sure do that same, Jeff, dear boy, now you really know what it is to be loving, and I prove
it to you now so, Jeff, you never can be forgetting. You see now, Jeff, good and certain, what
I always before been saying to you, Jeff, now." "Yes, Melanctha, darling," murmured Jeff, and
he was very happy in it, and so the two of them now in the warm air of the sultry, southern,
negro sunshine, lay there for a long time just resting.

And now for a real long time there was no open trouble any more between Jeff Campbell and Melanctha
Herbert. Then it came that Jeff knew he could not say out any more, what it was he wanted,
he could not say out any more, what it was, he wanted to know about, what Melanctha wanted.

Melanctha sometimes now, when she was tired with being all the time so much excited, when Jeff
would talk a long time to her about what was right for them both to be always doing, would
be, as if she gave way in her head, and lost herself in a bad feeling. Sometimes when they
had been strong in their loving, and Jeff would have rise inside him some strange feeling,
and Melanctha felt it in him as it would soon be coming, she would lose herself then in this
bad feeling that made her head act as if she never knew what it was they were doing. And slowly
now, Jeff soon always came to be feeling that his Melanctha would be hurt very much in her
head in the ways he never liked to think of, if she would ever now again have to listen to
his trouble, when he was telling about what it was he still was wanting to make things for
himself really understanding.

Now Jeff began to have always a strong feeling that Melanctha could no longer stand it, with
all her bad suffering, to let him fight out with himself what was right for him to be doing.
Now he felt he must not, when she was there with him, keep on, with this kind of fighting that
was always going on inside him. Jeff Campbell never knew yet, what he thought was the right
way, for himself and for all the colored people to be living. Jeff was coming always each time
closer to be really understanding, but now Melanctha was so bad in her suffering with him,
that he knew she could not any longer have him with her while he was always showing that he
never really yet was sure what it was, the right way, for them to be really loving.

Jeff saw now he had to go so fast, so that Melanctha never would have to wait any to get from
him always all that she ever wanted. He never could be honest now, he never could be now, any
more, trying to be really understanding, for always every moment now he felt it to be a strong
thing in him, how very much it was Melanctha Herbert always suffered. 

CHAPTER XLIV

A Midnight Adventure

Something as to the jewels had been told to Lord George;--and this was quite necessary, as Lord
George intended to travel with the ladies from Portray to London.

Of course, he had heard of the diamonds,--as who had not? He had heard too of Lord Fawn, and knew
why it was that Lord Fawn had peremptorily refused to carry out his engagement. But, till he
was told by Mrs. Carbuncle, he did not know that the diamonds were then kept within the castle,
nor did he understand that it would be part of his duty to guard them on their way back to London.
"They are worth ever so much; ain't they?" he said to Mrs. Carbuncle,
when she first gave him the information.

"Ten thousand pounds," said Mrs. Carbuncle, almost with awe.

"I don't believe a word of it," said Lord George.

"She says that they've been valued at that, since she's had them."

Lord George owned to himself that such a necklace was worth having,--as also, no doubt, were Portray
Castle and the income arising from the estate, even though they could be held in possession only
for a single life. Hitherto in his very chequered career he had escaped the trammels of matrimony,
and among his many modes of life had hardly even suggested to himself the expediency of taking
a wife with a fortune, and then settling down for the future, if
submissively, still comfortably.

To say that he had never looked forward to such a marriage as a possible future arrangement
would probably be incorrect. To men such as Lord George it is too easy a result of a career to
be altogether banished from the mind. But no attempt had ever yet been made, nor had any special
lady ever been so far honoured in his thoughts as to be connected in them with any vague ideas
which he might have formed on the subject. But now it did occur to him that Portray Castle was
a place in which he could pass two or three months annually without ennui; and that if he were
to marry, little Lizzie Eustace would do as well as any other woman
with money whom he might chance to meet.

He did not say all this to anybody, and therefore cannot be accused of vanity. He was the
last man in the world to speak on such a subject to any one. And as our Lizzie certainly bestowed
upon him many of her smiles, much of her poetry, and some of her
confidence, it cannot be said that he was not justified in his views.
But then she was such "an infernal little liar." Lord George was quite
able to discover so much of her.

"She does lie, certainly," said
Mrs. Carbuncle, "but then who doesn't?"

On the morning of their departure
the box with the diamonds was brought down into the hall just as they
were about to depart. The tall London footman again brought it down,
and deposited it on one of the oak hall-chairs, as though it were
a thing so heavy that he could hardly stagger along with it. How Lizzie
did hate the man as she watched him, and regret that she had not attempted
to carry it down herself. She pulled him so fast with her, and he did not dare to hurt her, and he could
not come right, so fast, the way she always needed he should be doing it now, for her.

These days were not very joyful ones now any more, to Jeff Campbell, with Melanctha. He did
not think it out to himself now, in words, about her. He did not know enough, what was his
real trouble, with her.

Sometimes now and again with them, and with all this trouble for a little while well forgotten
by him, Jeff, and Melanctha with him, would be very happy in a strong, sweet loving. Sometimes
then, Jeff would find himself to be soaring very high in his true loving. Sometimes Jeff would
find them, in his loving, his soul swelling out full inside him. Always Jeff felt now in himself,
deep feeling.

Always now Jeff had to go so much faster than was real with his feeling. Yet always Jeff knew
how he had a right, strong feeling. Always now when Jeff was wondering, it was Melanctha he
was doubting, in the loving. Now he would often ask her, was she real now to him, in her loving.
He would ask her often, feeling something queer about it all inside him, though yet he was
never really strong in his doubting, and always Melanctha would answer to him, "Yes Jeff, sure,
you know it, always," and always Jeff felt a doubt now, in her loving.

Always now Jeff felt in himself, deep loving. Always now he did not know really, if Melanctha
was true in her loving.

All these days Jeff was uncertain in him, and he was uneasy about which way he should act so
as not to be wrong and put them both into bad trouble. Always now he was, as if he must feel
deep into Melanctha to see if it was real loving he would find she now had in her, and always
he would stop himself, with her, for always he was afraid now that he might badly hurt her.

Always now he liked it better when he was detained when he had to go and see her. Always now
he never liked to go to be with her, although he never wanted really, not to be always with
her. Always now he never felt really at ease with her, even when they were good friends together.
Always now he felt, with her, he could not be really honest to her. And Jeff never could be
happy with her when he could not feel strong to tell all his feeling to her. Always now every
day he found it harder to make the time pass, with her, and not let his feeling come so that
he would quarrel with her.

And so one evening, late, he was to go to her. He waited a little long, before he went to her.
He was afraid, in himself, to-night, he would surely hurt her. He never wanted to go when he
might quarrel with her.

Melanctha sat there looking very angry, when he came in to her. Jeff took off his hat and coat
and then sat down by the fire with her.

"If you come in much later to me just now, Jeff Campbell, I certainly never would have seen
you no more never to speak to you, 'thout your apologising real humble to me." "Apologising
Melanctha," and Jeff laughed and was scornful to her, "Apologising, Melanctha, I ain't proud
that kind of way, Melanctha, I don't mind apologising to you, Melanctha, all I mind, Melanctha
is to be doing of things wrong, to you." "That's easy, to say things that way, Jeff to me.
But you never was very proud Jeff, to be courageous to me." "I don't know about that Melanctha.
I got courage to say some things hard, when I mean them, to you." "Oh, yes, Jeff, I know all
about that, Jeff, to me. But I mean real courage, to run around and not care nothing about
what happens, and always to be game in any kind of trouble. That's what I mean by real courage,
to me, Jeff, if you want to know it." "Oh, yes, Melanctha, I know all that kind of courage.
I see plenty of it all the time with some kinds of colored men and with some girls like you
Melanctha, and Jane Harden. I know all about how you are always making a fuss to be proud because
you don't holler so much when you run in to where you ain't got any business to be, and so
you get hurt, the way you ought to. And then, you kind of people are very brave then, sure,
with all your kinds of suffering, but the way I see it, going round with all my patients, that
kind of courage makes all kind of trouble, for them who ain't so noble with their courage,
and then they got it, always to be bearing it, when the end comes, to be hurt the hardest.
It's like running around and being game to spend all your money always, and then a man's wife
and children are the ones do all the starving and they don't ever get a name for being brave,
and they don't ever want to be doing all that suffering, and they got to stand it and say nothing.
That's the way I see it a good deal now with all that kind of braveness in some of the colored
people. They always make a lot of noise to show they are so brave not to holler, when they
got so much suffering they always bring all on themselves, just by doing things they got no
business to be doing. I don't say, never, Melanctha, they ain't got good courage not to holler,
but I never did see much in looking for that kind of trouble just to show you ain't going to
holler. No its all right being brave every day, just living regular and not having new ways
all the time just to get excitements, the way I hate to see it in all the colored people. No
I don't see much, Melanctha, in being brave just to get it good, where you've got no business.
I ain't ashamed Melanctha, right here to tell you, I ain't ashamed ever to say I ain't got
no longing to be brave, just to go around and look for trouble." "Yes that's just like you
always, Jeff, you never understand things right, the way you are always feeling in you. You
ain't got no way to understand right, how it depends what way somebody goes to look for new
things, the way it makes it right for them to get excited."

"No Melanctha, I certainly never do say I understand much anybody's got a right to think they
won't have real bad trouble, if they go and look hard where they are certain sure to find it.
No Melanctha, it certainly does sound very pretty all this talking about danger and being game
and never hollering, and all that way of talking, but when two men are just fighting, the strong
man mostly gets on top with doing good hard pounding, and the man that's getting all that pounding,
he mostly never likes it so far as I have been able yet to see it, and I don't see much difference
what kind of noble way they are made of when they ain't got any kind of business to get together
there to be fighting. That certainly is the only way I ever see it happen right, Melanctha,
whenever I happen to be anywhere I can be looking."

"That's because you never can see anything that ain't just so simple, Jeff, with everybody,
the way you always think it. It do make all the difference the kind of way anybody is made
to do things game Jeff Campbell."

"Maybe Melanctha, I certainly never say no you ain't right, Melanctha. I just been telling
it to you all straight, Melanctha, the way I always see it. Perhaps if you run around where
you ain't got any business, and you stand up very straight and say, I am so brave, nothing
can ever ever hurt me, maybe nothing will ever hurt you then Melanctha. I never have seen it
do so. I never can say truly any differently to you Melanctha, but I always am ready to be
learning from you, Melanctha. And perhaps when somebody cuts into you real hard, with a brick
he is throwing, perhaps you never will do any hollering then, Melanctha. I certainly don't
ever say no, Melanctha, to you, I only say that ain't the way yet I ever see it happen when
I had a chance to be there looking."

They sat there together, quiet by the fire, and they did not seem to feel very loving.

"I certainly do wonder," Melanctha said dreamily, at last breaking into their long unloving
silence. "I certainly do wonder why always it happens to me I care for anybody who ain't no
ways good enough for me ever to be thinking to respect him."

Jeff looked at Melanctha. Jeff got up then and walked a little up and down the room, and then
he came back, and his face was set and dark and he was very quiet to her.

"Oh dear, Jeff, sure, why you look so solemn now to me. Sure Jeff I never am meaning anything
real by what I just been saying. What was I just been saying Jeff to you. I only certainly
was just thinking how everything always was just happening to me."

Jeff Campbell sat very still and dark, and made no answer.

"Seems to me, Jeff you might be good to me a little to-night when my head hurts so, and I am
so tired with all the hard work I have been doing, thinking, and I always got so many things
to be a trouble to me, living like I do with nobody ever who can help me. Seems to me you might
be good to me Jeff to-night, and not get angry, every little thing I am ever saying to you."

"I certainly would not get angry ever with you, Melanctha, just because you say things to me.
But now I certainly been thinking you really mean what you have been just then saying to me."
"But you say all the time to me Jeff, you ain't no ways good enough in your loving to me, you
certainly say to me all the time you ain't no ways good or understanding to me." "That certainly
is what I say to you always, just the way I feel it to you Melanctha always, and I got it right
in me to say it, and I have got a right in me to be very strong and feel it, and to be always
sure to believe it, but it ain't right for you Melanctha to feel it. When you feel it so Melanctha,
it does certainly make everything all wrong with our loving. It makes it so I certainly never
can bear to have it."

They sat there then a long time by the fire, very silent, and not loving, and never looking
to each other for it. Melanctha was moving and twitching herself and very nervous with it.
Jeff was heavy and sullen and dark and very serious in it.

"Oh why can't you forget I said it to you Jeff now, and I certainly am so tired, and my head
and all now with it."

Jeff stirred, "All right Melanctha, don't you go make yourself sick now in your head, feeling
so bad with it," and Jeff made himself do it, and he was a patient doctor again now with Melanctha
when he felt her really having her head hurt with it. "It's all right now Melanctha darling,
sure it is now I tell you. You just lie down now a little, dear one, and I sit here by the
fire and just read awhile and just watch with you so I will be here ready, if you need me to
give you something to help you resting." And then Jeff was a good doctor to her, and very sweet
and tender with her, and Melanctha loved him to be there to help her, and then Melanctha fell
asleep a little, and Jeff waited there beside her until he saw she was really sleeping, and
then he went back and sat down by the fire.

And Jeff tried to begin again with his thinking, and he could not make it come clear to himself,
with all his thinking, and he felt everything all thick and heavy and bad, now inside him,
everything that he could not understand right, with all the hard work he made, with his thinking.
And then he moved himself a little, and took a book to forget his thinking, and then as always,
he loved it when he was reading, and then very soon he was deep in his reading, and so he forgot
now for a little while that he never could seem to be very understanding.

And so Jeff forgot himself for awhile in his reading, and Melanctha was sleeping. And then
Melanctha woke up and she was screaming. "Oh, Jeff, I thought you gone away for always from
me. Oh, Jeff, never now go away no more from me. Oh, Jeff, sure, sure, always be just so good
to me"

There was a weight in Jeff Campbell from now on, always with him, that he could never lift
out from him, to feel easy. He always was trying not to have it in him and he always was trying
not to let Melanctha feel it, with him, but it was always there inside him. Now Jeff Campbell
always was serious, and dark, and heavy, and sullen, and he would often sit a long time with
Melanctha without moving.

"You certainly never have forgiven to me, what I said to you that night, Jeff, now have you?"
Melanctha asked him after a long silence, late one evening with him. "It ain't ever with me
a question like forgiving, Melanctha, I got in me. It's just only what you are feeling for
me, makes any difference to me. I ain't ever seen anything since in you, makes me think you
didn't mean it right, what you said about not thinking now any more I was good, to make it
right for you to be really caring so very much to love me."

"I certainly never did see no man like you, Jeff. You always wanting to have it all clear out
in words always, what everybody is always feeling. I certainly don't see a reason, why I should
always be explaining to you what I mean by what I am just saying. And you ain't got no feeling
ever for me, to ask me what I meant, by what I was saying when I was so tired, that night.
I never know anything right I was saying." "But you don't ever tell me now, Melanctha, so I
really hear you say it, you don't mean it the same way, the way you said it to me." "Oh Jeff,
you so stupid always to me and always just bothering with your always asking to me. And I don't
never any way remember ever anything I been saying to you, and I am always my head, so it hurts
me it half kills me, and my heart jumps so, sometimes I think I die so when it hurts me, and
I am so blue always, I think sometimes I take something to just kill me, and I got so much
to bother thinking always and doing, and I got so much to worry, and all that, and then you
come and ask me what I mean by what I was just saying to you. I certainly don't know, Jeff,
when you ask me. Seems to me, Jeff, sometimes you might have some kind of a right feeling to
be careful to me." "You ain't got no right Melanctha Herbert," flashed out Jeff through his
dark, frowning anger, "you certainly ain't got no right always to be using your being hurt
and being sick, and having pain, like a weapon, so as to make me do things it ain't never right
for me to be doing for you. You certainly ain't got no right to be always holding your pain
out to show me." "What do you mean by them words, Jeff Campbell." "I certainly do mean them
just like I am saying them, Melanctha. You act always, like I been responsible all myself for
all our loving one another. And if its anything anyway that ever hurts you, you act like as
if it was me made you just begin it all with me. I ain't no coward, you hear me, Melanctha?
I never put my trouble back on anybody, thinking that they made me. I certainly am right ready
always, Melanctha, you certainly had ought to know me, to stand all my own trouble for me,
but I tell you straight now, the way I think it Melanctha, I ain't going to be as if I was
the reason why you wanted to be loving, and to be suffering so now with me." "But ain't you
certainly ought to be feeling it so, to be right, Jeff Campbell. Did I ever do anything but
just let you do everything you wanted to me. Did I ever try to make you be loving to me. Did
I ever do nothing except just sit there ready to endure your loving with me. But I certainly
never, Jeff Campbell, did make any kind of way as if I wanted really to be having you for me."

Jeff stared at Melanctha. "So that's the way you say it when you are thinking right about it
all, Melanctha. Well I certainly ain't got a word to say ever to you any more, Melanctha, if
that's the way its straight out to you now, Melanctha." And Jeff almost laughed out to her,
and he turned to take his hat and coat, and go away now forever from her.

Melanctha dropped her head on her arms, and she trembled all over and inside her. Jeff stopped
a little and looked very sadly at her. Jeff could not so quickly make it right for himself,
to leave her.

"Oh, I certainly shall go crazy now, I certainly know that," Melanctha moaned as she sat there,
all fallen and miserable and weak together.

Jeff came and took her in his arms, and held her. Jeff was very good then to her, but they
neither of them felt inside all right, as they once did, to be together.

From now on, Jeff had real torment in him.

Was it true what Melanctha had said that night to him? Was it true that he was the one had
made all this trouble for them? Was it true, he was the only one, who always had had wrong
ways in him? Waking or sleeping Jeff now always had this torment going on inside him.

Jeff did not know now any more, what to feel within him. He did not know how to begin thinking
out this trouble that must always now be bad inside him. He just felt a confused struggle and
resentment always in him, a knowing, no, Melanctha was not right in what she had said that
night to him, and then a feeling, perhaps he always had been wrong in the way he never could
be understanding. And then would come strong to him, a sense of the deep sweetness in Melanctha's
loving and a hating the cold slow way he always had to feel things in him.

Always Jeff knew, sure, Melanctha was wrong in what she had said that night to him, but always
Melanctha had had deep feeling with him, always he was poor and slow in the only way he knew
how to have any feeling. Jeff knew Melanctha was wrong, and yet he always had a deep doubt
in him. What could he know, who had such slow feeling in him? What could he ever know, who
always had to find his way with just thinking. What could he know, who had to be taught such
a long time to learn about what was really loving? Jeff now always had this torment in him.

Melanctha was now always making him feel her way, strong whenever she was with him. Did she
go on to do it just to show him, did she do it so now because she was no longer loving, did
she do it so because that was her way to make him be really loving. Jeff never did know how
it was that it all happened so to him.

Melanctha acted now the way she had said it always had been with them. Now it was always Jeff
who had to do the asking. Now it was always Jeff who had to ask when would be the next time
he should come to see her. Now always she was good and patient to him, and now always she was
kind and loving with him, and always Jeff felt it was, that she was good to give him anything
he ever asked or wanted, but never now any more for her own sake to make her happy in him.
Now she did these things, as if it was just to please her Jeff Campbell who needed she should
now have kindness for him. Always now he was the beggar, with them. Always now Melanctha gave
it, not of her need, but from her bounty to him. Always now Jeff found it getting harder for him.

Sometimes Jeff wanted to tear things away from before him, always now he wanted to fight things
and be angry with them, and always now Melanctha was so patient to him.

Now, deep inside him, there was always a doubt with Jeff, of Melanctha's loving. It was not
a doubt yet to make him really doubting, for with that, Jeff never could be really loving,
but always now he knew that something, and that not in him, something was wrong with their
loving. Jeff Campbell could not know any right way to think out what was inside Melanctha with
her loving, he could not use any way now to reach inside her to find if she was true in her
loving, but now something had gone wrong between them, and now he never felt sure in him, the
way once she had made him, that now at last he really had got to be understanding.

Melanctha was too many for him. He was helpless to find out the way she really felt now for
him. Often Jeff would ask her, did she really love him. Always she said, "Yes Jeff, sure, you
know that," and now instead of a full sweet strong love with it, Jeff only felt a patient,
kind endurance in it.

Jeff did not know. If he was right in such a feeling, he certainly never any more did want
to have Melanctha Herbert with him. Jeff Campbell hated badly to think Melanctha never would
give him love, just for his sake, and not because she needed it herself, to be with him. Such
a way of loving would be very hard for Jeff to be enduring.

"Jeff what makes you act so funny to me. Jeff you certainly now are jealous to me. Sure Jeff,
now I don't see ever why you be so foolish to look so to me." "Don't you ever think I can be
jealous of anybody ever Melanctha, you hear me. It's just, you certainly don't ever understand
me. It's just this way with me always now Melanctha. You love me, and I don't care anything
what you do or what you ever been to anybody. You don't love me, then I don't care any more
about what you ever do or what you ever be to anybody. But I never want you to be being good
Melanctha to me, when it ain't your loving makes you need it. I certainly don't ever want to
be having any of your kind of kindness to me. If you don't love me, I can stand it. All I never
want to have is your being good to me from kindness. If you don't love me, then you and I certainly
do quit right here Melanctha, all strong feeling, to be always living to each other. It certainly
never is anybody I ever am thinking about when I am thinking with you Melanctha, darling. That's
the true way I am telling you Melanctha, always. It's only your loving me ever gives me anything
to bother me Melanctha, so all you got to do, if you don't really love me, is just certainly
to say so to me. I won't bother you more then than I can help to keep from it Melanctha. You
certainly need never to be in any worry, never, about me Melanctha. When an epoch of thirteen times
fifty-two years had passed, Quetzalcoatl seized a great stick, and with a blow of it knocked
Tezcatlipoca from the sky into the waters, and himself became sun. The fallen god transformed himself
into a tiger, and emerged from the waves to attack and devour the giants with which his brothers
had enviously filled the world which he had been lighting from the sky. After this, he passed
to the nocturnal heavens, and became the constellation of the Great Bear.

For an epoch the earth flourished under Quetzalcoatl as sun, but Tezcatlipoca was merely biding
his time, and the epoch ended, he appeared as a tiger and gave Quetzalcoatl such a blow with
his paw that it hurled him from the skies. The overthrown god revenged himself by sweeping the
earth with so violent a tornado that it destroyed all the inhabitants but a few, and these
were changed into monkeys. His victorious brother then placed in the heavens, as sun, Tlaloc,
the god of darkness, water and rains, but after half an epoch, Quetzalcoatl poured a flood
of fire upon the earth, drove Tlaloc from the sky, and placed in his stead, as sun, the goddess
Chalchiutlicue, the Emerald Skirted, wife of Tlaloc. In her time the rains poured so upon the
earth that all human beings were drowned or changed into fishes, and at last the heavens themselves
fell, and sun and stars were alike quenched.

Then the two brothers whose strife had brought this ruin, united their efforts and raised again
the sky, resting it on two mighty trees, the Tree of the Mirror (tezcaquahuitl)
and the Beautiful Great Rose Tree (quetzalveixochitl), on which the
concave heavens have ever since securely rested; though we know them
better, perhaps, if we drop the metaphor and call them the "mirroring
sea" and the "flowery earth," on one of which reposes the horizon,
in whichever direction we may look. Something in her always now was making
stronger the torment that was tearing every minute at the joy he once always had had with her.

Always now Jeff wondered did Melanctha love him. Always now he was wondering, was Melanctha
right when she said, it was he had made all their beginning. Was Melanctha right when she said,
it was he had the real responsibility for all the trouble they had and still were having now
between them. If she was right, what a brute he always had been in his acting. If she was right,
how good she had been to endure the pain he had made so bad so often for her. But no, surely
she had made herself to bear it, for her own sake, not for his to make him happy. Surely he
was not so twisted in all his long thinking. Surely he could remember right what it was had
happened every day in their long loving. Surely he was not so poor a coward as Melanctha always
seemed to be thinking. Surely, surely, and then the torment would get worse every minute in him.

One night Jeff Campbell was lying in his bed with his thinking, and night after night now he
could not do any sleeping for his thinking. Tonight suddenly he sat up in his bed, and it all
came clear to him, and he pounded his pillow with his fist, and he almost shouted out alone
there to him, "I ain't a brute the way Melanctha has been saying. Its all wrong the way I been
worried thinking. We did begin fair, each not for the other but for ourselves, what we were
wanting. Melanctha Herbert did it just like I did it, because she liked it bad enough to want
to stand it. It's all wrong in me to think it any way except the way we really did it. I certainly
don't know now whether she is now real and true in her loving. I ain't got any way ever to
find out if she is real and true now always to me. All I know is I didn't ever make her to
begin to be with me. Melanctha has got to stand for her own trouble, just like I got to stand
for my own trouble. Each man has got to do it for himself when he is in real trouble. Melanctha,
she certainly don't remember right when she says I made her begin and then I made her trouble.
No by God, I ain't no coward nor a brute either ever to her. I been the way I felt it honest,
and that certainly is all about it now between us, and everybody always has just got to stand
for their own trouble. I certainly am right this time the way I see it." And Jeff lay down
now, at last in comfort, and he slept, and he was free from his long doubting torment.

"You know Melanctha," Jeff Campbell began, the next time he was alone to talk a long time to
Melanctha. "You know Melanctha, sometimes I think a whole lot about what you like to say so
much about being game and never doing any hollering. Seems to me Melanctha, I certainly don't
understand right what you mean by not hollering. Seems to me it certainly ain't only what comes
right away when one is hit, that counts to be brave to be bearing, but all that comes later
from your getting sick from the shock of being hurt once in a fight, and all that, and all
the being taken care of for years after, and the suffering of your family, and all that, you
certainly must stand and not holler, to be certainly really brave the way I understand it."
"What you mean Jeff by your talking." "I mean, seems to me really not to holler, is to be strong
not to show you ever have been hurt. Seems to me, to get your head hurt from your trouble and
to show it, ain't certainly no braver than to say, oh, oh, how bad you hurt me, please don't
hurt me mister. It just certainly seems to me, like many people think themselves so game just
to stand what we all of us always just got to be standing, and everybody stands it, and we
don't certainly none of us like it, and yet we don't ever most of us think we are so much being
game, just because we got to stand it."

"I know what you mean now by what you are saying to me now Jeff Campbell. You make a fuss now
to me, because I certainly just have stopped standing everything you like to be always doing
so cruel to me. But that's just the way always with you Jeff Campbell, if you want to know
it. You ain't got no kind of right feeling for all I always been forgiving to you." "I said
it once for fun, Melanctha, but now I certainly do mean it, you think you got a right to go
where you got no business, and you say, I am so brave nothing can hurt me, and then something,
like always, it happens to hurt you, and you show your hurt always so everybody can see it,
and you say, I am so brave nothing did hurt me except he certainly didn't have any right to,
and see how bad I suffer, but you never hear me make a holler, though certainly anybody got
any feeling, to see me suffer, would certainly never touch me except to take good care of me.
Sometimes I certainly don't rightly see Melanctha, how much more game that is than just the
ordinary kind of holler." "No, Jeff Campbell, and made the way you is you certainly ain't likely
ever to be much more understanding." "No, Melanctha, nor you neither. You think always, you
are the only one who ever can do any way to really suffer." "Well, and ain't I certainly always
been the only person knows how to bear it. No, Jeff Campbell, I certainly be glad to love anybody
really worthy, but I made so, I never seem to be able in this world to find him." "No, and
your kind of way of thinking, you certainly Melanctha never going to any way be able ever to
be finding of him. Can't you understand Melanctha, ever, how no man certainly ever really can
hold your love for long times together. You certainly Melanctha, you ain't got down deep loyal
feeling, true inside you, and when you ain't just that moment quick with feeling, then you
certainly ain't ever got anything more there to keep you. You see Melanctha, it certainly is
this way with you, it is, that you ain't ever got any way to remember right what you been doing,
or anybody else that has been feeling with you. You certainly Melanctha, never can remember
right, when it comes what you have done and what you think happens to you." "It certainly is
all easy for you Jeff Campbell to be talking. You remember right, because you don't remember
nothing till you get home with your thinking everything all over, but I certainly don't think
much ever of that kind of way of remembering right, Jeff Campbell. I certainly do call it remembering
right Jeff Campbell, to remember right just when it happens to you, so you have a right kind
of feeling not to act the way you always been doing to me, and then you go home Jeff Campbell,
and you begin with your thinking, and then it certainly is very easy for you to be good and
forgiving with it. No, that ain't to me, the way of remembering Jeff Campbell, not as I can
see it not to make people always suffer, waiting for you certainly to get to do it. Seems to
me like Jeff Campbell, I never could feel so like a man was low and to be scorning of him,
like that day in the summer, when you threw me off just because you got one of those fits of
your remembering. No, Jeff Campbell, its real feeling every moment when its needed, that certainly
does seem to me like real remembering. And that way, certainly, you don't never know nothing
like what should be right Jeff Campbell. No Jeff, it's me that always certainly has had to
bear it with you. It's always me that certainly has had to suffer, while you go home to remember.
No you certainly ain't got no sense yet Jeff, what you need to make you really feeling. No,
it certainly is me Jeff Campbell, that always has got to be remembering for us both, always.
That's what's the true way with us Jeff Campbell, if you want to know what it is I am always
thinking." "You is certainly real modest Melanctha, when you do this kind of talking, you sure
is Melanctha," said Jeff Campbell laughing. "I think sometimes Melanctha I am certainly awful
conceited, when I think sometimes I am all out doors, and I think I certainly am so bright,
and better than most everybody I ever got anything now to do with, but when I hear you talk
this way Melanctha, I certainly do think I am a real modest kind of fellow." "Modest!" said
Melanctha, angry, "Modest, that certainly is a queer thing for you Jeff to be calling yourself
even when you are laughing." "Well it certainly does depend a whole lot what you are thinking
with," said Jeff Campbell. "I never did use to think I was so much on being real modest Melanctha,
but now I know really I am, when I hear you talking. I see all the time there are many people
living just as good as I am, though they are a little different to me. Now with you Melanctha
if I understand you right what you are talking, you don't think that way of no other one that
you are ever knowing." "I certainly could be real modest too, Jeff Campbell," said Melanctha,
"If I could meet somebody once I could keep right on respecting when I got so I was really
knowing with them. But I certainly never met anybody like that yet, Jeff Campbell, if you want
to know it." "No, Melanctha, and with the way you got of thinking, it certainly don't look
like as if you ever will Melanctha, with your never remembering anything only what you just
then are feeling in you, and you not understanding what any one else is ever feeling, if they
don't holler just the way you are doing. No Melanctha, I certainly don't see any ways you are
likely ever to meet one, so good as you are always thinking you be." "No, Jeff Campbell, it
certainly ain't that way with me at all the way you say it. It's because I am always knowing
what it is I am wanting, when I get it. I certainly don't never have to wait till I have it,
and then throw away what I got in me, and then come back and say, that's a mistake I just been
making, it ain't that never at all like I understood it, I want to have, bad, what I didn't
think it was I wanted. It's that way of knowing right what I am wanting, makes me feel nobody
can come right with me, when I am feeling things, Jeff Campbell. I certainly do say Jeff Campbell,
I certainly don't think much of the way you always do it, always never knowing what it is you
are ever really wanting and everybody always got to suffer. No Jeff, I don't certainly think
there is much doubting which is better and the stronger with us two, Jeff Campbell."

"As you will, Melanctha Herbert," cried Jeff Campbell, and he rose up, and he thundered out
a black oath, and he was fierce to leave her now forever, and then with the same movement,
he took her in his arms and held her.

"What a silly goose boy you are, Jeff Campbell," Melanctha whispered to him fondly.

"Oh yes," said Jeff, very dreary. "I never could keep really mad with anybody, not when I was
a little boy and playing. I used most to cry sometimes, I couldn't get real mad and keep on
a long time with it, the way everybody always did it. It's certainly no use to me Melanctha,
I certainly can't ever keep mad with you Melanctha, my dear one. But don't you ever be thinking
it's because I think you right in what you been just saying to me. I don't Melanctha really
think it that way, honest, though I certainly can't get mad the way I ought to. No Melanctha,
little girl, really truly, you ain't right the way you think it. I certainly do know that Melanctha,
honest. You certainly don't do me right Melanctha, the way you say you are thinking. Good-bye
Melanctha, though you certainly is my own little girl for always." And then they were very
good a little to each other, and then Jeff went away for that evening, from her.

Melanctha had begun now once more to wander. Melanctha did not yet always wander, but a little
now she needed to begin to look for others. Now Melanctha Herbert began again to be with some
of the better kind of black girls, and with them she sometimes wandered. Melanctha had not
yet come again to need to be alone, when she wandered.

Jeff Campbell did not know that Melanctha had begun again to wander. All Jeff knew, was that
now he could not be so often with her.

Jeff never knew how it had come to happen to him, but now he never thought to go to see Melanctha
Herbert, until he had before, asked her if she could be going to have time then to have him
with her. Then Melanctha would think a little, and then she would say to him, "Let me see Jeff,
to-morrow, you was just saying to me. I certainly am awful busy you know Jeff just now. It
certainly does seem to me this week Jeff, I can't anyways fix it. Sure I want to see you soon
Jeff. I certainly Jeff got to do a little more now, I been giving so much time, when I had
no business, just to be with you when you asked me. Now I guess Jeff, I certainly can't see
you no more this week Jeff, the way I got to do things." "All right Melanctha," Jeff would
answer and he would be very angry. "I want to come only just certainly as you want me now Melanctha."
"Now Jeff you know I certainly can't be neglecting always to be with everybody just to see
you. You come see me next week Tuesday Jeff, you hear me. I don't think Jeff I certainly be
so busy, Tuesday." Jeff Campbell would then go away and leave her, and he would be hurt and
very angry, for it was hard for a man with a great pride in himself, like Jeff Campbell, to
feel himself no better than a beggar. And yet he always came as she said he should, on the
day she had fixed for him, and always Jeff Campbell was not sure yet that he really understood
what it was Melanctha wanted. Always Melanctha said to him, yes she loved him, sure he knew
that. Always Melanctha said to him, she certainly did love him just the same as always, only
sure he knew now she certainly did seem to be right busy with all she certainly now had to
be doing.

Jeff never knew what Melanctha had to do now, that made her always be so busy, but Jeff Campbell
never cared to ask Melanctha such a question. Besides Jeff knew Melanctha Herbert would never,
in such a matter, give him any kind of a real answer. Jeff did not know whether it was that
Melanctha did not know how to give a simple answer. And then how could he, Jeff, know what
was important to her. Jeff Campbell always felt strongly in him, he had no right to interfere
with Melanctha in any practical kind of a matter. There they had always, never asked each other
any kind of question. There they had felt always in each other, not any right to take care
of one another. And Jeff Campbell now felt less than he had ever, any right to claim to know
what Melanctha thought it right that she should do in any of her ways of living. All Jeff felt
a right in himself to question, was her loving.

Jeff learned every day now, more and more, how much it was that he could really suffer. Sometimes
it hurt so in him, when he was alone, it would force some slow tears from him. But every day,
now that Jeff Campbell, knew more how it could hurt him, he lost his feeling of deep awe that
he once always had had for Melanctha's feeling. Suffering was not so much after all, thought
Jeff Campbell, if even he could feel it so it hurt him. It hurt him bad, just the way he knew
he once had hurt Melanctha, and yet he too could have it and not make any kind of a loud holler
with it.

In tender hearted natures, those that mostly never feel strong passion, suffering often comes
to make them harder. When these do not know in themselves what it is to suffer, suffering is
then very awful to them and they badly want to help everyone who ever has to suffer, and they
have a deep reverence for anybody who knows really how to always surfer. But when it comes
to them to really suffer, they soon begin to lose their fear and tenderness and wonder. Why
it isn't so very much to suffer, when even I can bear to do it. It isn't very pleasant to be
having all the time, to stand it, but they are not so much wiser after all, all the others
just because they know too how to bear it.

Passionate natures who have always made themselves, to suffer, that is all the kind of people
who have emotions that come to them as sharp as a sensation, they always get more tender-hearted
when they suffer, and it always does them good to suffer. Tender-hearted, unpassionate, and
comfortable natures always get much harder when they suffer, for so they lose the fear and
reverence and wonder they once had for everybody who ever has to suffer, for now they know
themselves what it is to suffer and it is not so awful any longer to them when they know too,
just as well as all the others, how to have it.

And so it came in these days to Jeff Campbell. Jeff knew now always, way inside him, what it
is to really suffer, and now every day with it, he knew how to understand Melanctha better.
Jeff Campbell still loved Melanctha Herbert and he still had a real trust in her and he still
had a little hope that some day they would once more get together, but slowly, every day, this
hope in him would keep growing always weaker. They still were a good deal of time together,
but now they never any more were really trusting with each other. In the days when they used
to be together, Jeff had felt he did not know much what was inside Melanctha, but he knew very
well, how very deep always was his trust in her; now he knew Melanctha Herbert better, but
now he never felt a deep trust in her. Now Jeff never could be really honest with her. He never
doubted yet, that she was steady only to him, but somehow he could not believe much really
in Melanctha's loving.

Melanctha Herbert was a little angry now when Jeff asked her, "I never give nobody before Jeff,
ever more than one chance with me, and I certainly been giving you most a hundred Jeff, you
hear me." "And why shouldn't you Melanctha, give me a million, if you really love me!" Jeff
flashed out very angry. "I certainly don't know as you deserve that anyways from me, Jeff Campbell."
"It ain't deserving, I am ever talking about to you Melanctha. Its loving, and if you are really
loving to me you won't certainly never any ways call them chances." "Deed Jeff, you certainly
are getting awful wise Jeff now, ain't you, to me." "No I ain't Melanctha, and I ain't jealous
either to you. I just am doubting from the way you are always acting to me." "Oh yes Jeff,
that's what they all say, the same way, when they certainly got jealousy all through them.
You ain't got no cause to be jealous with me Jeff, and I am awful tired of all this talking
now, you hear me."

Jeff Campbell never asked Melanctha any more if she loved him. Now things were always getting
worse between them. Now Jeff was always very silent with Melanctha. Now Jeff never wanted to
be honest to her, and now Jeff never had much to say to her.

Now when they were together, it was Melanctha always did most of the talking. Now she often
had other girls there with her. Melanctha was always kind to Jeff Campbell but she never seemed
to need to be alone now with him. She always treated Jeff, like her best friend, and she always
spoke so to him and yet she never seemed now to very often want to see him.

Every day it was getting harder for Jeff Campbell. It was as if now, when he had learned to
really love Melanctha, she did not need any more to have him. Jeff began to know this very
well inside him.

Jeff Campbell did not know yet that Melanctha had begun again to wander. Jeff was not very
quick to suspect Melanctha. All Jeff knew was, that he did not trust her to be now really loving
to him.

Jeff was no longer now in any doubt inside him. He knew very well now he really loved Melanctha.
He knew now very well she was not any more a real religion to him. Jeff Campbell knew very
well too now inside him, he did not really want Melanctha, now if he could no longer trust
her, though he loved her hard and really knew now what it was to suffer.

Every day Melanctha Herbert was less and less near to him. She always was very pleasant in
her talk and to be with him, but somehow now it never was any comfort to him.

Melanctha Herbert now always had a lot of friends around her. Jeff Campbell never wanted to
be with them. Now Melanctha began to find it, she said it often to him, always harder to arrange
to be alone now with him. Sometimes she would be late for him. Then Jeff always would try to
be patient in his waiting, for Jeff Campbell knew very well how to remember, and he knew it
was only right that he should now endure this from her.

Then Melanctha began to manage often not to see him, and once she went away when she had promised
to be there to meet him.

Then Jeff Campbell was really filled up with his anger. Now he knew he could never really want
her. Now he knew he never any more could really trust her.

Jeff Campbell never knew why Melanctha had not come to meet him. Jeff had heard a little talking
now, about how Melanctha Herbert had commenced once more to wander. Jeff Campbell still sometimes
saw Jane Harden, who always needed a doctor to be often there to help her. Jane Harden always
knew very well what happened to Melanctha. Jeff Campbell never would talk to Jane Harden anything
about Melanctha. Jeff was always loyal to Melanctha. Jeff never let Jane Harden say much to
him about Melanctha, though he never let her know that now he loved her. But somehow Jeff did
know now about Melanctha, and he knew about some men that Melanctha met with Rose Johnson very
often.

Jeff Campbell would not let himself really doubt Melanctha, but Jeff began to know now very
well, he did not want her. Melanctha Herbert did not love him ever, Jeff knew it now, the way
he once had thought that she could feel it. Once she had been greater for him than he had thought
he could ever know how to feel it. Now Jeff had come to where he could understand Melanctha
Herbert. Jeff was not bitter to her because she could not really love him, he was bitter only
that he had let himself have a real illusion in him. He was a little bitter too, that he had
lost now, what he had always felt real in the world, that had made it for him always full of
beauty, and now he had not got this new religion really, and he had lost what he before had
to know what was good and had real beauty.

Jeff Campbell was so angry now in him, because he had begged Melanctha always to be honest
to him. Jeff could stand it in her not to love him, he could not stand it in her not to be
honest to him.

Jeff Campbell went home from where Melanctha had not met him, and he was sore and full of anger
in him.

Jeff Campbell could not be sure what to do, to make it right inside him. Surely he must be
strong now and cast this loving from him, and yet, was he sure he now had real wisdom in him.
Was he sure that Melanctha Herbert never had had a real deep loving for him. Was he sure Melanctha
Herbert never had deserved a reverence from him. Always now Jeff had this torment in him, but
always now he felt more that Melanctha never had real greatness for him.

Jeff waited to see if Melanctha would send any word to him. Melanctha Herbert never sent a
line to him.

At last Jeff wrote his letter to Melanctha. "Dear Melanctha, I certainly do know you ain't
been any way sick this last week when you never met me right the way you promised, and never
sent me any word to say why you acted a way you certainly never could think was the right way
you should do it to me. Jane Harden said she saw you that day and you went out walking with
some people you like now to be with. Don't be misunderstanding me now any more Melanctha. I
love you now because that's my slow way to learn what you been teaching, but I know now you
certainly never had what seems to me real kind of feeling. I don't love you Melanctha any more
now like a real religion, because now I know you are just made like all us others. I know now
no man can ever really hold you because no man can ever be real to trust in you, because you
mean right Melanctha, but you never can remember, and so you certainly never have got any way
to be honest. So please you understand me right now Melanctha, it never is I don't know how
to love you. I do know now how to love you, Melanctha, really. You sure do know that, Melanctha,
in me. You certainly always can trust me. And so now Melanctha, I can say to you certainly
real honest with you, I am better than you are in my right kind of feeling. And so Melanctha,
I don't never any more want to be a trouble to you. You certainly make me see things Melanctha,
I never any other way could be knowing. You been very good and patient to me, when I was certainly
below you in my right feeling. I certainly never have been near so good and patient to you
every any way Melanctha, I certainly know that Melanctha. But Melanctha, with me, it certainly
is, always to be good together, two people certainly must be thinking each one as good as the
other, to be really loving right Melanctha. And it certainly must never be any kind of feeling,
of one only taking, and one only just giving, Melanctha, to me. I know you certainly don't
really ever understand me now Melanctha, but that's no matter. I certainly do know what I am
feeling now with you real Melanctha. And so good-bye now for good Melanctha. I say I can never
ever really trust you real Melanctha, that's only just certainly from your way of not being
ever equal in your feeling to anybody real, Melanctha, and your way never to know right how
to remember. Many ways I really trust you deep Melanctha, and I certainly do feel deep all
the good sweetness you certainly got real in you Melanctha. Its only just in your loving me
Melanctha. You never can be equal to me and that way I certainly never can bear any more to
have it. And so now Melanctha, I always be your friend, if you need me, and now we never see
each other any more to talk to."

And then Jeff Campbell thought and thought, and he could never make any way for him now, to
see it different, and so at last he sent this letter to Melanctha.

And now surely it was all over in Jeff Campbell. Surely now he never any more could know Melanctha.
And yet, perhaps Melanctha really loved him. And then she would know how much it hurt him never
any more, any way, to see her, and perhaps she would write a line to tell him. But that was
a foolish way for Jeff ever to be thinking. Of course Melanctha never would write a word to
him. It was all over now for always, everything between them, and Jeff felt it a real relief
to him.

For many days now Jeff Campbell only felt it as a relief in him. Jeff was all locked up and
quiet now inside him. It was all settling down heavy in him, and these days when it was sinking
so deep in him, it was only the rest and quiet of not fighting that he could really feel inside
him. Jeff Campbell could not think now, or feel anything else in him. He had no beauty nor
any goodness to see around him. It was a dull, pleasant kind of quiet he now had inside him.
Jeff almost began to love this dull quiet in him, for it was more nearly being free for him
than anything he had known in him since Melanctha Herbert first had moved him. He did not find
it a real rest yet for him, he had not really conquered what had been working so long in him,
he had not learned to see beauty and real goodness yet in what had happened to him, but it
was rest even if he was sodden now all through him. Jeff Campbell liked it very well, not to
have fighting always going on inside him.

And so Jeff went on every day, and he was quiet, and he began again to watch himself in his
working; and he did not see any beauty now around him, and it was dull and heavy always now
inside him, and yet he was content to have gone so far in keeping steady to what he knew was
the right way for him to come back to, to be regular, and see beauty in every kind of quiet
way of living, the way he had always wanted it for himself and for all the colored people.
He knew he had lost the sense he once had of joy all through him, but he could work, and perhaps
he would bring some real belief back into him about the beauty that he could not now any more
see around him.

And so Jeff Campbell went on with his working, and he staid home every evening, and he began
again with his reading, and he did not do much talking, and he did not seem to himself to have
any kind of feeling.

And one day Jeff thought perhaps he really was forgetting, one day he thought he could soon
come back and be happy in his old way of regular and quiet living.

Jeff Campbell had never talked to any one of what had been going on inside him. Jeff Campbell
liked to talk and he was honest, but it never came out from him, anything he was ever really
feeling, it only came out from him, what it was that he was always thinking. Jeff Campbell
always was very proud to hide what he was really feeling. Always he blushed hot to think things
he had been feeling. Only to Melanctha Herbert, had it ever come to him, to tell what it was
that he was feeling.

And so Jeff Campbell went on with this dull and sodden, heavy, quiet always in him, and he
never seemed to be able to have any feeling. Only sometimes he shivered hot with shame when
he remembered some things he once had been feeling. And then one day it all woke up, and was
sharp in him.

Dr. Campbell was just then staying long times with a sick man who might soon be dying. One
day the sick man was resting. Dr. Campbell went to the window to look out a little, while he
was waiting. It was very early now in the southern springtime. The trees were just beginning
to get the little zigzag crinkles in them, which the young buds always give them. The air was
soft and moist and pleasant to them. The earth was wet and rich and smelling for them. The
birds were making sharp fresh noises all around them. The wind was very gentle and yet urgent
to them. And the buds and the long earthworms, and the negroes, and all the kinds of children,
were coming out every minute farther into the new spring, watery, southern sunshine.

Jeff Campbell too began to feel a little his old joy inside him. The sodden quiet began to
break up in him. He leaned far out of the window to mix it all up with him. His heart went
sharp and then it almost stopped inside him. Was it Melanctha Herbert he had just seen passing
by him? Was it Melanctha, or was it just some other girl, who made him feel so bad inside him?
Well, it was no matter, Melanctha was there in the world around him, he did certainly always
know that in him. Melanctha Herbert was always in the same town with him, and he could never
any more feel her near him. What a fool he was to throw her from him. Did he know she did not
really love him. Suppose Melanctha was now suffering through him. Suppose she really would
be glad to see him. And did anything else he did, really mean anything now to him? What a fool
he was to cast her from him. And yet did Melanctha Herbert want him, was she honest to him,
had Melanctha ever loved him, and did Melanctha now suffer by him? Oh! Oh! Oh! and the bitter
water once more rose up in him.

All that long day, with the warm moist young spring stirring in him, Jeff Campbell worked,
and thought, and beat his breast, and wandered, and spoke aloud, and was silent, and was certain,
and then in doubt and then keen to surely feel, and then all sodden in him; and he walked,
and he sometimes ran fast to lose himself in his rushing, and he bit his nails to pain and
bleeding, and he tore his hair so that he could be sure he was really feeling, and he never
could know what it was right, he now should be doing. And then late that night he wrote it
all out to Melanctha Herbert, and he made himself quickly send it without giving himself any
time to change it.

"It has come to me strong to-day Melanctha, perhaps I am wrong the way I now am thinking. Perhaps
you do want me badly to be with you. Perhaps I have hurt you once again the way I used to.
I certainly Melanctha, if I ever think that really, I certainly do want bad not to be wrong
now ever any more to you. If you do feel the way to-day it came to me strong maybe you are
feeling, then say so Melanctha to me, and I come again to see you. If not, don't say anything
any more ever to me. I don't want ever to be bad to you Melanctha, really. I never want ever
to be a bother to you. I never can stand it to think I am wrong; really, thinking you don't
want me to come to you. Tell me Melanctha, tell me honest to me, shall I come now any more
to see you." "Yes" came the answer from Melanctha, "I be home Jeff to-night to see you."

Jeff Campbell went that evening late to see Melanctha Herbert. As Jeff came nearer to her,
he doubted that he wanted really to be with her, he felt that he did not know what it was he
now wanted from her. Jeff Campbell knew very well now, way inside him, that they could never
talk their trouble out between them. What was it Jeff wanted now to tell Melanctha Herbert?
What was it that Jeff Campbell now could tell her? Surely he never now could learn to trust
her. Surely Jeff knew very well all that Melanctha always had inside her. And yet it was awful,
never any more to see her.

Jeff Campbell went in to Melanctha, and he kissed her, and he held her, and then he went away
from her and he stood still and looked at her. "Well Jeff!" "Yes Melanctha!" "Jeff what was
it made you act so to me?" "You know very well Melanctha, it's always I am thinking you don't
love me, and you are acting to me good out of kindness, and then Melanctha you certainly never
did say anything to me why you never came to meet me, as you certainly did promise to me you
would that day I never saw you!" "Jeff don't you really know for certain, I always love you?"
"No Melanctha, deed I don't know it in me. Deed and certain sure Melanctha, if I only know
that in me, I certainly never would give you any bother." "Jeff, I certainly do love you more
seems to me always, you certainly had ought to feel that in you." "Sure Melanctha?" "Sure Jeff
boy, you know that." "But then Melanctha why did you act so to me?" "Oh Jeff you certainly
been such a bother to me. I just had to go away that day Jeff, and I certainly didn't mean
not to tell you, and then that letter you wrote came to me and something happened to me. I
don't know right what it was Jeff, I just kind of fainted, and what could I do Jeff, you said
you certainly never any more wanted to come and see me!" "And no matter Melanctha, even if
you knew, it was just killing me to act so to you, you never would have said nothing to me?"
"No of course, how could I Jeff when you wrote that way to me. I know how you was feeling Jeff
to me, but I certainly couldn't say nothing to you." "Well Melanctha, I certainly know I am
right proud too in me, but I certainly never could act so to you Melanctha, if I ever knew
any way at all you ever really loved me. No Melanctha darling, you and me certainly don't feel
much the same way ever. Any way Melanctha, I certainly do love you true Melanctha." "And I
love you too Jeff, even though you don't never certainly seem to believe me." "No I certainly
don't any way believe you Melanctha, even when you say it to me. I don't know Melanctha how,
but sure I certainly do trust you, only I don't believe now ever in your really being loving
to me. I certainly do know you trust me always Melanctha, only somehow it ain't ever all right
to me. I certainly don't know any way otherwise Melanctha, how I can say it to you." "Well
I certainly can't help you no ways any more Jeff Campbell, though you certainly say it right
when you say I trust you Jeff now always. You certainly is the best man Jeff Campbell, I ever
can know, to me. I never been anyways thinking it can be ever different to me." "Well you trust
me then Melanctha, and I certainly love you Melanctha, and seems like to me Melanctha, you
and me had ought to be a little better than we certainly ever are doing now to be together.
You certainly do think that way, too, Melanctha to me. But may be you do really love me. Tell
me, please, real honest now Melanctha darling, tell me so I really always know it in me, do
you really truly love me?" "Oh you stupid, stupid boy, Jeff Campbell. Love you, what do you
think makes me always to forgive you. If I certainly didn't always love you Jeff, I certainly
never would let you be always being all the time such a bother to me the way you certainly
Jeff always are to me. Now don't you dass ever any more say words like that ever to me. You
hear me now Jeff, or I do something real bad sometime, so I really hurt you. Now Jeff you just
be good to me. You know Jeff how bad I need it, now you should always be good to me!"

Jeff Campbell could not make an answer to Melanctha. What was it he should now say to her?
What words could help him to make their feeling any better? Jeff Campbell knew that he had
learned to love deeply, that, he always knew very well now in him, Melanctha had learned to
be strong to be always trusting, that he knew too now inside him, but Melanctha did not really
love him, that he felt always too strong for him. That fact always was there in him, and it
always thrust itself firm, between them. And so this talk did not make things really better
for them.

Jeff Campbell was never any more a torment to Melanctha, he was only silent to her. Jeff often
saw Melanctha and he was very friendly with her and he never any more was a bother to her.
Jeff never any more now had much chance to be loving with her. Melanctha never was alone now
when he saw her.

Melanctha Herbert had just been getting thick in her trouble with Jeff Campbell, when she went
to that church where she first met Rose, who later was married regularly to Sam Johnson. Rose
was a good-looking, better kind of black girl, and had been brought up quite like their own
child by white folks. Rose was living now with colored people. Rose was staying just then with
a colored woman, who had known 'Mis' Herbert and her black husband and this girl Melanctha.

Rose soon got to like Melanctha Herbert and Melanctha now always wanted to be with Rose, whenever
she could do it. Melanctha Herbert always was doing everything for Rose that she could think
of that Rose ever wanted. Rose always liked to be with nice people who would do things for
her. Rose had strong common sense and she was lazy. Rose liked Melanctha Herbert, she had such
kind of fine ways in her. Then, too, Rose had it in her to be sorry for the subtle, sweet-natured,
docile, intelligent Melanctha Herbert who always was so blue sometimes, and always had had
so much trouble. Then, too, Rose could scold Melanctha, for Melanctha Herbert never could know
how to keep herself from trouble, and Rose was always strong to keep straight, with her simple
selfish wisdom. This was a queer thing in Melanctha Herbert.

And so now in these new spring days, it was with Rose that Melanctha began again to wander.
Rose always knew very well in herself what was the right way to do when you wandered. Rose
knew very well, she was not just any common kind of black girl, for she had been raised by
white folks, and Rose always saw to it that she was engaged to him when she had any one man
with whom she ever always wandered. Rose always had strong in her the sense for proper conduct.
Rose always was telling the complex and less sure Melanctha, what was the right way she should
do when she wandered.

Rose never knew much about Jeff Campbell with Melanctha Herbert. Rose had not known about Melanctha
Herbert when she had been almost all her time with Dr. Campbell.

Jeff Campbell did not like Rose when he saw her with Melanctha. Jeff would never, when he could
help it, meet her. Rose did not think much about Dr. Campbell. Melanctha never talked much
about him to her. He was not important now to be with her.

Rose did not like Melanctha's old friend Jane Harden when she saw her. Jane despised Rose for
an ordinary, stupid, sullen black girl. Jane could not see what Melanctha could find in that
black girl, to endure her. It made Jane sick to see her. But then Melanctha had a good mind,
but she certainly never did care much to really use it. Jane Harden now really never cared
any more to see Melanctha, though Melanctha still always tried to be good to her. And Rose,
she hated that stuck up, mean speaking, nasty, drunk thing, Jane Harden. For can see chapter iv,
§1. Can was and still is a common surname in Yucatan. (Berendt, Nombres Proprios en Lengua Maya,
MS.)

I should prefer to spell the name Kukulkan, and have it refer to the first day of the Maya
week, Kan.]

The reference probably was to the fame of this divinity as an oracle, as connected with the
calendar.

But it is true that the name could with equal correctness be translated "The God, the Mighty
Serpent," for can is a homonym with these and other meanings, and
we are without positive proof which was intended.

To bring Kukulcan
into closer relations with other American hero-gods we must turn to
the locality where he was especially worshiped, to the traditions
of the ancient and opulent city of Chichen Itza, whose ruins still
rank among the most imposing on the peninsula. Rose was selfish and was stupid and was lazy, but
she was decent and knew always what was the right way she should do, and what she wanted, and
she certainly did admire how bright was her friend Melanctha Herbert, and she certainly did
feel how very much it was she always suffered and she scolded her to keep her from more trouble,
and she never was angry when she found some of the different ways Melanctha Herbert sometimes
had to do it.

And so always Rose and Melanctha were more and more together, and Jeff Campbell could now hardly
ever any more be alone with Melanctha.

Once Jeff had to go away to another town to see a sick man. "When I come back Monday Melanctha,
I come Monday evening to see you. You be home alone once Melanctha to see me." "Sure Jeff,
I be glad to see you!"

When Jeff Campbell came to his house on Monday there was a note there from Melanctha. Could
Jeff come day after to-morrow, Wednesday? Melanctha was so sorry she had to go out that evening.
She was awful sorry and she hoped Jeff would not be angry.

Jeff was angry and he swore a little, and then he laughed, and then he sighed. "Poor Melanctha,
she don't know any way to be real honest, but no matter, I sure do love her and I be good if
only she will let me."

Jeff Campbell went Wednesday night to see Melanctha. Jeff Campbell took her in his arms and
kissed her. "I certainly am awful sorry not to see you Jeff Monday, the way I promised, but
I just couldn't Jeff, no way I could fix it." Jeff looked at her and then he laughed a little
at her. "You want me to believe that really now Melanctha. All right I believe it if you want
me to Melanctha. I certainly be good to you to-night the way you like it. I believe you certainly
did want to see me Melanctha, and there was no way you could fix it." "Oh Jeff dear," said
Melanctha, "I sure was wrong to act so to you. It's awful hard for me ever to say it to you,
I have been wrong in my acting to you, but I certainly was bad this time Jeff to you. It do
certainly come hard to me to say it Jeff, but I certainly was wrong to go away from you the
way I did it. Only you always certainly been so bad Jeff, and such a bother to me, and making
everything always so hard for me, and I certainly got some way to do it to make it come back
sometimes to you. You bad boy Jeff, now you hear me, and this certainly is the first time Jeff
I ever yet said it to anybody, I ever been wrong, Jeff, you hear me!" "All right Melanctha,
I sure do forgive you, cause it's certainly the first time I ever heard you say you ever did
anything wrong the way you shouldn't," and Jeff Campbell laughed and kissed her, and Melanctha
laughed and loved him, and they really were happy now for a little time together.

And now they were very happy in each other and then they were silent and then they became a
little sadder and then they were very quiet once more with each other.

"Yes I certainly do love you Jeff!" Melanctha said and she was very dreamy. "Sure, Melanctha."
"Yes Jeff sure, but not the way you are now ever thinking. I love you more and more seems to
me Jeff always, and I certainly do trust you more and more always to me when I know you. I
do love you Jeff, sure yes, but not the kind of way of loving you are ever thinking it now
Jeff with me. I ain't got certainly no hot passion any more now in me. You certainly have killed
all that kind of feeling now Jeff in me. You certainly do know that Jeff, now the way I am
always, when I am loving with you. You certainly do know that Jeff, and that's the way you
certainly do like it now in me. You certainly don't mind now Jeff, to hear me say this to you."

Jeff Campbell was hurt so that it almost killed him. Yes he certainly did know now what it
was to have real hot love in him, and yet Melanctha certainly was right, he did not deserve
she should ever give it to him. "All right Melanctha I ain't ever kicking. I always will give
you certainly always everything you want that I got in me. I take anything you want now to
give me. I don't say never Melanctha it don't hurt me, but I certainly don't say ever Melanctha
it ought ever to be any different to me." And the bitter tears rose up in Jeff Campbell, and
they came and choked his voice to be silent, and he held himself hard to keep from breaking.

"Good-night Melanctha," and Jeff was very humble to her. "Goodnight Jeff, I certainly never
did mean any way to hurt you. I do love you, sure Jeff every day more and more, all the time
I know you." "I know Melanctha, I know, it's never nothing to me. You can't help it, anybody
ever the way they are feeling. It's all right now Melanctha, you believe me, good-night now
Melanctha, I got now to leave you, good-by Melanctha, sure don't look so worried to me, sure
Melanctha I come again soon to see you." And then Jeff stumbled down the steps, and he went
away fast to leave her.

And now the pain came hard and harder in Jeff Campbell, and he groaned, and it hurt him so,
he could not bear it. And the tears came, and his heart beat, and he was hot and worn and bitter
in him.

Now Jeff knew very well what it was to love Melanctha. Now Jeff Campbell knew he was really
understanding. Now Jeff knew what it was to be good to Melanctha. Now Jeff was good to her always.

Slowly Jeff felt it a comfort in him to have it hurt so, and to be good to Melanctha always.
Now there was no way Melanctha ever had had to bear things from him, worse than he now had
it in him. Now Jeff was strong inside him. Now with all the pain there was peace in him. Now
he knew he was understanding, now he knew he had a hot love in him, and he was good always
to Melanctha Herbert who was the one had made him have it. Now he knew he could be good, and
not cry out for help to her to teach him how to bear it. Every day Jeff felt himself more a
strong man, the way he once had thought was his real self, the way he knew it. Now Jeff Campbell
had real wisdom in him, and it did not make him bitter when it hurt him, for Jeff knew now
all through him that he was really strong to bear it.

And so now Jeff Campbell could see Melanctha often, and he was patient, and always very friendly
to her, and every day Jeff Campbell understood Melanctha Herbert better. And always Jeff saw
Melanctha could not love him the way he needed she should do it. Melanctha Herbert had no way
she ever really could remember.

And now Jeff knew there was a man Melanctha met very often, and perhaps she wanted to try to
have this man to be good, for her. Jeff Campbell never saw the man Melanctha Herbert perhaps
now wanted. Jeff Campbell only knew very well that there was one. Then there was Rose that
Melanctha now always had with her when she wandered.

Jeff Campbell was very quiet to Melanctha. He said to her, now he thought he did not want to
come any more especially to see her. When they met, he always would be glad to see her, but
now he never would go anywhere any more to meet her. Sure he knew she always would have a deep
love in him for her. Sure she knew that. "Yes Jeff, I always trust you Jeff, I certainly do
know that all right." Jeff Campbell said, all right he never could say anything to reproach
her. She knew always that he really had learned all through him how to love her. "Yes, Jeff,
I certainly do know that." She knew now she could always trust him. Jeff always would be loyal
to her though now she never was any more to him like a religion, but he never could forget
the real sweetness in her. That Jeff must remember always, though now he never can trust her
to be really loving to any man for always, she never did have any way she ever could remember.
If she ever needed anybody to be good to her, Jeff Campbell always would do anything he could
to help her. He never can forget the things she taught him so he could be really understanding,
but he never any more wants to see her. He be like a brother to her always, when she needs
it, and he always will be a good friend to her. Jeff Campbell certainly was sorry never any
more to see her, but it was good that they now knew each other really. "Good-bye Jeff you always
been very good always to me." "Good-bye Melanctha you know you always can trust yourself to
me." "Yes, I know, I know Jeff, really." "I certainly got to go now Melanctha, from you. I
go this time, Melanctha really," and Jeff Campbell went away and this time he never looked
back to her. This time Jeff Campbell just broke away and left her.

Jeff Campbell loved to think now he was strong again to be quiet, and to live regular, and
to do everything the way he wanted it to be right for himself and all the colored people. Jeff
went away for a little while to another town to work there, and he worked hard, and he was
very sad inside him, and sometimes the tears would rise up in him, and then he would work hard,
and then he would begin once more to see some beauty in the world around him. Jeff had behaved
right and he had learned to have a real love in him. That was very good to have inside him.

Jeff Campbell never could forget the sweetness in Melanctha Herbert, and he was always very
friendly to her, but they never any more came close to one another. More and more Jeff Campbell
and Melanctha fell away from all knowing of each other, but Jeff never could forget Melanctha.
Jeff never could forget the real sweetness she had in her, but Jeff never any more had the
sense of a real religion for her. Jeff always had strong in him the meaning of all the new
kind of beauty Melanctha Herbert once had shown him, and always more and more it helped him
with his working for himself and for all the colored people.

Melanctha Herbert, now that she was all through with Jeff Campbell, was free to be with Rose
and the new men she met now.

Rose was always now with Melanctha Herbert. Rose never found any way to get excited. Rose always
was telling Melanctha Herbert the right way she should do, so that she would not always be
in trouble. But Melanctha Herbert could not help it, always she would find new ways to get excited.

Melanctha was all ready now to find new ways to be in trouble. And yet Melanctha Herbert never
wanted not to do right. Always Melanctha Herbert wanted peace and quiet, and always she could
only find new ways to get excited.

"Melanctha," Rose would say to her, "Melanctha, I certainly have got to tell you, you ain't
right to act so with that kind of feller. You better just had stick to black men now, Melanctha,
you hear me what I tell you, just the way you always see me do it. They're real bad men, now
I tell you Melanctha true, and you better had hear to me. I been raised by real nice kind of
white folks, Melanctha, and I certainly knows awful well, soon as ever I can see 'em acting,
what is a white man will act decent to you and the kind it ain't never no good to a colored
girl to ever go with. Now you know real Melanctha how I always mean right good to you, and
you ain't got no way like me Melanctha, what was raised by white folks, to know right what
is the way you should be acting with men. I don't never want to see you have bad trouble come
hard to you now Melanctha, and so you just hear to me now Melanctha, what I tell you, for I
knows it. I don't say never certainly to you Melanctha, you never had ought to have nothing
to do ever with no white men, though it ain't never to me Melanctha, the best kind of a way
a colored girl can have to be acting, no I never do say to you Melanctha, you hadn't never
ought to be with white men, though it ain't never the way I feel it ever real, right for a
decent colored girl to be always doing, but not never Melanctha, now you hear me, no not never
no kind of white men like you been with always now Melanctha when I see you. You just hear
to me Melanctha, you certainly had ought to hear to me Melanctha, I say it just like I knows
it awful well, Melanctha, and I knows you don't know no better, Melanctha, how to act so, the
ways I seen it with them kind of white fellers, them as never can know what to do right by
a decent girl they have ever got to be with them. Now you hear to me Melanctha, what I tell you."

And so it was Melanctha Herbert found new ways to be in trouble. But it was not very bad this
trouble, for these white men Rose never wanted she should be with, never meant very much to
Melanctha. It was only that she liked it to be with them, and they knew all about fine horses,
and it was just good to Melanctha, now a little, to feel real reckless with them. But mostly
it was Rose and other better kind of colored girls and colored men with whom Melanctha Herbert
now always wandered.

It was summer now and the colored people came out into the sunshine, full blown with the flowers.
And they shone in the streets and in the fields with their warm joy, and they glistened in
their black heat, and they flung themselves free in their wide abandonment of shouting laughter.

It was very pleasant in some ways, the life Melanctha Herbert now led with Rose and all the
others. It was not always that Rose had to scold her.

There was not anybody of all these colored people, excepting only Rose, who ever meant much
to Melanctha Herbert. But they all liked Melanctha, and the men all liked to see her do things,
she was so game always to do anything anybody ever could do, and then she was good and sweet
to do anything anybody ever wanted from her.

These were pleasant days then, in the hot southern negro sunshine, with many simple jokes and
always wide abandonment of laughter. "Just look at that Melanctha there a running. Don't she
just go like a bird when she is flying. Hey Melanctha there, I come and catch you, hey Melanctha,
I put salt on your tail to catch you," and then the man would try to catch her, and he would
fall full on the earth and roll in an agony of wide-mouthed shouting laughter. And this was
the kind of way Rose always liked to have Melanctha do it, to be engaged to him, and to have
a good warm nigger time with colored men, not to go about with that kind of white man, never
could know how to act right, to any decent kind of girl they could ever get to be with them.

Rose, always more and more, liked Melanctha Herbert better. Rose often had to scold Melanctha
Herbert, but that only made her like Melanctha better. And then Melanctha always listened to
her, and always acted every way she could to please her. And then Rose was so sorry for Melanctha,
when she was so blue sometimes, and wanted somebody should come and kill her.

And Melanctha Herbert clung to Rose in the hope that Rose could save her. Melanctha felt the
power of Rose's selfish, decent kind of nature. It was so solid, simple, certain to her. Melanctha
clung to Rose, she loved to have her scold her, she always wanted to be with her. She always
felt a solid safety in her; Rose always was, in her way, very good to let Melanctha be loving
to her. Melanctha never had any way she could really be a trouble to her. Melanctha never had
any way that she could ever get real power, to come close inside to her. Melanctha was always
very humble to her. Melanctha was always ready to do anything Rose wanted from her. Melanctha
needed badly to have Rose always willing to let Melanctha cling to her. Rose was a simple,
sullen, selfish, black girl, but she had a solid power in her. Rose had strong the sense of
decent conduct, she had strong the sense of decent comfort. Rose always knew very well what
it was she wanted, and she knew very well what was the right way to do to get everything she
wanted, and she never had any kind of trouble to perplex her.

Rose was now to be married to a decent good man of the negroes. His name was Sam Johnson, and
he worked as a deck-hand on a coasting steamer, and he was very steady, and he got good wages.

Rose first met Sam Johnson at church, the same place where she had met Melanctha Herbert. Rose
liked Sam when she saw him, she knew he was a good man and worked hard and got good wages,
and Rose thought it would be very nice and very good now in her position to get really, regularly
married.

Sam Johnson liked Rose very well and he always was ready to do anything she wanted. Sam was
a tall, square shouldered, decent, a serious, straightforward, simple, kindly, colored workman.
They got on very well together, Sam and Rose, when they were married. Rose was lazy, but not
dirty, and Sam was careful but not fussy. Sam was a kindly, simple, earnest, steady workman,
and Rose had good common decent sense in her, of how to live regular, and not to have excitements,
and to be saving so you could be always sure to have money, so as to have everything you wanted.

It was not very long that Rose knew Sam Johnson, before they were regularly married. Sometimes
Sam went into the country with all the other young church people, and then he would be a great
deal with Rose and with her Melanctha Herbert. Sam did not care much about Melanctha Herbert.
He liked Rose's ways of doing, always better. Melanctha's mystery had no charm for Sam ever.
Sam wanted a nice little house to come to when he was tired from his working, and a little
baby all his own he could be good to. Sam Johnson was ready to marry as soon as ever Rose wanted
he should do it. And so Sam Johnson and Rose one day had a grand real wedding and were married.
Sam Johnson never really cared about Melanctha Herbert, but he always did almost everything
Rose ever wanted, and he was a gentle, kindly creature, and so he was very good to Rose's friend
Melanctha. Melanctha Herbert knew very well Sam did not like her, and so she was very quiet,
and always let Rose do the talking for her. She only was very good to always help Rose, and
to do anything she ever wanted from her, and to be very good and listen and be quiet whenever
Sam had anything to say to her. Melanctha liked Sam Johnson, and all her life Melanctha loved
and wanted good and kind and considerate people, and always Melanctha loved and wanted people
to be gentle to her, and always she wanted to be regular, and to have peace and quiet in her,
and always Melanctha could only find new ways to be in trouble. And Melanctha needed badly
to have Rose, to believe her, and to let her cling to her. Rose was the only steady thing Melanctha
had to cling to and so Melanctha demeaned herself to be like a servant, to wait on, and always
to be scolded, by this ordinary, sullen, black, stupid, childish woman.

Rose was always telling Sam he must be good to poor Melanctha. "You know Sam," Rose said very
often to him, "You certainly had ought to be very good to poor Melanctha, she always do have
so much trouble with her. You know Sam how I told you she had such a bad time always with that
father, and he was awful mean to her always that awful black man, and he never took no kind
of care ever to her, and he never helped her when her mother died so hard, that poor Melanctha.
Melanctha's ma you know Sam, always was just real religious. One day Melanctha was real little,
and she heard her ma say to her pa, it was awful sad to her, Melanctha had not been the one
the Lord had took from them stead of the little brother who was dead in the house there from
fever. That hurt Melanctha awful when she heard her ma say it. She never could feel it right,
and I don't no ways blame Melanctha, Sam, for not feeling better to her ma always after, though
Melanctha, just like always she is, always was real good to her ma after, when she was so sick,
and died so hard, and nobody never to help Melanctha do it, and she just all alone to do everything
without no help come to her no way, and that ugly awful black man she have for a father never
all the time come near her. I cannot find any particular tree called Homche. Hom was the name
applied to a wind instrument, a sort of trumpet. In the Codex Troano, Plates xxv, xxvii, xxxiv,
it is represented in use. The four Bacabs were probably imagined to blow the winds from the
four corners of the earth through such instruments. A similar representation is given in the
Codex Borgianus, Plate xiii, in Kingsborough. As the Chac was the god of bread, Dios de los
panes, so the cross was the tree of bread.]

[Footnote 2: See the Myths of the New World, p. 95 (1st ed., New York, 1868). This explanation
has since been adopted by Dr. Carl Schultz-Sellack, although he omits
to state whence he derived it. I don't see Sam how some men can be
to act so awful. I told you Sam, how once Melanctha broke her arm bad and she was so sick and
it hurt her awful and he never would let no doctor come near to her and he do some things so
awful to her, she don't never want to tell nobody how bad he hurt her. That's just the way
Sam with Melanctha always, you never can know how bad it is, it hurts her. You hear me Sam,
you always be real good to her now you and me is married right to each other."

And so Rose and Sam Johnson were regularly married, and Rose sat at home and bragged to all
her friends how nice it was to be married really to a husband.

Rose did not have Melanctha to live with her, now Rose was married. Melanctha was with Rose
almost as much as ever but it was a little different now their being together.

Rose Johnson never asked Melanctha to live with her in the house, now Rose was married. Rose
liked to have Melanctha come all the time to help her, Rose liked Melanctha to be almost always
with her, but Rose was shrewd in her simple selfish nature, she did not ever think to ask Melanctha
to live with her.

Rose was hard headed, she was decent, and she always knew what it was she needed. Rose needed
Melanctha to be with her, she liked to have her help her, the quick, good Melanctha to do for
the slow, lazy, selfish, black girl, but Rose could have Melanctha to do for her and she did
not need her to live with her.

Sam never asked Rose why she did not have her. Sam always took what Rose wanted should be done
for Melanctha, as the right way he should act toward her.

It could never come to Melanctha to ask Rose to let her. It never could come to Melanctha to
think that Rose would ask her. It would never ever come to Melanctha to want it, if Rose should
ask her, but Melanctha would have done it for the safety she always felt when she was near
her. Melanctha Herbert wanted badly to be safe now, but this living with her, that, Rose would
never give her. Rose had strong the sense for decent comfort, Rose had strong the sense for
proper conduct, Rose had strong the sense to get straight always what she wanted, and she always
knew what was the best thing she needed, and always Rose got what she wanted.

And so Rose had Melanctha Herbert always there to help her, and she sat and was lazy and she
bragged and she complained a little and she told Melanctha how she ought to do, to get good
what she wanted like she Rose always did it, and always Melanctha was doing everything Rose
ever needed. "Don't you bother so, doing that Melanctha, I do it or Sam when he comes home
to help me. Sure you don't mind lifting it Melanctha? You is very good Melanctha to do it,
and when you go out Melanctha, you stop and get some rice to bring me to-morrow when you come
in. Sure you won't forget Melanctha. I never see anybody like you Melanctha to always do things
so nice for me." And then Melanctha would do some more for Rose, and then very late Melanctha
would go home to the colored woman where she lived now.

And so though Melanctha still was so much with Rose Johnson, she had times when she could not
stay there. Melanctha now could not really cling there. Rose had Sam, and Melanctha more and
more lost the hold she had had there.

Melanctha Herbert began to feel she must begin again to look and see if she could find what
it was she had always wanted. Now Rose Johnson could no longer help her.

And so Melanctha Herbert began once more to wander and with men Rose never thought it was right
she should be with.

One day Melanctha had been very busy with the different kinds of ways she wandered. It was
a pleasant late afternoon at the end of a long summer. Melanctha was walking along, and she
was free and excited. Melanctha had just parted from a white man and she had a bunch of flowers
he had left with her. A young buck, a mulatto, passed by and snatched them from her. "It certainly
is real sweet in you sister, to be giving me them pretty flowers," he said to her.

"I don't see no way it can make them sweeter to have with you," said Melanctha. "What one man
gives, another man had certainly just as much good right to be taking." "Keep your old flowers
then, I certainly don't never want to have them." Melanctha Herbert laughed at him and took
them. "No, I didn't nohow think you really did want to have them. Thank you kindly mister,
for them. I certainly always do admire to see a man always so kind of real polite to people."
The man laughed, "You ain't nobody's fool I can say for you, but you certainly are a damned
pretty kind of girl, now I look at you. Want men to be polite to you? All right, I can love
you, that's real polite now, want to see me try it." "I certainly ain't got no time this evening
just only left to thank you. I certainly got to be real busy now, but I certainly always will
admire to see you." The man tried to catch and stop her, Melanctha Herbert laughed and dodged
so that he could not touch her. Melanctha went quickly down a side street near her and so the
man for that time lost her.

For some days Melanctha did not see any more of her mulatto. One day Melanctha was with a white
man and they saw him. The white man stopped to speak to him. Afterwards Melanctha left the
white man and she then soon met him. Melanctha stopped to talk to him. My guiding principle has
been that when the same, and that a very extraordinary, story is
told by several tribes wholly apart in language and location, then
the probabilities are enormous that it is not a legend but a myth,
and must be explained as such.

 Sometimes Jem would be betting badly, and then
he would not be having any money.

Jem Richards was a straight man. Jem Richards always knew that by and by he would win again
and pay it, and so Jem mostly did win again, and then he always paid it.

Jem Richards was a man other men always trusted. Men gave him money when he lost all his, for
they all knew Jem Richards would win again, and when he did win they knew, and they were right,
that he would pay it.

Melanctha Herbert all her life had always loved to be with horses. Melanctha liked it that
Jem knew all about fine horses. He was a reckless man was Jem Richards. He knew how to win
out, and always all her life, Melanctha Herbert loved successful power.

Melanctha Herbert always liked Jem Richards better. Things soon began to be very strong between
them.

Jem was more game even than Melanctha. Jem always had known what it was to have real wisdom.
Jem had always all his life been understanding.

Jem Richards made Melanctha Herbert come fast with him. He never gave her any time with waiting.
Soon Melanctha always had Jem with her. Melanctha did not want anything better. Now in Jem
Richards, Melanctha found everything she had ever needed to content her.

Melanctha was now less and less with Rose Johnson. Rose did not think much of the way Melanctha
now was going. Jem Richards was all right, only Melanctha never had no sense of the right kind
of way she should be doing. Rose often was telling Sam now, she did not like the fast way Melanctha
was going. Rose told it to Sam, and to all the girls and men, when she saw them. But Rose was
nothing just then to Melanctha. Melanctha Herbert now only needed Jem Richards to be with her.

And things were always getting stronger between Jem Richards and Melanctha Herbert. Jem Richards
began to talk now as if he wanted to get married to her. Jem was deep in his love now for her.
And as for Melanctha, Jem was all the world now to her. And so Jem gave her a ring, like white
folks, to show he was engaged to her, and would by and by be married to her. And Melanctha
was filled full with joy to have Jem so good to her.

Melanctha always loved to go with Jem to the races. Jem had been lucky lately with his betting,
and he had a swell turn-out to drive in, and Melanctha looked very handsome there beside him.

Melanctha was very proud to have Jem Richards want her. Melanctha loved it the way Jem knew
how to do it. Melanctha loved Jem and loved that he should want her. She loved it too, that
he wanted to be married to her. Jem Richards was a straight decent man, whom other men always
looked up to and trusted. Melanctha needed badly a man to content her.

Melanctha's joy made her foolish. Melanctha told everybody about how Jem Richards, that swell
man who owned all those fine horses and was so game, nothing ever scared him, was engaged to
be married to her, and that was the ring he gave her.

Melanctha let out her joy very often to Rose Johnson. Melanctha had begun again now to go there.

Melanctha's love for Jem made her foolish. Melanctha had to have some one always now to talk
to and so she went often to Rose Johnson.

Melanctha put all herself into Jem Richards. She was mad and foolish in the joy she had there.

Rose never liked the way Melanctha did it. "No Sam I don't say never Melanctha ain't engaged
to Jem Richards the way she always says it, and Jem he is all right for that kind of man he
is, though he do think himself so smart and like he owns the earth and everything he can get
with it, and he sure gave Melanctha a ring like he really meant he should be married right
soon with it, only Sam, I don't ever like it the way Melanctha is going. When she is engaged
to him Sam, she ain't not right to take on so excited. That ain't no decent kind of a way a
girl ever should be acting. There ain't no kind of a man going stand that, not like I knows
men Sam, and I sure does know them. I knows them white and I knows them colored, for I was
raised by white folks, and they don't none of them like a girl to act so. That's all right
to be so when you is just only loving, but it ain't no ways right to be acting so when you
is engaged to him, and when he says, all right he get really regularly married to you. You
see Sam I am right like I am always and I knows it. Jem Richards, he ain't going to the last
to get real married, not if I knows it right, the way Melanctha now is acting to him. Rings
or anything ain't nothing to them, and they don't never do no good for them, when a girl acts
foolish like Melanctha always now is acting. I certainly will be right sorry Sam, if Melanctha
has real bad trouble come now to her, but I certainly don't no ways like it Sam the kind of
way Melanctha is acting to him. I don't never say nothing to her Sam. I just listens to what
she is saying always, and I thinks it out like I am telling to you Sam but I don't never say
nothing no more now to Melanctha. Melanctha didn't say nothing to me about that Jem Richards
till she was all like finished with him, and I never did like it Sam, much, the way she was
acting, not coming here never when she first ran with those men and met him. And I didn't never
say nothing to her, Sam, about it, and it ain't nothing ever to me, only I don't never no more
want to say nothing to her, so I just listens to what she got to tell like she wants it. No
Sam, I don't never want to say nothing to her. Melanctha just got to go her own way, not as
I want to see her have bad trouble ever come hard to her, only it ain't in me never Sam, after
Melanctha did so, ever to say nothing more to her how she should be acting. You just see Sam
like I tell you, what way Jem Richards will act to her, you see Sam I just am right like I
always am when I knows it."

Melanctha Herbert never thought she could ever again be in trouble. Melanctha's joy had made
her foolish.

And now Jem Richards had some bad trouble with his betting. Melanctha sometimes felt now when
she was with him that there was something wrong inside him. Melanctha knew he had had trouble
with his betting but Melanctha never felt that that could make any difference to them.

Melanctha once had told Jem, sure he knew she always would love to be with him, if he was in
jail or only just a beggar. Now Melanctha said to him, "Sure you know Jem that it don't never
make any kind of difference you're having any kind of trouble, you just try me Jem and be game,
don't look so worried to me. Jem sure I know you love me like I love you always, and its all
I ever could be wanting Jem to me, just your wanting me always to be with you. I get married
Jem to you soon ever as you can want me, if you once say it Jem to me. It ain't nothing to
me ever, anything like having any money Jem, why you look so worried to me."

Melanctha Herbert's love had surely made her mad and foolish. She thrust it always deep into
Jem Richards and now that he had trouble with his betting, Jem had no way that he ever wanted
to be made to feel it. Jem Richards never could want to marry any girl while he had trouble.
That was no way a man like him should do it. Melanctha's love had made her mad and foolish,
she should be silent now and let him do it. Jem Richards was not a kind of man to want a woman
to be strong to him, when he was in trouble with his betting. That was not the kind of a time
when a man like him needed to have it.

Melanctha needed so badly to have it, this love which she had always wanted, she did not know
what she should do to save it. Melanctha saw now, Jem Richards always had something wrong inside
him. Melanctha soon dared not ask him. Jem was busy now, he had to sell things and see men
to raise money. Jem could not meet Melanctha now so often.

It was lucky for Melanctha Herbert that Rose Johnson was coming now to have her baby. It had
always been understood between them, Rose should come and stay then in the house where Melanctha
lived with an old colored woman, so that Rose could have the Doctor from the hospital near
by to help her, and Melanctha there to take care of her the way Melanctha always used to do it.

Melanctha was very good now to Rose Johnson.

All this time Melanctha was always being every now and then with Jem Richards. Melanctha was
beginning to be stronger with Jem Richards. Melanctha was never so strong and sweet and in
her nature as when she was deep in trouble, when she was fighting so with all she had, she
could not do any foolish thing with her nature.

Always now Melanctha Herbert came back again to be nearer to Rose Johnson. Always now Melanctha
would tell all about her troubles to Rose Johnson. Rose had begun now a little again to advise her.

Melanctha always told Rose now about the talks she had with Jem Richards, talks where they
neither of them liked very well what the other one was saying. Melanctha did not know what
it was Jem Richards wanted. All Melanctha knew was, he did not like it when she wanted to be
good friends and get really married, and then when Melanctha would say, "all right, I never
wear your ring no more Jem, we ain't not any more to meet ever like we ever going to get really
regular married," then Jem did not like it either. What was it Jem Richards really wanted?

Melanctha stopped wearing Jem's ring on her finger. Poor Melanctha, she wore it on a string
she tied around her neck so that she could always feel it, but Melanctha was strong now with
Jem Richards, and he never saw it. And sometimes Jem seemed to be awful sorry for it, and sometimes
he seemed kind of glad of it. Melanctha never could make out really what it was Jem Richards
wanted.

There was no other woman yet to Jem, that Melanctha knew, and so she always trusted that Jem
would come back to her, deep in his love, the way once he had had it and had made all the world
like she once had never believed anybody could really make it. But Jem Richards was more game
than Melanctha Herbert. He knew how to fight to win out, better. Melanctha really had already
lost it, in not keeping quiet and waiting for Jem to do it.

Jem Richards was not yet having better luck in his betting. He never before had had such a
long time without some good coming to him in his betting. Sometimes Jem talked as if he wanted
to go off on a trip somewhere and try some other place for luck with his betting. Jem Richards
never talked as if he wanted to take Melanctha with him.

And so Melanctha sometimes was really trusting, and sometimes she was all sick inside her with
her doubting. What was it Jem really wanted to do with her? It flies away from him, perhaps when
he needs it most.

"A man's reputation may be sacrificed in a moment of ill considered action. The people who
are prone to fall on their knees to do us honor when success is with us, may be the first to
throw the stone of malice when failure settles its cloud upon our heads.

"A man's dog stands by him in prosperity and in poverty, in health
and in sickness. He will lick the wounds and sores that come in encounter
with the roughness of the world. Melanctha would wear the ring a little while, and then they
would have some more trouble, and then she would say to him, no she certainly never would any
more wear anything he gave her, and then she would wear it on the string so nobody could see
it but she could always feel it on her.

Poor Melanctha, surely her love had made her mad and foolish.

And now Melanctha needed always more and more to be with Rose Johnson, and Rose had commenced
again to advise her, but Rose could not help her. There was no way now that anybody could advise
her. The time when Melanctha could have changed it with Jem Richards was now all past for her.
Rose knew it, and Melanctha too, she knew it, and it almost killed her to let herself believe it.

The only comfort Melanctha ever had now was waiting on Rose till she was so tired she could
hardly stand it. Always Melanctha did everything Rose ever wanted. Sam Johnson began now to
be very gentle and a little tender to Melanctha. She was so good to Rose and Sam was so glad
to have her there to help Rose and to do things and to be a comfort to her.

Rose had a hard time to bring her baby to its birth and Melanctha did everything that any woman
could. When Rose had become strong again she went back to her house with Sam. And Sam Johnson
was always now very gentle and kind and good to Melanctha who had been so good to Rose in her
bad trouble.

Melanctha Herbert's troubles with Jem Richards were never getting any better. Jem always now
had less and less time to be with her. When Jem was with Melanctha now he was good enough to
her. Jem Richards was worried with his betting. Never since Jem had first begun to make a living
had he ever had so much trouble for such a long time together with his betting. Jem Richards
was good enough now to Melanctha but he had not much strength to give her. Melanctha could
never any more now make him quarrel with her. Melanctha never now could complain of his treatment
of her, for surely, he said it always by his actions to her, surely she must know how a man
was when he had trouble on his mind with trying to make things go a little better.

Sometimes Jem and Melanctha had long talks when they neither of them liked very well what the
other one was saying, but mostly now Melanctha could not make Jem Richards quarrel with her,
and more and more, Melanctha could not find any way to make it right to blame him for the trouble
she now always had inside her. Jem was good to her, and she knew, for he told her, that he
had trouble all the time now with his betting. Melanctha knew very well that for her it was
all wrong inside Jem Richards, but Melanctha had now no way that she could really reach him.

Things between Melanctha and Jem Richards were now never getting any better. Melanctha now
more and more needed to be with Rose Johnson. Rose still liked to have Melanctha come to her
house and do things for her, and Rose liked to grumble to her and to scold her and to tell
Melanctha what was the way Melanctha always should be doing so she could make things come out
better and not always be so much in trouble. Sam Johnson in these days was always very good
and gentle to Melanctha. Sam was now beginning to be very sorry for her.

Jem Richards never made things any better for Melanctha. Often Jem would talk so as to make
Melanctha almost certain that he never any more wanted to have her. Then Melanctha would get
very blue, and she would say to Rose, sure she would kill herself, for that certainly now was
the best way she could do. And that certainly is the way you should feel it Melanctha, now
you hear me, not just talking foolish like you always do. It certainly is only your way just
always being foolish makes you all that trouble to come to you always now, Melanctha, and I
certainly right well knows that. You certainly never can learn no way Melanctha ever with all
I certainly been telling to you, ever since I know you good, that it ain't never no way like
you do always is the right way you be acting ever and talking, the way I certainly always have
seen you do so Melanctha always. I certainly am right Melanctha about them ways you have to
do it, and I knows it; but you certainly never can noways learn to act right Melanctha, I certainly
do know that, I certainly do my best Melanctha to help you with it only you certainly never
do act right Melanctha, not to nobody ever, I can see it. You never act right by me Melanctha
no more than by everybody. I never say nothing to you Melanctha when you do so, for I certainly
never do like it when I just got to say it to you, but you just certainly done with that Jem
Richards you always say wanted real bad to be married to you, just like I always said to Sam
you certainly was going to do it. And I certainly am real kind of sorry like for you Melanctha,
but you certainly had ought to have come to see me to talk to you, when you first was engaged
to him so I could show you, and now you got all this trouble come to you Melanctha like I certainly
know you always catch it. It certainly ain't never Melanctha I ain't real sorry to see trouble
come so hard to you, but I certainly can see Melanctha it all is always just the way you always
be having it in you not never to do right. And now you always talk like you just kill yourself
because you are so blue, that certainly never is Melanctha, no kind of a way for any decent
kind of a girl to do."

Rose had begun to be strong now to scold Melanctha and she was impatient very often with her,
but Rose could now never any more be a help to her. Melanctha Herbert never could know now
what it was right she should do. Melanctha always wanted to have Jem Richards with her and
now he never seemed to want her, and what could Melanctha do. Surely she was right now when
she said she would just kill herself, for that was the only way now she could do.

Sam Johnson always, more and more, was good and gentle to Melanctha. Poor Melanctha, she was
so good and sweet to do anything anybody ever wanted, and Melanctha always liked it if she
could have peace and quiet, and always she could only find new ways to be in trouble. Sam often
said this now to Rose about Melanctha.

"I certainly don't never want Sam to say bad things about Melanctha, for she certainly always
do have most awful kind of trouble come hard to her, but I never can say I like it real right
Sam the way Melanctha always has to do it. Its now just the same with her like it is always
she has got to do it, now the way she is with that Jem Richards. He certainly now don't never
want to have her but Melanctha she ain't got no right kind of spirit. No Sam I don't never
like the way any more Melanctha is acting to him, and then Sam, she ain't never real right
honest, the way she always should do it. She certainly just don't kind of never Sam tell right
what way she is doing with it. I don't never like to say nothing Sam no more to her about the
way she always has to be acting. She always say, yes all right Rose, I do the way you say it,
and then Sam she don't never noways do it. She certainly is right sweet and good, Sam, is Melanctha,
nobody ever can hear me say she ain't always ready to do things for everybody anyway she ever
can see to do it, only Sam some ways she never does act real right ever, and some ways, Sam,
she ain't ever real honest with it. And Sam sometimes I hear awful kind of things she been
doing, some girls know about her how she does it, and sometimes they tell me what kind of ways
she has to do it, and Sam it certainly do seem to me like more and more I certainly am awful
afraid Melanctha never will come to any good. And then Sam, sometimes, you hear it, she always
talk like she kill herself all the time she is so blue, and Sam that certainly never is no
kind of way any decent girl ever had ought to do. You see Sam, how I am right like I always
is when I knows it. You just be careful, Sam, now you hear me, you be careful Sam sure, I tell
you, Melanctha more and more I see her I certainly do feel Melanctha no way is really honest.
You be careful, Sam now, like I tell you, for I knows it, now you hear to me, Sam, what I tell
you, for I certainly always is right, Sam, when I knows it."

At first Sam tried a little to defend Melanctha, and Sam always was good and gentle to her,
and Sam liked the ways Melanctha had to be quiet to him, and to always listen as if she was
learning, when she was there and heard him talking, and then Sam liked the sweet way she always
did everything so nicely for him; but Sam never liked to fight with anybody ever, and surely
Rose knew best about Melanctha and anyway Sam never did really care much about Melanctha. Her
mystery never had had any interest for him. Sam liked it that she was sweet to him and that
she always did everything Rose ever wanted that she should be doing. But Melanctha never would
be important to him. All Sam ever wanted was to have a little house and to live regular and
to work hard and to come home to his dinner, when he was tired with his working and by and
by he wanted to have some children all his own to be good to, and so Sam was real sorry for
Melanctha, she was so good and so sweet always to them, and Jem Richards was a bad man to behave
so to her, but that was always the way a girl got it when she liked that kind of fast fellow.
Anyhow Melanctha was Rose's friend, and Sam never cared to have anything to do with the kind
of trouble always came to women, when they wanted to have men, who never could know how to
behave good and steady to their women.

And so Sam never said much to Rose about Melanctha. Sam was always very gentle to her, but
now he began less and less to see her. Soon Melanctha never came any more to the house to see
Rose and Sam never asked Rose anything about her.

Melanctha Herbert was beginning now to come less and less to the house to be with Rose Johnson.
This was because Rose seemed always less and less now to want her, and Rose would not let Melanctha
now do things for her. Melanctha was always humble to her and Melanctha always wanted in every
way she could to do things for her. Rose said no, she guessed she do that herself like she
likes to have it better. Melanctha is real good to stay so long to help her, but Rose guessed
perhaps Melanctha better go home now, Rose don't need nobody to help her now, she is feeling
real strong, not like just after she had all that trouble with the baby, and then Sam, when
he comes home for his dinner he likes it when Rose is all alone there just to give him his
dinner. Sam always is so tired now, like he always is in the summer, so many people always
on the steamer, and they make so much work so Sam is real tired now, and he likes just to eat
his dinner and never have people in the house to be a trouble to him.

Each day Rose treated Melanctha more and more as if she never wanted Melanctha any more to
come there to the house to see her. Melanctha dared not ask Rose why she acted in this way
to her. Melanctha badly needed to have Rose always there to save her. Melanctha wanted badly
to cling to her and Rose had always been so solid for her. Melanctha did not dare to ask Rose
if she now no longer wanted her to come and see her.

Melanctha now never any more had Sam to be gentle to her. Rose always sent Melanctha away from
her before it was time for Sam to come home to her. One day Melanctha had stayed a little longer,
for Rose that day had been good to let Melanctha begin to do things for her. Melanctha then
left her and Melanctha met Sam Johnson who stopped a minute to speak kindly to her.

The next day Rose Johnson would not let Melanctha come in to her. Rose stood on the steps,
and there she told Melanctha what she thought now of her.

"I guess Melanctha it certainly ain't no ways right for you to come here no more just to see
me. I certainly don't Melanctha no ways like to be a trouble to you. I certainly think Melanctha
I get along better now when I don't have nobody like you are, always here to help me, and Sam
he do so good now with his working, he pay a little girl something to come every day to help
me. I certainly do think Melanctha I don't never want you no more to come here just to see
me." "Why Rose, what I ever done to you, I certainly don't think you is right Rose to be so
bad now to me." "I certainly don't no ways Melanctha Herbert think you got any right ever to
be complaining the way I been acting to you. I certainly never do think Melanctha Herbert,
you hear me, nobody ever been more patient to you than I always been to like you, only Melanctha,
I hear more things now so awful bad about you, everybody always is telling to me what kind
of a way you always have been doing so much, and me always so good to you, and you never no
ways, knowing how to be honest to me. No Melanctha it ain't ever in me, not to want you to
have good luck come to you, and I like it real well Melanctha when you some time learn how
to act the way it is decent and right for a girl to be doing, but I don't no ways ever like
it the kind of things everybody tell me now about you. No Melanctha, I can't never any more
trust you. I certainly am real sorry to have never any more to see you, but there ain't no
other way, I ever can be acting to you. That's all I ever got any more to say to you now Melanctha."
"But Rose, deed; I certainly don't know, no more than the dead, nothing I ever done to make
you act so to me. Anybody say anything bad about me Rose, to you, they just a pack of liars
to you, they certainly is Rose, I tell you true. I certainly never done nothing I ever been
ashamed to tell you. Why you act so bad to me Rose. Sam he certainly don't think ever like
you do, and Rose I always do everything I can, you ever want me to do for you." "It ain't never
no use standing there talking, Melanctha Herbert. I just can tell it to you, and Sam, he don't
know nothing about women ever the way they can be acting. I certainly am very sorry Melanctha,
to have to act so now to you, but I certainly can't do no other way with you, when you do things
always so bad, and everybody is talking so about you. It ain't no use to you to stand there
and say it different to me Melanctha. I certainly am always right Melanctha Herbert, the way
I certainly always have been when I knows it, to you. No Melanctha, it just is, you never can
have no kind of a way to act right, the way a decent girl has to do, and I done my best always
to be telling it to you Melanctha Herbert, but it don't never do no good to tell nobody how
to act right; they certainly never can learn when they ain't got no sense right to know it,
and you never have no sense right Melanctha to be honest, and I ain't never wishing no harm
to you ever Melanctha Herbert, only I don't never want any more to see you come here. I just
say to you now, like I always been saying to you, you don't know never the right way, any kind
of decent girl has to be acting, and so Melanctha Herbert, me and Sam, we don't never any more
want you to be setting your foot in my house here Melanctha Herbert, I just tell you. And so
you just go along now, Melanctha Herbert, you hear me, and I don't never wish no harm to come
to you."

Rose Johnson went into her house and closed the door behind her. Melanctha stood like one dazed,
she did not know how to bear this blow that almost killed her. Slowly then Melanctha went away
without even turning to look behind her.

Melanctha Herbert was all sore and bruised inside her. Melanctha had needed Rose always to
believe her, Melanctha needed Rose always to let her cling to her, Melanctha wanted badly to
have somebody who could make her always feel a little safe inside her, and now Rose had sent
her from her. Melanctha wanted Rose more than she had ever wanted all the others. Rose always
was so simple, solid, decent, for her. And now Rose had cast her from her. Melanctha was lost,
and all the world went whirling in a mad weary dance around her.

Melanctha Herbert never had any strength alone ever to feel safe inside her. And now Rose Johnson
had cast her from her, and Melanctha could never any more be near her. Melanctha Herbert knew
now, way inside her, that she was lost, and nothing any more could ever help her.

Melanctha went that night to meet Jem Richards who had promised to be at the old place to meet
her. Jem Richards was absent in his manner to her. By and by he began to talk to her, about
the trip he was going to take soon, to see if he could get some luck back in his betting. Melanctha
trembled, was Jem too now going to leave her. Jem Richards talked some more then to her, about
the bad luck he always had now, and how he needed to go away to see if he could make it come
out any better.

Then Jem stopped, and then he looked straight at Melanctha.

"Tell me Melanctha right and true, you don't care really nothing more about me now Melanctha,"
he said to her.

"Why you ask me that, Jem Richards," said Melanctha.

"Why I ask you that Melanctha, God Almighty, because I just don't give a damn now for you any
more Melanctha. That the reason I was asking."

Melanctha never could have for this an answer. Jem Richards waited and then he went away and
left her.

Melanctha Herbert never again saw Jem Richards. Melanctha never again saw Rose Johnson, and
it was hard to Melanctha never any more to see her. Rose Johnson had worked in to be the deepest
of all Melanctha's emotions. 

"I didn't steal them," said Lizzie; "they're my very own. Frank says that nobody can take them
away from me. Why shouldn't a man give his wife a diamond necklace as well as a diamond ring?
That's what I can't understand. What may he give her so that men sha'n't come and worry her
life out of her in this way? As for an heirloom, anybody who knows anything, knows that it can't
be an heirloom. A pot or a pan may be an heirloom;--but a diamond necklace cannot be an heirloom.
Everybody knows that, that knows anything."

"I daresay it will all come right," said Mrs. Carbuncle, who did not in the least believe Lizzie's
law about the pot and pan.

In the first week in January Lord George
and Sir Griffin returned to the castle with the view of travelling
up to London with the three ladies. I expect some day Melanctha kill herself, when she
act so bad like she do always, and then she got so awful blue. Melanctha always says that's
the only way she ever can think it a easy way for her to do. No, I always am real sorry for
Melanctha, she never was no just common kind of nigger, but she don't never know not with all
the time I always was telling it to her, no she never no way could learn, what was the right
way she should do. I certainly don't never want no kind of harm to come bad to Melanctha, but
I certainly do think she will most kill herself some time, the way she always say it would
be easy way for her to do. I never see nobody ever could be so awful blue."

But Melanctha Herbert never really killed herself because she was so blue, though often she
thought this would be really the best way for her to do. Melanctha never killed herself, she
only got a bad fever and went into the hospital where they took good care of her and cured her.

When Melanctha was well again, she took a place and began to work and to live regular. Then
Melanctha got very sick again; she began to cough and sweat and be so weak she could not stand
to do her work.

Melanctha went back to the hospital, and there the Doctor told her she had the consumption,
and before long she would surely die. They sent her where she would be taken care of, a home
for poor consumptives, and there Melanctha stayed until she died.

FINIS

THE GENTLE LENA

Lena was patient, gentle, sweet and german. She had been a servant for four years and had liked
it very well.

Lena had been brought from Germany to Bridgepoint by a cousin and had been in the same place
there for four years.

This place Lena had found very good. There was a pleasant, unexacting mistress and her children,
and they all liked Lena very well.

There was a cook there who scolded Lena a great deal but Lena's german patience held no suffering
and the good incessant woman really only scolded so for Lena's good.

Lena's german voice when she knocked and called the family in the morning was as awakening,
as soothing, and as appealing, as a delicate soft breeze in midday, summer. She stood in the
hallway every morning a long time in her unexpectant and unsuffering german patience calling
to the young ones to get up. She would call and wait a long time and then call again, always
even, gentle, patient, while the young ones fell back often into that precious, tense, last
bit of sleeping that gives a strength of joyous vigor in the young, over them that have come
to the readiness of middle age, in their awakening.

Lena had good hard work all morning, and on the pleasant, sunny afternoons she was sent out
into the park to sit and watch the little two year old girl baby of the family.

The other girls, all them that make the pleasant, lazy crowd, that watch the children in the
sunny afternoons out in the park, all liked the simple, gentle, german Lena very well. They
all, too, liked very well to tease her, for it was so easy to make her mixed and troubled,
and all helpless, for she could never learn to know just what the other quicker girls meant
by the queer things they said.

The two or three of these girls, the ones that Lena always sat with, always worked together
to confuse her. Still it was pleasant, all this life for Lena.

The little girl fell down sometimes and cried, and then Lena had to soothe her. When the little
girl would drop her hat, Lena had to pick it up and hold it. When the little girl was bad and
threw away her playthings, Lena told her she could not have them and took them from her to
hold until the little girl should need them.

It was all a peaceful life for Lena, almost as peaceful as a pleasant leisure. The other girls,
of course, did tease her, but then that only made a gentle stir within her.

Lena was a brown and pleasant creature, brown as blonde races often have them brown, brown,
not with the yellow or the red or the chocolate brown of sun burned countries, but brown with
the clear color laid flat on the light toned skin beneath, the plain, spare brown that makes
it right to have been made with hazel eyes, and not too abundant straight, brown hair, hair
that only later deepens itself into brown from the straw yellow of a german childhood.

Lena had the flat chest, straight back and forward falling shoulders of the patient and enduring
working woman, though her body was now still in its milder girlhood and work had not yet made
these lines too clear.

The rarer feeling that there was with Lena, showed in all the even quiet of her body movements,
but in all it was the strongest in the patient, old-world ignorance, and earth made pureness
of her brown, flat, soft featured face. Lena had eyebrows that were a wondrous thickness. They
were black, and spread, and very cool, with their dark color and their beauty, and beneath
them were her hazel eyes, simple and human, with the earth patience of the working, gentle,
german woman.

Yes it was all a peaceful life for Lena. The other girls, of course, did tease her, but then
that only made a gentle stir within her.

"What you got on your finger Lena," Mary, one of the girls she always sat with, one day asked
her. Mary was good natured, quick, intelligent and Irish.

Lena had just picked up the fancy paper made accordion that the little girl had dropped beside
her, and was making it squeak sadly as she pulled it with her brown, strong, awkward finger.

"Why, what is it, Mary, paint?" said Lena, putting her finger to her mouth to taste the dirt spot. 

He went forth with many followers, some of whom he left in each city
he visited.

At length he reached the town of Ma Tlapallan. Here he announced that he should soon die, and
directed his followers to burn his body and all his treasures with
him.

"Ain't it poison, Nellie, that green paint, that Lena sucked just now," said Mary. "Sure it
is Lena, its real poison, I ain't foolin' this time anyhow."

Lena was a little troubled. She looked hard at her finger where the paint was, and she wondered
if she had really sucked it.

It was still a little wet on the edges and she rubbed it off a long time on the inside of her
dress, and in between she wondered and looked at the finger and thought, was it really poison
that she had just tasted.

"Ain't it too bad, Nellie, Lena should have sucked that," Mary said.

Nellie smiled and did not answer. Nellie was dark and thin, and looked Italian. She had a big
mass of black hair that she wore high up on her head, and that made her face look very fine.

Nellie always smiled and did not say much, and then she would look at Lena to perplex her.

And so they all three sat with their little charges in the pleasant sunshine a long time. And
Lena would often look at her finger and wonder if it was really poison that she had just tasted
and then she would rub her finger on her dress a little harder.

Mary laughed at her and teased her and Nellie smiled a little and looked queerly at her.

Then it came time, for it was growing cooler, for them to drag together the little ones, who
had begun to wander, and to take each one back to its own mother. And Lena never knew for certain
whether it was really poison, that green stuff that she had tasted.

During these four years of service, Lena always spent her Sundays out at the house of her aunt,
who had brought her four years before to Bridgepoint.

This aunt, who had brought Lena, four years before, to Bridgepoint, was a hard, ambitious,
well meaning, german woman. Her husband was a grocer in the town, and they were very well to
do. Mrs. Haydon, Lena's aunt, had two daughters who were just beginning as young ladies, and
she had a little boy who was not honest and who was very hard to manage.

Mrs. Haydon was a short, stout, hard built, german woman. She always hit the ground very firmly
and compactly as she walked. Mrs. Haydon was all a compact and well hardened mass, even to
her face, reddish and darkened from its early blonde, with its hearty, shiny cheeks, and doubled
chin well covered over with the up roll from her short, square neck.

The two daughters, who were fourteen and fifteen, looked like unkneaded, unformed mounds of
flesh beside her.

The elder girl, Mathilda, was blonde, and slow, and simple, and quite fat. The younger, Bertha,
who was almost as tall as her sister, was dark, and quicker, and she was heavy, too, but not
really fat.

These two girls the mother had brought up very firmly. They were well taught for their position.
They were always both well dressed, in the same kinds of hats and dresses, as is becoming in
two german sisters. The mother liked to have them dressed in red. Their best clothes were red
dresses, made of good heavy cloth, and strongly trimmed with braid of a glistening black. They
had stiff, red felt hats, trimmed with black velvet ribbon, and a bird. The mother dressed
matronly, in a bonnet and in black, always sat between her two big daughters, firm, directing,
and repressed.

The only weak spot in this good german woman's conduct was the way she spoiled her boy, who
was not honest and who was very hard to manage.

The father of this family was a decent, quiet, heavy, and uninterfering german man. He tried
to cure the boy of his bad ways, and make him honest, but the mother could not make herself
let the father manage, and so the boy was brought up very badly.

