Other village at Framley there was none. At the back of the Court, up one of those cross-roads,
there was another small shop or two, and there was a very neat cottage residence, in which
lived the widow of a former curate, another protégé of Lady Lufton's; and there was a big,
staring, brick house, in which the present curate lived; but this was a full mile distant from
the church, and farther from Framley Court, standing on that cross-road which runs from Framley
Cross in a direction away from the mansion. This gentleman, the Rev. Evan Jones, might, from
his age, have been the vicar's father; but he had been for many years curate of Framley; and
though he was personally disliked by Lady Lufton, as being Low Church in his principles, and
unsightly in his appearance, nevertheless, she would not urge his removal He had two or three
pupils in that large brick house, and, if turned out from these and from his curacy, might
find it difficult to establish himself elsewhere. On this account mercy was extended to the
Rev. E. Jones, and, in spite of his red face and awkward big feet, he was invited to dine at
Framley Court, with his plain daughter, once in every three months.

Over and above these, there was hardly a house in the parish of Framley, outside the bounds
of Framley Court, except those of farmers and farm labourers; and yet the parish was of large
extent.

Framley is in the eastern division of the county of Barsetshire, which, as all the world knows,
is, politically speaking, as true blue a county as any in England. There have been backslidings
even here, it is true; but then, in what county have there not been such backslidings? Where,
in these pinchbeck days, can we hope to find the old agricultural virtue in all its purity?
But, among those backsliders, I regret to say, that men now reckon Lord Lufton. Not that he
is a violent Whig, or perhaps that he is a Whig at all. But he jeers and sneers at the old
county doings; declares, when solicited on the subject, that, as far as he is concerned, Mr.
Bright may sit for the county, if he pleases; and alleges, that being unfortunately a peer,
he has no right even to interest himself in the question. All this is deeply regretted, for,
in the old days, there was no portion of the county more decidedly true blue than that Framley
district; and, indeed, up to the present day, the dowager is able to give an occasional helping
hand.

Chaldicotes is the seat of Nathaniel Sowerby, Esq., who, at the moment supposed to be now present,
is one of the members for the Western Division of Barsetshire. But this Western Division can
boast none of the fine political attributes which grace its twin brother. It is decidedly Whig,
and is almost governed in its politics by one or two great Whig families. It has been said
that Mark Robarts was about to pay a visit to Chaldicotes, and it has been hinted that his
wife would have been as well pleased had this not been the case. Such was certainly the fact;
for she, dear, prudent, excellent wife as she was, knew that Mr. Sowerby was not the most eligible
friend in the world for a young clergyman, and knew, also, that there was but one other house
in the whole county the name of which was so distasteful to Lady Lufton. The reasons for this
were, I may say, manifold. In the first place, Mr. Sowerby was a Whig, and was seated in Parliament
mainly by the interest of that great Whig autocrat the Duke of Omnium, whose residence was
more dangerous even than that of Mr. Sowerby, and whom Lady Lufton regarded as an impersonation
of Lucifer upon earth. Mr. Sowerby, too, was unmarried--as indeed, also, was Lord Lufton, much
to his mother's grief. Mr. Sowerby, it is true, was fifty, whereas the young lord was as yet
only twenty-six, but, nevertheless, her ladyship was becoming anxious on the subject. In her
mind every man was bound to marry as soon as he could maintain a wife; and she held an idea--a
quite private tenet, of which she was herself but imperfectly conscious--that men in general
were inclined to neglect this duty for their own selfish gratifications, that the wicked ones
encouraged the more innocent in this neglect, and that many would not marry at all, were not
an unseen coercion exercised against them by the other sex. The Duke of Omnium was the very
head of all such sinners, and Lady Lufton greatly feared that her son might be made subject
to the baneful Omnium influence, by means of Mr. Sowerby and Chaldicotes. And then Mr. Sowerby
was known to be a very poor man, with a very large estate. He had wasted, men said, much on
electioneering, and more in gambling. A considerable portion of his property had already gone
into the hands of the duke, who, as a rule, bought up everything around him that was to be
purchased. Indeed it was said of him by his enemies, that so covetous was he of Barsetshire
property, that he would lead a young neighbour on to his ruin, in order that he might get his
land. What--oh! what if he should come to be possessed in this way of any of the fair acres
of Framley Court? What if he should become possessed of them all? It can hardly be wondered
at that Lady Lufton should not like Chaldicotes.

The Chaldicotes set, as Lady Lufton called them, were in every way opposed to what a set should
be according to her ideas. She liked cheerful, quiet, well-to-do people, who loved their Church,
their country, and their Queen, and who were not too anxious to make a noise in the world.
She desired that all the farmers round her should be able to pay their rents without trouble,
that all the old women should have warm flannel petticoats, that the working men should be
saved from rheumatism by healthy food and dry houses, that they should all be obedient to their
pastors and masters--temporal as well as spiritual. That was her idea of loving her country.
She desired also that the copses should be full of pheasants, the stubble-field of partridges,
and the gorse covers of foxes; in that way, also, she loved her country. She had ardently longed,
during that Crimean War, that the Russians might be beaten--but not by the French, to the exclusion
of the English, as had seemed to her to be too much the case; and hardly by the English under
the dictatorship of Lord Palmerston. Indeed, she had had but little faith in that war after
Lord Aberdeen had been expelled. If, indeed, Lord Derby could have come in! But now as to this
Chaldicotes set. After all, there was nothing so very dangerous about them; for it was in London,
not in the country, that Mr. Sowerby indulged, if he did indulge, his bachelor mal-practices.
Speaking of them as a set, the chief offender was Mr. Harold Smith, or perhaps his wife. He
also was a member of Parliament, and, as many thought, a rising man. His father had been for
many years a debater in the House, and had held high office. Harold, in early life, had intended
himself for the Cabinet; and if working hard at his trade could ensure success, he ought to
obtain it sooner or later. He had already filled more than one subordinate station, had been
at the Treasury, and for a month or two at the Admiralty, astonishing official mankind by his
diligence. Those last-named few months had been under Lord Aberdeen, with whom he had been
forced to retire. He was a younger son, and not possessed of any large fortune. Politics, as
a profession, was, therefore, of importance to him. He had in early life married a sister of
Mr. Sowerby; and as the lady was some six or seven years older than himself, and had brought
with her but a scanty dowry, people thought that in this matter Mr. Harold Smith had not been
perspicacious. Mr. Harold Smith was not personally a popular man with any party, though some
judged him to be eminently useful. He was laborious, well-informed, and, on the whole, honest;
but he was conceited, long-winded, and pompous.

Mrs. Harold Smith was the very opposite of her lord. She was a clever, bright woman, good-looking
for her time of life--and she was now over forty--with a keen sense of the value of all worldly
things, and a keen relish for all the world's pleasures. She was neither laborious, nor well-informed,
nor perhaps altogether honest--what woman ever understood the necessity or recognized the advantage
of political honesty?--but then she was neither dull nor pompous, and if she was conceited,
she did not show it. She was a disappointed woman, as regards her husband; seeing that she
had married him on the speculation that he would at once become politically important; and
as yet Mr. Smith had not quite fulfilled the prophecies of his early life.

And Lady Lufton, when she spoke of the Chaldicotes set, distinctly included, in her own mind,
the Bishop of Barchester, and his wife and daughter. Seeing that Bishop Proudie was, of course,
a man much addicted to religion and to religious thinking, and that Mr. Sowerby himself had
no peculiar religious sentiments whatever, there would not at first sight appear to be ground
for much intercourse, and perhaps there was not much of such intercourse; but Mrs. Proudie
and Mrs. Harold Smith were firm friends of four or five years' standing--ever since the Proudies
came into the diocese; and therefore the bishop was usually taken to Chaldicotes whenever Mrs.
Smith paid her brother a visit. Now Bishop Proudie was by no means a High Church dignitary,
and Lady Lufton had never forgiven him for coming into that diocese. She had, instinctively,
a high respect for the episcopal office; but of Bishop Proudie himself she hardly thought better
than she did of Mr. Sowerby, or of that fabricator of evil, the Duke of Omnium. Whenever Mr.
Robarts would plead that in going anywhere he would have the benefit of meeting the bishop,
Lady Lufton would slightly curl her upper lip. She could not say in words that Bishop Proudie--bishop
as he certainly must be called--was no better than he ought to be; but by that curl of her
lip she did explain to those who knew her that such was the inner feeling of her heart.

And then it was understood--Mark Robarts, at least, had so heard, and the information soon
reached Framley Court--that Mr. Supplehouse was to make one of the Chaldicotes party. Good and
steady walkers they were too, with a military step and a four-mile-per-hour record.

The village churches were mostly of the same form in structure and service as at the conclusion
of the Civil War. The old oak pews were still in use, as were the galleries and the old "three-decker"
pulpits, with sounding-boards overhead. The parish clerk occupied the lower deck and gave out
the hymns therefrom, as well as other notices of a character not now announced in church. The minister
read the lessons and prayers, in a white surplice, from the second deck, and then, while a
hymn was being sung, he retired to the vestry, from which he again
emerged, attired in a black gown, to preach the sermon from the upper
deck. But how can
a man born to save a nation, and to lead a people, be content to fill the chair of an under-secretary?
Supplehouse was not content, and soon gave it to be understood that his place was much higher
than any yet tendered to him. The seals of high office, or war to the knife, was the alternative
which he offered to a much-belaboured Head of Affairs--nothing doubting that the Head of Affairs
would recognize the claimant's value, and would have before his eyes a wholesome fear of the
Jupiter. But the Head of Affairs, much belaboured as he was, knew that he might pay too high
even for Mr. Supplehouse and the Jupiter; and the saviour of the nation was told that he might
swing his tomahawk. Since that time he had been swinging his tomahawk, but not with so much
effect as had been anticipated. He also was very intimate with Mr. Sowerby, and was decidedly
one of the Chaldicotes set. And there were many others included in the stigma whose sins were
political or religious rather than moral. But they were gall and wormwood to Lady Lufton, who
regarded them as children of the Lost One, and who grieved with a mother's grief when she knew
that her son was among them, and felt all a patron's anger when she heard that her clerical
protégé was about to seek such society. Mrs. Robarts might well say that Lady Lufton would
be annoyed.

"You won't call at the house before you go, will you?" the wife asked on the following morning.
He was to start after lunch on that day, driving himself in his own gig, so as to reach Chaldicotes,
some twenty-four miles distant, before dinner.

"No, I think not. What good should I do?"

"Well, I can't explain; but I think I should call: pertly, perhaps, to show her that, as I
had determined to go, I was not afraid of telling her so."

"Afraid! That's nonsense, Fanny. I'm not afraid of her. But I don't see why I should bring
down upon myself the disagreeable things she will say. Besides, I have not time. I must walk
up and see Jones about the duties; and then, what with getting ready, I shall have enough to
do to get off in time."

He paid his visit to Mr. Jones, the curate, feeling no qualms of conscience there, as he rather
boasted of all the members of Parliament he was going to meet, and of the bishop who would
be with them. Mr. Evan Jones was only his curate, and in speaking to him on the matter he could
talk as though it were quite the proper thing for a vicar to meet his bishop at the house of
a county member. And one would be inclined to say that it was proper: only why could he not
talk of it in the same tone to Lady Lufton? And then, having kissed his wife and children,
he drove off, well pleased with his prospect for the coming ten days, but already anticipating
some discomfort on his return.

On the three following days, Mrs. Robarts did not meet her ladyship. She did not exactly take
any steps to avoid such a meeting, but she did not purposely go up to the big house. She went
to her school as usual, and made one or two calls among the farmers' wives, but put no foot
within the Framley Court grounds. She was braver than her husband, but even she did not wish
to anticipate the evil day. On the Saturday, just before it began to get dusk, when she was
thinking of preparing for the fatal plunge, her friend, Lady Meredith, came to her.

"So, Fanny, we shall again be so unfortunate as to miss Mr. Robarts," said her ladyship.

"Yes. Did you ever know anything so unlucky? But he had promised Mr. Sowerby before he heard
that you were coming. Pray do not think that he would have gone away had he known it."

"We should have been sorry to keep him from so much more amusing a party."

"Now, Justinia, you are unfair. You intend to imply that he has gone to Chaldicotes, because
he likes it better than Framley Court; but that is not the case. I hope Lady Lufton does not
think that it is."

Lady Meredith laughed as she put her arm round her friend's waist. "Don't lose your eloquence
in defending him to me," she said. "You'll want all that for my mother."

"But is your mother angry?" asked Mrs. Robarts, showing by her countenance how eager she was
for true tidings on the subject.

"Well, Fanny, you know her ladyship as well as I do. She thinks so very highly of the vicar
of Framley, that she does begrudge him to those politicians at Chaldicotes."

"But, Justinia, the bishop is to be there, you know."

"I don't think that that consideration will at all reconcile my mother to the gentleman's absence.
He ought to be very proud, I know, to find that he is so much thought of. But come, Fanny,
I want you to walk back with me, and you can dress at the house. And now we'll go and look
at the children."

After that, as they walked together to Framley Court, Mrs. Robarts made her friend promise
that she would stand by her if any serious attack were made on the absent clergyman.

"Are you going up to your room at once?" said the vicar's wife, as soon as they were inside
the porch leading into the hall. Lady Meredith immediately knew what her friend meant, and
decided that the evil day should not be postponed. "We had better go in and have it over,"
she said, "and then we shall be comfortable for the evening." So the drawing-room door was
opened, and there was Lady Lufton alone upon the sofa.

"Now, mamma," said the daughter, "you mustn't scold Fanny much about Mr. Robarts. He has gone
to preach a charity sermon before the bishop, and, under those circumstances, perhaps, he could
not refuse." This was a stretch on the part of Lady Meredith--put in with much good-nature,
no doubt; but still a stretch; for no one had supposed that the bishop would remain at Chaldicotes
for the Sunday.

"How do you do, Fanny?" said Lady Lufton, getting up. "I am not going to scold her; and I don't
know how you can talk such nonsense, Justinia. Of course, we are very sorry not to have Mr.
Robarts; more especially as he was not here the last Sunday that Sir George was with us. I
do like to see Mr. Robarts in his own church, certainly; and I don't like any other clergyman
there as well. If Fanny takes that for scolding, why--"

"Oh! no, Lady Lufton; and it's so kind of you to say so. But Mr. Robarts was so sorry that
he had accepted this invitation to Chaldicotes, before he heard that Sir George was coming, and--"

"Oh, I know that Chaldicotes has great attractions which we cannot offer," said Lady Lufton.

"Indeed, it was not that. But he was asked to preach, you know; and Mr. Harold Smith--" Poor
Fanny was only making it worse. Had she been worldly wise, she would have accepted the little
compliment implied in Lady Lufton's first rebuke, and then have held her peace.

"Oh, yes; the Harold Smiths! They are irresistible, I know. How could any man refuse to join
a party, graced both by Mrs. Harold Smith and Mrs. Proudie--even though his duty should require
him to stay away?"

"Now, mamma--" said Justinia.

"Well, my dear, what am I to say? You would not wish me to tell a fib. I don't like Mrs. Harold
Smith--at least, what I hear of her; for it has not been my fortune to meet her since her marriage.
It may be conceited; but to own the truth, I think that Mr. Robarts would be better off with
us at Framley than with the Harold Smiths at Chaldicotes--even though Mrs. Proudie be thrown
into the bargain."

It was nearly dark, and therefore the rising colour in the face of Mrs. Robarts could not be
seen. She, however, was too good a wife to hear these things said without some anger within
her bosom. She could blame her husband in her own mind; but it was intolerable to her that
others should blame him in her hearing.

"He would undoubtedly be better off," she said; "but then, Lady Lufton, people can't always
go exactly where they will be best off. Gentlemen sometimes must--"

"Well--well, my dear, that will do. He has not taken you, at any rate; and so we will forgive
him." And Lady Lufton kissed her. "As it is,"--and she affected a low whisper between the two
young wives--"as it is, we must e'en put up with poor old Evan Jones. He is to be here to-night,
and we must go and dress to receive him."

And so they went off. Lady Lufton was quite good enough at heart to like Mrs. Robarts all the
better for standing up for her absent lord.

CHAPTER III

Chaldicotes

Chaldicotes is a house of much more pretension than Framley Court. Indeed, if one looks at
the ancient marks about it, rather than at those of the present day, it is a place of very
considerable pretension. There is an old forest, not altogether belonging to the property,
but attached to it, called the Chace of Chaldicotes. A portion of this forest comes up close
behind the mansion, and of itself gives a character and celebrity to the place. The Chace of
Chaldicotes--the greater part of it, at least--is, as all the world knows, Crown property,
and now, in these utilitarian days, is to be disforested. In former times it was a great forest,
stretching half across the country, almost as far as Silverbridge; and there are bits of it,
here and there, still to be seen at intervals throughout the whole distance; but the larger
remaining portion, consisting of aged hollow oaks, centuries old, and wide-spreading withered
beeches, stands in the two parishes of Chaldicotes and Uffley. People still come from afar
to see the oaks of Chaldicotes, and to hear their feet rustle among the thick autumn leaves.
But they will soon come no longer. The giants of past ages are to give way to wheat and turnips;
a ruthless Chancellor of the Exchequer, disregarding old associations and rural beauty, requires
money returns from the lands; and the Chace of Chaldicotes is to vanish from the earth's surface.

Some part of it, however, is the private property of Mr. Sowerby, who hitherto, through all
his pecuniary distresses, has managed to save from the axe and the auction-mart that portion
of his paternal heritage. The house of Chaldicotes is a large stone building, probably of the
time of Charles the Second. It is approached on both fronts by a heavy double flight of stone
steps. In the front of the house a long, solemn, straight avenue through a double row of lime-trees,
leads away to lodge-gates, which stand in the centre of the village of Chaldicotes; but to
the rear the windows open upon four different vistas, which run down through the forest: four
open green rides, which all converge together at a large iron gateway, the barrier which divides
the private grounds from the Chace. The Sowerbys, for many generations, have been rangers of
the Chace of Chaldicotes, thus having almost as wide an authority over the Crown forest as
over their own. But now all this is to cease, for the forest will be disforested.

It was nearly dark as Mark Robarts drove up through the avenue of lime-trees to the hall-door;
but it was easy to see that the house, which was dead and silent as the grave through nine
months of the year, was now alive in all its parts. There were lights in many of the windows,
and a noise of voices came from the stables, and servants were moving about, and dogs barked,
and the dark gravel before the front steps was cut up with many a coach-wheel.

"Oh, be that you, sir, Mr. Robarts?" said a groom, taking the parson's horse by the head, and
touching his own hat. "I hope I see your reverence well?"

"Quite well, Bob, thank you. All well at Chaldicotes?"

"Pretty bobbish, Mr. Robarts. Deal of life going on here now, sir. The bishop and his lady
came this morning."

"Oh--ah--yes! I understood they were to be here. Any of the young ladies?"

"One young lady. Miss Olivia, I think they call her, your reverence."

"And how's Mr. Sowerby?"

"Very well, your reverence. He, and Mr. Harold Smith, and Mr. Fothergill--that's the duke's
man of business, you know--is getting off their horses now in the stable-yard there."

"Home from hunting--eh, Bob?"

"Yes, sir, just home, this minute." And then Mr. Robarts walked into the house, his portmanteau
following on a foot-boy's shoulder.

It will be seen that our young vicar was very intimate at Chaldicotes; so much so that the
groom knew him, and talked to him about the people in the house. Yes; he was intimate there:
much more than he had given the Framley people to understand. Not that he had wilfully and
overtly deceived any one; not that he had ever spoken a false word about Chaldicotes. But he
had never boasted at home that he and Sowerby were near allies. Neither had he told them there
how often Mr. Sowerby and Lord Lufton were together in London. Why trouble women with such
matters? Why annoy so excellent a woman as Lady Lufton? And then Mr. Sowerby was one whose
intimacy few young men would wish to reject. He was fifty, and had lived, perhaps, not the
most salutary life; but he dressed young, and usually looked well. He was bald, with a good
forehead, and sparkling moist eyes. He was a clever man, and a pleasant companion, and always
good-humoured when it so suited him. He was a gentleman, too, of high breeding and good birth,
whose ancestors had been known in that county--longer, the farmers around would boast, than
those of any other land-owner in it, unless it be the Thornes of Ullathorne, or perhaps the
Greshams of Greshamsbury--much longer than the de Courcys at Courcy Castle. As for the Duke
of Omnium, he, comparatively speaking, was a new man. And then he was a member of Parliament,
a friend of some men in power, and of others who might be there; a man who could talk about
the world as one knowing the matter of which he talked. And moreover, whatever might be his
ways of life at other times, when in the presence of a clergyman he rarely made himself offensive
to clerical tastes. He neither swore, nor brought his vices on the carpet, nor sneered at the
faith of the Church. If he was no Churchman himself, he at least knew how to live with those
who were.

How was it possible that such a one as our vicar should not relish the intimacy of Mr. Sowerby?
It might be very well, he would say to himself, for a woman like Lady Lufton to turn up her
nose at him--for Lady Lufton, who spent ten months of the year at Framley Court, and who during
those ten months, and for the matter of that, during the two months also which she spent in
London, saw no one out of her own set. Women did not understand such things, the vicar said
to himself; even his own wife--good, and nice, and sensible, and intelligent as she was--even
she did not understand that a man in the world must meet all sorts of men; and that in these
days it did not do for a clergyman to be a hermit. 'Twas thus that Mark Robarts argued when
he found himself called upon to defend himself before the bar of his own conscience for going
to Chaldicotes and increasing his intimacy with Mr. Sowerby. He did know that Mr. Sowerby was
a dangerous man; he was aware that he was over head and ears in debt, and that he had already
entangled young Lord Lufton in some pecuniary embarrassment; his conscience did tell him that
it would be well for him, as one of Christ's soldiers, to look out for companions of a different
stamp. But nevertheless he went to Chaldicotes, not satisfied with himself indeed, but repeating
to himself a great many arguments why he should be so satisfied.

He was shown into the drawing-room at once, and there he found Mrs. Harold Smith, with Mrs.
and Miss Proudie, and a lady whom he had never before seen, and whose name he did not at first
hear mentioned.

"Is that Mr. Robarts?" said Mrs. Harold Smith, getting up to greet him, and screening her pretended
ignorance under the veil of the darkness. "And have you really driven over four-and-twenty
miles of Barsetshire roads on such a day as this to assist us in our little difficulties? Well,
we can promise you gratitude at any rate." And then the vicar shook hands with Mrs. Proudie,
in that deferential manner which is due from a vicar to his bishop's wife; and Mrs. Proudie
returned the greeting with all that smiling condescension which a bishop's wife should show
to a vicar. Miss Proudie was not quite so civil. Had Mr. Robarts been still unmarried, she
also could have smiled sweetly; but she had been exercising smiles on clergymen too long to
waste them now on a married parish parson.

"And what are the difficulties, Mrs. Smith, in which I am to assist you?"

"We have six or seven gentlemen here, Mr. Robarts, and they always go out hunting before breakfast,
and they never come back--I was going to say--till after dinner. I wish it were so, for then
we should not have to wait for them."

"Excepting Mr. Supplehouse, you know," said the unknown lady, in a loud voice.

"And he is generally shut up in the library, writing articles."

"He'd be better employed if he were trying to break his neck like the others," said the unknown
lady.

"Only he would never succeed," says Mrs. Harold Smith. "But perhaps, Mr. Robarts, you are as
bad as the rest; perhaps you, too, will be hunting to-morrow."

"My dear Mrs. Smith!" said Mrs. Proudie, in a tone denoting slight reproach, and modified horror.

"Oh! I forgot. No, of course, you won't be hunting, Mr. Robarts; you'll only be wishing that
you could."

"Why can't he?" said the lady, with a loud voice.

"My dear Miss Dunstable! a clergyman hunt, while he is staying in the same house with the bishop?
Think of the proprieties!"

"Oh--ah! The bishop wouldn't like it--wouldn't he? Now, do tell me, sir, what would the bishop
do to you if you did hunt?"

"It would depend upon his mood at the time, madam," said Mr. Robarts. "If that were very stern,
he might perhaps have me beheaded before the palace gates."

Mrs. Proudie drew herself up in her chair, showing that she did not like the tone of the conversation;
and Miss Proudie fixed her eyes vehemently on her book, showing that Miss Dunstable and her
conversation were both beneath her notice.

"If these gentlemen do not mean to break their necks to-night," said Mrs. Harold Smith, "I
wish they'd let us know it. It's half-past six already." And then Mr. Robarts gave them to
understand that no such catastrophe could be looked for that day, as Mr. Sowerby and the other
sportsmen were within the stable-yard when he entered the door.

"Then, ladies, we may as well dress," said Mrs. Harold Smith. But as she moved towards the
door, it opened, and a short gentleman, with a slow, quiet step, entered the room; but was
not yet to be distinguished through the dusk by the eyes of Mr. Robarts. "Oh! bishop, is that
you?" said Mrs. Smith. "Here is one of the luminaries of your diocese." And then the bishop,
feeling through the dark, made his way up to the vicar and shook him cordially by the hand.
"He was delighted to meet Mr. Robarts at Chaldicotes," he said--"quite delighted. Was he not
going to preach on behalf of the Papuan Mission next Sunday? Ah! so he, the bishop, had heard.
It was a good work, an excellent work." And then Dr. Proudie expressed himself as much grieved
that he could not remain at Chaldicotes, and hear the sermon. It was plain that his bishop
thought no ill of him on account of his intimacy with Mr. Sowerby. But then he felt in his
own heart that he did not much regard his bishop's opinion.

"Ah, Robarts, I'm delighted to see you," said Mr. Sowerby, when they met on the drawing-room
rug before dinner. "You know Harold Smith? Yes, of course you do. Well, who else is there?
Oh! Supplehouse. Mr. Supplehouse, allow me to introduce to you my friend Mr. Robarts. It is
he who will extract the five-pound note out of your pocket next Sunday for these poor Papuans
whom we are going to Christianize. That is, if Harold Smith does not finish the work out of
hand at his Saturday lecture. By no means sea-faring men, having mainly been accustomed to village
life, we had some misgivings when we boarded the s.s. St. Magnus at eight o'clock in the evening,
and our sensations during the night were such as are common to what the sailors call "land-lubbers."
We were fortunate, however, in forming the acquaintance of a lively young Scot, who was also
bound for Wick, and who cheered us during the night by giving us
copious selections from Scotland's favourite bard, of whom he was
greatly enamoured.

 Of the former he was not very fond, and, in spite of his host's petition,
was not inclined to play bachelor parson for her benefit. With the other lady he would willingly
have chatted during the dinner, only that everybody else at table seemed to be intent on doing
the same thing. She was neither young, nor beautiful, nor peculiarly ladylike; yet she seemed
to enjoy a popularity which must have excited the envy of Mr. Supplehouse, and which certainly
was not altogether to the taste of Mrs. Proudie--who, however, fêted her as much as did the
others. So that our clergyman found himself unable to obtain more than an inconsiderable share
of the lady's attention.

"Bishop," said she, speaking across the table, "we have missed you so all day! we have had
no one on earth to say a word to us."

"My dear Miss Dunstable, had I known that-- But I really was engaged on business of some importance."

"I don't believe in business of importance; do you, Mrs. Smith?"

"Do I not?" said Mrs. Smith. "If you were married to Mr. Harold Smith for one week, you'd believe
in it."

"Should I, now? What a pity that I can't have that chance of improving my faith! But you are
a man of business, also, Mr. Supplehouse; so they tell me." And she turned to her neighbour
on her right hand.

"I cannot compare myself to Harold Smith," said he. "But perhaps I may equal the bishop."

"What does a man do, now, when he sits himself down to business? How does he set about it?
What are his tools? A quire of blotting paper, I suppose, to begin with?"

"That depends, I should say, on his trade. A shoemaker begins by waxing his thread."

"And Mr. Harold Smith--?"

"By counting up his yesterday's figures, generally, I should say; or else by unrolling a ball
of red tape. Well-docketed papers and statistical facts are his forte."

"And what does a bishop do? Can you tell me that?"

"He sends forth to his clergy either blessings or blowings-up, according to the state of his
digestive organs. But Mrs. Proudie can explain all that to you with the greatest accuracy."

"Can she now? I understand what you mean, but I don't believe a word of it. The bishop manages
his own affairs himself, quite as much as you do, or Mr. Harold Smith."

"I, Miss Dunstable?"

"Yes, you."

"But I, unluckily, have not a wife to manage them for me."

"Then you should not laugh at those who have, for you don't know what you may come to yourself,
when you're married."

Mr. Supplehouse began to make a pretty speech, saying that he would be delighted to incur any
danger in that respect to which he might be subjected by the companionship of Miss Dunstable.
But before he was half through it, she had turned her back upon him, and begun a conversation
with Mark Robarts.

"Have you much work in your parish, Mr. Robarts?" she asked. Now, Mark was not aware that she
knew his name, or the fact of his having a parish, and was rather surprised by the question.
And he had not quite liked the tone in which she had seemed to speak of the bishop and his
work. His desire for her further acquaintance was therefore somewhat moderated, and he was
not prepared to answer her question with much zeal.

"All parish clergymen have plenty of work, if they choose to do it."

"Ah, that is it; is it not, Mr. Robarts? If they choose to do it? A great many do--many that
I know, do; and see what a result they have. But many neglect it--and see what a result they
have. I think it ought to be the happiest life that a man can lead, that of a parish clergyman,
with a wife and family and a sufficient income."

