"But that war," said the cynic, "may soon be brought to a conclusion, and your adventures close
in Bridewell, provided you meet with some determined constable, who will seize your worship
as a vagrant, according to the statute."  "Heaven and earth!" cried the stranger, starting
up, and laying his hand on his sword, "do I live to hear myself insulted with such an opprobrious
epithet, and refrain from trampling into dust the insolent calumniator?"

The tone in which these words were pronounced, and the indignation that flashed from the eyes
of the speaker, intimidated every individual of the society, and reduced Ferret to a temporary
privation of all his faculties.  His eyes retired within their sockets; his complexion, which
was naturally of a copper hue, now shifted to a leaden colour; his teeth began to chatter;
and all his limbs were agitated by a sudden palsy.  The knight observed his condition, and
resumed his seat, saying, "I was to blame; my vengeance must be reserved for very different
objects.  Friend, you have nothing to fear--the sudden gust of passion is now blown over. Recollect
yourself, and I will reason calmly on the observation you have made."

This was a very seasonable declaration to Mr. Ferret, who opened his eyes, and wiped his forehead,
while the other proceeded in these terms: "You say I am in danger of being apprehended as a
vagrant.  I am not so ignorant of the laws of my country, but that I know the description of
those who fall within the legal meaning of this odious term.  You must give me leave to inform
you, friend, that I am neither bearward, fencer, stroller, gipsy, mountebank, nor mendicant;
nor do I practise subtle craft, to deceive and impose upon the king's lieges; nor can I be
held as an idle disorderly person, travelling from place to place, collecting monies by virtue
of counterfeited passes, briefs, and other false pretences; in what respect, therefore, am
I to be deemed a vagrant? Answer boldly without fear or scruple."

To this interrogation the misanthrope replied, with a faltering accent, "If not a vagrant,
you incur the penalty for riding armed in affray of the peace."  "But, instead of riding armed
in affray of the peace," resumed the other, "I ride in preservation of the peace; and gentlemen
are allowed by the law to wear armour for their defence.  Some ride with blunderbusses, some
with pistols, some with swords, according to their various inclinations.  Mine is to wear the
armour of my forefathers. Perhaps I use them for exercise, in order to accustom myself to fatigue,
and strengthen my constitution; perhaps I assume them for a frolic."

"But if you swagger, armed and in disguise, assault me on the highway, or put me in bodily
fear for the sake of the jest, the law will punish you in earnest," cried the other.  "But
my intention," answered the knight, "is carefully to avoid all those occasions of offence."
"Then," said Ferret, "you may go unarmed, like other sober people."  "Not so," answered the
knight; "as I propose to travel all times, and in all places, mine armour may guard me against
the attempts of treachery; it may defend me in combat against odds, should I be assaulted by
a multitude, or have occasion to bring malefactors to justice."

"What, then," exclaimed the philosopher, "you intend to co-operate with the honourable fraternity
of thief-takers?"  "I do purpose," said the youth, eyeing him with a look of ineffable contempt,
"to act as a coadjutator to the law, and even to remedy evils which the law cannot reach; to
detect fraud and treason, abase insolence, mortify pride, discourage slander, disgrace immodesty,
and stigmatise ingratitude, but the infamous part of a thief-catcher's character I disclaim.
I neither associate with robbers and pickpockets, knowing them to be such, that, in being intrusted
with their secrets, I may the more effectually betray them; nor shall I ever pocket the reward
granted by the legislature to those by whom robbers are brought to conviction; but I shall
always think it my duty to rid my country of that pernicious vermin, which prey upon the bowels
of the commonwealth--not but that an incorporated company of licensed thieves might, under
proper regulations, be of service to the community."

Ferret, emboldened by the passive tameness with which the stranger bore
his last reflection, began to think he had nothing of Hector but his
outside, and gave a loose to all the acrimony of his party rancour.
Hearing the knight mention a company of licensed thieves, "What else,"
cried he, "is the majority of the nation?  What is your standing army at
home, that eat up their fellow-subjects?  What are your mercenaries
abroad, whom you hire to fight their own quarrels?  What is your militia,
that wise measure of a sagacious ministry, but a larger gang of petty
thieves, who steal sheep and poultry through mere idleness; and were
they confronted with an enemy, would steal themselves away?  What is your
 .  .  .  but a knot of thieves, who pillage the nation under colour of
law, and enrich themselves with the wreck of their country?  When you
consider the enormous debt of above an hundred millions, the intolerable
load of taxes and impositions under which we groan, and the manner in
which that burden is yearly accumulating, to support two German
electorates, without our receiving anything in return, but the shows of
triumph and shadows of conquest;--I say, when you reflect on these
circumstances, and at the same time behold our cities filled with
bankrupts, and our country with beggars, can you be so infatuated as to
deny that the ministry is mad, or worse than mad--our wealth exhausted,
our people miserable, our credit blasted, and our state on the brink of
perdition?  This prospect, indeed, will make the fainter impression, if
we recollect that we ourselves are a pack of such profligate, corrupted,
pusillanimous rascals, as deserve no salvation."

The stranger, raising his voice to a loud tone, replied, "Such, indeed, are the insinuations,
equally false and insidious, with which the desperate emissaries of a party endeavour to poison
the minds of his majesty's subjects, in defiance of common honesty and common sense.  But he
must be blind to all perception, and dead to candour, who does not see and own that we are
involved in a just and necessary war, which has been maintained on truly British principles,
prosecuted with vigour, and crowned with success; that our taxes are easy, in proportion to
our wealth; that our conquests are equally glorious and important; that our commerce flourishes,
our people are happy, and our enemies reduced to despair.  Is there a man who boasts a British
heart, that repines at the success and prosperity of his country?  Such there are, (Oh, shame
to patriotism, and reproach to Great Britain!) who act as the emissaries of France, both in
word and writing; who exaggerate our necessary burdens, magnify our dangers, extol the power
of our enemies, deride our victories, extenuate our conquests, condemn the measures of our
government, and scatter the seeds of dissatisfaction through the land. Such domestic traitors
are doubly the objects of detestation;--first, in perverting truth; and, secondly, in propagating
falsehood, to the prejudice of that community of which they have professed themselves members.
One of these is well known by the name of Ferret, an old, rancorous, incorrigible instrument
of sedition.  Happy it is for him that he has never fallen in my way; for, notwithstanding
the maxims of forbearance which I have adopted, the indignation which the character of that
caitiff inspires, would probably impel me to some act of violence, and I should crush him like
an ungrateful viper, that gnawed the bosom which warmed it into life!"

These last words were pronounced with a wildness of look, that even bordered upon frenzy. 
The misanthrope once more retired to the pantry for shelter, and the rest of the guests were
evidently disconcerted.

Mr. Fillet, in order to change the conversation, which was likely to produce serious consequences,
expressed uncommon satisfaction at the remarks which the knight had made, signified his approbation
of the honourable office he had undertaken, declared himself happy in having seen such an accomplished
cavalier, and observed, that nothing was wanting to render him a complete knight-errant, but
some celebrated beauty, the mistress of his heart, whose idea might animate his breast, and
strengthen his arm to the utmost exertion of valour.  He added, that love was the soul of chivalry.

The stranger started at this discourse.  He turned his eyes on the surgeon with a fixed regard;
his countenance changed; a torrent of tears gushed down his cheeks; his head sunk upon his
bosom; he heaved a profound sigh, and remained in silence with all the external marks of unutterable
sorrow.  The company were, in some measure, infected by his despondence, concerning the cause
of which, however, they would not venture to inquire.

By this time the landlady, having disposed of the squire, desired to know, with many curtsies,
if his honour would not choose to put off his wet garments, assuring him, that she had a very
good feather bed at his service, upon which many gentlevolks of the virst quality had lain,
that the sheets were well aired, and that Dolly would warm them for his worship with a pan
of coals.  This hospitable offer being repeated, he seemed to wake from a trance of grief,
arose from his seat, and, bowing courteously to the company, withdrew.

Captain Crowe, whose faculty of speech had been all this time absorbed in amazement, now broke
into the conversation with a volley of interjections.

Here he was interrupted by his nephew, Tom Clarke, who had disappeared at the knight's first
entrance, and now produced himself with an eagerness in his look, while the tears stared in
his eyes.--"Lord bless my soul!" cried he, "I know that gentleman, and his servant, as well
as I know my own father!--I am his own godson, uncle; he stood for me when he was a boy--yes,
indeed, sir, my father was steward to the estate--I may say I was bred up in the family of
Sir Everhard Greaves, who has been dead these two years--this is the only son, Sir Launcelot;
the best-natured, worthy, generous gentleman--I care not who knows it.  I love him as well
as if he was my own flesh and blood."

At this period, Tom, whose heart was of the melting mood, began to sob and weep plenteously,
from pure affection.  Crowe, who was not very subject to these tendernesses, d---ed him for
a chicken-hearted lubber; repeating, with much peevishness, "What dost cry for? what dost cry
for, noddy?"  The surgeon, impatient to know the story of Sir Launcelot, which he had heard
imperfectly recounted, begged that Mr. Clarke would compose himself, and relate it as circumstantially
as his memory would retain the particulars; and Tom, wiping his eyes, promised to give him
that satisfaction; which the reader, if he be so minded, may partake in the next chapter.

CHAPTER THREE

WHICH THE READER, ON PERUSAL, MAY WISH WERE CHAPTER THE LAST.

The doctor prescribed a repetatur of the julep, and mixed the ingredients, secundum artem;
Tom Clarke hemmed thrice, to clear his pipes; while the rest of the company, including Dolly
and her mother, who had by this time administered to the knight, composed themselves into earnest
and hushed attention.  Then the young lawyer began his narrative to this effect:--

"I tell ye what, gemmen, I don't pretend in this here case to flourish and harangue like a--having
never been called to--but what of that, d'ye see? perhaps I may know as much as--facts are
facts, as the saying is.--I shall tell, repeat, and relate a plain story--matters of fact,
d'ye see, without rhetoric, oratory, ornament, or embellishment; without repetition, tautology,
circumlocution, or going about the bush; facts which I shall aver, partly on the testimony
of my own knowledge, and partly from the information of responsible evidences of good repute
and credit, any circumstance known to the contrary notwithstanding.--For as the law saith,
if so be as how there is an exception to evidence, that exception is in its nature but a denial
of what is taken to be good by the other party, and exceptio in non exceptis, firmat regulam,
d'ye see. --But howsomever, in regard to this here affair, we need not be so scrupulous as
if we were pleading before a judge sedente curia."

Ferret, whose curiosity was rather more eager than that of any other person in this audience,
being provoked by this preamble, dashed the pipe he had just filled in pieces against the grate;
and after having pronounced the interjection pish! with an acrimony of aspect altogether peculiar
to himself, "If," said he, "impertinence and folly were felony by the statute, there would
be no warrant of unexceptionable evidence to hang such an eternal babbler."  "Anan, babbler!"
cried Tom, reddening with passion, and starting up; "I'd have you to know, sir, that I can
bite as well as babble; and that, if I am so minded, I can run upon the foot after my game
without being in fault, as the saying is; and, which is more, I can shake an old fox by the
collar."

How far this young lawyer might have proceeded to prove himself staunch on the person of the
misanthrope, if he had not been prevented, we shall not determine; but the whole company were
alarmed at his looks and expressions.  Dolly's rosy cheeks assumed an ash colour, while she
ran between the disputants, crying, "Naay, naay--vor the love of God doan't then, doan't then!"
But Captain Crowe exerted a parental authority over his nephew, saying, "Avast, Tom, avast!--Snug's
the word--we'll have no boarding, d'ye see.--Haul forward thy chair again, take thy berth,
and proceed with thy story in a direct course, without yawing like a Dutch yanky."

Tom, thus tutored, recollected himself, resumed his seat, and, after some pause, plunged at
once into the current of narration.  "I told you before, gemmen, that the gentleman in armour
was the only son of Sir Everhard Greaves, who possessed a free estate of five thousand a year
in our country, and was respected by all his neighbours as much for his personal merit as for
his family fortune.  With respect to his son Launcelot, whom you have seen, I can remember
nothing until he returned from the university, about the age of seventeen, and then I myself
was not more than ten years old.  The young gemman was at that time in mourning for his mother;
though, God knows, Sir Everhard had more cause to rejoice than to be afflicted at her death:--for,
among friends" (here he lowered his voice, and looked round the kitchen), "she was very whimsical,
expensive, ill-tempered, and, I'm afraid, a little--upon the-- flightly order--a little touched
or so;--but mum for that--the lady is now dead; and it is my maxim, de mortuis nil nisi bonum.
The young squire was even then very handsome, and looked remarkably well in his weepers; but
he had an awkward air and shambling gait, stooped mortally, and was so shy and silent that
he would not look a stranger in the face, nor open his mouth before company.  Whenever he spied
a horse or carriage at the gate, he would make his escape into the garden, and from thence
into the park; where many is the good time and often he has been found sitting under a tree,
with a book in his hand, reading Greek, Latin, and other foreign linguas.

"Sir Everhard himself was no great scholar, and my father had forgot his classical learning;
and so the rector of the parish was desired to examine young Launcelot.  It was a long time
before he found an opportunity; the squire always gave him the slip.--At length the parson
catched him in bed of a morning, and, locking the door, to it they went tooth and nail.  What
passed betwixt them the Lord in heaven knows; but when the doctor came forth, he looked wild
and haggard as if he had seen a ghost, his face as white as paper, and his lips trembling like
an aspen-leaf.  'Parson,' said the knight, 'what is the matter?--how dost find my son?  I hope
he won't turn out a ninny, and disgrace his family?' The doctor, wiping the sweat from his
forehead, replied, with some hesitation, 'he could not tell--he hoped the best--the squire
was to be sure a very extraordinary young gentleman.'--But the father urging him to give an
explicit answer, he frankly declared, that, in his opinion, the son would turn out either a
mirror of wisdom, or a monument of folly; for his genius and disposition were altogether preternatural.
The knight was sorely vexed at this declaration, and signified his displeasure by saying, the
doctor, like a true priest, dealt in mysteries and oracles, that would admit of different and
indeed contrary interpretations.  He afterwards consulted my father, who had served as a steward
upon the estate for above thirty years, and acquired a considerable share of his favour.  'Will
Clarke,' said he, with tears in his eyes, 'what shall I do with this unfortunate lad?  I would
to God he had never been born; for I fear he will bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave.
When I am gone, he will throw away the estate, and bring himself to infamy and ruin, by keeping
company with rooks and beggars.--O Will! I could forgive extravagance in a young man; but it
breaks my heart to see my only son give such repeated proofs of a mean spirit and sordid disposition!'

"Here the old gentleman shed a flood of tears, and not without some shadow of reason.  By this
time Launcelot was grown so reserved to his father, that he seldom saw him or any of his relations,
except when he was in a manner forced to appear at table, and there his bashfulness seemed
every day to increase.  On the other hand, he had formed some very strange connexions.  Every
morning he visited the stable, where he not only conversed with the grooms and helpers, but
scraped acquaintance with the horses; he fed his favourites with his own hand, stroked, caressed,
and rode them by turns; till at last they grew so familiar, that, even when they were a-field
at grass, and saw him at a distance, they would toss their manes, whinny like so many colts
at sight of the dam, and, galloping up to the place where he stood, smell him all over.

"You must know that I myself, though a child, was his companion in all these excursions.  He
took a liking to me on account of my being his godson, and gave me more money than I knew what
to do with.  He had always plenty of cash for the asking, as my father was ordered to supply
him liberally, the knight thinking that a command of money might help to raise his thoughts
to a proper consideration of his own importance.  He never could endure a common beggar, that
was not either in a state of infancy or of old age; but, in other respects, he made the guineas
fly in such a manner, as looked more like madness than generosity.  He had no communication
with your rich yeomen, but rather treated them and their families with studied contempt, because
forsooth they pretended to assume the dress and manners of the gentry.

"They kept their footmen, their saddle horses, and chaises; their wives and daughters appeared
in their jewels, their silks, and their satins, their negligees and trollopees; their clumsy
shanks, like so many shins of beef, were cased in silk hose and embroidered slippers; their
raw red fingers, gross as the pipes of a chamber organ, which had been employed in milking
the cows, in twirling the mop or churn-staff, being adorned with diamonds, were taught to thrum
the pandola, and even to touch the keys of the harpsichord!  Nay, in every village they kept
a rout, and set up an assembly; and in one place a hog-butcher was master of the ceremonies.

"I have heard Mr. Greaves ridicule them for their vanity and awkward imitation; and therefore,
I believe, he avoided all concerns with them, even when they endeavoured to engage his attention.
It was the lower sort of people with whom he chiefly conversed, such as ploughmen, ditchers,
and other day-labourers.  To every cottager in the parish he was a bounteous benefactor.  He
was, in the literal sense of the word, a careful overseer of the poor; for he went from house
to house, industriously inquiring into the distresses of the people.  He repaired their huts,
clothed their backs, filled their bellies, and supplied them with necessaries for exercising
their industry and different occupations.

"I'll give you one instance now, as a specimen of his character:--He and I, strolling one day
on the side of a common, saw two boys picking hips and haws from the hedges; one seemed to
be about five, and the other a year older; they were both barefoot and ragged, but at the same
time fat, fair, and in good condition.  'Who do you belong to?' said Mr. Greaves. 'To Mary
Stile,' replied the oldest, 'the widow that rents one of them housen.'  'And how dost live,
my boy?  Thou lookest fresh and jolly,' resumed the squire.  'Lived well enough till yesterday,'
answered the child.  'And pray what happened yesterday, my boy?' continued Mr. Greaves.  'Happened!'
said he, 'why, mammy had a coople of little Welsh keawes, that gi'en milk enough to fill all
our bellies; mammy's, and mine, and Dick's here, and my two little sisters' at hoam:--Yesterday
the squire seized the keawes for rent, God rot'un!  Mammy's gone to bed sick and sulky; my
two sisters be crying at hoam vor vood; and Dick and I be come hither to pick haws and bullies.'

"My godfather's face grew red as scarlet; he took one of the children in either hand, and leading
them towards the house, found Sir Everhard talking with my father before the gate.  Instead
of avoiding the old gentleman, as usual, he brushed up to him with a spirit he had never shown
before, and presenting the two ragged boys, 'Surely, sir,' said he, 'you will not countenance
that there ruffian, your steward, in oppressing the widow and fatherless?  On pretence of distraining
for the rent of a cottage, he has robbed the mother of these and other poor infant-orphans
of two cows, which afforded them their whole sustenance.  Shall you be concerned in tearing
the hard-earned morsel from the mouth of indigence? Shall your name, which has been so long
mentioned as a blessing, be now detested as a curse by the poor, the helpless, and forlorn?
The father of these babes was once your gamekeeper, who died of a consumption caught in your
service.--You see they are almost naked--I found them plucking haws and sloes, in order to
appease their hunger.  The wretched mother is starving in a cold cottage, distracted with the
cries of other two infants, clamorous for food; and while her heart is bursting with anguish
and despair, she invokes Heaven to avenge the widow's cause upon the head of her unrelenting
landlord!'

"This unexpected address brought tears into the eyes of the good old gentleman.  'Will Clarke,'
said he to my father, 'how durst you abuse my authority at this rate?  You who know I have
always been a protector, not an oppressor of the needy and unfortunate.  I charge you, go immediately
and comfort this poor woman with immediate relief; instead of her own cows, let her have two
of the best milch cows of my dairy; they shall graze in my parks in summer, and be foddered
with my hay in winter.--She shall sit rent-free for life; and I will take care of these her
poor orphans.'

"This was a very affecting scene.  Mr. Launcelot took his father's hand and kissed it, while
the tears ran down his cheeks; and Sir Everhard embraced his son with great tenderness, crying,
'My dear boy!  God be praised for having given you such a feeling heart.'  My father himself
was moved, thof a practitioner of the law, and consequently used to distresses.--He declared,
that he had given no directions to distrain; and that the bailiff must have done it by his
own authority.--'If that be the case,' said the young squire, 'let the inhuman rascal be turned
out of our service.'

"Well, gemmen, all the children were immediately clothed and fed, and the poor widow had well-nigh
run distracted with joy.  The old knight, being of a humane temper himself, was pleased to
see such proofs of his son's generosity.  He was not angry at his spending his money, but at
squandering away his time among the dregs of the people.  For you must know, he not only made
matches, portioned poor maidens, and set up young couples that came together without money;
but he mingled in every rustic diversion, and bore away the prize in every contest.  He excelled
every swain of that district in feats of strength and activity; in leaping, running, wrestling,
cricket, cudgel-playing, and pitching the bar; and was confessed to be, out of sight, the best
dancer at all wakes and holidays.  Happy was the country-girl who could engage the young squire
as her partner!  To be sure, it was a comely sight for to see as how the buxom country-lasses,
fresh and fragrant and blushing like the rose, in their best apparel dight, their white hose,
and clean short dimity petticoats, their gaudy gowns of printed cotton; their top-knots and
stomachers, bedizened with bunches of ribbons of various colours, green, pink, and yellow;
to see them crowned with garlands, and assembled on Mayday, to dance before Squire Launcelot,
as he made his morning's progress through the village.  Then all the young peasants made their
appearance with cockades, suited to the fancies of their several sweethearts, and boughs of
flowering hawthorn.  The children sported about like flocks of frisking lambs, or the young
fry swarming under the sunny bank of some meandering river.  The old men and women, in their
holiday garments, stood at their doors to receive their benefactor, and poured forth blessings
on him as he passed.  The children welcomed him with their shrill shouts, the damsels with
songs of praise, and the young men, with the pipe and tabor, marched before him to the May-pole,
which was bedecked with flowers and bloom.  There the rural dance began.  A plentiful dinner,
with oceans of good liquor, was bespoke at the White Hart.  The whole village was regaled at
the squire's expense; and both the day and the night was spent in mirth and pleasure.

"Lord help you! he could not rest if he thought there was an aching heart in the whole parish.
Every paltry cottage was in a little time converted into a pretty, snug, comfortable habitation,
with a wooden porch at the door, glass casements in the windows, and a little garden behind,
well stored with greens, roots, and salads.  In a word, the poor's rate was reduced to a mere
trifle; and one would have thought the golden age was revived in Yorkshire.  But, as I told
you before, the old knight could not bear to see his only son so wholly attached to these lowly
pleasures, while he industriously shunned all opportunities of appearing in that superior sphere
to which he was designed by nature and by fortune.  He imputed his conduct to meanness of spirit,
and advised with my father touching the properest expedient to wean his affections from such
low-born pursuits.  My father counselled him to send the young gentleman up to London, to be
entered as a student in the Temple, and recommended him to the superintendence of some person
who knew the town, and might engage him insensibly in such amusements and connexions, as would
soon lift his ideas above the humble objects on which they had been hitherto employed.

"This advice appeared so salutary, that it was followed without the least hesitation.  The
young squire himself was perfectly well satisfied with the proposal; and in a few days he set
out for the great city.  But there was not a dry eye in the parish at his departure, although
he prevailed upon his father to pay in his absence all the pensions he had granted to those
who could not live on the fruit of their own industry.  In what manner he spent his time in
London, it is none of my business to inquire; thof I know pretty well what kind of lives are
led by gemmen of your Inns of Court.--I myself once belonged to Serjeants' Inn, and was perhaps
as good a wit and a critic as any Templar of them all.  Nay, as for that matter, thof I despise
vanity, I can aver with a safe conscience, that I had once the honour to belong to the society
called the Town.  We were all of us attorney's clerks, gemmen, and had our meetings at an ale-house
in Butcher Row, where we regulated the diversions of the theatre.

"But to return from this digression.  Sir Everhard Greaves did not seem to be very well pleased
with the conduct of his son at London.  He got notice of some irregularities and scrapes into
which he had fallen; and the squire seldom wrote to his father, except to draw upon him for
money; which he did so fast, that in eighteen months the old gentleman lost all patience.

"At this period Squire Darnel chanced to die, leaving an only daughter, a minor, heiress of
three thousand a year under the guardianship of her uncle Anthony, whose brutal character all
the world knows.  The breath was no sooner out of his brother's body, than he resolved, if
possible, to succeed him in parliament as representative for the borough of Ashenton.  Now
you must know, that this borough had been for many years a bone of contention between the families
of Greaves and Darnel; and at length the difference was compromised by the interposition of
friends, on condition that Sir Everhard and Squire Darnel should alternately represent the
place in parliament.  They agreed to this compromise for their mutual convenience; but they
were never heartily reconciled.  Their political principles did not tally; and their wives
looked upon each other as rivals in fortune and magnificence.  So that there was no intercourse
between them, thof they lived in the same neighbourhood.  On the contrary, in all disputes,
they constantly headed the opposite parties.  Sir Everhard understanding that Anthony Darnel
had begun to canvass, and was putting every iron in the fire, in violation and contempt of
the pactum familiae before mentioned, fell into a violent passion, that brought on a severe
fit of the gout; by which he was disabled from giving personal attention to his own interest.
My father, indeed, employed all his diligence and address, and spared neither money, time,
nor constitution, till at length he drank himself into a consumption, which was the death of
him.  But, after all, there is a great difference between a steward and a principal.  Mr. Darnel
attended in propria persona, flattered and caressed the women, feasted the electors, hired
mobs, made processions, and scattered about his money in such a manner, that our friends durst
hardly show their heads in public.

"At this very crisis, our young squire, to whom his father had written an account of the transaction,
arrived unexpectedly at Greavesbury Hall, and had a long private conference with Sir Everhard.
The news of his return spread like wildfire through all that part of the country.  Bonfires
were made, and the bells set a-ringing in several towns and steeples; and next morning above
seven hundred people were assembled at the gate, with music, flags, and streamers, to welcome
their young squire, and accompany him to the borough of Ashenton.  He set out on foot with
his retinue, and entered one end of the town just as Mr. Darnel's mob had come in at the other.
Both arrived about the same time at the market-place; but Mr. Darnel, mounting first into the
balcony of the town-house, made a long speech to the people in favour of his own pretensions,
not without some invidious reflections glanced at Sir Everhard, his competitor.

"We did not much mind the acclamations of his party, which we knew had been hired for the purpose;
but we were in some pain for Mr. Greaves, who had not been used to speak in public.  He took
his turn, however, in the balcony, and, uncovering his head, bowed all round with the most
engaging courtesy.  He was dressed in a green frock, trimmed with gold, and his own dark hair
flowed about his ears in natural curls, while his face was overspread with a blush, that improved
the glow of youth to a deeper crimson; and I daresay set many a female heart a palpitating.
When he made his first appearance, there was just such a humming and clapping of hands as you
may have heard when the celebrated Garrick comes upon the stage in King Lear, or King Richard,
or any other top character.  But how agreeably were we disappointed, when our young gentleman
made such an oration as would not have disgraced a Pitt, an Egmont, or a Murray! while he spoke,
all was hushed in admiration and attention; you could have almost heard a feather drop to the
ground.  It would have charmed you to hear with what modesty he recounted the services which
his father and grandfather had done to the corporation; with what eloquence he expatiated upon
the shameful infraction of the treaty subsisting between the two families; and with what keen
and spirited strokes of satire he retorted the sarcasms of Darnel.

"He no sooner concluded his harangue, than there was such a burst of applause, as seemed to
rend the very sky.  Our music immediately struck up; our people advanced with their ensigns,
and, as every man had a good cudgel, broken heads would have ensued, had not Mr. Darnel and
his party thought proper to retreat with uncommon despatch.  He never offered to make another
public entrance, as he saw the torrent ran so violently against him; but sat down with his
loss, and withdrew his opposition, though at bottom extremely mortified and incensed.  Sir
Everhard was unanimously elected, and appeared to be the happiest man upon earth; for, besides
the pleasure arising from his victory over this competitor, he was now fully satisfied that
his son, instead of disgracing, would do honour to his family.  It would have moved a heart
of stone, to see with what a tender transport of paternal joy he received his dear Launcelot,
after having heard of his deportment and success at Ashenton; where, by the bye, he gave a
ball to the ladies, and displayed as much elegance and politeness, as if he had been bred at
the court of Versailles.

"This joyous season was of short duration.  In a little time all the happiness of the family
was overcast by a sad incident, which hath left such an unfortunate impression upon the mind
of the young gentleman, as, I am afraid, will never be effaced.  Mr. Darnel's niece and ward,
the great heiress, whose name is Aurelia, was the most celebrated beauty of the whole country;
if I said the whole kingdom, or indeed all Europe, perhaps I should barely do her justice.
I don't pretend to be a limner, gemmen; nor does it become me to delineate such excellence;
but surely I may presume to repeat from the play--

     Oh! she is all that painting can express,
     Or youthful poets fancy when they love?

"At that time she might be about seventeen, tall and fair, and so exquisitely shaped--you may
talk of your Venus de Medicis, your Dianas, your Nymphs, and Galateas; but if Praxiteles, and
Roubilliac, and Wilton, were to lay their heads together, in order to make a complete pattern
of beauty, they would hardly reach her model of perfection.--As for complexion, poets will
talk of blending the lily with the rose, and bring in a parcel of similes of cowslips, carnations,
pinks, and daisies.-- There's Dolly, now, has got a very good complexion.--Indeed, she's the
very picture of health and innocence--you are, indeed, my pretty lass;-- but parva componere
magnis.--Miss Darnel is all amazing beauty, delicacy, and dignity!  Then the softness and expression
of her fine blue eyes; her pouting lips of coral hue; her neck, that rises like a tower of
polished alabaster between two mounts of snow.  I tell you what, gemmen, it don't signify talking;
if e'er a one of you was to meet this young lady alone, in the midst of a heath or common,
or any unfrequented place, he would down on his knees, and think he kneeled before some supernatural
being. I'll tell you more: she not only resembles an angel in beauty, but a saint in goodness,
and an hermit in humility;--so void of all pride and affectation; so soft, and sweet, and affable,
and humane!  Lord! I could tell such instances of her charity!

"Sure enough, she and Sir Launcelot were formed by nature for each other. Howsoever, the cruel
hand of fortune hath intervened, and severed them for ever.  Every soul that knew them both,
said it was a thousand pities but they should come together, and extinguish, in their happy
union, the mutual animosity of the two families, which had so often embroiled the whole neighbourhood.
Nothing was heard but the praises of Miss Aurelia Darnel and Mr. Launcelot Greaves; and no
doubt the parties were prepossessed, by this applause, in favour of each other.  At length,
Mr. Greaves went one Sunday to her parish church; but, though the greater part of the congregation
watched their looks, they could not perceive that she took the least notice of him; or that
he seemed to be struck with her appearance.  He afterwards had an opportunity of seeing her,
more at leisure, at the York assembly, during the races; but this opportunity was productive
of no good effect, because he had that same day quarrelled with her uncle on the turf.

"An old grudge, you know, gemmen, is soon inflamed to a fresh rupture. It was thought Mr. Darnel
came on purpose to show his resentment.  They differed about a bet upon Miss Cleverlegs, and,
in the course of the dispute, Mr. Darnel called him a petulant boy.  The young squire, who
was as hasty as gunpowder, told him he was man enough to chastise him for his insolence; and
would do it on the spot, if he thought it would not interrupt the diversion.  In all probability
they would have come to points immediately, had not the gentlemen interposed; so that nothing
further passed, but abundance of foul language on the part of Mr. Anthony, and a repeated defiance
to single combat.

"Mr. Greaves, making a low bow, retired from the field; and in the evening danced at the assembly
with a young lady from the bishoprick, seemingly in good temper and spirits, without having
any words with Mr. Darnel, who was also present.  But in the morning he visited that proud
neighbour betimes; and they had almost reached a grove of trees on the north side of the town,
when they were suddenly overtaken by half a dozen gentlemen, who had watched their motions.
It was in vain for them to dissemble their design, which could not now take effect.  They gave
up their pistols, and a reconciliation was patched up by the pressing remonstrances of their
common friends; but Mr. Darnel's hatred still rankled at bottom, and soon broke out in the
sequel.  About three months after this transaction, his niece Aurelia, with her mother, having
been to visit a lady in the chariot, the horses being young, and not used to the traces, were
startled at the braying of a jackass on the common, and, taking fright, ran away with the carriage,
like lightning.  The coachman was thrown from the box, and the ladies screamed piteously for
help.  Mr. Greaves chanced to be a-horseback on the other side of an enclosure, when he heard
their shrieks; and riding up the hedge, knew the chariot, and saw their disaster.  The horses
were then running full speed in such a direction, as to drive headlong over a precipice into
a stone quarry, where they and the chariot, and the ladies, must be dashed to pieces.

"You may conceive, gemmen, what his thoughts were when he saw such a fine young lady, in the
flower of her age, just plunging into eternity; when he saw the lovely Aurelia on the brink
of being precipitated among rocks, where her delicate limbs must be mangled and tore asunder;
when he perceived, that, before he could ride round by the gate, the tragedy would be finished.
The fence was so thick and high, flanked with a broad ditch on the outside, that he could not
hope to clear it, although he was mounted on Scipio, bred out of Miss Cowslip, the sire Muley,
and his grandsire the famous Arabian Mustapha.--Scipio was bred by my father, who would not
have taken a hundred guineas for him, from any other person but the young squire--indeed, I
have heard my poor father say"----

By this time Ferret's impatience was become so outrageous, that he exclaimed in a furious tone,
"D--n your father, and his horse, and his colt into the bargain!"

Tom made no reply; but began to strip with great expedition.  Captain Crowe was so choked with
passion that he could utter nothing but disjointed sentences.  He rose from his seat, brandished
his horsewhip, and, seizing his nephew by the collar, cried, "Odd's heartlikins! sirrah, I
have a good mind--Devil fire your running tackle, you landlubber!-- can't you steer without
all this tacking hither and thither, and the Lord knows whither?--'Noint my block!  I'd give
thee a rope's end for thy supper if it wan't"----

Dolly had conceived a sneaking kindness for the young lawyer, and thinking him in danger of
being roughly handled, flew to his relief.  She twisted her hand in Crowe's neckcloth without
ceremony, crying, "Sha't then, I tell thee, old codger--who kears a vig vor thy voolish tantrums?"

While Crowe looked black in the face, and ran the risk of strangulation under the gripe of
this Amazon, Mr. Clarke having disengaged himself of his hat, wig, coat, and waistcoat, advanced
in an elegant attitude of manual offence towards the misanthrope, who snatched up a gridiron
from the chimney corner, and Discord seemed to clap her sooty wings in expectation of battle.
But as the reader may have more than once already cursed the unconscionable length of this
chapter, we must postpone to the next opportunity the incidents that succeeded this denunciation
of war.

CHAPTER FOUR

IN WHICH IT APPEARS THAT THE KNIGHT, WHEN HEARTILY SET IN FOR SLEEPING, WAS NOT EASILY DISTURBED.

In all probability the kitchen of the Black Lion, from a domestic temple of society and good
fellowship, would have been converted into a scene or stage of sanguinary dispute, had not
Pallas, or Discretion, interposed in the person of Mr. Fillet, and, with the assistance of
the ostler, disarmed the combatants, not only of their arms, but also of their resentment.

The impetuosity of Mr. Clarke was a little checked at sight of the gridiron, which Ferret brandished
with uncommon dexterity; a circumstance from whence the company were, upon reflection, induced
to believe, that before he plunged into the sea of politics, he had occasionally figured in
the character of that facetious droll, who accompanies your itinerant physicians, under the
familiar appellation of Merry-Andrew, or Jack-Pudding, and on a wooden stage entertains the
populace with a solo on the saltbox, or a sonata on the tongs and gridiron.  Be that as it
may, the young lawyer seemed to be a little discomposed at the glancing of this extraordinary
weapon of offence, which the fair hands of Dolly had scoured, until it had shone as bright
as the shield of Achilles; or as the emblem of good old English fare, which hangs by a red
ribbon round the neck of that thrice-honoured sage's head, in velvet bonnet cased, who presides
by rotation at the genial board, distinguished by the title of the Beef-steak Club where the
delicate rumps irresistibly attract the stranger's eye, and, while they seem to cry, "Come
cut me--come cut me," constrain, by wondrous sympathy, each mouth to overflow.  Where the obliging
and humorous Jemmy B----t, the gentle Billy H----d, replete with human kindness, and the generous
Johnny B----d, respected and beloved by all the world, attend as the priests and ministers
of mirth, good cheer, and jollity, and assist with culinary art the raw, unpractised, awkward
guest.

But to return from this digressive simile.  The ostler no sooner stept between those menacing
antagonists, than Tom Clarke very quietly resumed his clothes, and Mr. Ferret resigned the
gridiron without further question.  The doctor did not find it quite so easy to release the
throat of Captain Crowe from the masculine grasp of the virago Dolly, whose fingers could not
be disengaged until the honest seaman was almost at the last gasp.  After some pause, during
which he panted for breath, and untied his neckcloth, "D--n thee, for a brimstone galley,"
cried he; "I was never so grappled withal since I knew a card from a compass.-- Adzooks! the
jade has so tautened my rigging, d'ye see, that I--Snatch my bowlines, if I come athwart thy
hawser, I'll turn thy keel upwards--or mayhap set thee a-driving under thy bare poles--I will--I
will, you hell-fire, saucy--I will."

Dolly made no reply; but seeing Mr. Clarke sit down again with great composure, took her station
likewise at the opposite side of the apartment.  Then Mr. Fillet requested the lawyer to proceed
with his story, which, after three hems, he accordingly prosecuted in these words:

"I told you, gemmen, that Mr. Greaves was mounted on Scipio, when he saw Miss Darnel and her
mother in danger of being hurried over a precipice. Without reflecting a moment, he gave Scipio
the spur, and at one spring he cleared five-and-twenty feet, over hedge and ditch and every
obstruction.  Then he rode full speed, in order to turn the coach-horses; and, finding them
quite wild and furious, endeavoured to drive against the counter of the hither horse, which
he missed, and staked poor Scipio on the pole of the coach.  The shock was so great, that the
coach-horses made a full stop within ten yards of the quarry, and Mr. Greaves was thrown forwards
towards the coach-box, which mounting with admirable dexterity, he seized the reins before
the horses could recover of their fright.  At that instant the coachman came running up, and
loosed them from the traces with the utmost despatch.  Mr. Greaves had now time to give his
attention to the ladies, who were well-nigh distracted with fear.  He no sooner opened the
chariot door than Aurelia, with a wildness of look, sprung into his arms, and, clasping him
round the neck, fainted away.  I leave you to guess, gemmen, what were his feelings at this
instant.  The mother was not so discomposed, but that she could contribute to the recovery
of her daughter, whom the young squire still supported in his embrace.  At length she retrieved
the use of her senses, and, perceiving the situation in which she was, the blood revisited
her face with a redoubled glow, while she desired him to set her down upon the turf.

"Mrs. Darnel, far from being shy or reserved in her compliments of acknowledgments, kissed
Mr. Launcelot without ceremony, the tears of gratitude running down her cheeks; she called
him her dear son, her generous deliverer, who, at the hazard of his own life, had saved her
and her child from the most dismal fate that could be imagined.

"Mr. Greaves was so much transported on this occasion, that he could not help disclosing a
passion, which he had hitherto industriously concealed. 'What I have done,' said he, 'was but
a common office of humanity, which I would have performed for any of my fellow-creatures; but
for the preservation of Miss Aurelia Darnel, I would at any time sacrifice my life with pleasure.'
The young lady did not hear this declaration unmoved.  Her face was again flushed, and her
eyes sparkled with pleasure.  Nor was the youth's confession disagreeable to the good lady,
her mother, who, at one glance, perceived all the advantages of such an union between the two
families.

"Mr. Greaves proposed to send the coachman to his father's stable for a pair of sober horses,
that could be depended upon, to draw the ladies home to their own habitation; but they declined
the offer, and chose to walk, as the distance was not great.  He then insisted upon his being
their conductor; and, each taking him under the arm, supported them to their own gate, where
such an apparition filled all the domestics with astonishment.  Mrs. Darnel taking him by the
hand, led him into the house, where she welcomed him with another affectionate embrace, and
indulged him with an ambrosial kiss of Aurelia, saying, 'But for you, we had both been by this
time in eternity.  Sure it was Heaven that sent you as an angel to our assistance!'  She kindly
inquired if he had himself sustained any damage in administering that desperate remedy to which
they owed their lives.  She entertained him with a small collation; and, in the course of the
conversation, lamented the animosity which had so long divided two neighbouring families of
such influence and character.  He was not slow in signifying his approbation of her remarks,
and expressing the most eager desire of seeing all those unhappy differences removed. In a
word, they parted with mutual satisfaction.

"Just as he advanced from the outward gate, on his return to Greavesbury Hall, he was met by
Anthony Darnel on horseback, who, riding up to him with marks of surprise and resentment, saluted
him with, 'Your servant, sir.--Have you any commands for me?'  The other replying with an air
of indifference, 'None at all,'--Mr. Darnel asked, what had procured him the honour of a visit.
The young gentleman, perceiving by the manner in which he spoke, that the old quarrel was not
yet extinguished, answered with equal disdain, that the visit was not intended for him; and
that, if he wanted to know the cause of it, he might inform himself by his own servants.  'So
I shall,' cried the uncle of Aurelia; 'and perhaps let you know my sentiments of the matter.'--'Hereafter
as it may be,' said the youth; who, turning out of the avenue, walked home, and made his father
acquainted with the particulars of this adventure.

"The old gentleman chid him for his rashness; but seemed pleased with the success of his attempt;
and still more so, when he understood his sentiments of Aurelia, and the deportment of the ladies.

"Next day the son sent over a servant with a compliment to inquire about their health; and
the messenger, being seen by Mr. Darnel, was told that the ladies were indisposed, and did
not choose to be troubled with messages.  The mother was really seized with a fever, produced
by the agitation of her spirits, which every day became more and more violent, until the physicians
despaired of her life.  Believing that her end approached, she sent a trusty servant to Mr.
Greaves, desiring that she might see him without delay; and he immediately set out with the
messenger, who introduced him in the dark.

"He found the old lady in bed almost exhausted, and the fair Aurelia sitting by her overwhelmed
with grief, her lovely hair in the utmost disorder, and her charming eyes inflamed with weeping.
The good lady beckoning Mr. Launcelot to approach, and directing all the attendants to quit
the room, except a favourite maid, from whom I learned the story, she took him by the hand,
and fixing her eyes upon him with all the fondness of a mother, shed some tears in silence,
while the same marks of sorrow trickled down his cheeks.  After this affecting pause, 'My dear
son,' said she, 'Oh! that I could have lived to see you so indeed! you find me hastening to
the goal of life.'  Here the tender-hearted Aurelia, being unable to contain herself longer,
broke out into a violent passion of grief, and wept aloud.  The mother, waiting patiently till
she had thus given vent to her anguish, calmly entreated her to resign herself submissively
to the will of Heaven; then turning to Mr. Launcelot, 'I had indulged,' said she, 'a fond hope
of seeing you allied to my family. This is no time for me to insist upon the ceremonies and
forms of a vain world.  Aurelia looks upon you with the eyes of tender prepossession.' No sooner
had she pronounced these words than he threw himself on his knees before the young lady, and
pressing her hand to his lips, breathed the softest expressions which the most delicate love
could suggest.  'I know,' resumed the mother, 'that your passion is mutually sincere, and I
should die satisfied if I thought your union would not be opposed; but that violent man, my
brother-in-law, who is Aurelia's sole guardian, will thwart her wishes with every obstacle
that brutal resentment and implacable malice can contrive.  Mr. Greaves, I have long admired
your virtues, and am confident that I can depend upon your honour.  You shall give me your
word, that when I am gone you will take no steps in this affair without the concurrence of
your father, and endeavour, by all fair and honourable means, to vanquish the prejudices, and
obtain the consent of her uncle; the rest we must leave to the dispensation of Providence.'

"The squire promised, in the most solemn and fervent manner, to obey all her injunctions, as
the last dictates of a parent whom he should never cease to honour.  Then she favoured them
both with a great deal of salutary advice touching their conduct before and after marriage,
and presented him with a ring as a memorial of her affection, at the same time he pulled another
off his finger, and made a tender of it as a pledge of his love to Aurelia, whom her mother
permitted to receive this token.  Finally, he took a last farewell of the good matron, and
returned to his father with the particulars of this interview.

"In two days Mrs. Darnel departed this life, and Aurelia was removed to the house of a relation,
where her grief had like to have proved fatal to her constitution.

"In the meantime, the mother was no sooner committed to the earth, than Mr. Greaves, mindful
of her exhortations, began to take measures for a reconciliation with the guardian.  He engaged
several gentlemen to interpose their good offices, but they always met with the most mortifying
repulse, and at last Anthony Darnel declared that his hatred to the house of Greaves was hereditary,
habitual, and unconquerable.  He swore he would spend his heart's blood to perpetuate the quarrel,
and that, sooner than his niece should match with young Launcelot, he would sacrifice her with
his own hand.

"The young gentleman, finding his prejudice so rancorous and invincible, left off making any
further advances, and, since he found it impossible to obtain his consent, resolved to cultivate
the good graces of Aurelia, and wed her in despite of her implacable guardian.  He found means
to establish a literary correspondence with her as soon as her grief was a little abated, and
even to effect an interview, after her return to her own house; but he soon had reason to repent
of his indulgence.  The uncle entertained spies upon the young lady, who gave him an account
of this meeting, in consequence of which she was suddenly hurried to some distant part of the
country, which we never could discover.

"It was then we thought Mr. Launcelot a little disordered in his brain, his grief was so wild,
and his passion so impetuous.  He refused all sustenance, neglected his person, renounced his
amusements, rode out in the rain, sometimes bareheaded; strolled about the fields all night,
and became so peevish, that none of the domestics durst speak to him without the hazard of
broken bones.  Having played these pranks for about three weeks, to the unspeakable chagrin
of his father, and the astonishment of all that knew him, he suddenly grew calm, and his good-humour
returned. But this, as your seafaring people say, was a deceitful calm, that soon ushered in
a dreadful storm.

"He had long sought an opportunity to tamper with some of Mr. Darnel's servants, who could
inform him of the place where Aurelia was confined; but there was not one about the family
who could give him that satisfaction, for the persons who accompanied her remained as a watch
upon her motions, and none of the other domestics were privy to the transaction.  All attempts
proving fruitless, he could no longer restrain his impatience, but throwing himself in the
way of the uncle, upbraided him in such harsh terms, that a formal challenge ensued.  They
agreed to decide their difference without witnesses, and one morning, before sunrise, met on
that very common where Mr. Greaves had saved the life of Aurelia.  The first pistol was fired
on each side without any effect, but Mr. Darnel's second wounded the young squire in the flank;
nevertheless, having a pistol in reserve, he desired his antagonist to ask his life. The other,
instead of submitting, drew his sword, and Mr. Greaves, firing his piece into the air, followed
his example.  The contest then became very hot, though of short continuance.  Darnel being
disarmed at the first onset, our young squire gave him back the sword, which he was base enough
to use a second time against his conqueror.  Such an instance of repeated ingratitude and brutal
ferocity divested Mr. Greaves of his temper and forbearance.  He attacked Mr. Anthony with
great fury, and at the first lunge ran him up to the hilt, at the same time seized with his
left hand the shell of his enemy's sword, which he broke in disdain.  Mr. Darnel having fallen,
the other immediately mounted his horse, which he had tied to a tree before the engagement,
and, riding full speed to Ashenton, sent a surgeon to Anthony's assistance.  He afterwards
ingenuously confessed all these particulars to his father, who was overwhelmed with consternation,
for the wounds of Darnel were judged mortal; and, as no person had seen the particulars of
the duel, Mr. Launcelot might have been convicted of murder.

"On these considerations, before a warrant could be served upon him, the old knight, by dint
of the most eager entreaties, accompanied with marks of horror and despair, prevailed upon
his son to withdraw himself from the kingdom until such time as the storm should be overblown.
Had his heart been unengaged, he would have chose to travel, but at this period, when his whole
soul was engrossed, and so violently agitated by his passion for Aurelia, nothing but the fear
of seeing the old gentleman run distracted would have induced him to desist from the pursuit
of that young lady, far less quit the kingdom where she resided.

"Well then, gemmen, he repaired to Harwich, where he embarked for Holland, from whence he proceeded
to Brussels, where he procured a passport from the French king, by virtue of which he travelled
to Marseilles, and there took a tartan for Genoa.  The first letter Sir Everhard received from
him was dated at Florence.  Meanwhile the surgeon's prognostic was not altogether verified.
Mr. Darnel did not die immediately of his wounds, but he lingered a long time, as it were in
the arms of death, and even partly recovered, yet, in all probability, he will never be wholly
restored to the enjoyment of his health, and is obliged every summer to attend the hot-well
at Bristol.  As his wounds began to heal, his hatred to Mr. Greaves seemed to revive with augmented
violence, and he is now, if possible, more than ever determined against all reconciliation.

"Mr. Launcelot, after having endeavoured to amuse his imagination with a succession of curious
objects, in a tour of Italy, took up his residence at a town called Pisa, and there fell into
a deep melancholy, from which nothing could rouse him but the news of his father's death.

"The old gentleman, God rest his soul, never held up his head after the departure of his darling
Launcelot, and the dangerous condition of Darnel kept up his apprehension.  This was reinforced
by the obstinate silence of the youth, and certain accounts of his disordered mind, which he
had received from some of those persons who take pleasure in communicating disagreeable tidings.
A complication of all these grievances, co-operating with a severe fit of the gout and gravel,
produced a fever, which, in a few days, brought Sir Everhard to his long home, after he had
settled his affairs with heaven and earth, and made his peace with God and man.  I'll assure
you, gemmen, he made a most edifying and Christian end; he died regretted by all his neighbours
except Anthony, and might be said to be embalmed by the tears of the poor, to whom he was always
a bounteous benefactor.

"When the son, now Sir Launcelot, came home, he appeared so meagre, wan, and hollow-eyed, that
the servants hardly knew their young master.  His first care was to take possession of his
fortune, and settle accounts with the steward who had succeeded my father.  These affairs being
discussed, he spared no pains to get intelligence concerning Miss Darnel; and soon learned
more of that young lady than he desired to know; for it was become the common talk of the country,
that a match was agreed upon between her and young Squire Sycamore, a gentleman of a very great
fortune.  These tidings were probably confirmed under her own hand, in a letter which she wrote
to Sir Launcelot.  The contents were never exactly known but to the parties themselves; nevertheless,
the effects were too visible, for, from that blessed moment, he spoke not one word to any living
creature for the space of three days; but was seen sometimes to shed a flood of tears, and
sometimes to burst out into a fit of laughing. At last he broke silence, and seemed to wake
from his disorder.  He became more fond than ever of the exercise of riding, and began to amuse
himself again with acts of benevolence.

"One instance of his generosity and justice deserves to be recorded in brass or marble.  You
must know, gemmen, the rector of the parish was lately dead, and Sir Everhard had promised
the presentation to another clergyman.  In the meantime, Sir Launcelot chancing one Sunday
to ride through a lane, perceived a horse saddled and bridled, feeding on the side of a fence;
and, casting his eyes around, beheld on the other side of the hedge an object lying extended
on the ground, which he took to be the body of a murdered traveller.  He forthwith alighted,
and, leaping into the field, descried a man at full length, wrapped in a greatcoat and writhing
in agony.  Approaching nearer, he found it was a clergyman, in his gown and cassock.  When
he inquired into the case, and offered his assistance, the stranger rose up, thanked him for
his courtesy, and declared that he was now very well.  The knight who thought there was something
mysterious in this incident, expressed a desire to know the cause of his rolling in the grass
in that manner, and the clergyman, who knew his person, made no scruple in gratifying his curiosity.
'You must know, sir,' said he, 'I serve the curacy of your own parish, for which the late incumbent
paid me twenty pounds a year; but this sum being scarce sufficient to maintain my wife and
children, who are five in number, I agreed to read prayers in the afternoon at another church,
about four miles from hence; and for this additional duty I receive ten pounds more.  As I
keep a horse, it was formerly an agreeable exercise rather than a toil; but of late years I
have been afflicted with a rupture, for which I consulted the most eminent operators in the
kingdom; but I have no cause to rejoice in the effects of their advice, though one of them
assured me I was completely cured.  The malady is now more troublesome than ever, and often
comes upon me so violently while I am on horseback, that I am forced to alight, and lie down
upon the ground, until the cause of the disorder can for the time be reduced.'

"Sir Launcelot not only condoled with him upon his misfortune, but desired him to throw up
the second cure, and he would pay him ten pounds a year out of his own pocket.  'Your generosity
confounds me, good sir,' replied the clergyman; 'and yet I ought not to be surprised at any
instance of benevolence in Sir Launcelot Greaves; but I will check the fulness of my heart.
I shall only observe, that your good intention towards me can hardly take effect.  The gentleman,
who is to succeed the late incumbent, has given me notice to quit the premises, as he hath
provided a friend of his own for the curacy.'  'What!' cried the knight, 'does he mean to take
your bread from you, without assigning any other reason?'  'Surely, sir,' replied the ecclesiastic,
'I know of no other reason.  I hope my morals are irreproachable, and that I have done my duty
with a conscientious regard; I may venture an appeal to the parishioners among whom I have
lived these seventeen years.  After all, it is natural for every man to favour his own friends
in preference to strangers.  As for me, I propose to try my fortune in the great city, and
I doubt not but Providence will provide for me and my little ones.'

"To this declaration Sir Launcelot made no reply; but, riding home, set on foot a strict inquiry
into the character of this man, whose name was Jenkins.  He found that he was a reputed scholar,
equally remarkable for his modesty and good life; that he visited the sick, assisted the needy,
compromised disputes among his neighbours, and spent his time in such a manner as would have
done honour to any Christian divine.  Thus informed, the knight sent for the gentleman to whom
the living had been promised, and accosted him to this effect: 'Mr. Tootle, I have a favour
to ask of you.  The person who serves the cure of this parish is a man of good character, beloved
by the people, and has a large family.  I shall be obliged to you if you will continue him
in the curacy.'  The other told him he was sorry he could not comply with his request, being
that he had already promised the curacy to a friend of his own.  'No matter,' replied Sir Launcelot,
'since I have not interest with you, I will endeavour to provide for Mr. Jenkins in some other
way.'

"That same afternoon he walked over to the curate's house, and told him that he had spoken
in his behalf to Dr. Tootle, but the curacy was pre-engaged.  The good man having made a thousand
acknowledgments for the trouble his honour had taken; 'I have not interest sufficient to make
you curate,' said the knight, 'but I can give you the living itself, and that you shall have.'
So saying, he retired, leaving Mr. Jenkins incapable of uttering one syllable, so powerfully
was he struck with this unexpected turn of good fortune.  The presentation was immediately
made out, and in a few days Mr. Jenkins was put in possession of his benefice, to the inexpressible
joy of the congregation.

"Hitherto everything went right, and every unprejudiced person commended the knight's conduct;
but in a little time his generosity seemed to overleap the bounds of discretion, and even in
some cases might be thought tending to a breach of the king's peace.  For example, he compelled,
vi et armis, a rich farmer's son to marry the daughter of a cottager, whom the young fellow
had debauched.  Indeed, it seems there was a promise of marriage in the case, though it could
not be legally ascertained.  The wench took on dismally, and her parents had recourse to Sir
Launcelot, who, sending for the delinquent, expostulated with him severely on the injury he
had done the young woman, and exhorted him to save her life and reputation by performing his
promise, in which case he, Sir Launcelot, would give her three hundred pounds to her portion.
Whether the farmer thought there was something interested in this uncommon offer, or was a
little elevated by the consciousness of his father's wealth, he rejected the proposal with
rustic disdain, and said, if so be as how the wench would swear the child to him, he would
settle it with the parish; but declared, that no squire in the land should oblige him to buckle
with such a cracked pitcher.  This resolution, however, he could not maintain; for, in less
than two hours the rector of the parish had direction to publish the banns, and the ceremony
was performed in due course.

"Now, though we know not precisely the nature of the arguments that were used with the farmer,
we may conclude they were of the minatory species, for the young fellow could not, for some
time, look any person in the face.

"The knight acted as the general redresser of grievances.  If a woman complained to him of
being ill-treated by her husband, he first inquired into the foundation of the complaint, and,
if he found it just, catechised the defendant.  If the warning had no effect, and the man proceeded
to fresh acts of violence, then his judge took the execution of the law in his own hand, and
horsewhipped the party.  Thus he involved himself in several law-suits, that drained him of
pretty large sums of money.  He seemed particularly incensed at the least appearance of oppression;
and supported divers poor tenants against the extortion of their landlords.  Nay, he has been
known to travel two hundred miles as a volunteer, to offer his assistance in the cause of a
person, who he heard was by chicanery and oppression wronged of a considerable estate.  He
accordingly took her under his protection, relieved her distresses, and was at a vast expense
in bringing the suit to a determination; which being unfavourable to his client, he resolved
to bring an appeal into the House of Lords, and certainly would have executed his purpose,
if the gentlewoman had not died in the interim."

At this period Ferret interrupted the narrator, by observing that the said Greaves was a common
nuisance, and ought to be prosecuted on the statute of barratry.

"No, sir," resumed Mr. Clarke, "he cannot be convicted of barratry, unless he is always at
variance with some person or other, a mover of suits and quarrels, who disturbs the peace under
colour of law. Therefore he is in the indictment styled, Communis malefactor, calumniator,
et seminator litium."

"Pr'ythee, truce with thy definitions," cried Ferret, "and make an end to thy long-winded story.
Thou hast no title to be so tedious, until thou comest to have a coif in the Court of Common
Pleas."

Tom smiled contemptuous, and had just opened his mouth to proceed, when the company were disturbed
by a hideous repetition of groans, that seemed to issue from the chamber in which the body
of the squire was deposited. The landlady snatched the candle, and ran into the room, followed
by the doctor and the rest; and this accident naturally suspended the narration. In like manner
we shall conclude the chapter, that the reader may have time to breathe and digest what he
has already heard.

CHAPTER FIVE

IN WHICH THIS RECAPITULATION DRAWS TO A CLOSE.

When the landlady entered the room from whence the groaning proceeded, she found the squire
lying on his back, under the dominion of the nightmare, which rode him so hard that he not
only groaned and snorted, but the sweat ran down his face in streams.  The perturbation of
his brain, occasioned by this pressure, and the fright he had lately undergone, gave rise to
a very terrible dream, in which he fancied himself apprehended for a robbery.  The horror of
the gallows was strong upon him, when he was suddenly awaked by a violent shock from the doctor;
and the company broke in upon his view, still perverted by fear, and bedimmed by slumber. 
His dream was now realised by a full persuasion that he was surrounded by the constable and
his gang.  The first object that presented itself to his disordered view was the figure of
Ferret, who might very well have passed for the finisher of the law; against him, therefore,
the first effort of his despair was directed.  He started upon the floor, and seizing a certain
utensil, that shall be nameless, launched it at the misanthrope with such violence, that had
he not cautiously slipt his head aside, it is supposed that actual fire would have been produced
from the collision of two such hard and solid substances.  All future mischief was prevented
by the strength and agility of Captain Crowe, who, springing upon the assailant, pinioned his
arms to his sides, crying, "O, d--n ye, if you are for running a-head, I'll soon bring you
to your bearings."

The squire, thus restrained, soon recollected himself, and gazing upon every individual in
the apartment, "Wounds!" said he, "I've had an ugly dream.  I thought, for all the world, they
were carrying me to Newgate, and that there was Jack Ketch coom to vetch me before my taim."

Ferret, who was the person he had thus distinguished, eyeing him with a look of the most emphatic
malevolence, told him it was very natural for a knave to dream of Newgate; and that he hoped
to see the day when his dream would be found a true prophecy, and the commonwealth purged of
all such rogues and vagabonds.  But it could not be expected that the vulgar would be honest
and conscientious, while the great were distinguished by profligacy and corruption.  The squire
was disposed to make a practical reply to this insinuation, when Mr. Ferret prudently withdrew
himself from the scene of altercation.  The good woman of the house persuaded his antagonist
to take out his nap, assuring him that the eggs and bacon, with a mug of excellent ale, should
be forthcoming in due season.  The affair being thus fortunately adjusted, the guests returned
to the kitchen, and Mr. Clarke resumed his story to this effect:--

"You'll please to take notice, gemmen, that, besides the instances I have alleged of Sir Launcelot's
extravagant benevolence, I could recount a great many others of the same nature, and particularly
the laudable vengeance he took of a country lawyer.  I'm sorry that any such miscreant should
belong to the profession.  He was clerk of the assize, gemmen, in a certain town, not a great
way distant; and having a blank pardon left by the judges for some criminals whose cases were
attended with favourable circumstances, he would not insert the name of one who could not procure
a guinea for the fee; and the poor fellow, who had only stole an hour-glass out of a shoemaker's
window, was actually executed, after a long respite, during which he had been permitted to
go abroad, and earn his subsistence by his daily labour.

"Sir Launcelot being informed of this barbarous act of avarice, and having some ground that
bordered on the lawyer's estate, not only rendered him contemptible and infamous, by exposing
him as often as they met on the grand jury, but also, being vested with the property of the
great tithe, proved such a troublesome neighbour, sometimes by making waste among his hay and
corn, sometimes by instituting suits against him for petty trespasses, that he was fairly obliged
to quit his habitation, and remove into another part of the kingdom.

"All these avocations could not divert Sir Launcelot from the execution of a wild scheme, which
has carried his extravagance to such a pitch that I am afraid, if a statute--you understand
me, gemmen--were sued, the jury would--I don't choose to explain myself further on this circumstance.
Be that as it may, the servants at Greavesbury Hall were not a little confounded, when their
master took down from the family armoury a complete suit of armour, which belonged to his great-grandfather,
Sir Marmaduke Greaves, a great warrior, who lost his life in the service of his king.  This
armour being scoured, repaired, and altered, so as to fit Sir Launcelot, a certain knight,
whom I don't choose to name, because I believe he cannot be proved compos mentis, came down,
seemingly on a visit, with two attendants; and, on the evening of the festival of St. George,
the armour being carried into the chapel.  Sir Launcelot (Lord have mercy upon us!) remained
all night in that dismal place alone, and without light, though it was confidently reported
all over the country, that the place was haunted by the spirit of his great-great-uncle, who,
being lunatic, had cut his throat from ear to ear, and was found dead on the communion table."

It was observed, that while Mr. Clarke rehearsed this circumstance his eyes began to stare
and his teeth to chatter; while Dolly, whose looks were fixed invariably on this narrator,
growing pale, and hitching her joint-stool nearer the chimney, exclaimed, in a frightened tone,
"Moother, moother, in the neame of God, look to 'un! how a quakes! as I'm a precious saoul,
a looks as if a saw something."  Tom forced a smile, and thus proceeded:--

"While Sir Launcelot tarried within the chapel, with the doors all locked, the other knight
stalked round and round it on the outside, with his sword drawn, to the terror of divers persons
who were present at the ceremony.  As soon as day broke he opened one of the doors, and going
in to Sir Launcelot, read a book for some time, which we did suppose to be the constitutions
of knight-errantry.  They gazed at one another in silent horror, and when Sir Launcelot came
forth completely armed, took to their heels in a body, and fled with the utmost precipitation.
I myself was overturned in the crowd; and this was the case with that very individual person
who now serves him as squire.  He was so frightened that he could not rise, but lay roaring
in such a manner that the knight came up and gave him a thwack with his lance across the shoulders,
which roused him with a vengeance.  For my own part I freely own I was not unmoved at seeing
such a figure come stalking out of a church in the grey of the morning; for it recalled to
my remembrance the idea of the ghost in Hamlet, which I had seen acted in Drury Lane, when
I made my first trip to London, and I had not yet got rid of the impression.

"Sir Launcelot, attended by the other knight, proceeded to the stable, from whence, with his
own hands, he drew forth one of his best horses, a fine mettlesome sorrel, who had got blood
in him, ornamented with rich trappings.  In a trice, the two knights, and the other two strangers,
who now appeared to be trumpeters, were mounted.  Sir Launcelot's armour was lacquered black;
and on his shield was represented the moon in her first quarter, with the motto, Impleat orbem.
The trumpets having sounded a charge, the stranger pronounced with a loud voice, 'God preserve
this gallant knight in all his honourable achievements; and may he long continue to press the
sides of his now adopted steed, which I denominate Bronzomarte, hoping that he will rival in
swiftness and spirit, Bayardo, Brigliadoro, or any other steed of past or present chivalry!'
After another flourish of the trumpets, all four clapped spurs to their horses, Sir Launcelot
couching his lance, and galloped to and fro, as if they had been mad, to the terror and astonishment
of all the spectators.

"What should have induced our knight to choose this here man for his squire, is not easy to
determine; for, of all the servants about the house, he was the least likely either to please
his master, or engage in such an undertaking.  His name is Timothy Crabshaw, and he acted in
the capacity of whipper-in to Sir Everhard.  He afterwards married the daughter of a poor cottager,
by whom he has several children, and was employed about the house as a ploughman and carter.
To be sure, the fellow has a dry sort of humour about him; but he was universally hated among
the servants, for his abusive tongue and perverse disposition, which often brought him into
trouble; for, though the fellow is as strong as an elephant, he has no more courage naturally
than a chicken; I say naturally, because, since his being a member of knight-errantry, he has
done some things that appear altogether incredible and preternatural.

"Timothy kept such a bawling, after he had received the blow from Sir Launcelot, that everybody
on the field thought that some of his bones were broken; and his wife, with five bantlings,
came snivelling to the knight, who ordered her to send the husband directly to his house. 
Tim accordingly went thither, groaning piteously all the way, creeping along, with his body
bent like a Greenland canoe.  As soon as he entered the court, the outward door was shut; and
Sir Launcelot coming downstairs with a horsewhip in his hand, asked what was the matter with
him that he complained so dismally?  To this question he replied, that it was as common as
duck-weed in his country for a man to complain when his bones were broke.  'What should have
broke your bones?' said the knight.  'I cannot guess,' answered the other, 'unless it was that
delicate switch that your honour in your mad pranks handled so dexterously upon my carcass.'
Sir Launcelot then told him, there was nothing so good for a bruise, as a sweat; and he had
the remedy in his hand.  Timothy, eyeing the horsewhip askance, observed that there was another
still more speedy, to wit, a moderate pill of lead, with a sufficient dose of gunpowder. 'No,
rascal,' cried the knight; 'that must be reserved for your betters.' So saying, he employed
the instrument so effectually, that Crabshaw soon forgot his fractured ribs, and capered about
with great agility.

"When he had been disciplined in this manner to some purpose, the knight told him he might
retire, but ordered him to return next morning, when he should have a repetition of the medicine,
provided he did not find himself capable of walking in an erect posture.

"The gate was no sooner thrown open, than Timothy ran home with all the speed of a greyhound,
and corrected his wife, by whose advice he had pretended to be so grievously damaged in his person.

"Nobody dreamed that he would next day present himself at Greavesbury Hall; nevertheless, he
was there very early in the morning, and even closeted a whole hour altogether with Sir Launcelot.
He came out, making wry faces, and several times slapped himself on the forehead, crying, 'Bodikins!
thof he be crazy, I an't, that I an't?'  When he was asked what was the matter, he said, he
believed the devil had got in him, and he should never be his own man again.

"That same day the knight carried him to Ashenton, where he bespoke those accoutrements which
he now wears; and while these were making, it was thought the poor fellow would have run distracted.
He did nothing but growl, and curse and swear to himself, run backwards and forwards between
his own hut and Greavesbury Hall, and quarrel with the horses in the stable.  At length, his
wife and family were removed into a snug farmhouse, that happened to be empty, and care taken
that they should be comfortably maintained.

"These precautions being taken, the knight, one morning, at daybreak, mounted Bronzomarte,
and Crabshaw, as his squire, ascended the back of a clumsy cart-horse, called Gilbert.  This,
again, was looked upon as an instance of insanity in the said Crabshaw; for, of all the horses
in the stable, Gilbert was the most stubborn and vicious, and had often like to have done mischief
to Timothy while he drove the cart and plough.  When he was out of humour, he would kick and
plunge as if the devil was in him.  He once thrust Crabshaw into the middle of a quick-set
hedge, where he was terribly torn; another time he canted him over his head into a quagmire,
where he stuck with his heels up, and must have perished, if people had not been passing that
way; a third time he seized him in the stable with his teeth by the rim of the belly, and swung
him off the ground, to the great danger of his life; and I'll be hanged, if it was not owing
to Gilbert, that Crabshaw was now thrown into the river.

"Thus mounted and accoutred, the knight and his squire set out on their first excursion.  They
turned off from the common highway, and travelled all that day without meeting anything worthy
recounting; but, in the morning of the second day, they were favoured with an adventure.  The
hunt was upon a common through which they travelled, and the hounds were in full cry after
a fox, when Crabshaw, prompted by his own mischievous disposition, and neglecting the order
of his master, who called aloud to him to desist, rode up to the hounds, and crossed them at
full gallop. The huntsman, who was not far off, running towards the squire, bestowed upon his
head such a memento with his pole, as made the landscape dance before his eyes; and, in a twinkling
he was surrounded by all the fox-hunters, who plied their whips about his ears with infinite
agility. Sir Launcelot, advancing at an easy pace, instead of assisting the disastrous squire,
exhorted his adversaries to punish him severely for his insolence, and they were not slow in
obeying this injunction. Crabshaw, finding himself in this disagreeable situation, and that
there was no succour to be expected from his master, on whose prowess he had depended, grew
desperate, and, clubbing his whip, laid about him with great fury, wheeling about Gilbert,
who was not idle; for he, having received some of the favours intended for his rider, both
bit with his teeth and kicked with his heels; and, at last, made his way through the ring that
encircled him, though not before he had broke the huntsman's leg, lamed one of the best horses
on the field, and killed half a score of the hounds.

"Crabshaw, seeing himself clear of the fray, did not tarry to take leave of his master, but
made the most of his way to Greavesbury Hall, where he appeared hardly with any vestige of
the human countenance, so much had he been defaced in this adventure.  He did not fail to raise
a great clamour against Sir Launcelot, whom he cursed as a coward in plain terms, swearing
he would never serve him another day.  But whether he altered his mind on cooler reflection,
or was lectured by his wife, who well understood her own interest, he rose with the cock, and
went again in quest of Sir Launcelot, whom he found on the eve of a very hazardous enterprise.

"In the midst of a lane, the knight happened to meet with a party of about forty recruits,
commanded by a serjeant, a corporal, and a drummer, which last had his drum slung at his back;
but seeing such a strange figure mounted on a high-spirited horse, he was seized with an inclination
to divert his company.  With this view, he braced his drum, and, hanging it in its proper position,
began to beat a point of war, advancing under the very nose of Bronzomarte; while the corporal
exclaimed, 'D--n my eyes, who have we got here?--old King Stephen, from the horse armoury in
the Tower, or the fellow that rides armed at my Lord Mayor's show?'  The knight's steed seemed,
at least, as well pleased with the sound of the drum, as were the recruits that followed it;
and signified his satisfaction in some curvetings and caprioles, which did not at all discompose
the rider, who, addressing himself to the serjeant, 'Friend,' said he, 'you ought to teach
your drummer better manners.  I would chastise the fellow on the spot for his insolence, were
it not out of the respect I bear to his majesty's service.'  'Respect mine a--!' cried this
ferocious commander; what, d'ye think to frighten us with your pewter piss-pot on your skull,
and your lacquered pot-lid on your arm? Get out of the way, and be d--ned, or I'll raise with
my halbert such a clatter upon your target, that you'll remember it the longest day you have
to live.'  At that instant, Crabshaw arriving upon Gilbert, 'So, rascal,' said Sir Launcelot,
'you are returned.  Go and beat in that scoundrel's drum-head.'

"The squire, who saw no weapons of offence about the drummer but a sword, which he hoped the
owner durst not draw, and being resolved to exert himself in making atonement for his desertion,
advanced to execute his master's orders; but Gilbert, who liked not the noise, refused to proceed
in the ordinary way.  Then the squire, turning his tail to the drummer, he advanced in a retrograde
motion, and with one kick of his heels, not only broke the drum into a thousand pieces, but
laid the drummer in the mire, with such a blow upon his hip-bone, that he halted all the days
of his life.  The recruits, perceiving the discomfiture of their leader, armed themselves with
stones; the serjeant raised his halbert in a posture of defence, and immediately a severe action
ensued.  By this time, Crabshaw had drawn his sword, and begun to lay about him like a devil
incarnate; but, in a little time, he was saluted by a volley of stones, one of which knocked
out two of his grinders, and brought him to the earth, where he had like to have found no quarter;
for the whole company crowded about him, with their cudgels brandished; and perhaps he owed
his preservation to their pressing so hard that they hindered one another from using their weapons.

"Sir Launcelot, seeing with indignation the unworthy treatment his squire had received, and
scorning to stain his lance with the blood of plebeians, instead of couching it at the rest,
seized it by the middle, and fetching one blow at the serjeant, broke in twain the halbert
which he had raised as a quarter-staff for his defence.  The second stroke encountered his
pate, which being the hardest part about him, sustained the shock without damage; but the third,
lighting on his ribs, he honoured the giver with immediate prostration.  The general being
thus overthrown, Sir Launcelot advanced to the relief of Crabshaw, and handled his weapon so
effectually, that the whole body of the enemy were disabled or routed, before one cudgel had
touched the carcass of the fallen squire.  As for the corporal, instead of standing by his
commanding officer, he had overleaped the hedge, and run to the constable of an adjoining village
for assistance.  Accordingly, before Crabshaw could be properly remounted, the peace officer
arrived with his posse; and by the corporal was charged with Sir Launcelot and his squire,
as two highwaymen.  The constable, astonished at the martial figure of the knight, and intimidated
at sight of the havoc he had made, contented himself with standing at a distance, displaying
the badge of his office, and reminding the knight that he represented his majesty's person.

"Sir Launcelot, seeing the poor man in great agitation, assured him that his design was to
enforce, not violate the laws of his country; and that he and his squire would attend him to
the next justice of peace; but, in the meantime, he, in his turn, charged the peace officer
with the serjeant and drummer, who had begun the fray.

"The justice had been a pettifogger, and was a sycophant to a nobleman in the neighbourhood,
who had a post at court.  He therefore thought he should oblige his patron, by showing his
respect for the military; but treated our knight with the most boorish insolence; and refused
to admit him into his house, until he had surrendered all his weapons of offence to the constable.
Sir Launcelot and his squire being found the aggressors, the justice insisted upon making out
their mittimus, if they did not find bail immediately; and could hardly be prevailed upon to
agree that they should remain at the house of the constable, who, being a publican, undertook
to keep them in safe custody, until the knight could write to his steward.  Meanwhile he was
bound over to the peace; and the serjeant with his drummer were told they had a good action
against him for assault and battery, either by information or indictment.

"They were not, however, so fond of the law as the justice seemed to be. Their sentiments had
taken a turn in favour of Sir Launcelot, during the course of his examination, by which it
appeared that he was really a gentleman of fashion and fortune; and they resolved to compromise
the affair without the intervention of his worship.  Accordingly, the serjeant repaired to
the constable's house, where the knight was lodged; and humbled himself before his honour,
protesting with many oaths, that, if he had known his quality, he would have beaten the drummer's
brains about his ears, for presuming to give his honour or his horse the least disturbance;
thof the fellow, he believed, was sufficiently punished in being a cripple for life.

"Sir Launcelot admitted of his apologies; and taking compassion on the fellow who had suffered
so severely for his folly, resolved to provide for his maintenance.  Upon the representation
of the parties to the justice, the warrant was next day discharged; and the knight returned
to his own house, attended by the serjeant and the drummer mounted on horseback, the recruits
being left to the corporal's charge.

"The halberdier found the good effects of Sir Launcelot's liberality; and his companion being
rendered unfit for his majesty's service, by the heels of Gilbert, is now entertained at Greavesbury
Hall, where he will probably remain for life.

"As for Crabshaw, his master gave him to understand, that if he did not think him pretty well
chastised for his presumption and flight, by the discipline he had undergone in the last two
adventures, he would turn him out of his service with disgrace.  Timothy said he believed it
would be the greatest favour he could do him to turn him out of a service in which he knew
he should be rib-roasted every day, and murdered at last.

"In this situation were things at Greavesbury Hall about a month ago, when I crossed the country
to Ferrybridge, where I met my uncle. Probably, this is the first incident of their second
excursion; for the distance between this here house and Sir Launcelot's estate does not exceed
fourscore or ninety miles."

CHAPTER SIX

IN WHICH THE READER WILL PERCEIVE THAT IN SOME CASES MADNESS IS CATCHING.

Mr. Clarke having made an end of his narrative, the surgeon thanked him for the entertainment
he had received; and Mr. Ferret shrugged up his shoulders in silent disapprobation.  As for
Captain Crowe, who used at such pauses to pour in a broadside of dismembered remarks, linked
together like chain-shot, he spoke not a syllable for some time; but, lighting a fresh pipe
at the candle, began to roll such voluminous clouds of smoke as in an instant filled the whole
apartment, and rendered himself invisible to the whole company.  Though he thus shrouded himself
from their view, he did not long remain concealed from their hearing. They first heard a strange
dissonant cackle, which the doctor knew to be a sea-laugh, and this was followed by an eager
exclamation of "Rare pastime, strike my yards and topmasts!--I've a good mind--why shouldn't--
many a losing voyage I've--smite my taffrel but I wool"--

By this time he had relaxed so much in his fumigation, that the tip of his nose and one eye
reappeared; and as he had drawn his wig forwards, so as to cover his whole forehead, the figure
that now saluted their eyes was much more ferocious and terrible than the fire-breathing chimera
of the ancients.  Notwithstanding this dreadful appearance, there was no indignation in his
heart, but, on the contrary, an agreeable curiosity, which he was determined to gratify.

Addressing himself to Mr. Fillet, "Pr'ythee, doctor," said he, "canst tell, whether a man,
without being rated a lord or a baron, or what d'ye call um, d'ye see, may n't take to the
highway in the way of a frolic, d'ye see?--Adad! for my own part, brother, I'm resolved as
how to cruise a bit in the way of an arrant--if so be as I can't at once be commander, mayhap
I may be bore upon the books as a petty officer or the like, d'ye see."

"Now, the Lord forbid!" cried Clarke, with tears in his eyes, "I'd rather see you dead than
brought to such a dilemma."  "Mayhap thou wouldst," answered the uncle; "for then, my lad,
there would be some picking--aha! dost thou tip me the traveller, my boy?"  Tom assured him
he scorned any such mercenary views.  "I am only concerned," said he, "that you should take
any step that might tend to the disgrace of yourself or your family; and I say again I had
rather die than live to see you reckoned any otherwise than compos."--"Die and be d--ned! you
shambling half-timber'd son of a----," cried the choleric Crowe; "dost talk to me of keeping
a reckoning and compass?--I could keep a reckoning, and box my compass long enough before thy
keelstone was laid--Sam Crowe is not come here to ask thy counsel how to steer his course."
"Lord! sir," resumed the nephew, "consider what people will say--all the world will think you
mad."  "Set thy heart at ease, Tom," cried the seaman, "I'll have a trip to and again in this
here channel.  Mad! what then?  I think for my part one half of the nation is mad--and the
other not very sound--I don't see why I han't as good a right to be mad as another man--but,
doctor, as I was saying, I'd be bound to you, if you would direct me where I can buy that same
tackle that all arrant must wear; as for the matter of the long pole, headed with iron, I'd
never desire better than a good boat-hook, and could make a special good target of that there
tin sconce that holds the candle--mayhap any blacksmith will hammer me a skull-cap, d'ye see,
out of an old brass kettle; and I can call my horse by the name of my ship, which was Mufti."

The surgeon was one of those wags who can laugh inwardly, without exhibiting the least outward
mark of mirth or satisfaction.  He at once perceived the amusement which might be drawn from
this strange disposition of the sailor, together with the most likely means which could be
used to divert him from such an extravagant pursuit.  He therefore tipped Clarke the wink with
one side of his face, while the other was very gravely turned to the captain, whom he addressed
to this effect.  "It is not far from hence to Sheffield, where you might be fitted completely
in half a day--then you must wake your armour in church or chapel, and be dubbed.  As for this
last ceremony, it may be performed by any person whatsoever.  Don Quixote was dubbed by his
landlord; and there are many instances on record, of errants obliging and compelling the next
person they met to cross their shoulders, and dub them knights. I myself would undertake to
be your godfather; and I have interest enough to procure the keys of the parish church that
stands hard by; besides, this is the eve of St. Martin, who was himself a knight-errant, and
therefore a proper patron to a novitiate.  I wish we could borrow Sir Launcelot's armour for
the occasion."

Crowe, being struck with this hint, started up, and laying his fingers on his lips to enjoin
silence, walked off softly on his tiptoes, to listen at the door of our knight's apartment,
and judge whether or not he was asleep.  Mr. Fillet took this opportunity to tell his nephew
that it would be in vain for him to combat this humour with reason and argument; but the most
effectual way of diverting him from the plan of knight-errantry would be, to frighten him heartily
while he should keep his vigil in the church; towards the accomplishment of which purpose he
craved the assistance of the misanthrope as well as the nephew.  Clarke seemed to relish the
scheme; and observed, that his uncle, though endued with courage enough to face any human danger,
had at bottom a strong fund of superstition, which he had acquired, or at least improved, in
the course of a sea-life.  Ferret, who perhaps would not have gone ten paces out of his road
to save Crowe from the gallows, nevertheless engaged as an auxiliary, merely in hope of seeing
a fellow-creature miserable; and even undertook to be the principal agent in this adventure.
For this office indeed he was better qualified than they could have imagined.  In the bundle
which he kept under his greatcoat, there was, together with divers nostrums, a small vial of
liquid phosphorus, sufficient, as he had already observed, to frighten a whole neighbourhood
out of their senses.

In order to concert the previous measures without being overheard, these confederates retired
with a candle and lantern into the stable; and their backs were scarce turned, when Captain
Crowe came in loaded with pieces of the knight's armour, which he had conveyed from the apartment
of Sir Launcelot, whom he had left fast asleep.

Understanding that the rest of the company were gone out for a moment, he could not resist
the inclination he felt of communicating his intention to the landlady, who, with her daughter,
had been too much engaged in preparing Crabshaw's supper, to know the purport of their conversation.
The good woman, being informed of the captain's design to remain alone all night in the church,
began to oppose it with all her rhetoric.  She said it was setting his Maker at defiance, and
a wilful running into temptation.  She assured him that all the country knew that the church
was haunted by spirits and hobgoblins; that lights had been seen in every corner of it, and
a tall woman in white had one night appeared upon the top of the tower; that dreadful shrieks
were often heard to come from the south aisle, where a murdered man had been buried; that she
herself had seen the cross on the steeple all a-fire; and one evening as she passed a-horseback
close by the stile at the entrance into the churchyard, the horse stood still, sweating and
trembling, and had no power to proceed, until she had repeated the Lord's Prayer.

These remarks made a strong impression on the imagination of Crowe, who asked in some confusion,
if she had got that same prayer in print?  She made no answer, but reaching the Prayer-Book
from a shelf, and turning up the leaf, put it into his hand; then the captain having adjusted
his spectacles, began to read, or rather spell aloud, with equal eagerness and solemnity. 
He had refreshed his memory so well as to remember the whole, when the doctor, returning with
his companions, gave him to understand that he had procured the key of the chancel, where he
might watch his armour as well as in the body of the church; and that he was ready to conduct
him to the spot.  Crowe was not now quite so forward as he had appeared before, to achieve
this adventure.  He began to start objections with respect to the borrowed armour; he wanted
to stipulate the comforts of a can of flip, and a candle's end, during his vigil; and hinted
something of the damage he might sustain from your malicious imps of darkness.

The doctor told him, the constitutions of chivalry absolutely required that he should be left
in the dark alone, and fasting, to spend the night in pious meditations; but if he had any
fears which disturbed his conscience, he had much better desist, and give up all thoughts of
knight-errantry, which could not consist with the least shadow of apprehension.  The captain,
stung by this remark, replied not a word, but gathering up the armour into a bundle, threw
it on his back, and set out for the place of probation, preceded by Clarke with the lantern.
When they arrived at the church, Fillet, who had procured the key from the sexton, who was
his patient, opened the door, and conducted our novice into the middle of the chancel, where
the armour was deposited.  Then bidding Crowe draw his hanger, committed him to the protection
of Heaven, assuring him he would come back, and find him either dead or alive by daybreak,
and perform the remaining part of the ceremony.  So saying, he and the other associates shook
him by the hand and took their leave, after the surgeon had tilted up the lantern to take a
view of his visage, which was pale and haggard.

Before the door was locked upon him, he called aloud, "Hilloa! doctor, hip--another word, d'ye
see."  They forthwith returned to know what he wanted, and found him already in a sweat.  "Hark
ye, brother," said he, wiping his face, "I do suppose as how one may pass away the time in
whistling the Black Joke, or singing Black-eyed Susan, or some such sorrowful ditty."--"By
no means," cried the doctor; "such pastimes are neither suitable to the place, nor the occasion,
which is altogether a religious exercise.  If you have got any psalms by heart, you may sing
a stave or two, or repeat the Doxology."--"Would I had Tom Laverick here," replied our novitiate;
"he would sing your anthems like a sea-mew--a had been a clerk a-shore--many's the time and
often I've given him a rope's end for singing psalms in the larboard watch.  Would I had hired
the son of a b---h to have taught me a cast of his office--but it cannot be holp, brother--if
we can't go large, we must haul up a wind, as the saying is; if we can't sing, we must pray."
The company again left him to his devotion, and returned to the public-house, in order to execute
the essential part of their project.

CHAPTER SEVEN

IN WHICH THE KNIGHT RESUMES HIS IMPORTANCE.

Doctor Fillet having borrowed a couple of sheets from the landlady, dressed the misanthrope
and Tom Clarke in ghostly apparel, which was reinforced by a few drops of liquid phosphorus,
from Ferret's vial, rubbed on the foreheads of the two adventurers.  Thus equipped, they returned
to the church with their conductor, who entered with them softly at an aisle which was opposite
to a place where the novice kept watch. They stole unperceived through the body of the church;
and though it was so dark that they could not distinguish the captain with the eye, they heard
the sound of his steps, as he walked backwards and forwards on the pavement with uncommon expedition,
and an ejaculation now and then escaped in a murmur from this lips.

The triumvirate having taken their station with a large pew in their front, the two ghosts
uncovered their heads, which by the help of the phosphorus exhibited a pale and lambent flame,
extremely dismal and ghastly to the view; then Ferret in a squeaking tone, exclaimed, "Samuel
Crowe! Samuel Crowe!"  The captain hearing himself accosted in this manner, at such a time,
and in such a place, replied, "Hilloah"; and turning his eyes towards the quarter whence the
voice seemed to proceed, beheld the terrible apparition.  This no sooner saluted his view than
his hair bristled up, his knees began to knock, and his teeth to chatter, while he cried aloud,
"In the name of God, where are you bound, ho?"  To this hail the misanthrope answered, "We
are the spirits of thy grandmother Jane and thy aunt Bridget."

At mention of these names, Crowe's terrors began to give way to his resentment, and he pronounced
in a quick tone of surprise, mixed with indignation, "What d'ye want? what d'ye want? what
d'ye want, ho?"  The spirit replied, "We are sent to warn thee of thy fate."  "From whence,
ho?" cried the captain, whose choler had by this time well-nigh triumphed over his fear.  "From
Heaven," said the voice.  "Ye lie, ye b------s of hell!" did our novice exclaim; "ye are d--ned
for heaving me out of my right, five fathom and a half by the lead, in burning brimstone. 
Don't I see the blue flames come out of your hawse holes?--mayhap you may be the devil himself,
for aught I know--but I trust in the Lord, d'ye see--I never disrated a kinsman, d'ye see,
so don't come alongside of me--put about on th'other tack, d'ye see--you need not clap hard
a-weather, for you'll soon get to hell again with a flowing sail."

So saying, he had recourse to his Paternoster; but perceiving the apparitions approach, he
thundered out, "Avast,--avast--sheer off, ye babes of hell, or I'll be foul of your forelights."
He accordingly sprung forwards with his hanger, and very probably would have set the spirits
on their way to the other world, had he not fallen over a pew in the dark, and entangled himself
so much among the benches, that he could not immediately recover his footing.  The triumvirate
took this opportunity to retire; and such was the precipitation of Ferret in his retreat, that
he encountered a post by which his right eye sustained considerable damage; a circumstance
which induced him to inveigh bitterly against his own folly, as well as the impertinence of
his companions, who had inveigled him into such a troublesome adventure.  Neither he nor Clarke
could be prevailed upon to revisit the novice.  The doctor himself thought his disease was
desperate; and, mounting his horse, returned to his own habitation.

Ferret, finding all the beds in the public-house were occupied, composed himself to sleep in
a Windsor chair at the chimney corner; and Mr. Clarke, whose disposition was extremely amorous,
resolved to renew his practices on the heart of Dolly.  He had reconnoitred the apartments
in which the bodies of the knight and his squire were deposited, and discovered close by the
top of the staircase a sort of a closet or hovel, just large enough to contain a truckle bed,
which, from some other particulars, he supposed to be the bedchamber of his beloved Dolly,
who had by this time retired to her repose.  Full of this idea, and instigated by the demon
of desire, Mr. Thomas crept softly upstairs, and lifting the latch of the closet door, his
heart began to palpitate with joyous expectation; but before he could breathe the gentle effusions
of his love, the supposed damsel started up and seizing him by the collar with a Herculean
gripe, uttered, in the voice of Crabshaw, "It wan't for nothing that I dreamed of Newgate,
sirrah; but I'd have thee to know, an arrant squire is not to be robbed by such a peddling
thief as thee--here I'll howld thee vast, an the devil were in thy doublet--help! murder! vire!
help!"

It was impossible for Mr. Clarke to disengage himself, and equally impracticable to speak in
his own vindication; so that here he stood trembling and half throttled, until the whole house
being alarmed, the landlady and her ostler ran upstairs with a candle.  When the light rendered
objects visible, an equal astonishment prevailed on all sides; Crabshaw was confounded at sight
of Mr. Clarke, whose person he well knew; and releasing him instantly from his grasp, "Bodikins!"
cried he, "I believe as how this hause is haunted--who thought to meet with Measter Laawyer
Clarke at midnight, and so far from hoam?"  The landlady could not comprehend the meaning of
this encounter; nor could Tom conceive how Crabshaw had transported himself thither from the
room below, in which he saw him quietly reposed.  Yet nothing was more easy than to explain
this mystery: the apartment below was the chamber which the hostess and her daughter reserved
for their own convenience; and this particular having been intimated to the squire while he
was at supper, he had resigned his bed quietly, and been conducted hither in the absence of
the company. Tom, recollecting himself as well as he could, professed himself of Crabshaw's
opinion, that the house was haunted, declaring that he could not well account for his being
there in the dark; and leaving those that were assembled to discuss this knotty point, retired
downstairs in hope of meeting with his charmer, whom accordingly he found in the kitchen just
risen, and wrapped in a loose dishabille.

The noise of Crabshaw's cries had awakened and aroused his master, who, rising suddenly in
the dark, snatched up his sword that lay by his bedside, and hastened to the scene of tumult,
where all their mouths were opened at once, to explain the cause of the disturbance, and make
an apology for breaking his honour's rest.  He said nothing, but taking the candle in his hand,
beckoned his squire to follow him into his apartment, resolving to arm and take horse immediately.
Crabshaw understood his meaning; and while he shuffled on his clothes, yawning hideously all
the while, wished the lawyer at the devil for having visited him so unseasonably; and even
cursed himself for the noise he had made, in consequence of which he foresaw he should now
be obliged to forfeit his night's rest, and travel in the dark, exposed to the inclemencies
of the weather.  "Pox rot thee, Tom Clarke, for a wicked lawyer!" said he to himself; "hadst
thou been hanged at Bartlemy-tide, I should this night have slept in peace, that I should--an
I would there was a blister on this plaguy tongue of mine for making such a hollo-ballo, that
I do--five gallons of cold water has my poor belly been drenched with since night fell, so
as my reins and my liver are all one as if they were turned into ice, and my whole harslet
shakes and shivers like a vial of quicksilver. I have been dragged, half-drowned like a rotten
ewe, from the bottom of a river; and who knows but I may be next dragged quite dead from the
bottom of a coal-pit--if so be as I am, I shall go to hell to be sure, for being consarned
like in my own moorder, that I will, so I will; for, a plague on it!  I had no business with
the vagaries of this crazy-peated measter of mine, a pox on him, say I."

He had just finished this soliloquy as he entered the apartment of his master, who desired
to know what was become of his armour.  Timothy, understanding that it had been left in the
room when the knight undressed, began to scratch his head in great perplexity; and at last
declared it as his opinion, that it must have been carried off by witchcraft. Wisconsin dairymen
believe in banquets. A leading member of the convention declared that the prosperous history
of the association began with its first banquet.

Governor Rusk was in attendance at this convention, and his address was one calculated to encourage
and help on the association.

He assured the members that if they thought the association needed legislative aid, all they
have to do is to ask for it. If they ask for $5,000, he will do his best to have the appropriation
bill passed, and he will sign the enactment promptly when it reaches him for signature. He believes
Wisconsin one of the foremost of dairy States, and he wants it to
retain its position.

Among other prominent gentlemen present who participated in the discussions
were Prof. Henry, of the Agricultural Department of the State University;
Hon. Clinton Babbitt, Secretary of the State Agricultural Society;
Hon. Hiram Smith, Chester Hazen, S. Favile, J. M. Smith, J. H. Smith,
J. B. Harris, Inspector of Dairy Factories, Canada, and T. D. Curtis,
Syracuse, N. Y.

The election of officers resulted in retaining the
incumbents of last year for another year's service.

These gentlemen are: W. H. Morrison, Elkhorn, President; D. W. Curtis, Fort Atkinson, Secretary;
H. K. Loomis, Treasurer.

One of the prominent papers read was on Co-operative Dairying, by J. B. Harris, Esq., of Antwerp,
N. Y., who is employed by the Canadian government as inspector of cheese and butter factories. We will
give it in full, and follow next week with some account of the discussions.

CO-OPERATIVE CHEESE-MAKING.

In all human efforts, grand results have been attained chiefly by concert of action.

In our own time, everything is done by co-operation. Railways across continents, canals uniting
oceans and seas, bridges almost of fabulous proportions, enterprises in engineering and commerce,
never before known, evince the extent to which modern genius is availing
itself of concert of effort in testing human capacity.

There is a visible tendency in all branches of business toward co-operation and centralization.

In looking down upon a large city, the unity visible even in the diversity of human affairs
manifests itself in a manner truly wonderful. The air is literally filled with a vast net-work
of wire, crossing and re-crossing in every conceivable direction, and over these, backward
and forward, the thoughts of men are made to vibrate with the speed of lightning, in the elaboration
and consummation of thousands of business schemes, and the air, as well as the buildings and
streets, is full of human activity and enterprise. The lawyer, sitting comfortably at his
desk in his office, talks with his banker, physician, grocer, a hundred clients, and his family,
all seated like him himself at home, or at their various places of
business.

Thus is the telephone made the instrument of human co-operation and concert of action.

It is now less than thirty years since dairymen stumbled into the
practice of co-operation in the business of making-cheese.

Previous to that time cheese-making in this country was, to say the least, a crude affair.
Every farmer ran his own factory, according to his own peculiar notion, and disposed of his products
as he could "light on" chaps. In that day, cheese-making was guess work and hap-hazard. To-day it
is a science. Then there were as many rules and methods as there were men. To-day the laws which
nature has enacted, to govern the process of converting milk into cheese, are codified, and
cheese-making has become a profession. In that day the accumulated results of the cheese industry
of a neighborhood or township was a sight to behold--all manner of
circular blocks, of concentrated error, large and small, thick and
thin, when heaped together presented a spectacle that would now bring
a smile upon the countenance of the most sober and dignified cheese-maker
in the State.

The condition of the market at that time was quite as crude and irregular as the system, or
rather the want of system, in manufacturing. There was no cable, no regular reports from the great
business centers of the land, no regularly organized boards of trade, railroads not as numerous, less
daily papers were in circulation, and many other circumstances which left the seller comparatively
at the mercy of the buyer, and the purchase and sale of a dairy was conducted upon principles
similar to those usually practiced in a horse trade.

The great changes which since that day have taken place in the dairying world are due chiefly to
a division of labor, the introduction of system and co-operation. Our machinery, we are sorry
to say, is not yet quite perfect in all its parts, and does not move with the precision and
harmony of the orchestra, to which we have already alluded. Yet, although still in its infancy,
it has already produced and does annually produce results grand indeed.

If

we take a glance at the various industries at which men are to-day engaged, intellectual, commercial,
and mechanical, the painstaking exactitude everywhere practiced will be found to be a growing
subject of wonder and admiration. The secret of this lies in the fact that perfection in any department
of business not only enlarges that business but also enriches those
engaged in it.

For example: there are perhaps ten times as many watches manufactured in the world to-day as
at any other period in its history. It is a profitable business, or men would not engage in it, and the
superhuman effort that is being continually put forth to increase
the value, by making as perfect an article as human power can produce,
establishes conclusively the assertion that there is always a profit
in doing well.

I am glad to observe that in the cheese industry of the United States and Canada, the light of this truth
has to some extent aroused the slumbering dairymen. To quote from the Utica Herald of Sept. 11,
1883: "It is estimated that about 700,000 men are employed in this business, in one capacity
or another, and that about 15,000,000 cows are used to furnish the one product of milk. The
returns from this product are over $800,000,000. The total amount of capital invested in dairying
in the United States is estimated to reach the enormous sum of $2,000,000,000." In consulting
these figures we hope there is no person so dense of understanding as to entertain for a moment
the idea that had the old system of every man his own cheese-maker prevailed that anything
approaching this grand result would ever have been attained. Never. The concert or effort attained
in the factory system is the key note to this grand, soul-inspiring chorus.

But an experience of twenty-five years in the dairy industry leads me to the conclusion that
in the music of our business there is yet much discord.

The dairymen and factorymen fail to understand the spirit of the piece we are attempting to
perform, and fail to catch the idea that individual profit and prosperity depend upon the success
of the business as a whole. No chain is stronger than its weakest link, and so long as there remains
a slovenly dairyman in the business just so long our system will be incomplete and the working
of co-operation remain imperfect. Perfect concert of effort, unbroken unity of hand with hand,
in all the various details of the business, reaching down to the most unimportant items in the
production of milk and the making of cheese, will produce in the long run the most profitable
and permanent results to the individual as well as to the community.

"But," say some, "there is too much of the millennium, too much of theory, too much of the unattainable,
in all this." To such I answer that there is much of the millennium, much of theory, and much
of the unattainable in the Sermon on the Mount, and yet our Divine Master preached it, nevertheless.

It
may perhaps be considered chimerical and theorizing to talk of a
time when there will be no such persons among dairymen as what are
known to the cheese-maker as a skimmer or stripper, but we hope such
a time will come, nevertheless.

To what purpose do A., B., and C., and a score of other industrious, honest, painstaking fellows,
exert themselves to collect a model dairy, sparing neither time nor expense in providing themselves
with perfect sets of improved appurtenances for those dairies, from rich, well-watered pastures
down to good, substantial three-legged milking stools, and labor incessantly from sunrise until
sundown, that their barns may be in perfect order and everything
connected with the business neat and clean, in order that their material
may come into the hands of the manufacturer in a perfect condition--if
heedless, lazy, shiftless, dishonest, ignorant, good-for-nothing D.
keeps about him a herd of sick, disconsolated racks-of-bones, to wander
over his arid and desolate fields in search of food and drink in summer,
or with backs humped up, hover together for shelter under the lea
of a wheat-straw stack, their only food in winter, and using a kit
of dairying tools, the very best article of which is an old, water-soaked,
dirty wooden pail, drawing his whey from the factory in the old, rusty,
time-embattled milk cans, in which it is allowed to stand until the
next milking, and which, after an imperfect washing, and refilled
and returned to the factory, freighted with a compound sufficiently
poisoned to nullify and undo the best efforts of a hundred A., B.,
and C's. It may be theorizing and visionary to talk of a time when
the spirit of co-operation shall have driven such fellows out of the
dairying business, to betake themselves with a pick-ax and spade to
the ditch, but that such a time may come ought to be the earnest prayer
of every thorough-going friend of co-operation in the land.

It may seem like castle building and an unprofitable waste of time to indulge in theories and construct
plans by which the rivalry among factorymen may be kept within a limit sufficiently circumscribed
to prevent the fear of loss of patronage from interfering with, and lowering the standard of,
our cheese. It is too often the case, nowadays, that factorymen are deterred from a full and
complete discharge of their duty to themselves, their patrons, and the world in general, by a
fear, by no means groundless, that a bold and upright course with regard to the material brought
to them will result in a damaging, if not entire loss, of their occupation.

The unwise extent to which men have gone in the erection of cheese factories, has increased
competition to an extent decidedly prejudicial to the interest of the cheese-consuming world.
A., having invested his entire capital in the construction and equipment
of a factory, will be quite likely, when B., C., and D. erect factories
in his immediate neighborhood, to hold his peace when sundry varieties
of swill milk are offered at his door, instead of speaking out an
equivocal protest against the insult thus offered to his professional
pride and sense of decency.

To the dairyman naturally given to slovenly and careless habits, the restraint to which he might
otherwise be subjected is practically removed when nearly equi-distant from his place of abode
there are three or four factories, instead of one, and he knows that if rejected at one place,
he can without inconvenience go to another, and thus it transpires that at five factories in
every ten there will be found a conspicuous absence of thorough and inexorable discriminations
which ought always to prevail in the receipt of milk for factory
purposes.

For this abuse there is, in our estimation, a remedy however theoretical and visionary it may
appear, and that is concert of action and co-operation among factorymen. Men in all branches of business,
nowadays, associate with each other, and form themselves into bodies for the purpose of closer
union and mutual protection, and when this is done for the general good, as well as individual
advancement, the purpose is laudable and universally successful.

We know of no business in which the necessity of combination is so great as that of cheese-making,
and, what, let me ask, could be more desirable and praiseworthy than
an association of cheese-makers, for the purpose of sending the swill
milk of the country to the hogs, where it belongs, instead of making
it up, as at present, for human consumption.

We have an idea that such an association might be successfully formed, and that, when once in
effectual operation, it might ask the legislative body of its country to enact a law, entitled
"An Act for the suppression of swill milk, and for the general good of mankind," in which it
should be provided, among other things, that in every case where a dairyman has left a factory
on account of having had his milk rejected for cause traceable to his negligence, that in all
such cases, the factory or factory company knowingly receiving the milk of such rejected party,
shall be liable to some appropriate penalty.

The extreme sensitiveness of milk in the absorption of taint from the atmosphere, or any substance
with which it comes in contact, ought to be thoroughly understood by all persons engaged in
handling it, but, we believe, that but few comparatively are alive
to the true facts of the case.

I herewith present several paragraphs clipped from journals of recent date:

"There are seventy-five cases of typhoid fever in the town of Port Jarvis. Dr. McDonald attributes
the spread of the disease to the use of milk from the farm of Mrs. Thomas Cuddebach, in whose
family there have been several typhoid cases, holding that the milk conveyed the disease germs.
Nearly all of the parties now sick had used milk from the farm."

"A dairyman from Dundee has been apprehended and fined for allowing his wife and daughter to
milk cows and assist in the sale of milk, after they had been engaged in nursing a child suffering
from scarlet fever. No less than nineteen cases of fever, four of which resulted fatally,
were traced to this act of carelessness."

With these facts in view, how can it be expected that any amount of diligence on the part of a cheese-maker
can atone for the unpardonable sin committed, day after day, by the heedless and unobserving patrons,
of leaving a can of freshly drawn milk standing all night in an unwholesome barn or yard, until
it has absorbed a whole family of pestilential odors, and then to
carry it to the factory to corrupt and poison everything with which
it comes in contact.

Some may suppose it a mere theory to speak of a condition of things in which abuses of this character
can not be found, but during an experience of five years as cheese instructor, in the Province
of Ontario, during which I superintended the making of cheese in about 400 different factories,
and during the last year inspected the milk from about 65,000 cows, the property of about
7,000 dairymen, I occasionally made up vats in which there was no discoverable taint and which,
I was pretty certain, came from the farms of well drilled, well posted dairymen, and, from
a circumstance of this character, I am led to the conclusion that
what has been done once can be done again, and I make such facts a
text upon which I found my plea for more thorough co-operation and
diligent painstaking in the work of producing milk for factory purposes.

*

* * * *

There may be times when peculiar atmospheric conditions will exert unfavorable influences, and
seasons when drought and wet weather will produce changes, over which human efforts have no control,
and for these sufficient allowance must be made. We quarrel with the stupidity, shiftlessness, and ignorance
of men, and not with the providence of God.

In this day and age of the world there is no excuse for ignorance upon the points to which we have
alluded. Wisdom uttereth her voice in the streets, and he who will not hear her ought to be drummed
out of the camp of dairymen. As a rule, a common carpenter puts more thought into his business
in a month than many dairymen do in a year. Indeed, it would be difficult to point out a single
branch of human industry, of one-half the magnitude which the manufacture and sale of cheese has
reached, carried on in a manner so slipshod and slovenly as dairying.

The banker, the columns of whose ledger fail by one cent of balancing, spares neither time nor
money in searching out and correcting the error; the merchant brings to bear upon his business
a care and insight so unceasing and laborious that his locks are soon sprinkled with premature
silver; the machinist works to plans from which the variation of a thousandth part of an inch
can not be allowed to pass uncorrected; but the dairyman too often stumbles along through his
work without thought, or employs the little intellect he has in putting in and harvesting his
crops, leaving the dairy in the meantime to take care of itself.


"So is cowardice, as I'm a living soul," exclaimed the squire; "don't you say a man is frightened
out of his senses? for my peart, measter, I can neither see nor hear, much less argufy, when
I'm in such a quandary. Wherefore, I do believe, odds bodikins! that cowardice and madness
are both distempers, and differ no more than the hot and cold fits of an ague.  When it teakes
your honour, you're all heat, and fire, and fury, Lord bless us! but when it catches poor Tim,
he's cold and dead-hearted, he sheakes and shivers like an aspen leaf, that he does."  "In
that case," answered the knight, "I shall not punish you for the distemper which you cannot
help, but for engaging in a service exposed to perils, when you knew your own infirmity; in
the same manner as a man deserves punishment, who enlists himself for a soldier, while he labours
under any secret disease."  "At that rate," said the squire, "my bread is like to be rarely
buttered o' both sides, i'faith.  But, I hope, as by the blessing of God I have run mad, so
I shall in good time grow valiant, under your honour's precept and example."

By this time a very disagreeable night was succeeded by a fair bright morning, and a market-town
appeared at the distance of three or four miles, when Crabshaw, having no longer the fear of
hobgoblins before his eyes, and being moreover cheered by the sight of a place where he hoped
to meet with comfortable entertainment, began to talk big, to expatiate on the folly of being
afraid, and finally set all danger at defiance; when all of a sudden he was presented with
an opportunity of putting in practice those new-adopted maxims.  In an opening between two
lanes, they perceived a gentleman's coach stopped by two highwaymen on horseback, one of whom
advanced to reconnoitre and keep the coast clear, while the other exacted contribution from
the travellers in the coach.  He who acted as sentinel, no sooner saw our adventurer appearing
from the lane, than he rode up with a pistol in his hand, and ordered him to halt on pain of
immediate death.

To this peremptory mandate the knight made no other reply than charging him with such impetuosity,
that he was unhorsed in a twinkling, and lay sprawling on the ground, seemingly sore bruised
with his fall.  Sir Launcelot, commanding Timothy to alight and secure the prisoner, couched
his lance, and rode full speed at the other highwayman, who was not a little disturbed at sight
of such an apparition.  Nevertheless, he fired his pistol without effect; and, clapping spurs
to his horse, fled away at full gallop.  The knight pursued him with all the speed that Bronzomarte
could exert; but the robber, being mounted on a swift hunter, kept him at a distance; and,
after a chase of several miles, escaped through a wood so entangled with coppice, that Sir
Launcelot thought proper to desist. He then, for the first time, recollected the situation
in which he had left the other thief, and, remembering to have heard a female shriek, as he
passed by the coach window, resolved to return with all expedition, that he might make a proffer
of his service to the lady, according to the obligation of knight-errantry.  But he had lost
his way; and after an hour's ride, during which he traversed many a field, and circled divers
hedges, he found himself in the market-town aforementioned.  Here the first object that presented
itself to his eyes was Crabshaw, on foot, surrounded by a mob, tearing his hair, stamping with
his feet, and roaring out in manifest distraction, "Show me the mayor! for the love of God,
show me the mayor!--O Gilbert, Gilbert! a murrain take thee, Gilbert! sure thou wast foaled
for my destruction!"

From these exclamations, and the antique dress of the squire, the people, not without reason,
concluded that the poor soul had lost his wits; and the beadle was just going to secure him,
when the knight interposed, and at once attracted the whole attention of the populace.  Timothy
seeing his master fell down on his knees, crying, "The thief has run away with Gilbert--you
may pound me into a peast, as the saying is.  But now I'se as mad as your worship, I an't afeard
of the divil and all his works." Sir Launcelot desiring the beadle would forbear, was instantly
obeyed by that officer, who had no inclination to put the authority of his place in competition
with the power of such a figure, armed at all points, mounted on a fiery steed, and ready for
the combat.  He ordered Crabshaw to attend him to the next inn, where he alighted; then, taking
him into a separate apartment, demanded an explanation of the unconnected words he had uttered.

The squire was in such agitation, that, with infinite difficulty, and by dint of a thousand
different questions, his master learned the adventure to this effect.  Crabshaw, according
to Sir Launcelot's command, had alighted from his horse, and drawn his cutlass, in hope of
intimidating the discomfited robber into a tame surrender, though he did not at all relish
the nature of the service.  But the thief was neither so much hurt nor so tame as Timothy had
imagined.  He started on his feet with his pistol still in his hand; and presenting it to the
squire, swore with dreadful imprecations, that he would blow his brains out in an instant.
Crabshaw, unwilling to hazard the trial of this experiment, turned his back, and fled with
great precipitation; while the robber, whose horse had run away, mounted Gilbert, and rode
off across the country.  It was at this period, that two footmen, belonging to the coach, who
had stayed behind to take their morning's whet at the inn where they lodged, came up to the
assistance of the ladies, armed with blunderbusses; and the carriage proceeded, leaving Timothy
alone in distraction and despair.  He knew not which way to turn, and was afraid of remaining
on the spot, lest the robbers should come back and revenge themselves upon him for the disappointment
they had undergone.  In this distress, the first thought that occurred was to make the best
of his way to the town, and demand the assistance of the civil magistrate towards the retrieval
of what he had lost; a design which he executed in such a manner, as justly entailed upon him
the imputation of lunacy.

While Timothy stood fronting the window, and answering the interrogations of his master, he
suddenly exclaimed, "Bodikins! there's Gilbert!" and sprung into the street with incredible
agility.  There finding his strayed companion brought back by one of the footmen who attended
the coach, he imprinted a kiss on his forehead; and, hanging about his neck, with the tears
in his eyes, hailed his return with the following salutation: "Art thou come back, my darling?
ah, Gilbert, Gilbert! a pize upon thee! thou hadst like to have been a dear Gilbert to me!
how couldst thou break the heart of thy old friend, who has known thee from a colt? seven years
next grass have I fed thee and bred thee; provided thee with sweet hay, delicate corn, and
fresh litter, that thou mought lie warm, dry, and comfortable.  Han't I currycombed thy carcass
till it was as sleek as a sloe, and cherished thee as the apple of mine eye? for all that thou
hast played me an hundred dog's tricks; biting, and kicking, and plunging, as if the devil
was in thy body; and now thou couldst run away with a thief, and leave me to be flayed alive
by measter.  What canst thou say for thyself, thou cruel, hard-hearted, unchristian tuoad?"
To this tender expostulation, which afforded much entertainment to the boys, Gilbert answered
not one word; but seemed altogether insensible to the caresses of Timothy, who forthwith led
him into the stable.  On the whole, he seems to have been an unsocial animal; for it does not
appear that he ever contracted any degree of intimacy, even with Bronzomarte, during the whole
course of their acquaintance and fellowship.  On the contrary, he has been more than once known
to signify his aversion, by throwing out behind, and other eruptive marks of contempt for that
elegant charger, who excelled him as much in personal merit, as his rider Timothy was outshone
by his all-accomplished master.

While the squire accommodated Gilbert in the stable, the knight sent for the footman who had
brought him back; and, having presented him with a liberal acknowledgment, desired to know
in what manner the horse had been retrieved.

The stranger satisfied him in this particular, by giving him to understand, that the highwayman,
perceiving himself pursued across the country, plied Gilbert so severely with whip and spur,
that the animal resented the usage, and being besides, perhaps, a little struck with remorse
for having left his old friend Crabshaw, suddenly halted, and stood stock still, notwithstanding
all the stripes and tortures he underwent; or if he moved at all, it was in a retrograde direction.
The thief, seeing all his endeavours ineffectual, and himself in danger of being overtaken,
wisely quitted his acquisition, and fled into the bosom of a neighbouring wood.

Then the knight inquired about the situation of the lady in the coach, and offered himself
as her guard and conductor; but was told that she was already safely lodged in the house of
a gentleman at some distance from the road.  He likewise learned that she was a person disordered
in her senses, under the care and tuition of a widow lady, her relation, and that in a day
or two they should pursue their journey northward to the place of her habitation.

After the footman had been some time dismissed, the knight recollected that he had forgot to
ask the name of the person to whom he belonged; and began to be uneasy at this omission, which
indeed was more interesting than he could imagine.  For an explanation of this nature would,
in all likelihood, have led to a discovery, that the lady in the coach was no other than Miss
Aurelia Darnel, who seeing him unexpectedly in such an equipage and attitude, as he passed
the coach, for his helmet was off, had screamed with surprise and terror, and fainted away.
Nevertheless, when she recovered from her swoon, she concealed the real cause of her agitation,
and none of her attendants were acquainted with the person of Sir Launcelot.

The circumstances of the disorder under which she was said to labour shall be revealed in due
course.  In the meantime, our adventurer, though unaccountably affected, never dreamed of such
an occurrence; but being very much fatigued, resolved to indemnify himself for the loss of
last night's repose; and this happened to be one of the few things in which Crabshaw felt an
ambition to follow his master's example.

CHAPTER NINE

WHICH MAY SERVE TO SHOW, THAT TRUE PATRIOTISM IS OF NO PARTY.

The knight had not enjoyed his repose above two hours, when he was disturbed by such a variety
of noises, as might have discomposed a brain of the firmest texture.  The rumbling of carriages,
and the rattling of horses' feet on the pavement, was intermingled with loud shouts, and the
noise of fiddle, French horn, and bagpipe.  A loud peal was heard ringing in the church tower,
at some distance, while the inn resounded with clamour, confusion, and uproar.

Sir Launcelot being thus alarmed, started from his bed, and running to the window, beheld a
cavalcade of persons well mounted, and distinguished by blue cockades.  They were generally
attired like jockies, with gold-laced hats and buckskin breeches, and one of them bore a standard
of blue silk, inscribed in white letters, LIBERTY AND THE LANDED INTEREST. He who rode at their
head was a jolly figure, of a florid complexion and round belly, seemingly turned of fifty,
and, in all appearance, of a choleric disposition.  As they approached the market-place, they
waved their hats, huzzaed, and cried aloud, NO FOREIGN CONNEXIONS!--OLD ENGLAND FOR EVER! 
This acclamation, however, was not so loud or universal, but that our adventurer could distinctly
hear a counter-cry from the populace of, NO SLAVERY!--NO POPISH PRETENDER! an insinuation so
ill relished by the cavaliers, that they began to ply their horsewhips among the multitude,
and were, in their turn, saluted with a discharge or volley of stones, dirt, and dead cats;
in consequence of which some teeth were demolished, and many surtouts defiled.

Our adventurer's attention was soon called off from this scene, to contemplate another procession
of people on foot, adorned with bunches of orange ribbons, attended by a regular band of music,
playing God save great George our King, and headed by a thin swarthy personage, of a sallow
aspect, and large goggling eyes, arched over with two thick semicircles of hair, or rather
bristles, jet black, and frowsy.  His apparel was very gorgeous, though his address was very
awkward; he was accompanied by the mayor, recorder, and heads of the corporation, in their
formalities.  His ensigns were known by the inscription, Liberty of Conscience, and the Protestant
Succession; and the people saluted him as he passed with repeated cheers, that seemed to prognosticate
success.  He had particularly ingratiated himself with the good women, who lined the street,
and sent forth many ejaculatory petitions in his favour.

Sir Launcelot immediately comprehended the meaning of this solemnity.  He perceived it was
the prelude to the election of a member to represent the county in parliament, and he was seized
with an eager desire to know the names and characters of the competitors.

In order to gratify this desire, he made repeated application to the bell-rope that depended
from the ceiling of his apartment; but this produced nothing, except the repetition of the
words, "Coming, sir," which echoed from three or four different corners of the house.  The
waiters were so distracted by a variety of calls, that they stood motionless, in the state
of the schoolman's ass between two bundles of hay, incapable of determining where they should
first offer their attendance.

Our knight's patience was almost exhausted, when Crabshaw entered the room, in a very strange
equipage.  One half of his face appeared close shaved, and the other covered with lather, while
the blood trickled in two rivulets from his nose, upon a barber's cloth that was tucked under
his chin; he looked grim with indignation, and under his left arm carried his cutlass, unsheathed.
Where he had acquired so much of the profession of knight-errantry we shall not pretend to
determine; but certain it is, he fell on his knees before Sir Launcelot, crying, with an accent
of grief and distraction, "In the name of St. George for England, I beg a boon, Sir Knight,
and thy compliance I demand, before the peacock and the ladies."

Sir Launcelot, astonished at this address, replied in a lofty strain, "Valiant squire, thy
boon is granted, provided it doth not contravene the laws of the land, and the constitution
of chivalry."  "Then I crave leave," answered Crabshaw, "to challenge and defy to mortal combat
that caitiff barber who hath left me in this piteous condition; and I vow by the peacock, that
I will not shave my beard, until I have shaved his head from his shoulders.  So may I thrive
in the occupation of an arrant squire."

Before his master had time to inquire into particulars, they were joined by a decent man in
boots, who was likewise a traveller, and had seen the rise and progress of Timothy's disaster.
He gave the knight to understand, that Crabshaw had sent for a barber, and already undergone
one half of the operation, when the operator received the long-expected message from both the
gentlemen who stood candidates at the election. The double summons was no sooner intimated
to him, than he threw down his bason, and retired with precipitation, leaving the squire in
the suds. Timothy, incensed at this desertion, followed him with equal celerity into the street,
where he collared the shaver, and insisted upon being entirely trimmed, on pain of the bastinado.
The other finding himself thus arrested, and having no time to spare for altercation, lifted
up his fist, and discharged it upon the snout of Crabshaw with such force, that the unfortunate
aggressor was fain to bite the ground, while the victor hastened away, in hope of touching
the double wages of corruption.

The knight being informed of these circumstances, told Timothy with a smile, that he should
have liberty to defy the barber; but, in the meantime, he ordered him to saddle Bronzomarte,
and prepare for immediate service.  While the squire was thus employed, his master engaged
in conversation with the stranger, who happened to be a London dealer travelling for orders,
and was well acquainted with the particulars which our adventurer wanted to know.

It was from this communicative tradesman he learned, that the competitors were Sir Valentine
Quickset and Mr. Isaac Vanderpelft; the first a mere fox-hunter, who depended for success in
his election upon his interest among the high-flying gentry; the other a stock jobber and contractor
of foreign extract, not without a mixture of Hebrew blood, immensely rich, who was countenanced
by his Grace of----, and supposed to have distributed large sums in securing a majority of
votes among the yeomanry of the county, possessed of small freeholds, and copyholders, a great
number of which last resided in this borough.  He said these were generally dissenters and
weavers; and that the mayor, who was himself a manufacturer, had received a very considerable
order for exportation, in consequence of which it was believed he would support Mr. Vanderpelft
with all his influence and credit.

Sir Launcelot, roused at this intelligence, called for his armour, which being buckled on in
a hurry, he mounted his steed, attended by Crabshaw on Gilbert, and rode immediately into the
midst of the multitude by which the hustings were surrounded, just as Sir Valentine Quickset
began to harangue the people from an occasional theatre, formed of a plank supported by the
upper board of the public stocks, and an inferior rib of a wooden cage pitched also for the
accommodation of petty delinquents.

Though the singular appearance of Sir Launcelot at first attracted the eyes of all the spectators,
yet they did not fail to yield attention to the speech of his brother-knight, Sir Valentine,
which ran in the following strain:--"Gentlemen vreeholders of this here county, I shan't pretend
to meake a vine flourishing speech--I'm a plain-spoken man, as you all know.  I hope I shall
always speak my maind without vear or vavour, as the zaying is.  'T is the way of the Quicksets--we
are no upstarts, nor vorreigners, nor have we any Jewish blood in our veins; we have lived
in this here neighbourhood time out of mind, as you all know, and possess an estate of vive
thousand clear, which we spend at whoam, among you, in old English hospitality.  All my vorevathers
have been parliament-men, and I can prove that ne'er a one o' um gave a zingle vote for the
court since the Revolution.  Vor my own peart, I value not the ministry three skips of a louse,
as the zaying is--I ne'er knew but one minister that was an honest man, and vor all the rest,
I care not if they were hanged as high as Haman, with a pox to' un.  I am, thank God, a vree-born,
true-hearted Englishman, and a loyal, thof unworthy, son of the Church--vor all they have done
vor H----r, I'd vain know what they have done vor the Church, with a vengeance--vor my own
peart, I hate all vorreigners and vorreign measures, whereby this poor nation is broken-backed
with a dismal load of debt, and the taxes rise so high that the poor cannot get bread.  Gentlemen
vreeholders of this county, I value no minister a vig's end, d'ye see; if you will vavour me
with your votes and interest, whereby I may be returned, I'll engage one half of my estate
that I never cry yea to your shillings in the pound, but will cross the ministry in everything,
as in duty bound, and as becomes an honest vreeholder in the ould interest--but, if you sell
your votes and your country for hire, you will be detested in this here world, and damned in
the next to all eternity: so I leave every man to his own conscience."

This eloquent oration was received by his own friends with loud peals of applause, which, however,
did not discourage his competitor, who, confident of his own strength, ascended the rostrum,
or, in other words, an old cask, set upright for the purpose.  Having bowed all round to the
audience, with a smile of gentle condescension, he told them how ambitious he was of the honour
to represent this county in parliament, and how happy he found himself in the encouragement
of his friends, who had so unanimously agreed to support his pretensions.  He said, over and
above the qualifications he possessed among them, he had fourscore thousand pounds in his pocket,
which he had acquired by commerce, the support of the nation, under the present happy establishment,
in defence of which he was ready to spend the last farthing.  He owned himself a faithful subject
to his Majesty King George, sincerely attached to the Protestant succession, in detestation
and defiance of a popish, an abjured, and outlawed Pretender; and declared that he would exhaust
his substance and his blood, if necessary, in maintaining the principles of the glorious Revolution.
"This," cried he, "is the solid basis and foundation upon which I stand."

These last words had scarce proceeded from his mouth, when the head of the barrel or puncheon
on which he stood, being frail and infirm, gave way, so that down he went with a crash, and
in a twinkling disappeared from the eyes of the astonished beholders.  The fox-hunters, perceiving
his disaster, exclaimed, in the phrase and accent of the chase, "Stole away! stole away!" and
with hideous vociferation, joined in the sylvan chorus which the hunters halloo when the hounds
are at fault.

The disaster of Mr. Vanderpelft was soon repaired by the assiduity of his friends, who disengaged
him from the barrel in a trice, hoisted him on the shoulders of four strong weavers, and, resenting
the unmannerly exultation of their antagonists, began to form themselves in order of battle.

An obstinate fray would have undoubtedly ensued, had not their mutual indignation given way
to their curiosity, at the motion of our knight, who had advanced into the middle between the
two fronts, and waving his hand as a signal for them to give attention, addressed himself to
them, with graceful demeanour, in these words:--"Countrymen, friends, and fellow-citizens,
you are this day assembled to determine a point of the utmost consequence to yourselves and
your posterity; a point that ought to be determined by far other weapons than brutal force
and factious clamour.  You, the freemen of England, are the basis of that excellent constitution
which hath long flourished the object of envy and admiration.  To you belongs the inestimable
privilege of choosing a delegate properly qualified to represent you in the High Court of Parliament.
This is your birthright,--inherited from your ancestors, obtained by their courage, and sealed
with their blood.  It is not only your birthright, which you should maintain in defiance of
all danger, but also a sacred trust, to be executed with the most scrupulous care and fidelity.
The person whom you trust ought not only to be endued with the most inflexible integrity, but
should likewise possess a fund of knowledge that may enable him to act as a part of the legislature.
He must be well acquainted with the history, the constitution, and the laws of his country;
he must understand the forms of business, the extent of the royal prerogative, the privilege
of parliament, the detail of government, the nature and regulation of the finances, the different
branches of commerce, the politics that prevail, and the connexions that subsist among the
different powers of Europe; for on all these subjects the deliberations of a House of Commons
occasionally turn.

"But these great purposes will never be answered by electing an illiterate savage, scarce qualified,
in point of understanding, to act as a country justice of peace, a man who has scarce ever
travelled beyond the excursion of a fox-chase, whose conversation never rambles farther than
his stable, his kennel, and the barnyard; who rejects decorum as degeneracy, mistakes rusticity
for independence, ascertains his courage by leaping over gates and ditches, and founds his
triumph on feats of drinking; who holds his estate by a factious tenure, professes himself
the blind slave of a party, without knowing the principles that gave it birth, or the motives
by which it is actuated, and thinks that all patriotism consists in railing indiscriminately
at ministers, and obstinately opposing every measure of the administration.  Such a man, with
no evil intentions of his own, might be used as a dangerous tool in the hands of a desperate
faction, by scattering the seeds of disaffection, embarrassing the wheels of government, and
reducing the whole kingdom to anarchy."

Here the knight was interrupted by the shouts and acclamations of the Vanderpelfites, who cried
aloud, "Hear him! hear him! long life to the iron-cased orator."  This clamour subsiding, he
prosecuted his harangue to the following effect:--

"Such a man as I have described may be dangerous from ignorance, but is neither so mischievous,
nor so detestable as the wretch who knowingly betrays his trust, and sues to be the hireling
and prostitute of a weak and worthless minister; a sordid knave, without honour or principle,
who belongs to no family whose example can reproach him with degeneracy, who has no country
to command his respect, no friend to engage his affection, no religion to regulate his morals,
no conscience to restrain his iniquity, and who worships no God but Mammon; an insinuating
miscreant, who undertakes for the dirtiest work of the vilest administration; who practises
national usury, receiving by wholesale the rewards of venality, and distributing the wages
of corruption by retail."

In this place our adventurer's speech was drowned in the acclamations of the fox-hunters, who
now triumphed in their turn, and hoicksed the speaker, exclaiming, "Well opened, Jowler--to'
un, to' un again, Sweetlips! hey, Merry, Whitefoot!"  After a short interruption, he thus resumed
his discourse:--

"When such a caitiff presents himself to you, like the devil, with a temptation in his hand,
avoid him as if he were in fact the devil--it is not the offering of disinterested love, for
what should induce him, who has no affections, to love you, to whose persons he is an utter
stranger? alas! it is not a benevolence, but a bribe.  He wants to buy you at one market that
he may sell you at another.  Without doubt his intention is to make an advantage of his purchase,
and this aim he cannot accomplish but by sacrificing, in some sort, your interest, your independency,
to the wicked designs of a minister, as he can expect no gratification for the faithful discharge
of his duty.  But, even if he should not find an opportunity of selling you to advantage, the
crime, the shame, the infamy, will still be the same in you, who, baser than the most abandoned
prostitutes, have sold yourselves and your posterity for hire--for a paltry price, to be refunded
with interest by some minister, who will indemnify himself out of your own pockets; for, after
all, you are bought and sold with your own money--the miserable pittance you may now receive
is no more than a pitcher full of water thrown in to moisten the sucker of that pump which
will drain you to the bottom.  Let me therefore advise and exhort you, my countrymen, to avoid
the opposite extremes of the ignorant clown and the designing courtier, and choose a man of
honesty, intelligence, and moderation, who will"----

The doctrine of moderation was a very unpopular subject in such an assembly; and, accordingly,
they rejected it as one man.  They began to think the stranger wanted to set up for himself;
a supposition that could not fail to incense both sides equally, as they were both zealously
engaged in their respective causes.  The Whigs and the Tories joined against this intruder,
who, being neither, was treated like a monster, or chimera in politics.  They hissed, they
hooted, and they hallooed; they annoyed him with missiles of dirt, sticks, and stones; they
cursed, they threatened and reviled, till, at length, his patience was exhausted.

"Ungrateful and abandoned miscreants!" he cried, "I spoke to you as men and Christians--as
free-born Britons and fellow-citizens; but I perceive you are a pack of venal, infamous scoundrels,
and I will treat you accordingly."  So saying, he brandished his lance, and riding into the
thickest of the concourse, laid about him with such dexterity and effect, that the multitude
was immediately dispersed, and he retired without further molestation.

The same good fortune did not attend squire Crabshaw in his retreat.  The ludicrous singularity
of his features, and the half-mown crop of hair that bristled from one side of his countenance,
invited some wags to make merry at his expense; one of them clapped a furze-bush under the
tail of Gilbert, who, feeling himself thus stimulated a posteriori, kicked and plunged, and
capered in such a manner, that Timothy could hardly keep the saddle.  In this commotion he
lost his cap and his periwig, while the rabble pelted him in such a manner, that, before he
could join his master, he looked like a pillar, or rather a pillory of mud.

CHAPTER TEN

WHICH SHOWETH THAT HE WHO PLAYS AT BOWLS, WILL SOMETIMES MEET WITH RUBBERS.

Sir Launcelot, boiling with indignation at the venality and faction of the electors, whom he
had harangued to so little purpose, retired with the most deliberate disdain towards one of
the gates of the town, on the outside of which his curiosity was attracted by a concourse of
people, in the midst of whom stood Mr. Ferret, mounted upon a stool, with a kind of satchel
hanging round his neck, and a phial displayed in his right hand, while he held forth to the
audience in a very vehement strain of elocution.

Crabshaw thought himself happily delivered when he reached the suburbs, and proceeded without
halting; but his master mingled with the crowd, and heard the orator express himself to this
effect:--

"Very likely you may undervalue me and my medicine, because I don't appear upon a stage of
rotten boards, in a shabby velvet coat, and tie-periwig, with a foolish fellow in a motley
coat, to make you laugh, by making wry faces; but I scorn to use these dirty arts for engaging
your attention.  These paltry tricks, ad captandum vulgus, can have no effect but on idiots;
and if you are idiots, I don't desire you should be my customers.  Take notice, I don't address
you in the style of a mountebank, or a High German doctor; and yet the kingdom is full of mountebanks,
empirics, and quacks.  We have quacks in religion, quacks in physic, quacks in law, quacks
in politics, quacks in patriotism, quacks in government--High German quacks, that have blistered,
sweated, bled, and purged the nation into an atrophy.  But this is not all; they have not only
evacuated her into a consumption, but they have intoxicated her brain, until she is become
delirious; she can no longer pursue her own interest, or, indeed, rightly distinguish it. 
Like the people of Nineveh, she can hardly tell her right hand from her left; but, as a changeling,
is dazzled and delighted by an ignis fatuus, a Will-o'-the-wisp, an exhalation from the vilest
materials in nature, that leads her astray through Westphalian bogs and deserts, and will one
day break her neck over some barren rocks, or leave her sticking in some H----n pit, or quagmire.

"For my part, if you have a mind to betray your country, I have no objection.  In selling yourselves
and your fellow-citizens, you only dispose of a pack of rascals who deserve to be sold.  If
you sell one another, why should not I sell this here Elixir of Long Life, which, if properly
used, will protract your days till you shall have seen your country ruined.  I shall not pretend
to disturb your understandings, which are none of the strongest, with a hotchpotch of unintelligible
terms, such as Aristotle's four principles of generation, unformed matter, privation, efficient,
and final causes.  Aristotle was a pedantic blockhead, and still more knave than fool.  The
same censure we may safely put on that wiseacre, Dioscorides, with his faculties of simples--
his seminal, specific, and principal virtues; and that crazy commentator, Galen, with his four
elements, elementary qualities, his eight complexions, his harmonies and discords.  Nor shall
I expatiate on the alkahest of that mad scoundrel, Paracelsus, with which he pretended to reduce
flints into salt; nor archaeus or spiritus rector of that visionary Van Helmont, his simple,
elementary water, his gas, ferments, and transmutations; nor shall I enlarge upon the salt,
sulphur, and oil, the acidum vagum, the mercury of metals, and the volatilised vitriol of other
modern chemists, a pack of ignorant, conceited, knavish rascals, that puzzle your weak heads
with such jargon, just as a Germanised m----r throws dust in your eyes, by lugging in and ringing
the changes on the balance of power, the Protestant religion, and your allies on the continent;
acting like the juggler, who picks your pockets while he dazzles your eyes and amuses your
fancy with twirling his fingers and reciting the gibberish of hocus pocus; for, in fact, the
balance of power is a mere chimera.  As for the Protestant religion, nobody gives himself any
trouble about it; and allies on the continent, we have none, or, at least, none that would
raise an hundred men to save us from perdition, unless we paid an extravagant price for their
assistance.

"But, to return to this here Elixir of Long Life, I might embellish it with a great many high-sounding
epithets; but I disdain to follow the example of every illiterate vagabond, that, from idleness,
turns quack, and advertises his nostrum in the public papers.  I am neither a felonious drysalter
returned from exile, an hospital stump-turner, a decayed staymaker, a bankrupt printer, or
insolvent debtor, released by act of parliament.  I do not pretend to administer medicines
without the least tincture of letters, or suborn wretches to perjure themselves in false affidavits
of cures that were never performed; nor employ a set of led captains to harangue in my praise
at all public places.  I was bred regularly to the profession of chemistry, and have tried
all the processes of alchemy; and I may venture to say, that this here elixir is, in fact,
the chruseon pepuromenon ek puros, the visible, glorious, spiritual body, from whence all other
beings derive their existence, as proceeding from their father the sun, and their mother the
moon; from the sun, as from a living and spiritual gold, which is mere fire; consequently,
the common and universal first-created mover, from whence all moveable things have their distinct
and particular motions; and also from the moon, as from the wife of the sun, and the common
mother of all sublunary things.

"And forasmuch as man is, and must be, the comprehensive end of all creatures, and the microcosm,
he is counselled in the Revelation to buy gold that is thoroughly fired, or rather pure fire,
that he may become rich and like the sun; as, on the contrary, he becomes poor, when he abuses
the arsenical poison; so that, his silver, by the fire, must be calcined to a caput mortuum,
which happens when he will hold and retain the menstruum, out of which he partly exists, for
his own property, and doth not daily offer up the same in the fire of the sun, that the woman
may be clothed with the sun, and become a sun, and thereby rule over the moon; that is to say,
that he may get the moon under his feet.  Now, this here elixir, sold for no more than sixpence
a phial, contains the essence of the alkahest, the archaeus, the catholicon, the menstruum,
the sun, the moon, and, to sum up all in one word, is the true, genuine, unadulterated, unchangeable,
immaculate, and specific chruseon pepuromenon ek puros."

The audience were variously affected by this learned oration.  Some of those who favoured the
pretensions of the Whig candidate, were of opinion, that he ought to be punished for his presumption,
in reflecting so scurrilously on ministers and measures.  Of this sentiment was our adventurer,
though he could not help admiring the courage of the orator, and owning within himself, that
he had mixed some melancholy truths with his scurrility.

Mr. Ferret would not have stood so long in his rostrum unmolested, had not he cunningly chosen
his station immediately without the jurisdiction of the town, whose magistrates therefore could
not take cognisance of his conduct; but application was made to the constable of the other
parish, while our nostrum-monger proceeded in his speech, the conclusion of which produced
such an effect upon his hearers, that his whole cargo was immediately exhausted.  He had just
stepped down from his stool, when the constable with his staff arrived, and took him under
his guidance.  Mr. Ferret, on this occasion, attempted to interest the people in his behalf,
by exhorting them to vindicate the liberty of the subject against such an act of oppression;
but finding them deaf to the tropes and figures of his elocution, he addressed himself to our
knight, reminding him of his duty to protect the helpless and the injured, and earnestly soliciting
his interposition.

Sir Launcelot, without making the least reply to his entreaties, resolved to see the end of
this adventure; and, being joined by his squire, followed the prisoner at a distance, measuring
back the ground he had travelled the day before, until he reached another small borough, where
Ferret was housed in the common prison.

While he sat a-horseback, deliberating on the next step he should take, he was accosted by
the voice of Tom Clarke, who called, in a whimpering tone, through a window grated with iron,
"For the love of God, Sir Launcelot, do, dear sir, be so good as to take the trouble to alight,
and come upstairs; I have something to communicate, of consequence to the community in general,
and you in particular.  Pray do, dear Sir Knight. I beg a boon in the name of St. Michael and
St. George for England."

Our adventurer, not a little surprised at this address, dismounted without hesitation, and,
being admitted to the common jail, there found not only his old friend Tom, but also the uncle,
sitting on a bench, with a woollen night-cap on his head, and a pair of spectacles on his nose,
reading very earnestly in a book, which he afterwards understood was entitled, The Life and
Adventures of Valentine and Orson.  The captain no sooner saw his great pattern enter, than
he rose, and received him with the salutation of, "What cheer, brother?" and before the knight
could answer, added these words: "You see how the land lies--here have Tom and I been fast
ashore these four-and-twenty hours; and this berth we have got by attempting to tow your galley,
brother, from the enemy's harbour. Adds bobs! if we had this here fellow w---eson for a consort,
with all our tackle in order, brother, we'd soon show 'em the topsail, slip our cable, and
down with their barricadoes.  But, howsomever, it don't signify talking--patience is a good
stream-anchor, and will hold, as the saying is--but, d--n my--as for the matter of my boltsprit.--Harkye,
harkye, brother, d--ned hard to engage with three at a time, one upon my bow, one upon my quarter,
and one right a-head, rubbing and drubbing, lying athwart hawse, raking fore and aft, battering
and grappling, and lashing and clashing--adds heart, brother; crash went the bolt-sprit-- down
came the round-top--up with the deadlights--I saw nothing but the stars at noon, lost the helm
of my seven senses, and down I broached upon my broadside."

As Mr. Clarke rightly conceived that his uncle would need an interpreter, he began to explain
these hints, by giving a circumstantial detail of his own and the captain's disaster.

He told Sir Launcelot, that, notwithstanding all his persuasion and remonstrances, Captain
Crowe insisted upon appearing in the character of a knight errant; and, with that view, had
set out from the public-house on the morning that succeeded his vigil in the church.  That
upon the highway they had met with a coach, containing two ladies, one of whom seemed to be
under great agitation; for, as they passed, she struggled with the other, thrust out her head
at the window, and said something which he could not distinctly hear.  That Captain Crowe was
struck with admiration of her unequalled beauty; and he, Tom, no sooner informed him who she
was, than he resolved to set her at liberty, on the supposition that she was under restraint,
and in distress.  That he accordingly unsheathed his cutlass, and, riding after the coach,
commanded the driver to bring to, on pain of death.  That one of the servants, believing the
captain to be a highwayman, presented a blunderbuss, and in all probability would have shot
him on the spot, had not he, the nephew, rode up, and assured them the gentleman was non compos.
That, notwithstanding his intimation, all the three attacked him with the butt-ends of their
horsewhips, while the coach drove on, and although he laid about him with great fury, at last
brought him to the ground, by a stroke on the temple. That Mr. Clarke himself then interposed
in defence of his kinsman, and was also severely beaten.  That two of the servants, upon application
to a justice of the peace, residing near the field of battle, had granted a warrant against
the captain and his nephew, and, without examination, committed them as idle vagrants, after
having seized their horses and their money, on pretence of their being suspected for highwaymen.

"But, as there was no just cause of suspicion," added he, "I am of opinion, the justice is
guilty of a trespass, and may be sued for falsum imprisonamentum, and considerable damages
obtained; for you will please to observe, sir, no justice has a right to commit any person
till after due examination; besides, we were not committed for an assault and battery, audita
querela, nor as wandering lunatics by the statute, who, to be sure, may be apprehended by a
justice's warrant, and locked up and chained, if necessary, or to be sent to their last legal
settlement; but we were committed as vagrants and suspected highwaymen.  Now we do not fall
under the description of vagrants; nor did any circumstance appear to support the suspicion
of robbery; for, to constitute robbery, there must be something taken; but here nothing was
taken but blows, and they were upon compulsion.  Even an attempt to rob, without any taking,
is not felony, but a misdemeanour.  To be sure, there is a taking in deed, and a taking in
law.  But still the robber must be in possession of a thing stolen; and we attempted to steal
ourselves away.  My uncle, indeed, would have released the young lady vi et armis, had his
strength been equal to his inclination; and in so doing, I would have willingly lent my assistance,
both from a desire to serve such a beautiful young creature, and also in regard to your honour,
for I thought I heard her call upon your name."

"Ha! how! what! whose name? say, speak--Heaven and earth!" cried the knight, with marks of
the most violent emotion.--Clarke, terrified at his looks, replied, "I beg your pardon a thousand
times; I did not say positively she did speak those words; but I apprehended she did speak
them.  Words, which may be taken or interpreted by law in a general or common sense, ought
not to receive a strained or unusual construction; and ambiguous words"--"Speak, or be dumb
for ever!" exclaimed Sir Launcelot, in a terrific tone, laying his hand on his sword.  "What
young lady, ha?  What name did she call upon?"--Clarke, falling on his knees, answered, not
without stammering, "Miss Aurelia Darnel; to the best of my recollection, she called upon Sir
Launcelot Greaves."--"Sacred powers!" cried our adventurer, "which way did the carriage proceed?"

When Tom told him that the coach quitted the post-road, and struck away to the right at full
speed, Sir Launcelot was seized with a pensive fit; his head sunk upon his breast, and he mused
in silence for several minutes, with the most melancholy expression on his countenance; then
recollecting himself, he assumed a more composed and cheerful air, and asked several questions
with respect to the arms on the coach, and the liveries worn by the servants?  It was in the
course of this interrogation, that he discovered he had actually conversed with one of the
footmen, who had brought back Crabshaw's horse.  A circumstance that filled him with anxiety
and chagrin, as he had omitted to inquire the name of his master, and the place to which the
coach was travelling; though, in all probability, had he made these inquiries, he would have
received very little satisfaction, there being reason to think the servants were enjoined secrecy.

The knight, in order to meditate on this unexpected adventure, sat down by his old friend,
and entered into a reverie, which lasted about a quarter of an hour, and might have continued
longer had it not been interrupted by the voice of Crabshaw, who bawled aloud, "Look to it,
my masters--as you brew you must drink--this shall be a dear day's work to some of you; for
my part, I say nothing--the braying ass eats little grass--one barber shaves not so close,
but another finds a few stubble-- you wanted to catch a capon, and you've stole a cat--he that
takes up his lodgings in a stable, must be contented to lie upon litter."

The knight, desirous of knowing the cause that prompted Timothy to apothegmatise in this manner,
looked through the grate, and perceived the squire fairly set in the stocks, surrounded by
a mob of people.  When he called to him, and asked the reason of this disgraceful restraint,
Crabshaw replied, "There's no cake, but there's another of the same make --who never climbed,
never fell--after clouds comes clear weather.  'T is all along of your honour, I've met with
this preferment; no deservings of my own, but the interest of my master.  Sir Knight, if you
will slay the justice, hang the constable, release your squire, and burn the town, your name
will be famous in story; but, if you are content, I am thankful. Two hours are soon spent in
such good company; in the meantime, look to 'un, jailor, there's a frog in the stocks."

Sir Launcelot, incensed at this affront offered to his servant, advanced to the prison door,
but found it fast locked; and when he called to the turnkey, he was given to understand, that
he himself was prisoner. Enraged at this intimation, he demanded at whose suit, and was answered
through the wicket, "At the suit of the King, in whose name I will hold you fast, with God's
assistance."

The knight's looks now began to lighten; he rolled his eyes around; and snatching up an oaken
bench, which three ordinary men could scarce have lifted from the ground, he, in all likelihood,
would have shattered the door in pieces, had not he been restrained by the interposition of
Mr. Clarke, who entreated him to have a little patience, assuring him he would suggest a plan
that would avenge himself amply on the justice, without any breach of the peace.  "I say the
justice," added Tom, "because it must be his doing.  He is a little petulant sort of a fellow,
ignorant of the law, guilty of numberless irregularities, and if properly managed, may, for
this here act of arbitrary power, be not only cast in a swingeing sum, but even turned out
of the commission with disgrace."

This was a very seasonable hint, in consequence of which the bench was softly replaced, and
Captain Crowe deposited the poker, with which he had armed himself, to second the efforts of
Sir Launcelot.  They now, for the first time, perceived that Ferret had disappeared; and, upon
inquiry, found that he was in fact the occasion of the knight's detention and the squire's
disgrace.

CHAPTER ELEVEN

DESCRIPTION OF A MODERN MAGISTRATE.

Before the knight would take any resolution for extricating himself from his present embarrassment,
he desired to be better acquainted with the character and circumstances of the justice by whom
he had been confined, and likewise to understand the meaning of his own detention.  To be informed
in this last particular, he renewed his dialogue with the turnkey, who told him through the
grate, that Ferret no sooner perceived him in the jail without his offensive arms, which he
had left below, than he desired to be carried before the justice, where he had given information
against the knight, as a violator of the public peace, who strolled about the country with
unlawful arms, rendering the highways unsafe, encroaching upon the freedom of elections, putting
his majesty's liege subjects in fear of their lives, and, in all probability, harbouring more
dangerous designs under an affected cloak of lunacy. Ferret, upon this information, had been
released, and entertained as an evidence for the King; and Crabshaw was put into the stocks,
as an idle stroller.

Sir Launcelot, being satisfied in these particulars, addressed himself to his fellow-prisoners,
and begged they would communicate what they knew respecting the worthy magistrate, who had
been so premature in the execution of his office.  This request was no sooner signified, than
a crew of naked wretches crowded around him, and, like a congregation of rooks, opened their
throats all at once, in accusation of Justice Gobble. The knight was moved at this scene, which
he could not help comparing, in his own mind, to what would appear upon a much more awful occasion,
when the cries of the widow and the orphan, the injured and oppressed, would be uttered at
the tribunal of an unerring Judge, against the villanous and insolent authors of their calamity.

When he had, with some difficulty, quieted their clamours, and confined his interrogation to
one person of a tolerably decent appearance, he learned, that Justice Gobble, whose father
was a tailor, had for some time served as a journeyman hosier in London, where he had picked
up some law terms, by conversing with hackney writers and attorneys' clerks of the lowest order;
that, upon the death of his master, he had insinuated himself into the good graces of the widow,
who took him for her husband, so that he became a person of some consideration, and saved money
apace; that his pride, increasing with his substance, was reinforced by the vanity of his wife,
who persuaded him to retire from business, that they might live genteelly in the country; that
his father dying, and leaving a couple of houses in this town, Mr. Gobble had come down with
his lady to take possession, and liked the place so well, as to make a more considerable purchase
in the neighbourhood; that a certain peer being indebted to him in the large way of his business,
and either unable or unwilling to pay the money, had compounded the debt, by inserting his
name in the commission; since which period his own insolence, and his wife's ostentation, had
exceeded all bounds; that, in the execution of his authority, he had committed a thousand acts
of cruelty and injustice against the poorer sort of people, who were unable to call him to
a proper account; that his wife domineered with a more ridiculous, though less pernicious usurpation,
among the females of the place; that, in a word, she was the subject of continual mirth, and
he the object of universal detestation.

Our adventurer, though extremely well disposed to believe what was said to the prejudice of
Gobble, would not give entire credit to this description, without first inquiring into the
particulars of his conduct. He therefore asked the speaker, what was the cause of his particular
complaint.  "For my own part, sir," said he, "I lived in repute, and kept a shop in this here
town, well furnished with a great variety of articles.  All the people in the place were my
customers; but what I and many others chiefly depended upon, was the extraordinary sale at
two annual customary fairs, to which all the country people in the neighbourhood resorted to
lay out their money.  I had employed all my stock, and even engaged my credit, to procure a
large assortment of goods for the Lammas market; but, having given my vote in the election
of a vestry-clerk, contrary to the interest of Justice Gobble, he resolved to work my ruin.
He suppressed the annual fairs, by which a great many people, especially publicans, earned
the best part of their subsistence. The country people resorted to another town.  I was overstocked
with a load of perishable commodities, and found myself deprived of the best part of my home
customers, by the ill-nature and revenge of the justice, who employed all his influence among
the common people, making use of threats and promises, to make them desert my shop, and give
their custom to another person, whom he settled in the same business under my nose. Being thus
disabled from making punctual payments, my commodities spoiling, and my wife breaking her heart,
I grew negligent and careless, took to drinking, and my affairs went to wreck.  Being one day
in liquor, and provoked by the fleers and taunts of the man who had set up against me, I struck
him at his own door; upon which I was carried before the justice, who treated me with such
insolence, that I became desperate, and not only abused him in the execution of his office,
but also made an attempt to lay violent hands upon his person.  You know, sir, when a man is
both drunk and desperate, he cannot be supposed to have any command of himself.  I was sent
hither to jail.  My creditors immediately seized my effects; and, as they were not sufficient
to discharge my debts, a statute of bankruptcy was taken out against me; so that here I must
lie, until they think proper to sign my certificate, or the parliament shall please to pass
an act for the relief of insolvent debtors."

The next person who presented himself in the crowd of accusers was a meagre figure, with a
green apron, who told the knight that he had kept a public-house in town for a dozen years,
and enjoyed a good trade, which was in a great measure owing to a skittle-ground, in which
the best people of the place diverted themselves occasionally.  That Justice Gobble, being
disobliged at his refusing to part with a gelding which he had bred for his own use, first
of all shut up the skittle-ground; but, finding the publican still kept his house open, he
took care that he should be deprived of his licence, on pretence that the number of ale-houses
was too great, and that this man had been bred to another employment.  The poor publican being
thus deprived of his bread, was obliged to try the staymaking business, to which he had served
an apprenticeship; but being very ill qualified for this profession, he soon fell to decay
and contracted debts, in consequence of which he was now in prison, where he had no other support
but what arose from the labour of his wife, who had gone to service.

The next prisoner who preferred his complaint against the unrighteous judge was a poacher,
at whose practices Justice Gobble had for some years connived, so as even to screen him from
punishment, in consideration of being supplied with game gratis, till at length he was disappointed
by accident.  His lady had invited guests to an entertainment, and bespoke a hare, which the
poacher undertook to furnish.  He laid his snares accordingly overnight, but they were discovered,
and taken away by the gamekeeper of the gentleman to whom the ground belonged.  All the excuses
the poacher could make proved ineffectual in appeasing the resentment of the justice and his
wife at being thus disconcerted.  Measures were taken to detect the delinquent in the exercise
of his illicit occupation; he was committed to safe custody, and his wife, with five bantlings,
was passed to her husband's settlement in a different part of the country.

A stout squat fellow, rattling with chains, had just taken up the ball of accusation, when
Sir Launcelot was startled with the appearance of a woman, whose looks and equipage indicated
the most piteous distress.  She seemed to be turned of the middle age, was of a lofty carriage,
tall, thin, weather-beaten, and wretchedly attired; her eyes were inflamed with weeping, and
her looks displayed that wildness and peculiarity which denote distraction.  Advancing to Sir
Launcelot, she fell upon her knees, and, clasping her hands together, uttered the following
rhapsody in the most vehement tone of affliction:--

"Thrice potent, generous, and august emperor; here let my knees cleave to the earth, until
thou shalt do me justice on that inhuman caitiff Gobble. Let him disgorge my substance which
he hath devoured; let him restore to my widowed arms my child, my boy, the delight of my eyes,
the prop of my life, the staff of my sustenance, whom he hath torn from my embrace, stolen,
betrayed, sent into captivity, and murdered!  Behold these bleeding wounds upon his lovely
breast! see how they mangle his lifeless corse!  Horror! give me my child, barbarians! his
head shall lie upon his Suky's bosom--she will embalm him with her tears.  Ha! plunge him in
the deep!--shall my boy then float in a watery tomb?  Justice, most mighty emperor! justice
upon the villain who hath ruined us all!  May Heaven's dreadful vengeance overtake him! may
the keen storm of adversity strip him of all his leaves and fruit! may peace forsake his mind,
and rest be banished from his pillow, so that all his days shall be filled with reproach and
sorrow, and all his nights be haunted with horror and remorse! may he be stung by jealousy
without cause, and maddened by revenge without the means of execution! may all his offspring
be blighted and consumed, like the mildewed ears of corn, except one that shall grow up to
curse his old age, and bring his hoary head with sorrow to the grave, as he himself has proved
a curse to me and mine!"

The rest of the prisoners, perceiving the knight extremely shocked at her misery and horrid
imprecation, removed her by force from his presence, and conveyed her to another room; while
our adventurer underwent a violent agitation, and could not for some minutes compose himself
so well as to inquire into the nature of this wretched creature's calamity.

The shopkeeper, of whom he demanded this satisfaction, gave him to understand that she was
born a gentlewoman, and had been well educated; that she married a curate, who did not long
survive his nuptials, and afterwards became the wife of one Oakley, a farmer in opulent circumstances.
That after twenty years' cohabitation with her husband, he sustained such losses by the distemper
among the cattle, as he could not repair; and that this reverse of fortune was supposed to
have hastened his death.  That the widow, being a woman of spirit, determined to keep up and
manage the farm, with the assistance of an only son, a very promising youth, who was already
contracted in marriage with the daughter of another wealthy farmer.  Thus the mother had a
prospect of retrieving the affairs of her family, when all her hopes were dashed and destroyed
by a ridiculous pique which Mrs. Gobble conceived against the young farmer's sweetheart, Mrs.
Susan Sedgemoor.

This young woman chancing to be at a country assembly, where the gravedigger of the parish
acted as master of the ceremonies, was called out to dance before Miss Gobble, who happened
to be there present also with her mother.  The circumstance was construed into an unpardonable
affront by the justice's lady, who abused the director in the most opprobrious terms for his
insolence and ill manners; and retiring in a storm of passion, vowed revenge against the saucy
minx who had presumed to vie in gentility with Miss Gobble.  The justice entered into her resentment.
The gravedigger lost his place; and Suky's lover, young Oakley, was pressed for a soldier.
Before his mother could take any steps for his discharge, he was hurried away to the East Indies,
by the industry and contrivance of the justice.  Poor Suky wept and pined until she fell into
a consumption.  The forlorn widow, being thus deprived of her son, was overwhelmed with grief
to such a degree, that she could no longer manage her concerns.  Everything went backwards;
she ran in arrears with her landlord; and the prospect of bankruptcy aggravated her affliction,
while it added to her incapacity.  In the midst of these disastrous circumstances, news arrived
that her son Greaves had lost his life in a sea engagement with the enemy; and these tidings
almost instantly deprived her of reason.  Then the landlord seized for his rent, and she was
arrested at the suit of Justice Gobble, who had bought up one of her debts in order to distress
her, and now pretended that her madness was feigned.

When the name of Greaves was mentioned, our adventurer started and changed colour; and, now
the story was ended, asked, with marks of eager emotion, if the name of the woman's first husband
was not Wilford. A good dressing of well-rotted manure, put on the ground this winter when it is
not frozen, will start off the plants briskly in the spring. The same is true for asparagus.

Mr. Russel Heath, Carpenteria, Cal., has an "English walnut orchard" of two hundred acres of rich,
level land, near the sea-shore. The trees are from ten to twenty-five years planted. His crop in
1882 was 630 sacks of 70 pounds each; this season he expects the harvest will aggregate about
one-third more.

Gardener's Monthly: The writer found among the gardeners in Canada, when in that country recently,
that the English plan of preserving grapes in bottles of water was in not uncommon use. The bunches
are cut with pieces of stems, and then so arranged that the ends are in bottles of water.
By this plan the grapes can be preserved far into the spring season.

The American Cultivator: "Can you tell we what kind of weather we may expect next month?" wrote
a farmer to the editor of his paper, and the editor replied: "It
is my belief that the weather next month will be like your subscription
bill."

The farmer wondered for an hour what the editor was driving at, when he happened to think
of the word "unsettled," and he sent a postal note forthwith.

The Farmer and Fruit Grower: Mr. Willis, Lamer, a prominent fruit grower of the Cobden region,
says he very distinctly remembers that the freeze of 1864 killed young fruit trees to the snow
line, and that he cut his peach trees to that line, and saved that much. In 1864 the temperature
was about the same as it was on January 5, 1884--in the neighborhood of 21 degrees below zero.
Mr. Lamer thought no damage was done to strawberry plants.

A pomologist gives the following excellent advice in regard to maintaining
the fertility of fruit lands: "Encourage the utmost variety of vegetable
growth near and upon your orchard lands, and never rob the soil of
its honest dues.

Give judicious and thorough cultivation and pruning; and with our generous soils and climate,
I do not believe the child is yet born that will live to see our orchards languish on account
of poverty of soil, or any necessity arise for the importation of fertilizers."

The Country Gentleman says two things are necessary for the growing of good asparagus, namely,
plenty of room for the plant to grow, and copious manuring. The latter
is best applied to thick beds by covering the whole surface with manure
two or three inches thick, late in autumn, and forking it in very
early in spring, before the new shoots start. Thick beds, however,
should not be planted, but the plants allowed three or four feet each
way to each. Three by five is a common and suitable distance, and
large stalks may be obtained in this way.  Disordered with these reflections, he imparted them to the
justice, who had in vain caused search to be made for Ferret, and was now extremely well inclined
to set the knight and his friends at liberty, though he did not at all suspect the quality
and importance of our adventurer.  He could not, however, resist the temptation of displaying
the authority of his office, and therefore ordered the prisoners to be brought before his tribunal,
that, in the capacity of a magistrate, he might give them a severe reproof, and proper caution
with respect to their future behaviour.

They were accordingly led through the street in procession, guarded by the constable and his
gang, followed by Crabshaw, who had by this time been released from the stocks, and surrounded
by a crowd of people, attracted by curiosity.  When they arrived at the justice's house, they
were detained for some time in the passage; then a voice was heard, commanding the constable
to bring in the prisoners, and they were introduced to the hall of audience, where Mr. Gobble
sat in judgment, with a crimson velvet night-cap on his head; and on his right hand appeared
his lady, puffed up with the pride and insolence of her husband's office, fat, frouzy, and
not over-clean, well stricken in years, without the least vestige of an agreeable feature,
having a rubicund nose, ferret eyes, and imperious aspect.  The justice himself was a little,
affected, pert prig, who endeavoured to solemnise his countenance by assuming an air of consequence,
in which pride, impudence, and folly were strangely blended.  He aspired at nothing so much
as the character of an able spokesman; and took all opportunities of holding forth at vestry
and quarter sessions, as well as in the administration of his office in private.  He would
not, therefore, let slip this occasion of exciting the admiration of his hearers, and, in an
authoritative tone, thus addressed our adventurer:--

"The laws of this land has provided--I says as how provision is made by the laws of this here
land, in reverence to delinquems and malefactors, whereby the king's peace is upholden by we
magistrates, who represents his majesty's person, better than in e'er a contagious nation under
the sun; but, howsomever, that there king's peace, and this here magistrate's authority cannot
be adequably and identically upheld, if so be as how criminals escapes unpunished.  Now, friend,
you must be confidentious in your own mind, as you are a notorious criminal, who have trespassed
again the laws on divers occasions and importunities; if I had a mind to exercise the rigour
of the law, according to the authority wherewith I am wested, you and your companions in iniquity
would be sewerely punished by the statue; but we magistrates has a power to litigate the sewerity
of justice, and so I am contented that you should be mercifully dealt withal, and even dismissed."

To this harangue the knight replied, with a solemn and deliberate accent, "If I understand
your meaning aright, I am accused of being a notorious criminal; but nevertheless you are contented
to let me escape with impunity.  If I am a notorious criminal, it is the duty of you, as a
magistrate, to bring me to condign punishment; and if you allow a criminal to escape unpunished,
you are not only unworthy of a place in the commission, but become accessory to his guilt,
and, to all intents and purposes, socius criminis.  With respect to your proffered mercy, I
shall decline the favour; nor do I deserve any indulgence at your hands, for, depend upon it,
I shall show no mercy to you in the steps I intend to take for bringing you to justice.  I
understand that you have been long hackneyed in the ways of oppression, and I have seen some
living monuments of your inhumanity--of that hereafter.  I myself have been detained in prison,
without cause assigned.  I have been treated with indignity, and insulted by jailors and constables;
led through the streets like a felon, as a spectacle to the multitude; obliged to dance attendance
in your passage, and afterwards branded with the name of notorious criminal.--I now demand
to see the information in consequence of which I was detained in prison, the copy of the warrant
of commitment or detainer, and the face of the person by whom I was accused.  I insist upon
a compliance with these demands, as the privileges of a British subject; and if it is refused,
I shall seek redress before a higher tribunal."

The justice seemed to be not a little disturbed at this peremptory declaration; which, however,
had no other effect upon his wife, but that of enraging her choler, and inflaming her countenance.
"Sirrah! sirrah!" cried she, "do you dares to insult a worshipful magistrate on the bench?
--Can you deny that you are a vagram, and a dilatory sort of a person? Han't the man with the
satchel made an affidavy of it?--If I was my husband, I'd lay you fast by the heels for your
resumption, and ferk you with a priminery into the bargain, unless you could give a better
account of yourself--I would."

Gobble, encouraged by this fillip, resumed his petulance, and proceeded in this manner:--"Hark
ye, friend, I might, as Mrs. Gobble very justly observes, trounce you for your audacious behaviour;
but I scorn to take such advantages.  Howsomever, I shall make you give an account of yourself
and your companions; for I believes as how you are in a gang, and all in a story, and perhaps
you may be found one day in a cord.--What are you, friend?  What is your station and degree?"--"I
am a gentleman," replied the knight.--"Ay, that is English for a sorry fellow," said the justice.
"Every idle vagabond, who has neither home nor habitation, trade nor profession, designs himself
a gentleman.  But I must know how you live?"--"Upon my means."--"What are your means?"--"My
estate." "Whence does it arise?"--"From inheritance."--"Your estate lies in brass, and that
you have inherited from nature; but do you inherit lands and tenements?"--"Yes."--"But they
are neither here nor there, I doubt. Come, come, friend, I shall bring you about presently."
Here the examination was interrupted by the arrival of Mr. Fillet the surgeon, who chancing
to pass, and seeing a crowd about the door, went in to satisfy his curiosity.

CHAPTER TWELVE

WHICH SHOWS THERE ARE MORE WAYS TO KILL A DOG THAN HANGING.

Mr. Fillet no sooner appeared in the judgment-chamber of Justice Gobble, than Captain Crowe,
seizing him by the hand, exclaimed, "Body o' me! Doctor, thou'rt come up in the nick of time
to lend us a hand in putting about.--We're a little in the stays here--but howsomever we've
got a good pilot, who knows the coast; and can weather the point, as the saying is. As for
the enemy's vessel, she has had a shot or two already athwart her forefoot; the next, I do
suppose, will strike the hull, and then you will see her taken all a-back."  The doctor, who
perfectly understood his dialect, assured him he might depend upon his assistance; and, advancing
to the knight, accosted him in these words: "Sir Launcelot Greaves, your most humble servant--when
I saw a crowd at the door, I little thought of finding you within, treated with such indignity--yet
I can't help being pleased with an opportunity of proving the esteem and veneration I have
for your person and character.--You will do me particular pleasure in commanding my best services."

Our adventurer thanked him for this instance of his friendship, which he told him he would
use without hesitation; and desired he would procure immediate bail for him and his two friends,
who had been imprisoned contrary to law, without any cause assigned.

During this short dialogue, the justice, who had heard of Sir Launcelot's family and fortune,
though an utter stranger to his person, was seized with such pangs of terror and compunction,
as a grovelling mind may be supposed to have felt in such circumstances; and they seemed to
produce the same unsavoury effects that are so humorously delineated by the inimitable Hogarth,
in his print of Felix on his tribunal, done in the Dutch style.  Nevertheless, seeing Fillet
retire to execute the knight's commands, he recollected himself so far as to tell the prisoners,
there was no occasion to give themselves any farther trouble, for he would release them without
bail or mainprise.  Then discarding all the insolence from his features, and assuming an aspect
of the most humble adulation, he begged the knight ten thousand pardons for the freedoms he
had taken, which were entirely owing to his ignorance of Sir Launcelot's quality.

"Yes, I'll assure you, sir," said the wife, "my husband would have bit off his tongue rather
than say black is the white of your eye, if so be he had known your capacity.--Thank God, we
have been used to deal with gentlefolks, and many's the good pound we have lost by them; but
what of that?  Sure we know how to behave to our betters.  Mr. Gobble, thanks be to God, can
defy the whole world to prove that he ever said an uncivil word, or did a rude thing to a gentleman,
knowing him to be a person of fortune.  Indeed, as to your poor gentry and riffraff, your tag-rag
and bob-tail, or such vulgar scoundrelly people, he has always behaved like a magistrate, and
treated them with the rigger of authority."--"In other words," said the knight, "he has tyrannised
over the poor, and connived at the vices of the rich.  Your husband is little obliged to you
for this confession, woman."--"Woman!" cried Mrs. Gobble, impurpled with wrath, and fixing
her hands on her sides by way of defiance, "I scorn your words.--Marry come up! woman, quotha!
no more a woman than your worship." Then bursting into tears, "Husband," continued she, "if
you had the soul of a louse, you would not suffer me to be abused at this rate; you would not
sit still on the bench, and hear your spouse called such contemptible epitaphs.--Who cares
for his title and his knightship?  You and I, husband, knew a tailor that was made a knight;
but thank God, I have noblemen to stand by me with their privileges and beroguetifs."

At this instant Mr. Fillet returned with his friend, a practitioner in the law, who freely
offered to join in bailing our adventurer, and the other two prisoners, for any sum that should
be required.  The justice perceiving the affair began to grow more and more serious, declared
that he would discharge the warrants and dismiss the prisoners.

Here Mr. Clarke interposing, observed, that against the knight no warrant had been granted,
nor any information sworn to; consequently, as the justice had not complied with the form of
proceeding directed by statute, the imprisonment was coram non judice, void.  "Right, sir,"
said the other lawyer; "if a justice commits a felon for trial without binding over the prosecutor
to the assizes, he shall be fined."--"And again," cried Clarke, "if a justice issues a warrant
for commitment, where there is no accusation, action will lie against the justice."  "Moreover,"
replied the stranger, "if a justice of peace is guilty of any misdemeanour in his office, information
lies against him in Banco Regis, where he shall be punished by fine and imprisonment"  "And,
besides," resumed the accurate Tom, "the same court will grant an information against a justice
of peace, on motion, for sending even a servant to the house of correction or common jail without
sufficient cause."--"True!" exclaimed the other limb of the law, "and, for contempt of the
law, attachment may be had against justices of peace in Banco Regis.  A justice of the peace
was fined a thousand marks for corrupt practices."

With these words, advancing to Mr. Clarke, he shook him by the hand, with the appellation of
brother, saying, "I doubt the justice has got into a cursed hovel."  Mr. Gobble himself seemed
to be of the same opinion.  He changed colour several times during the remarks which the lawyers
had made; and now, declaring that the gentlemen were at liberty, begged, in the most humble
phrase, that the company would eat a bit of mutton with him, and after dinner the affair might
be amicably compromised.

To this proposal our adventurer replied, in a grave and resolute tone, "If your acting in the
commission as a justice of the peace concerned my own particular only, perhaps I should waive
any further inquiry, and resent your insolence no other way but by silent contempt.  If I thought
the errors of your administration proceeded from a good intention, defeated by want of understanding,
I should pity your ignorance, and, in compassion, advise you to desist from acting a part for
which you are so ill qualified; but the preposterous conduct of such a man deeply affects the
interest of the community, especially that part of it, which, from its helpless situation,
is the more entitled to your protection and assistance.  I am, moreover, convinced that your
misconduct is not so much the consequence of an uninformed head, as the poisonous issue of
a malignant heart, devoid of humanity, inflamed with pride, and rankling with revenge.  The
common prison of this little town is filled with the miserable objects of your cruelty and
oppression.  Instead of protecting the helpless, restraining the hands of violence, preserving
the public tranquillity, and acting as a father to the poor, according to the intent and meaning
of that institution of which you are an unworthy member, you have distressed the widow and
the orphan, given a loose to all the insolence of office, embroiled your neighbours by fomenting
suits and animosities, and played the tyrant among the indigent and forlorn.  You have abused
the authority with which you were invested, entailed a reproach upon your office, and, instead
of being revered as a blessing, you are detested as a curse among your fellow-creatures.  This
indeed is generally the case of low fellows, who are thrust into the magistracy without sentiment,
education, or capacity.

"Among other instances of your iniquity, there is now in prison an unhappy woman, infinitely
your superior in the advantages of birth, sense, and education, whom you have, even without
provocation, persecuted to ruin and distraction, after having illegally and inhumanly kidnapped
her only child, and exposed him to a violent death in a foreign land. Ah, caitiff! if you were
to forego all the comforts of life, distribute your means among the poor, and do the severest
penance that ever priestcraft prescribed for the rest of your days, you could not atone for
the ruin of that hapless family; a family through whose sides you cruelly and perfidiously
stabbed the heart of an innocent young woman, to gratify the pride and diabolical malice of
that wretched lowbred woman, who now sits at your right hand as the associate of power and
presumption. All these enactments were under the constitution of 1848 which was silent on drainage,
and the courts annulled most of these as unconstitutional. In 1870 the new constitution was framed
containing a brief provision on drainage.  Where is our admired constitution, the freedom, the security of the subject,
the boasted humanity of the British nation!  Sacred Heaven! if there was no human institution
to take cognisance of such atrocious crimes, I would listen to the dictates of eternal justice,
and, arming myself with the right of nature, exterminate such villains from the face of the earth!"

These last words he pronounced in such a strain, while his eyes lightened with indignation,
that Gobble and his wife underwent the most violent agitation; the constable's teeth chattered
in his head, the jailor trembled, and the whole audience was overwhelmed with consternation.

After a short pause, Sir Launcelot proceeded in a milder strain: "Thank Heaven, the laws of
this country have exempted me from the disagreeable task of such an execution.  To them we
shall have immediate recourse, in three separate actions against you for false imprisonment;
and any other person who has been injured by your arbitrary and wicked proceedings, in me shall
find a warm protector, until you shall be expunged from the commission with disgrace, and have
made such retaliation as your circumstances will allow for the wrongs you have done the community."

In order to complete the mortification and terror of the justice, the lawyer, whose name was
Fenton, declared that, to his certain knowledge, these actions would be reinforced with divers
prosecutions for corrupt practices, which had lain dormant until some person of courage and
influence should take the lead against Justice Gobble, who was the more dreaded, as he acted
under the patronage of Lord Sharpington.  By this time fear had deprived the justice and his
helpmate of the faculty of speech.  They were indeed almost petrified with dismay, and made
no effort to speak, when Mr. Fillet, in the rear of the knight, as he retired with his company,
took his leave of them in these words: "And now, Mr. Justice, to dinner with what appetite
you may."

Our adventurer, though warmly invited to Mr. Fenton's house, repaired to a public inn, where
he thought he should be more at his ease, fully determined to punish and depose Gobble from
his magistracy, to effect a general jail-delivery of all the debtors whom he had found in confinement,
and in particular to rescue poor Mrs. Oakley from the miserable circumstances in which she
was involved.

In the meantime he insisted upon entertaining his friends at dinner, during which many sallies
of sea-wit and good humour passed between Captain Crowe and Dr. Fillet, which last had just
returned from a neighbouring village, whither he was summoned to fish a man's yard-arm, which
had snapt in the slings.  Their enjoyment, however, was suddenly interrupted by a loud scream
from the kitchen, whither Sir Launcelot immediately sprung, with equal eagerness and agility.
There he saw the landlady, who was a woman in years, embracing a man dressed in a sailor's
jacket, while she exclaimed, "It is thy own flesh and blood, so sure as I'm a living soul.--Ah!
poor Greaves, poor Greaves, many a poor heart has grieved for thee!"  To this salutation the
youth replied, "I'm sorry for that, mistress.--How does poor mother? how does Suky Sedgemoor?"

The good woman of the house could not help shedding tears at these interrogations; while Sir
Launcelot, interposing, said, not without emotion, "I perceive you are the son of Mrs. Oakley.--Your
mother is in a bad state of health, but in me you will find a real parent."  Perceiving that
the young man eyed him with astonishment, he gave him to understand that his name was Launcelot
Greaves.

Oakley no sooner heard these words pronounced, than he fell upon his knees, and seizing the
knight's hand, kissed it eagerly, crying, "God for ever bless your honour, I am your name-son,
sure enough--but what of that?  I can earn my bread without being beholden to any man." 

Through all these years I have told myself that, after all, I had done no great wrong. But
sometimes, when the bands were playing and the flags were flying, I knew that I had turned away
from the Grail after I had looked upon it. I knew it to-day when I stood beside that boy's
coffin. I had said that times change. I know now that only the time changes. The spirit does not
die, but it's a stream that goes underground to come up, a clear spring, in unexpected places.
My father died in Mexico.  "Ey, indeed," cried the landlady, "we were all of the same opinion, being as the
report went, that poor Greaves Oakley was killed in battle."  "Lord, mistress," said Oakley,
"there wan't a word of truth in it, I'll assure you.--What, d'ye think I'd tell a lie about
the matter?  Hurt I was, to be sure, but that don't signify; we gave 'em as good as they brought,
and so parted.-- Well, if so be I can't see mother, I'll go and have some chat with Suky. --What
d'ye look so glum for? she an't married, is she?"  "No, no," replied the woman, "not married,
but almost heart-broken.  Since thou wast gone she has done nothing but sighed, and wept, and
pined herself into a decay.  I'm afraid thou hast come too late to save her life."

Oakley's heart was not proof against this information.  Bursting into tears, he exclaimed,
"O my dear, sweet, gentle Suky!  Have I then lived to be the death of her whom I loved more
than the whole world?"  He would have gone instantly to her father's house, but was restrained
by the knight and his company, who had now joined him in the kitchen.

The young man was seated at table, and gave them to understand, that the ship to which he belonged
having arrived in England, he was indulged with a month's leave to see his relations; and that
he had received about fifty pounds in wages and prize-money.  After dinner, just as they began
to deliberate upon the measures to be taken against Gobble, that gentleman arrived at the inn,
and humbly craved admittance.  Mr. Fillet, struck with a sudden idea, retired into another
apartment with the young farmer; while the justice, being admitted to the company, declared
that he came to propose terms of accommodation.  He accordingly offered to ask pardon of Sir
Launcelot in the public papers, and pay fifty pounds to the poor of the parish, as an atonement
for his misbehaviour, provided the knight and his friends would grant him a general release.
Our adventurer told him, he would willingly waive all personal concessions; but, as the case
concerned the community, he insisted upon his leaving off acting in the commission, and making
satisfaction to the parties he had injured and oppressed.  This declaration introduced a discussion,
in the course of which the justice's petulance began to revive; when Fillet, entering the room,
told them he had a reconciling measure to propose, if Mr. Gobble would for a few minutes withdraw.

He rose up immediately, and was shown into the room which Fillet had prepared for his reception.
While he sat musing on this untoward adventure, so big with disgrace and disappointment, young
Oakley, according to the instructions he had received, appeared all at once before him, pointing
to a ghastly wound, which the doctor had painted on his forehead.  The apparition no sooner
presented itself to the eyes of Gobble, than, taking it for granted it was the spirit of the
young farmer whose death he had occasioned, he roared aloud, "Lord have mercy upon us!" and
fell insensible on the floor.  There being found by the company, to whom Fillet had communicated
his contrivance, he was conveyed to bed, where he lay some time before he recovered the perfect
use of his senses. Then he earnestly desired to see the knight, and assured him he was ready
to comply with his terms, inasmuch as he believed he had not long to live.  Advantage was immediately
taken of this salutary disposition.  He bound himself not to act as a justice of the peace,
in any part of Great Britain, under the penalty of five thousand pounds.  He burnt Mrs. Oakley's
note; paid the debts of the shopkeeper; undertook to compound those of the publican, and to
settle him again in business; and, finally, discharged them all from prison, paying the dues
out of his own pocket. These steps being taken with peculiar eagerness, he was removed to his
own house, where he assured his wife he had seen a vision that prognosticated his death; and
had immediate recourse to the curate of the parish for spiritual consolation.

The most interesting part of the task that now remained was to make the widow Oakley acquainted
with her good fortune, in such a manner as might least disturb her spirits, already but too
much discomposed.  For this purpose they chose the landlady, who, after having received proper
directions how to regulate her conduct, visited her in person that same evening.  Finding her
quite calm, and her reflection quite restored, she began with exhorting her to put her trust
in Providence, which would never forsake the cause of the injured widow and fatherless.  She
promised to assist and befriend her on all occasions, as far as her abilities would reach.
She gradually turned the conversation upon the family of the Greaves; and by degrees informed
her, that Sir Launcelot, having learned her situation, was determined to extricate her from
all her troubles.  Perceiving her astonished, and deeply affected at this intimation, she artfully
shifted the discourse, recommended resignation to the divine will, and observed, that this
circumstance seemed to be an earnest of further happiness.

"Oh! I'm incapable of receiving more!" cried the disconsolate widow, with streaming eyes.--"Yet
I ought not to be surprised at any blessing that flows from that quarter.  The family of Greaves
were always virtuous, humane, and benevolent.  This young gentleman's mother was my dear lady
and benefactress:--he himself was suckled at these breasts.  Oh! he was the sweetest, comeliest,
best-conditioned babe!--I loved not my own Greaves with greater affection--but he, alas! is
now no more!"  "Have patience, good neighbour," said the landlady of the White Hart, "that
is more than you have any right to affirm--all that you know of the matter is by common report,
and common report is commonly false; besides, I can tell you I have seen a list of the men
that were killed in Admiral P----'s ship, when he fought the French in the East Indies, and
your son was not in the number."  To this intimation she replied, after a considerable pause,
"Don't, my good neighbour, don't feed me with false hope.--My poor Greaves too certainly perished
in a foreign land--yet he is happy;--had he lived to see me in this condition, grief would
soon have put a period to his days."  "I tell you then," cried the visitant, "he is not dead.
I have seen a letter that mentions his being well since the battle.  You shall come along with
me--you are no longer a prisoner, but shall live at my house comfortably, till your affairs
are settled to your wish."  The poor widow followed her in silent astonishment, and was immediately
accommodated with necessaries.

Next morning her hostess proceeded with her in the same cautious manner, until she was assured
that her son had returned.  Being duly prepared, she was blest with a sight of poor Greaves,
and fainted away in his arms. We shall not dwell upon this tender scene, because it is but
of a secondary concern in the history of our knight-errant.  Let it suffice to say, their mutual
happiness was unspeakable.  She was afterwards visited by Sir Launcelot, whom she no sooner
beheld, than springing forwards with all the eagerness of maternal affection, she clasped him
to her breast, crying, "My dear child! my Launcelot! my pride! my darling! my kind benefactor!
This is not the first time I have hugged you in these arms! Oh! you are the very image of Sir
Everhard in his youth; but you have got the eyes, the complexion, the sweetness, and complacency
of my dear and ever-honoured lady."  This was not in the strain of hireling praise; but the
genuine tribute of esteem and admiration. Still there are men and women here who not only endure
the climate, but praise it unstintingly, and that, too, in the face of physical hardships the
most intense.

The writer heard of a striking illustration of this a few days since which is given herewith:

Mr.
Joseph Jacques is connected with the Vermont Central Railroad in the capacity of master mason.
He is well advanced in years, with a ruddy complexion and hale appearance, while his general
bearing is such as to instantly impress one with his strict honor
and integrity.

Several years ago he became afflicted with most distressing troubles, which prevented the prosecution
of his duties. He was languid, and yet restless, while at times a dizziness would come over him
which seemed almost blinding.
Young Oakley was married to Suky, with whom he received a considerable portion.  The new-married
couple found a farm ready stocked for them on the knight's estate; and the mother enjoyed a
happy retreat in the character of housekeeper at Greavesbury Hall.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

IN WHICH OUR KNIGHT IS TANTALISED WITH A TRANSIENT GLIMPSE OF FELICITY.

The success of our adventurer, which we have particularised in the last chapter, could not
fail of enhancing his character, not only among those who knew him, but also among the people
of the town to whom he was not an utter stranger.  The populace surrounded the house, and testified
their approbation in loud huzzas.  Captain Crowe was more than ever inspired with veneration
for his admired patron, and more than ever determined to pursue his footsteps in the road of
chivalry.  Fillet and his friend the lawyer could not help conceiving an affection, and even
a profound esteem for the exalted virtue, the person, and accomplishments of the knight, dashed
as they were with a mixture of extravagance and insanity. Even Sir Launcelot himself was elevated
to an extraordinary degree of self-complacency on the fortunate issue of his adventure, and
became more and more persuaded that a knight-errant's profession might be exercised, even in
England, to the advantage of the community.  The only person of the company who seemed unanimated
with the general satisfaction was Mr. Thomas Clarke.  He had, not without good reason, laid
it down as a maxim, that knight-errantry and madness were synonymous terms; and that madness,
though exhibited in the most advantageous and agreeable light, could not change its nature,
but must continue a perversion of sense to the end of the chapter.  He perceived the additional
impression which the brain of his uncle had sustained, from the happy manner in which the benevolence
of Sir Launcelot had so lately operated; and began to fear it would be in a little time quite
necessary to have recourse to a commission of lunacy, which might not only disgrace the family
of the Crowes, but also tend to invalidate the settlement which the captain had already made
in favour of our young lawyer.

Perplexed with these cogitations, Mr. Clarke appealed to our adventurer's own reflection. 
He expatiated upon the bad consequences that would attend his uncle's perseverance in the execution
of a scheme so foreign to his faculties; and entreated him, for the love of God, to divert
him from his purpose, either by arguments or authority; as, of all mankind, the knight alone
had gained such an ascendency over his spirits, that he would listen to his exhortations with
respect and submission.

Our adventurer was not so mad, but that he saw and owned the rationality of these remarks.
He readily undertook to employ all his influence with Crowe, to dissuade him from his extravagant
design; and seized the first opportunity of being alone with the captain, to signify his sentiments
on this subject.  "Captain Crowe," said he, "you are then determined to proceed in the course
of knight-errantry?"  "I am," replied the seaman, "with God's help, d'ye see, and the assistance
of wind and weather"-- "What dost thou talk of wind and weather?" cried the knight, in an elevated
tone of affected transport; "without the help of Heaven, indeed, we are all vanity, imbecility,
weakness, and wretchedness; but if thou art resolved to embrace the life of an errant, let
me not hear thee so much as whisper a doubt, a wish, a hope, or sentiment with respect to any
other obstacle, which wind or weather, fire or water, sword or famine, danger or disappointment,
may throw in the way of thy career.  When the duty of thy profession calls, thou must singly
rush upon innumerable hosts of armed men.  Thou must storm the breach in the mouth of batteries
loaded with death and destruction, while, every step thou movest, thou art exposed to the horrible
explosion of subterranean mines, which, being sprung, will whirl thee aloft in air, a mangled
corse, to feed the fowls of heaven.  Thou must leap into the abyss of dreadful caves and caverns,
replete with poisonous toads and hissing serpents; thou must plunge into seas of burning sulphur;
thou must launch upon the ocean in a crazy bark, when the foaming billows roll mountains high--when
the lightning flashes, the thunder roars, and the howling tempest blows, as if it would commix
the jarring elements of air and water, earth and fire, and reduce all nature to the original
anarchy of chaos.  Thus involved, thou must turn thy prow full against the fury of the storm,
and stem the boisterous surge to thy destined port, though at the distance of a thousand leagues;
thou must"----

"Avast, avast, brother," exclaimed the impatient Crowe, "you've got into the high latitudes,
d'ye see.  If so be as you spank it away at that rate, adad, I can't continue in tow--we must
cast off the rope, or 'ware timbers. Then he began to pace the room till in his striding he struck
his foot against the paper he had cast aside. He picked it up, tossing it toward Peter. The boy turned
from his strained watching of his father's face to read the letter. It was the official notification
of the Senate's confirmation of the President's appointment of James Thorold as ambassador
to the Court of St. Jerome.

"Why, father!" Incredulity heightened the boyishness in Peter's tone. James Thorold wheeled around
until he faced him. "Peter," he said huskily, "there's something you'll have to know before I
go to Forsland--if ever I go to Forsland.

You'll have to decide." The boy shrank from the ominous cadence of the words. "Why, I can't
judge for you, dad," he said awkwardly. "Our children are always our ultimate judges," James
Thorold said.

"I have sometimes wondered," he went on, speaking to himself rather than to the puzzled boy, "how the
disciples who met Christ but who did not go his way with him to the end felt when they heard
he had died.

I knew a great man once, Peter. I went his way for a little while, then I took my own. I saw
them bring him, dead, over the way they have brought that boy to-day. I came down to the court-house
that night, and there, just where that boy lies, Peter, I made a promise that I have not kept."

Again
he resumed his pacing, speaking as he went, sometimes in low tones, sometimes with tensity
of voice, always as if urged by some force that was driving him from silence. The boy, leaning
forward at the edge of the chair, watched his father through the first part of the story. Before
the end came he turned away.
"You remember," James Thorold began, his voice pleading patience,
"that I've told you I came to Chicago from Ohio before the war? I
was older than you then, Peter, but I was something of a hero-worshipper,
too. Judge Adams was my hero in those troublous times of the fifties.
I knew him only by sight for a long time, watching him go in and out
of the big white house where he lived.

"An that be all," replied the sailor, "I told you before as how I've got a sweetheart, as true
a hearted girl as ever swung in canvas.  What thof she may have started a hoop in rolling,
that signifies nothing; I'll warrant her tight as a nut-shell."

"She must, in your opinion, be a paragon either of beauty or virtue. Now, as you have given
up the last, you must uphold her charms unequalled, and her person without a parallel."  "I
do, I do uphold she will sail upon a parallel as well as e'er a frigate that was rigged to
the northward of fifty."

"At that rate, she must rival the attractions of her whom I adore; but that I say is impossible.
The perfections of my Aurelia are altogether supernatural; and as two suns cannot shine together
in the same sphere with equal splendour, so I affirm, and will prove with my body, that your
mistress, in comparison with mine, is as a glow-worm to the meridian sun, a rushlight to the
full moon, or a stale mackerel's eye to a pearl of orient."  "Harkee, brother, you might give
good words, however.  An we once fall a-jawing, d'ye see, I can heave out as much bilgewater
as another; and since you besmear my sweetheart, Besselia, I can as well bedaub your mistress
Aurelia, whom I value no more than old junk, pork slush, or stinking stock-fish."

"Enough, enough!--such blasphemy shall not pass unchastised.  In consideration of our having
fed from the same table, and maintained together a friendly, though short intercourse, I will
not demand the combat before you are duly prepared.  Proceed to the first great town, where
you can be furnished with horse and harnessing, with arms offensive and defensive; provide
a trusty squire, assume a motto and device, declare yourself a son of chivalry, and proclaim
the excellence of her who rules your heart.  I shall fetch a compass; and wheresoever we may
chance to meet, let us engage with equal arms in mortal combat, that shall decide and determine
this dispute."

So saying, our adventurer stalked with great solemnity into another apartment; while Crowe,
being sufficiently irritated, snapped his fingers in token of defiance.  Honest Crowe thought
himself scurvily used by a man whom he had cultivated with such humility and veneration; and,
after an incoherent ejaculation of sea oaths, went in quest of his nephew, in order to make
him acquainted with this unlucky transaction.

In the meantime, Sir Launcelot, having ordered supper, retired into his own chamber, and gave
a loose to the most tender emotions of his heart. He recollected all the fond ideas which had
been excited in the course of his correspondence with the charming Aurelia.  He remembered,
with horror, the cruel letter he had received from that young lady, containing a formal renunciation
of his attachment, so unsuitable to the whole tenor of her character and conduct.  He revolved
the late adventure of the coach, and the declaration of Mr. Clarke, with equal eagerness and
astonishment; and was seized with the most ardent desire of unravelling a mystery so interesting
to the predominant passion of his heart.  All these mingled considerations produced a kind
of ferment in the economy of his mind, which subsided into a profound reverie, compounded of
hope and perplexity.

From this trance he was waked by the arrival of his squire, who entered the room with the blood
trickling over his nose, and stood before him without speaking.  When the knight asked whose
livery was that he wore? he replied, "'T is your honour's own livery; I received it on your
account, and hope as you will quit the score."  Then he proceeded to inform his master, that
two officers of the army having come into the kitchen, insisted upon having for their supper
the victuals which Sir Launcelot had bespoke; and that he, the squire, objecting to the proposal,
one of them had seized the poker, and basted him with his own blood; that when he told them
he belonged to a knight-errant, and threatened them with the vengeance of his master, they
cursed and abused him, calling him Sancho Panza, and such dog's names; and bade him tell his
master, Don Quicksot, that, if he made any noise, they would confine him to his cage, and lie
with his mistress, Dulcinea.  "To be sure, sir," said he, "they thought you as great a nincompoop
as your squire-trimtram, like master, like man; but I hope as how you will give them a Rowland
for their Oliver."

"Miscreant!" cried the knight, "you have provoked the gentlemen with your impertinence, and
they have chastised you as you deserve.  I tell thee, Crabshaw, they have saved me the trouble
of punishing thee with my own hands; and well it is for thee, sinner as thou art, that they
themselves have performed the office, for, had they complained to me of thy insolence and rusticity,
by Heaven!  I would have made thee an example to all the impudent squires upon the face of
the earth.  Hence, then! avaunt, caitiff! let his majesty's officers, who perhaps are fatigued
with hard duty in the service of their country, comfort themselves with the supper which was
intended for me, and leave me undisturbed to my own meditations."

Timothy did not require a repetition of this command, which he forthwith obeyed, growling within
himself, that thenceforward he should let every cuckold wear his own horns; but he could not
help entertaining some doubts with respect to the courage of his master, who, he supposed,
was one of those hectors who have their fighting days, but are not at all times equally prepared
for the combat.

The knight having taken a slight repast, retired to his repose, and had for some time enjoyed
a very agreeable slumber, when he was startled by a knocking at his chamber door.  "I beg your
honour's pardon," said the landlady, "but there are two uncivil persons in the kitchen who
have well-nigh turned my whole house topsy-turvy.  Not content with laying violent hands on
your honour's supper, they want to be rude to two young ladies who are just arrived, and have
called for a post-chaise to go on. They are afraid to open their chamber door to get out, and
the young lawyer is like to be murdered for taking the ladies' part."

Sir Launcelot, though he refused to take notice of the insult which had been offered to himself,
no sooner heard of the distress of the ladies than he started up, huddled on his clothes, and
girding his sword to his loins, advanced with a deliberate pace to the kitchen, where he perceived
Thomas Clarke warmly engaged in altercation with a couple of young men dressed in regimentals,
who, with a peculiar air of arrogance and ferocity, treated him with great insolence and contempt.
Tom was endeavouring to persuade them, that, in the constitution of England, the military was
always subservient to the civil power, and that their behaviour to a couple of helpless young
women was not only unbecoming gentlemen, but expressly contrary to the law, inasmuch as they
might be sued for an assault on an action of damages.

To this remonstrance the two heroes in red replied by a volley of dreadful oaths, intermingled
with threats, which put the lawyer in some pain for his ears.

While one thus endeavoured to intimidate honest Tom Clarke, the other thundered at the door
of the apartment to which the ladies had retired, demanding admittance, but received no other
answer than a loud shriek. Our adventurer advancing to this uncivil champion, accosted him
thus, in a grave and solemn tone: "Assuredly I could not have believed, except upon the evidence
of my own senses, that persons who have the appearance of gentlemen, and bear his majesty's
honourable commission in the army, could behave so wide of the decorum due to society, of a
proper respect to the laws, of that humanity which we owe to our fellow-creatures, and that
delicate regard for the fair sex which ought to prevail in the breast of every gentleman, and
which in particular dignifies the character of a soldier.  To whom shall that weaker, though
more amiable part of the creation, fly for protection, if they are insulted and outraged by
those whose more immediate duty it is to afford them security and defence from injury and violence?
What right have you, or any man upon earth, to excite riot in a public inn, which may be deemed
a temple sacred to hospitality; to disturb the quiet of your fellow-guests, some of them perhaps
exhausted by fatigue, some of them invaded by distemper; to interrupt the king's lieges in
their course of journeying upon their lawful occasions?  Above all, what motive but wanton
barbarity could prompt you to violate the apartment, and terrify the tender hearts of two helpless
young ladies, travelling, no doubt, upon some cruel emergency, which compels them, unattended,
to encounter in the night the dangers of the highway?"

"Hearkye, Don Bethlem," said the captain, strutting up, and cocking his hat in the face of
our adventurer, "you may be mad as ever a straw-crowned monarch in Moorfields, for aught I
care, but damme! don't you be saucy, otherwise I shall dub your worship with a good stick across
your shoulders."  "How! petulant boy," cried the knight, "since you are so ignorant of urbanity,
I will give you a lesson that you shall not easily forget."  So saying, he unsheathed his sword,
and called upon the soldier to draw in his defence.

The reader may have seen the physiognomy of a stockholder at Jonathan's when the rebels were
at Derby, or the features of a bard when accosted by a bailiff, or the countenance of an alderman
when his banker stops payment; if he has seen either of these phenomena, he may conceive the
appearance that was now exhibited by the visage of the ferocious captain, when the naked sword
of Sir Launcelot glanced before his eyes; far from attempting to produce his own, which was
of unconscionable length, he stood motionless as a statue, staring with the most ghastly look
of terror and astonishment.  His companion, who partook of his panic, seeing matters brought
to a very serious crisis, interposed with a crest-fallen countenance, assuring Sir Launcelot
they had no intention to quarrel, and what they had done was entirely for the sake of the frolic.

"By such frolics," cried the knight, "you become nuisances to society, bring yourselves into
contempt, and disgrace the corps to which you belong.  I now perceive the truth of the observation,
that cruelty always resides with cowardice.  My contempt is changed into compassion, and as
you are probably of good families, I must insist upon this young man's drawing his sword, and
acquitting himself in such a manner as may screen him from the most infamous censure which
an officer can undergo." "Lack-a-day, sir," said the other, "we are no officers, but prentices
to two London haberdashers, travellers for orders; Captain is a good travelling name, and we
have dressed ourselves like officers to procure more respect upon the road."

The knight said he was very glad, for the honour of the service, to find they were impostors,
though they deserved to be chastised for arrogating to themselves an honourable character which
they had not spirit to sustain.

These words were scarce pronounced, when Mr. Clarke approaching one of the bravadoes, who had
threatened to crop his ears, bestowed such a benediction on his jaw, as he could not receive
without immediate humiliation; while Timothy Crabshaw, smarting from his broken head and his
want of supper, saluted the other with a Yorkshire hug, that laid him across the body of his
companion.  In a word, the two pseudo-officers were very roughly handled, for their presumption
in pretending to act characters for which they were so ill qualified.

While Clarke and Crabshaw were thus laudably employed, the two young ladies passed through
the kitchen so suddenly, that the knight had only a transient glimpse of their backs, and they
disappeared before he could possibly make a tender of his services.  The truth is, they dreaded
nothing so much as their being discovered, and took the first opportunity of gliding into the
chaise, which had been for some time waiting in the passage.

Mr. Clarke was much more disconcerted than our adventurer by their sudden escape.  He ran with
great eagerness to the door, and, perceiving they were flown, returned to Sir Launcelot, saying,
"Lord bless my soul, sir, didn't you see who it was?"  "Ha! how!" exclaimed the knight, reddening
with alarm, "who was it?"  "One of them," replied the lawyer, "was Dolly, our old landlady's
daughter at the Black Lion.  I knew her when first she 'lighted, notwithstanding her being
neatly dressed in a green joseph, which, I'll assure you, sir, becomes her remarkably well.
--I'd never desire to see a prettier creature.  As for the other, she's a very genteel woman,
but whether old or young, ugly or handsome, I can't pretend to say, for she was masked.  I
had just time to salute Dolly, and ask a few questions; but all she could tell me was, that
the masked lady's name was Miss Meadows; and that she, Dolly, was hired as her waiting-woman."

When the name of Meadows was mentioned, Sir Launcelot, whose spirits had been in violent commotion,
became suddenly calm and serene, and he began to communicate to Clarke the dialogue which had
passed between him and Captain Crowe, when the hostess, addressing herself to our errant, "Well,"
said she, "I have had the honour to accommodate many ladies of the first fashion at the White
Hart, both young and old, proud and lowly, ordinary and handsome; but such a miracle as Miss
Meadows I never yet did see.--Lord, let me never thrive but I think she is of something more
than a human creature!--Oh! had your honour but set eyes on her, you would have said it was
a vision from heaven, a cherubim of beauty:--For my part, I can hardly think it was anything
but a dream--then so meek, so mild, so good-natured and generous!  I say, blessed is the young
woman who tends upon such a heavenly creature:--And, poor dear young lady! she seems to be
under grief and affliction, for the tears stole down her lovely cheeks, and looked for all
the world like orient pearl."

Sir Launcelot listened attentively to the description, which reminded him of his dear Aurelia,
and sighing bitterly, withdrew to his own apartment.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

WHICH SHOWS THAT A MAN CANNOT ALWAYS SIP, WHEN THE CUP IS AT HIS LIP.

Those who have felt the doubts, the jealousies, the resentments, the humiliations, the hopes,
the despair, the impatience, and, in a word, the infinite disquiets of love, will be able to
conceive the sea of agitation on which our adventurer was tossed all night long, without repose
or intermission.  Sometimes he resolved to employ all his industry and address in discovering
the place in which Aurelia was sequestered, that he might rescue her from the supposed restraint
to which she had been subjected.  But when his heart beat high with the anticipation of this
exploit, he was suddenly invaded, and all his ardour checked, by the remembrance of that fatal
letter, written and signed by her own hand, which had divorced him from all hope, and first
unsettled his understanding.  The emotions waked by this remembrance were so strong, that he
leaped from the bed, and the fire being still burning in the chimney, lighted a candle, that
he might once more banquet his spleen by reading the original billet, which, together with
the ring he had received from Miss Darnel's mother, he kept in a small box, carefully deposited
within his portmanteau.  This being instantly unlocked, he unfolded the paper, and recited
the contents in these words:--

"SIR,--Obliged as I am by the passion you profess, and the eagerness with which you endeavour
to give me the most convincing proof of your regard, I feel some reluctance in making you acquainted
with a circumstance, which, in all probability, you will not learn without some disquiet. 
But the affair is become so interesting, I am compelled to tell you, that however agreeable
your proposals may have been to those whom I thought it my duty to please by every reasonable
concession, and howsoever you may have been flattered by the seeming complacency with which
I have heard your addresses, I now find it absolutely necessary to speak in a decisive strain,
to assure you, that, without sacrificing my own peace, I cannot admit a continuation of your
correspondence; and that your regard for me will be best shown by your desisting from a pursuit
which is altogether inconsistent with the happiness of                 AURELIA DARNEL."

Having pronounced aloud the words that composed this dismission, he hastily replaced the cruel
scroll, and being too well acquainted with the hand to harbour the least doubt of its being
genuine, threw himself into his bed in a transport of despair, mingled with resentment, during
the predominancy of which he determined to proceed in the career of adventure, and endeavour
to forget the unkindness of his mistress amidst the avocations of knight-errantry. 

Monody dropped on him, an' I was about to shoot from the hip when of Jabez sez, "By George, Jim, I'd
forgot all about you--we can sure fix'em now. These is friends, Jim."
Jim was a savage lookin' brute an' I eyed him purty close.  Before these orders could be executed,
the good woman of the house entering his apartment, told him, with marks of concern, that the
poor young lady, Miss Meadows, had dropped her pocket-book in the next chamber, where it was
found by the hostess, who now presented it unopened.

Our knight having called in Mrs. Oakley and her son as witnesses, unfolded the book without
reading one syllable of the contents, and found in it five banknotes, amounting to two hundred
and thirty pounds. Perceiving at once the loss of this treasure might be attended with the
most embarrassing consequences to the owner, and reflecting that this was a case which demanded
the immediate interposition and assistance of chivalry, he declared that he himself would convey
it safely into the hands of Miss Meadows; and desired to know the road she had pursued, that
he might set out in quest of her without a moment's delay.  It was not without some difficulty
that this information was obtained from the postboy, who had been enjoined to secrecy by the
lady, and even gratified with a handsome reward for his promised discretion.  The same method
was used to make him disgorge his trust; he undertook to conduct Sir Launcelot, who hired a
post-chaise for despatch, and immediately departed, after having directed his squire to follow
his track with the horses.

Yet, whatever haste he made, it is absolutely necessary, for the reader's satisfaction, that
we should outstrip the chaise, and visit the ladies before his arrival.  We shall therefore,
without circumlocution, premise, that Miss Meadows was no other than that paragon of beauty
and goodness, the all-accomplished Miss Aurelia Darnel.  She had, with that meekness of resignation
peculiar to herself, for some years, submitted to every species of oppression which her uncle's
tyranny of disposition could plan, and his unlimited power of guardianship execute, till at
length it rose to such a pitch of despotism as she could not endure.  He had projected a match
between his niece and one Philip Sycamore, Esq., a young man who possessed a pretty considerable
estate in the north country; who liked Aurelia's person, but was enamoured of her fortune,
and had offered to purchase Anthony's interest and alliance with certain concessions, which
could not but be agreeable to a man of loose principles, who would have found it a difficult
task to settle the accounts of his wardship.

According to the present estimate of matrimonial felicity, Sycamore might have found admittance
as a future son-in-law to any private family of the kingdom.  He was by birth a gentleman,
tall, straight, and muscular, with a fair, sleek, unmeaning face, that promised more simplicity
than ill-nature.  His education had not been neglected, and he inherited an estate of five
thousand a year.  Miss Darnel, however, had penetration enough to discover and despise him,
as a strange composition of rapacity and profusion, absurdity and good sense, bashfulness and
impudence, self-conceit and diffidence, awkwardness and ostentation, insolence and good-nature,
rashness and timidity.  He was continually surrounded and preyed upon by certain vermin called
Led Captains and Buffoons, who showed him in leading-strings like a sucking giant, rifled his
pockets without ceremony, ridiculed him to his face, traduced his character, and exposed him
in a thousand ludicrous attitudes for the diversion of the public; while at the same time he
knew their knavery, saw their drift, detested their morals, and despised their understanding.
He was so infatuated by indolence of thought, and communication with folly, that he would have
rather suffered himself to be led into a ditch with company, than be at the pains of going
over a bridge alone; and involved himself in a thousand difficulties, the natural consequences
of an error in the first concoction, which, though he plainly saw it, he had not resolution
enough to avoid. 

"I went," James Thorold said. "The regiment, the Nineteenth, was at the border when Lincoln
gave the call. There was a bounty being offered to join it. I would have gone anyhow, but I thought
that I might just as well take the money. I was giving up so much to go, I reasoned. And so
I took the bounty. The provost marshal gave me the money in the office right across the square from
the old court-house. I put it in the bank before I started south.

"I left Chicago that night with a great thrill. I was going to fight for a great cause, for Abraham Lincoln's
great dream, for the country my father had died for in Mexico, that my grandfather had fought for
at Lundy's Lane. I think," he said, "that if I might have gone right
down to the fighting, I'd have stood the test.  Finding Aurelia deaf to all his remonstrances, proof against ill usage, and resolutely
averse to the proposed union with Sycamore, he endeavoured to detach her thoughts from Sir
Launcelot, by forging tales to the prejudice of his constancy and moral character; and, finally,
by recapitulating the proofs and instances of his distraction, which he particularised with
the most malicious exaggerations.

In spite of all his arts, he found it impracticable to surmount her objections to the proposed
alliance, and therefore changed his battery. Instead of transferring her to the arms of his
friend, he resolved to detain her in his own power by a legal claim, which would invest him
with the uncontrolled management of her affairs.  This was a charge of lunacy, in consequence
of which he hoped to obtain a commission, to secure a jury to his wish, and be appointed sole
committee of her person, as well as steward on her estate, of which he would then be heir-apparent.

As the first steps towards the execution of this honest scheme, he had subjected Aurelia to
the superintendency and direction of an old duenna, who had been formerly the procuress of
his pleasures; and hired a new set of servants, who were given to understand, at their first
admission, that the young lady was disordered in her brain.

An impression of this nature is easily preserved among servants, when the master of the family
thinks his interest is concerned in supporting the imposture.  The melancholy produced from
her confinement, and the vivacity of her resentment under ill usage, were, by the address of
Anthony, and the prepossession of his domestics, perverted into the effects of insanity; and
the same interpretation was strained upon her most indifferent words and actions.

The tidings of Miss Darnel's disorder was carefully circulated in whispers, and soon reached
the ears of Mr. Sycamore, who was not at all pleased with the information.  From his knowledge
of Anthony's disposition, he suspected the truth of the report; and, unwilling to see such
a prize ravished as it were from his grasp, he, with the advice and assistance of his myrmidons,
resolved to set the captive at liberty, in full hope of turning the adventure to his own advantage;
for he argued in this manner:--"If she is in fact compos mentis, her gratitude will operate
in my behalf, and even prudence will advise her to embrace the proffered asylum from the villany
of her uncle.  If she is really disordered, it will be no great difficulty to deceive her into
marriage, and then I become her trustee of course."

The plan was well conceived, but Sycamore had not discretion enough to keep his own counsel.
From weakness and vanity, he blabbed the design, which in a little time was communicated to
Anthony Darnel, and he took his precautions accordingly.  Being infirm in his own person, and
consequently unfit for opposing the violence of some desperadoes, whom he knew to be the satellites
of Sycamore, he prepared a private retreat for his ward at the house of an old gentleman, the
companion of his youth, whom he had imposed upon with the fiction of her being disordered in
her understanding, and amused with a story of a dangerous design upon her person.  Thus cautioned
and instructed, the gentleman had gone with his own coach and servants to receive Aurelia and
her governante at a third house, to which she had been privately removed from her uncle's habitation;
and in this journey it was that she had been so accidentally protected from the violence of
the robbers by the interposition and prowess of our adventurer.

As he did not wear his helmet in that exploit, she recognised his features as he passed the
coach, and, struck with the apparition, shrieked aloud.  She had been assured by her guardian
that his design was to convey her to her own house; but perceiving in the sequel that the carriage
struck off upon a different road, and finding herself in the hands of strangers, she began
to dread a much more disagreeable fate, and conceived doubts and ideas that filled her tender
heart with horror and affliction.  When she expostulated with the duenna, she was treated like
a changeling, admonished to be quiet, and reminded that she was under the direction of those
who would manage her with a tender regard to her own welfare, and the honour of her family.
When she addressed herself to the old gentleman, who was not much subject to the emotions of
humanity, and besides firmly persuaded that she was deprived of her reason, he made no answer,
but laid his finger on his mouth by way of enjoining silence. 

"Hum," he replied, without looking up.

"I wish to present to you--"
"What?" he exclaimed, looking up and catching sight of young Spickle.
"Have you the impudence to follow me here? Didn't I tell you that
I would see you to-morrow?"

The reader has already been informed in what manner the endeavours of Tom and his uncle miscarried.
Miss Darnel's new keeper having in the course of his journey halted for refreshment at the
Black Lion, of which being landlord, he believed the good woman and her family were entirely
devoted to his will and pleasure, Aurelia found an opportunity of speaking in private to Dolly,
who had a very prepossessing appearance.  She conveyed a purse of money into the hands of this
young woman, telling her, while the tears trickled down her cheeks, that she was a young lady
of fortune, in danger, as she apprehended, of assassination.  This hint, which she communicated
in a whisper while the governante stood at the other end of the room, was sufficient to interest
the compassionate Dolly in her behalf.  As soon as the coach departed, she made her mother
acquainted with the transaction; and as they naturally concluded that the young lady expected
their assistance, they resolved to approve themselves worthy of her confidence.

Dolly having enlisted in their design a trusty countryman, one of her own professed admirers,
they set out together for the house of the gentleman in which the fair prisoner was confined,
and waited for her in secret at the end of a pleasant park, in which they naturally concluded
she might be indulged with the privilege of taking the air.  The event justified their conception;
on the very first day of their watch they saw her approach, accompanied by her duenna.  Dolly
and her attendant immediately tied their horses to a stake, and retired into a thicket, which
Aurelia did not fail to enter.  Dolly forthwith appeared, and, taking her by the hand, led
her to the horses, one of which she mounted in the utmost hurry and trepidation, while the
countryman bound the duenna with a cord prepared for the purpose, gagged her mouth, and tied
her to a tree, where he left her to her own meditations.  Then he mounted before Dolly, and
through unfrequented paths conducted his charge to an inn on the post-road, where a chaise
was ready for their reception. 

The cook shack was built out o' pine logs at the bottom, an' fixed so the upper sides'd swing
out like awnings in hot weather. We felt purty comfortable. The' was a square window at each
end an' one on the side facin' the house; the stove was on the other side.
  Aurelia thought
proper to conceal both, and assumed the fictitious appellation of Meadows, until she should
be better acquainted with the disposition and discretion of her new attendant.

The first resolution she could take, in the present flutter of her spirits, was to make the
best of her way to London, where she thought she might find an asylum in the house of a female
relation, married to an eminent physician, known by the name of Kawdle.  In the execution of
this hasty resolve, she travelled at a violent rate, from stage to stage, in a carriage drawn
by four horses, without halting for necessary refreshment or repose, until she judged herself
out of danger of being overtaken.  As she appeared overwhelmed with grief and consternation,
the good-natured Dolly endeavoured to alleviate her distress with diverting discourse, and,
among other less interesting stories, entertained her with the adventures of Sir Launcelot
and Captain Crowe, which she had seen and heard recited while they remained at the Black Lion;
nor did she fail to introduce Mr. Thomas Clarke in her narrative, with such a favourable representation
of his person and character, as plainly discovered that her own heart had received a rude shock
from the irresistible force of his qualifications.

