II. II. I shall, for sufficient reasons, refrain from discussing the merits of the performance.
One remark, indeed, may be made in passing. The circle of readers to whom such a book is welcome
must, of necessity, be limited. To the true lovers of Boswell it is, to say the least, superfluous;
the gentlest omissions will always mangle some people's favourite passages, and additions,
whatever skill they may display, necessarily injure that dramatic vivacity which is one of
the great charms of the original. The most discreet of cicerones is an intruder when we open
our old favourite, and, without further magic, retire into that delicious nook of eighteenth-century
society. Upon those, again, who cannot appreciate the infinite humour of the original, the
mere excision of the less lively pages will be thrown away. There remains only that narrow
margin of readers whose appetites, languid but not extinct, can be titillated by the promise
that they shall not have the trouble of making their own selection. Let us wish them good digestions,
and, in spite of modern changes of fashion, more robust taste for the future. A man, indeed,
may be a good Christian, and an excellent father of a family, without loving Johnson or Boswell,
for a sense of humour is not one of the primary virtues. But Boswell's is one of the very few
books which, after many years of familiarity, will still provoke a hearty laugh even in the
solitude of a study; and the laughter is of that kind which does one good.

I do not wish, however, to pronounce one more eulogy upon an old friend, but to say a few words
on a question which he sometimes suggests. Macaulay's well-known but provoking essay is more
than usually lavish in overstrained paradoxes. He has explicitly declared that Boswell wrote
one of the most charming of books because he was one of the greatest of fools. And his remarks
suggest, if they do not implicitly assert, that Johnson wrote some of the most unreadable of
books, although, if not because, he possessed one of the most vigorous intellects of the time.
Carlyle has given a sufficient explanation of the first paradox; but the second may justify
a little further inquiry. As a general rule, the talk of a great man is the reflection of his
books. Nothing is so false as the common saying that the presence of a distinguished writer
is generally disappointing. It exemplifies a very common delusion. People are so impressed
by the disparity which sometimes occurs, that they take the exception for the rule. It is,
of course, true that a man's verbal utterances may differ materially from his written utterances.
He may, like Addison, be shy in company; he may, like many retired students, be slow in collecting
his thoughts; or he may, like Goldsmith, be over-anxious to shine at all hazards. But a patient
observer will even then detect the essential identity under superficial differences; and in
the majority of cases, as in that of Macaulay himself, the talking and the writing are palpably
and almost absurdly similar. The whole art of criticism consists in learning to know the human
being who is partially revealed to us in his spoken or his written words. Whatever the means
of communication, the problem is the same. The two methods of inquiry may supplement each other;
but their substantial agreement is the test of their accuracy. If Johnson, as a writer, appears
to us to be a mere windbag and manufacturer of sesquipedalian verbiage, whilst, as a talker,
he appears to be one of the most genuine and deeply feeling of men, we may be sure that our
analysis has been somewhere defective. The discrepancy is, of course, partly explained by the
faults of Johnson's style; but the explanation only removes the difficulty a degree further.
'The style is the man' is a very excellent aphorism, though some eminent writers have lately
pointed out that Buffon's original remark was le style c'est de l'homme. That only proves that,
like many other good sayings, it has been polished and brought to perfection by the process
of attrition in numerous minds, instead of being struck out at a blow by a solitary thinker.
From a purely logical point of view, Buffon may be correct; but the very essence of an aphorism
is that slight exaggeration which makes it more biting whilst less rigidly accurate. According
to Buffon, the style might belong to a man as an acquisition rather than to natural growth.
There are parasitical writers who, in the old phrase, have 'formed their style,' by the imitation
of accepted models, and who have, therefore, possessed it only by right of appropriation. Boswell
has a discussion as to the writers who may have served Johnson in this capacity. But, in fact,
Johnson, like all other men of strong idiosyncrasy, formed his style as he formed his legs.
The peculiarities of his limbs were in some degree the result of conscious efforts in walking,
swimming, and 'buffeting with his books.' This development was doubtless more fully determined
by the constitution which he brought into the world, and the circumstances under which he was
brought up. And even that queer Johnsonese, which Macaulay supposes him to have adopted in
accordance with a more definite literary theory, will probably appear to be the natural expression
of certain innate tendencies, and of the mental atmosphere which he breathed from youth. To
appreciate fairly the strangely cumbrous form of his written speech, we must penetrate more
deeply than may at first sight seem necessary beneath the outer rind of this literary Behemoth.
The difficulty of such spiritual dissection is, indeed, very great; but some little light may
be thrown upon the subject by following out such indications as we possess.

The talking Johnson is sufficiently familiar to us. So far as Boswell needs an interpreter,
Carlyle has done all that can be done. He has concentrated and explained what is diffused,
and often unconsciously indicated in Boswell's pages. When reading Boswell, we are half ashamed
of his power over our sympathies. It is like turning over a portfolio of sketches, caricatured,
inadequate, and each giving only some imperfect aspect of the original. Macaulay's smart paradoxes
only increase our perplexity by throwing the superficial contrasts into stronger relief. Carlyle,
with true imaginative insight, gives us at once the essence of Johnson; he brings before our
eyes the luminous body of which we had previously been conscious only by a series of imperfect
images refracted through a number of distorting media. To render such a service effectually
is the highest triumph of criticism; and it would be impertinent to say again in feebler language
what Carlyle has expressed so forcibly. We may, however, recall certain general conclusions
by way of preface to the problem which he has not expressly considered, how far Johnson succeeded
in expressing himself through his writings.

The world, as Carlyle sees it, is composed, we all know, of two classes: there are 'the dull
millions, who, as a dull flock, roll hither and thither, whithersoever they are led,' and there
are a few superior natures who can see and can will. There are, in other words, the heroes,
and those whose highest wisdom is to be hero-worshippers. Johnson's glory is that he belonged
to the sacred band, though he could not claim within it the highest, or even a very high, rank.
In the current dialect, therefore, he was 'nowise a clothes-horse or patent digester, but a
genuine man.' Whatever the accuracy of the general doctrine, or of certain corollaries which
are drawn from it, the application to Johnson explains one main condition of his power. Persons
of colourless imagination may hold--nor will we dispute their verdict--that Carlyle overcharges
his lights and shades, and brings his heroes into too startling a contrast with the vulgar
herd. Yet it is undeniable that the great bulk of mankind are transmitters rather than originators
of spiritual force. Most of us are necessarily condemned to express our thoughts in formulas
which we have learnt from others and can but slightly tinge with our feeble personality. Nor,
as a rule, are we even consistent disciples of any one school of thought. What we call our
opinions are mere bundles of incoherent formulæ, arbitrarily stitched together because our
reasoning faculties are too dull to make inconsistency painful. Of the vast piles of books
which load our libraries, ninety-nine hundredths and more are but printed echoes: and it is
the rarest of pleasures to say, Here is a distinct record of impressions at first hand. We
commonplace beings are hurried along in the crowd, living from hand to mouth on such slices
of material and spiritual food as happen to drift in our direction, with little more power
of taking an independent course, or of forming any general theory, than the polyps which are
carried along by an oceanic current. Ask any man what he thinks of the world in which he is
placed: whether, for example, it is on the whole a scene of happiness or misery, and he will
either answer by some cut-and-dried fragments of what was once wisdom, or he will confine himself
to a few incoherent details. He had a good dinner to-day and a bad toothache yesterday, and
a family affliction or blessing the day before. But he is as incapable of summing up his impressions
as an infant of performing an operation in the differential calculus. It is as rare as it is
refreshing to find a man who can stand on his own legs and be conscious of his own feelings,
who is sturdy enough to react as well as to transmit action, and lofty enough to raise himself
above the hurrying crowd and have some distinct belief as to whence it is coming and whither
it is going. Now Johnson, as one of the sturdiest of mankind, had the power due to a very distinct
sentiment, if not to a very clear theory, about the world in which he lived. It had buffeted
him severely enough, and he had formed a decisive estimate of its value. He was no man to be
put off with mere phrases in place of opinions, or to accept doctrines which were not capable
of expressing genuine emotion. To this it must be added that his emotions were as deep and
tender as they were genuine. How sacred was his love for his old and ugly wife; how warm his
sympathy wherever it could be effective; how manly the self-respect with which he guarded his
dignity through all the temptations of Grub Street, need not be once more pointed out. Perhaps,
however, it is worth while to notice the extreme rarity of such qualities. Many people, we
think, love their fathers. Fortunately, that is true; but in how many people is filial affection
strong enough to overpower the dread of eccentricity? How many men would have been capable
of doing penance in Uttoxeter market years after their father's death for a long-passed act
of disobedience? Most of us, again, would have a temporary emotion of pity for an outcast lying
helplessly in the street. We should call the police, or send her in a cab to the workhouse,
or, at least, write to the Times to denounce the defective arrangements of public charity.
But it is perhaps better not to ask how many good Samaritans would take her on their shoulders
to their own homes, care for her wants, and put her into a better way of life.

In the lives of most eminent men we find much good feeling and honourable conduct; but it is
an exception, even in the case of good men, when we find that a life has been shaped by other
than the ordinary conventions, or that emotions have dared to overflow the well-worn channels
of respectability. The love which we feel for Johnson is due to the fact that the pivots upon
which his life turned are invariably noble motives, and not mere obedience to custom. More
than one modern writer has expressed a fraternal affection for Addison, and it is justified
by the kindly humour which breathes through his 'Essays.' But what anecdote of that most decorous
and successful person touches our hearts or has the heroic ring of Johnson's wrestlings with
adverse fortune? Addison showed how a Christian could die--when his life has run smoothly through
pleasant places, secretaryships of state, and marriages with countesses, and when nothing--except
a few overdoses of port wine--has shaken his nerves or ruffled his temper. A far deeper emotion
rises at the deathbed of the rugged old pilgrim, who has fought his way to peace in spite of
troubles within and without, who has been jeered in Vanity Fair and has descended into the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, and escaped with pain and difficulty from the clutches of Giant
Despair. When the last feelings of such a man are tender, solemn, and simple, we feel ourselves
in a higher presence than that of an amiable gentleman who simply died, as he lived, with consummate
decorum.

On turning, however, from Johnson's life to his writings, from Boswell to the 'Rambler,' it
must be admitted that the shock is trying to our nerves. The 'Rambler' has, indeed, high merits.
The impression which it made upon his own generation proves the fact; for the reputation, however
temporary, was not won by a concession to the fashions of the day, but to the influence of
a strong judgment uttering itself through uncouth forms. The melancholy which colours its pages
is the melancholy of a noble nature. The tone of thought reminds us of Bishop Butler, whose
writings, defaced by a style even more tiresome, though less pompous than Johnson's, have owed
their enduring reputation to a philosophical acuteness in which Johnson was certainly very
deficient. Both of these great men, however, impress us by their deep sense of the evils under
which humanity suffers, and their rejection of the superficial optimism of the day. Butler's
sadness, undoubtedly, is that of a recluse, and Johnson's that of a man of the world; but the
sentiment is fundamentally the same. It may be added, too, that here, as elsewhere, Johnson
speaks with the sincerity of a man drawing upon his own experience. He announces himself as
a scholar thrust out upon the world rather by necessity than choice; and a large proportion
of the papers dwell upon the various sufferings of the literary class. Nobody could speak more
feelingly of those sufferings, as no one had a closer personal acquaintance with them. But
allowing to Johnson whatever credit is due to the man who performs one more variation on the
old theme, Vanitas vanitatum, we must in candour admit that the 'Rambler' has the one unpardonable
fault: it is unreadable.

What an amazing turn it shows for commonplaces! That life is short, that marriages from mercenary
motives produce unhappiness, that different men are virtuous in different degrees, that advice
is generally ineffectual, that adversity has its uses, that fame is liable to suffer from detraction;--these
and a host of other such maxims are of the kind upon which no genius and no depth of feeling
can confer a momentary interest. Here and there, indeed, the pompous utterance invests them
with an unlucky air of absurdity. 'Let no man from this time,' is the comment in one of his
stories, 'suffer his felicity to depend on the death of his aunt.' Every actor, of course,
uses the same dialect. A gay young gentleman tells us that he used to amuse his companions
by giving them notice of his friends' oddities. By premonition of these particularities, I
secured our pleasantry.' The feminine characters, Flirtillas, and Cleoras, and Euphelias, and
Penthesileas, are, if possible, still more grotesque. Macaulay remarks that he wears the petticoat
with as ill a grace as Falstaff himself. The reader, he thinks, will cry out with Sir Hugh,
'I like not when a 'oman has a great peard! I spy a great peard under her muffler.' Oddly enough
Johnson gives the very same quotation; and goes on to warn his supposed correspondents that
Phyllis must send no more letters from the Horse Guards; and that Belinda must 'resign her
pretensions to female elegance till she has lived three weeks without hearing the politics
of Button's Coffee House.' The Doctor was probably sensible enough of his own defects. And
yet there is a still more wearisome set of articles. In emulation of the precedent set by Addison,
Johnson indulges in the dreariest of allegories. Criticism, we are told, was the eldest daughter
of Labour and Truth, but at last resigned in favour of Time, and left Prejudice and False Taste
to reign in company with Fraud and Mischief. Then we have the genealogy of Wit and Learning,
and of Satire, the Son of Wit and Malice, and an account of their various quarrels, and the
decision of Jupiter. Neither are the histories of such semi-allegorical personages as Almamoulin,
the son of Nouradin, or of Anningait and Ayut, the Greenland lovers, much more refreshing to
modern readers. That Johnson possessed humour of no mean order, we know from Boswell; but no
critic could have divined his power from the clumsy gambols in which he occasionally recreates
himself. Perhaps his happiest effort is a dissertation upon the advantage of living in garrets;
but the humour struggles and gasps dreadfully under the weight of words. Or how, indeed, could
any man come to embody his thoughts in the style of which one other sentence will be a sufficient
example? As it is afterwards nearly repeated, it may be supposed to have struck his fancy.
It is still true, however, that this Johnsonese, so often burlesqued and ridiculed, was, as
far as we can judge, a genuine product. Macaulay says that it is more offensive than the mannerism
of Milton or Burke, because it is a mannerism adopted on principle and sustained by constant
effort. Facts do not confirm the theory. Milton's prose style seems to be the result of a conscious
effort to run English into classical moulds. Burke's mannerism does not appear in his early
writings, and we can trace its development from the imitation of Bolingbroke to the last declamation
against the Revolution. But Johnson seems to have written Johnsonese from his cradle. In his
first original composition, the preface to Father Lobo's 'Abyssinia,' the style is as distinctive
as in the 'Rambler.' The Parliamentary reports in the 'Gentleman's Magazine' make Pitt and
Fox[1] express sentiments which are probably their own in language which is as unmistakably
Johnson's. It is clear that his style, good or bad, was the same from his earliest efforts.
It is only in his last book, the 'Lives of the Poets,' that the mannerism, though equally marked,
is so far subdued as to be tolerable. What he himself called his habit of using 'too big words
and too many of them' was no affectation, but as much the result of his special idiosyncrasy
as his queer gruntings and twitchings. Sir Joshua Reynolds indeed maintained, and we may believe
so attentive an observer, that his strange physical contortions were the result of bad habit,
not of actual disease. Johnson, he said, could sit as still as other people when his attention
was called to it. And possibly, if he had tried, he might have avoided the fault of making
'little fishes talk like whales.' But how did the bad habits arise? According to Boswell, Johnson
professed to have 'formed his style' partly upon Sir W. Temple, and on 'Chambers's Proposal
for his Dictionary.' The statement was obviously misinterpreted: but there is a glimmering
of truth in the theory that the 'style was formed'--so far as those words have any meaning--on
the 'giants of the seventeenth century,' and especially upon Sir Thomas Browne. Johnson's taste,
in fact, had led him to the study of writers in many ways congenial to him. His favourite book,
as we know, was Burton's 'Anatomy of Melancholy.' The pedantry of the older school did not
repel him; the weighty thought rightly attracted him; and the more complex structure of sentence
was perhaps a pleasant contrast to an ear saturated with the Gallicised neatness of Addison
and Pope. Unluckily, the secret of the old majestic cadence was hopelessly lost. Johnson, though
spiritually akin to the giants, was the firmest ally and subject of the dwarfish dynasty which
supplanted them. The very faculty of hearing seems to change in obedience to some mysterious
law at different stages of intellectual development; and that which to one generation is delicious
music is to another a mere droning of bagpipes or the grinding of monotonous barrel-organs.

Assuming that a man can find perfect satisfaction in the versification of the 'Essay on Man,'
we can understand his saying of 'Lycidas,' that 'the diction is harsh, the rhymes uncertain,
and the numbers unpleasing.' In one of the 'Ramblers' we are informed that the accent in blank
verse ought properly to rest upon every second syllable throughout the whole line. A little
variety must, he admits, be allowed to avoid satiety; but all lines which do not go in the
steady jog-trot of alternate beats as regularly as the piston of a steam engine, are more or
less defective. This simple-minded system naturally makes wild work with the poetry of the
'mighty-mouthed inventor of harmonies.' Milton's harsh cadences are indeed excused on the odd
ground that he who was 'vindicating the ways of God to man' might have been condemned for 'lavishing
much of his attention upon syllables and sounds.' Moreover, the poor man did his best by introducing
sounding proper names, even when they 'added little music to his poem:' an example of this
feeble, though well-meant expedient, being the passage about the moon, which--

                  The Tuscan artist views,
    At evening, from the top of Fiesole
    Or in Valdarno, to descry new lands, &c.

This profanity passed at the time for orthodoxy. But the misfortune was, that Johnson, unhesitatingly
subscribing to the rules of Queen Anne's critics, is always instinctively feeling after the
grander effects of the old school. Nature prompts him to the stateliness of Milton, whilst
Art orders him to deal out long and short syllables alternately, and to make them up in parcels
of ten, and then tie the parcels together in pairs by the help of a rhyme. The natural utterance
of a man of strong perceptions, but of unwieldy intellect, of a melancholy temperament, and
capable of very deep, but not vivacious emotions, would be in stately and elaborate phrases.
His style was not more distinctly a work of art than the style of Browne or Milton, but, unluckily,
it was a work of bad art. He had the misfortune, not so rare as it may sound, to be born in
the wrong century; and is, therefore, a giant in fetters; the amplitude of stride is still
there, but it is checked into mechanical regularity. A similar phenomenon is observable in
other writers of the time. The blank verse of Young, for example, is generally set to Pope's
tune with the omission of the rhymes, whilst Thomson, revolting more or less consciously against
the canons of his time, too often falls into mere pompous mouthing. Shaftesbury, in the previous
generation, trying to write poetical prose, becomes as pedantic as Johnson, though in a different
style; and Gibbon's mannerism is a familiar example of a similar escape from a monotonous simplicity
into awkward complexity. Such writers are like men who have been chilled by what Johnson would
call the 'frigorifick' influence of the classicism of their fathers, and whose numbed limbs
move stiffly and awkwardly in a first attempt to regain the old liberty. The form, too, of
the 'Rambler' is unfortunate. Johnson has always Addison before his eyes; to whom it was formerly
the fashion to compare him for the same excellent reason which has recently suggested comparisons
between Dickens and Thackeray--namely, that their works were published in the same external
shape. Unluckily, Johnson gave too much excuse for the comparison by really imitating Addison.
He has to make allegories, and to give lively sketches of feminine peculiarities, and to ridicule
social foibles of which he was, at most, a distant observer. The inevitable consequence is,
that though here and there we catch a glimpse of the genuine man, we are, generally, too much
provoked by the awkwardness of his costume to be capable of enjoying, or even reading him.

In many of his writings, however, Johnson manages, almost entirely, to throw off these impediments.
In his deep capacity for sympathy and reverence, we recognise some of the elements that go
to the making of a poet. He is always a man of intuitions rather than of discursive intellect;
often keen of vision, though wanting in analytical power. For poetry, indeed, as it is often
understood now, or even as it was understood by Pope, he had little enough qualification. He
had not the intellectual vivacity implied in the marvellously neat workmanship of Pope, and
still less the delight in all natural and artistic beauty which we generally take to be essential
to poetic excellence. His contempt for 'Lycidas' is sufficiently significant upon that head.
Still more characteristic is the incapacity to understand Spenser, which comes out incidentally
in his remarks upon some of those imitations, which even in the middle of the eighteenth century
showed that sensibility to the purest form of poetry was not by any means extinct amongst us.
But there is a poetry, though we sometimes seem to forget it, which is the natural expression
of deep moral sentiment; and of this Johnson has written enough to reveal very genuine power.
The touching verses upon the death of Levett are almost as pathetic as Cowper; and fragments
of the two imitations of Juvenal have struck deep enough to be not quite forgotten. We still
quote the lines about pointing a moral and adorning a tale, which conclude a really noble passage.
We are too often reminded of his melancholy musings over the

    Fears of the brave and follies of the wise,

and a few of the concluding lines of the 'Vanity of Human Wishes,' in which he answers the
question whether man must of necessity

    Roll darkling down the torrent of his fate,

in helplessness and ignorance, may have something of a familiar ring.

These lines, and many others which might be quoted, are noble in expression, as well as lofty
and tender in feeling. Johnson, like Wordsworth, or even more deeply than Wordsworth, had felt
all the 'heavy and the weary weight of all this unintelligible world;' and, though he stumbles
a little in the narrow limits of his versification, he bears himself nobly, and manages to
put his heart into his poetry. Coleridge's paraphrase of the well-known lines, 'Let observation
with extensive observation, observe mankind from China to Peru,' would prevent us from saying
that he had thrown off his verbiage. He has not the felicity of Goldsmith's 'Traveller,' though
he wrote one of the best couplets in that admirable poem; but his ponderous lines show genuine
vigour, and can be excluded from poetry only by the help of an arbitrary classification.

The fullest expression, however, of Johnson's feeling is undoubtedly to be found in 'Rasselas.'
The inevitable comparison with Voltaire's 'Candide,' which, by an odd coincidence, appeared
almost simultaneously, suggests some curious reflections. The resemblance between the moral
of the two books is so strong that, as Johnson remarked, it would have been difficult not to
suppose that one had given a hint to the other but for the chronological difficulty. The contrast,
indeed, is as marked as the likeness. 'Candide' is not adapted for family reading, whereas
'Rasselas' might be a textbook for young ladies studying English in a convent. 'Candide' is
a marvel of clearness and vivacity; whereas to read 'Rasselas' is about as exhilarating as
to wade knee-deep through a sandy desert. Voltaire and Johnson, however, the great sceptic
and the last of the true old Tories, coincide pretty well in their view of the world, and in
the remedy which they suggest. The world is, they agree, full of misery, and the optimism which
would deny the reality of the misery is childish. Il faut cultiver notre jardin is the last
word of 'Candide,' and Johnson's teaching, both here and elsewhere, may be summed up in the
words 'Work, and don't whine.' It need not be considered here, nor, perhaps, is it quite plain,
what speculative conclusions Voltaire meant to be drawn from his teaching. The peculiarity
of Johnson is, that he is apparently indifferent to any such conclusion. A dogmatic assertion,
that the world is on the whole a scene of misery, may be pressed into the service of different
philosophies. Johnson asserted the opinion resolutely, both in writing and in conversation,
but apparently never troubled himself with any inferences but such as have a directly practical
tendency. He was no 'speculatist'--a word which now strikes us as having an American twang,
but which was familiar to the lexicographer. His only excursion to the borders of such regions
was in the very forcible review of Soane Jenyns, who had made a jaunty attempt to explain the
origin of evil by the help of a few of Pope's epigrams. Johnson's sledge-hammer smashes his
flimsy platitudes to pieces with an energy too good for such a foe. For speculation, properly
so called, there was no need. The review, like 'Rasselas,' is simply a vigorous protest against
the popular attempt to make things pleasant by a feeble dilution of the most watery kind of
popular teaching. He has no trouble in remarking that the evils of poverty are not alleviated
by calling it 'want of riches,' and that there is a poverty which involves want of necessaries.
The offered consolation, indeed, came rather awkwardly from the elegant country gentleman to
the poor scholar who had just known by experience what it was to live upon fourpence-halfpenny
a day. Johnson resolutely looks facts in the face, and calls ugly things by their right names.
Men, he tells us over and over again, are wretched, and there is no use in denying it. This
doctrine appears in his familiar talk, and even in the papers which he meant to be light reading.

In the 'Life of Savage' he makes the common remark that the lives of many of the greatest teachers
of mankind have been miserable. The explanation to which he inclines is that they have not
been more miserable than their neighbours, but that their misery has been more conspicuous.
His melancholy view of life may have been caused simply by his unfortunate constitution; for
everybody sees in the disease of his own liver a disorder of the universe; but it was also
intensified by the natural reaction of a powerful nature against the fluent optimism of the
time, which expressed itself in Pope's aphorism, Whatever is, is right. The strongest men of
the time revolted against that attempt to cure a deep-seated disease by a few fine speeches.
The form taken by Johnson's revolt is characteristic. His nature was too tender and too manly
to incline to Swift's misanthropy. Men might be wretched, but he would not therefore revile
them as filthy Yahoos. He was too reverent and cared too little for abstract thought to share
the scepticism of Voltaire. In this miserable world the one worthy object of ambition is to
do one's duty, and the one consolation deserving the name is to be found in religion. That
Johnson's religious opinions sometimes took the form of rather grotesque superstition may be
true; and it is easy enough to ridicule some of its manifestations. He took the creed of his
day without much examination of the evidence upon which its dogmas rested; but a writer must
be thoughtless indeed who should be more inclined to laugh at his superficial oddities, than
to admire the reverent spirit and the brave self-respect with which he struggled through a
painful life. The protest of 'Rasselas' against optimism is therefore widely different from
the protest of Voltaire. The deep and genuine feeling of the Frenchman is concealed under smart
assaults upon the dogmas of popular theology; the Englishman desires to impress upon us the
futility of all human enjoyments, with a view to deepen the solemnity of our habitual tone
of thought. It is true, indeed, that the evil is dwelt upon more forcibly than the remedy.
The book is all the more impressive. We are almost appalled by the gloomy strength which sees
so forcibly the misery of the world and rejects so unequivocally all the palliatives of sentiment
and philosophy. The melancholy is intensified by the ponderous style, which suggests a man
weary of a heavy burden. The air seems to be filled with what Johnson once called 'inspissated
gloom.' 'Rasselas,' one may say, has a narrow escape of being a great book, though it is ill
calculated for the hasty readers of to-day. Indeed, the defects are serious enough. The class
of writing to which it belongs demands a certain dramatic picturesqueness to point the moral
effectively. Not only the long-winded sentences, but the slow evolution of thought and the
deliberation with which he works out his pictures of misery, make the general effect dull beside
such books as 'Candide' or 'Gulliver's Travels.' A touch of epigrammatic exaggeration is very
much needed; and yet anybody who has the courage to read it through will admit that Johnson
is not an unworthy guide into those gloomy regions of imagination which we all visit sometimes,
and which it is as well to visit in good company.

After his fashion, Johnson is a fair representative of Greatheart. His melancholy is distinguished
from that of feebler men by the strength of the conviction that 'it will do no good to whine.'
We know his view of the great prophet of the Revolutionary school. Nothing, indeed, can be
truer than that Johnson cared very little for the new gospel of the rights of man. His truly
British contempt for all such fancies ('for anything I see,' he once said, 'foreigners are
fools') is one of his strongest characteristics. Now, Rousseau and his like took a view of
the world as it was quite as melancholy as Johnson's. They inferred that it ought to be turned
upside down, assured that the millennium would begin as soon as a few revolutionary dogmas
were accepted. All their remedies appeared to the excellent Doctor as so much of that cant
of which it was a man's first duty to clear his mind. The evils of life were far too deeply
seated to be caused or cured by kings or demagogues. One of the most popular commonplaces of
the day was the mischief of luxury. That we were all on the high road to ruin on account of
our wealth, our corruption, and the growth of the national debt, was the text of any number
of political agitators. The whole of this talk was, to his mind, so much whining and cant.
Luxury did no harm, and the mass of the people, as indeed was in one sense obvious enough,
had only too little of it. The pet 'state of nature' of theorists was a silly figment. The
genuine savage was little better than an animal; and a savage woman, whose contempt for civilised
life had prompted her to escape to the forest, was simply a 'speaking cat.' The natural equality
of mankind was mere moonshine. So far is it from being true, he says, that no two people can
be together for half an hour without one acquiring an evident superiority over the other. Subordination
is an essential element of human happiness. A Whig stinks in his nostrils because to his eye
modern Whiggism is 'a negation of all principles.' As he said of Priestley's writings, it unsettles
everything and settles nothing. 'He is a cursed Whig, a bottomless Whig as they all are now,'
was his description apparently of Burke. Order, in fact, is a vital necessity; what particular
form it may take matters comparatively little; and therefore all revolutionary dogmas were
chimerical as an attack upon the inevitable conditions of life, and mischievous so far as productive
of useless discontent. We need not ask what mixture of truth and falsehood there may be in
these principles. Of course, a Radical, or even a respectable Whig, like Macaulay, who believed
in the magical efficacy of the British Constitution, might shriek or laugh at such doctrine.
Johnson's political pamphlets, besides the defects natural to a writer who was only a politician
by accident, advocate the most retrograde doctrines. Nobody at the present day thinks that
the Stamp Act was an admirable or justifiable measure; or would approve of telling the Americans
that they ought to have been grateful for their long exemption instead of indignant at the
imposition. 'We do not put a calf into the plough; we wait till he is an ox'--was not a judicious
taunt. He was utterly wrong; and, if everybody who is utterly wrong in a political controversy
deserves unmixed contempt, there is no more to be said for him. We might indeed argue that
Johnson was in some ways entitled to the sympathy of enlightened people. His hatred of the
Americans was complicated by his hatred of slave-owners. He anticipated Lincoln in proposing
the emancipation of the negroes as a military measure. His uniform hatred for the slave trade
scandalised poor Boswell, who held that its abolition would be equivalent to 'shutting the
gates of mercy on mankind.' His language about the blundering tyranny of the English rule in
Ireland would satisfy Mr. Froude, though he would hardly have loved a Home Ruler. He denounces
the frequency of capital punishment and the harshness of imprisonment for debt, and he invokes
a compassionate treatment of the outcasts of our streets as warmly as the more sentimental
Goldsmith. His conservatism may be at times obtuse, but it is never of the cynical variety.
He hates cruelty and injustice as righteously as he hates anarchy. Indeed, Johnson's contempt
for mouthing agitators of the Wilkes and Junius variety is one which may be shared by most
thinkers who would not accept his principles. There is a vigorous passage in the 'False Alarm'
which is scarcely unjust to the patriots of the day. He describes the mode in which petitions
are generally got up. They are sent from town to town, and the people flock to see what is
to be sent to the king. The error, we may probably say, was less in the contempt for a very
shallow agitation than in the want of perception that deeper causes of discontent were accumulating
in the background. Wilkes in himself was a worthless demagogue; but Wilkes was the straw carried
by the rising tide of revolutionary sentiment, to which Johnson was entirely blind. Yet whatever
we may think of his political philosophy, the value of these solid sturdy prejudices is undeniable.
To the fact that Johnson was the typical representative of a large class of Englishmen, we
owe it that the Society of Rights did not develop into a Jacobin Club. The fine phrases on
which Frenchmen became intoxicated never turned the heads of men impervious to abstract theories
and incapable of dropping substances for shadows. There are evils in each temperament; but
it is as well that some men should carry into politics that rooted contempt for whining which
lay so deep in Johnson's nature. He scorned the sickliness of the Rousseau school as, in spite
of his constitutional melancholy, he scorned valetudinarianism whether of the bodily or the
spiritual order. He saw evil enough in the world to be heartily, at times too roughly, impatient
of all fine ladies who made a luxury of grief or of demagogues who shrieked about theoretical
grievances which did not sensibly affect the happiness of one man in a thousand. The lady would
not have time to nurse her sorrows if she had been a washerwoman; the grievances with which
the demagogues yelled themselves hoarse could hardly be distinguished amidst the sorrows of
the vast majority condemned to keep starvation at bay by unceasing labour. His incapacity for
speculation makes his pamphlets worthless beside Burke's philosophical discourses; but the
treatment, if wrong and defective on the theoretical side, is never contemptible. Here, as
elsewhere, he judges by his intuitive aversions. He rejects too hastily whatever seems insipid
or ill-flavoured to his spiritual appetite. Like all the shrewd and sensible part of mankind
he condemns as mere moonshine what may be really the first faint dawn of a new daylight. But
then his intuitions are noble, and his fundamental belief is the vital importance of order,
of religion, and of morality, coupled with a profound conviction, surely not erroneous, that
the chief sources of human suffering lie far deeper than any of the remedies proposed by constitution-mongers
and fluent theorists. The literary version of these prejudices or principles is given most
explicitly in the 'Lives of the Poets'--the book which is now the most readable of Johnson's
performances, and which most frequently recalls his conversational style. Indeed, it is a thoroughly
admirable book, and but for one or two defects might enjoy a much more decided popularity.
It is full of shrewd sense and righteous as well as keen estimates of men and things. The 'Life
of Savage,' written in earlier times, is the best existing portrait of that large class of
authors who, in Johnson's phrase, 'hung loose upon society' in the days of the Georges. The
Lives of Pope, Dryden, and others have scarcely been superseded, though much fuller information
has since come to light; and they are all well worth reading. But the criticism, like the politics,
is woefully out of date. Johnson's division between the shams and the realities deserves all
respect in both cases, but in both cases he puts many things on the wrong side of the dividing
line. His hearty contempt for sham pastorals and sham love-poetry will be probably shared by
modern readers. Where he errs by simply repeating the accepted rules of the Pope school, he
for once talks mere second-hand nonsense. But his independent judgments are interesting even
when erroneous. His unlucky assault upon 'Lycidas,' already noticed, is generally dismissed
with a pitying shrug of the shoulders. He will add, perhaps, that 'Lycidas' is a test of poetical
feeling, and that he who does not appreciate its exquisite melody has no music in his soul.
The same writer who will tell us all this, and doubtless with perfect truth, would probably
have adopted Pope or Johnson's theory with equal confidence if he had lived in the last century.
'Lycidas' repelled Johnson by incongruities, which, from his point of view, were certainly
offensive. Most modern readers, I will venture to suggest, feel the same annoyances, though
they have not the courage to avow them freely. If poetry is to be judged exclusively by the
simplicity and force with which it expresses sincere emotion, 'Lycidas' would hardly convince
us of Milton's profound sorrow for the death of King, and must be condemned accordingly. To
the purely pictorial or musical effects of a poem Johnson was nearly blind; but that need not
suggest a doubt as to the sincerity of his love for the poetry which came within the range
of his own sympathies. Every critic is in effect criticising himself as well as his author;
and I confess that to my mind an obviously sincere record of impressions, however one-sided
they may be, is infinitely refreshing, as revealing at least the honesty of the writer. The
ordinary run of criticism generally implies nothing but the extreme desire of the author to
show that he is open to the very last new literary fashion. I should welcome a good assault
upon Shakespeare which was not prompted by a love of singularity; and there are half-a-dozen
popular idols--I have not the courage to name them--a genuine attack upon whom I could witness
with entire equanimity, not to say some complacency. If Johnson's blunder in this case implied
sheer stupidity, one can only say that honest stupidity is a much better thing than clever
insincerity or fluent repetition of second-hand dogmas. But, in fact, this dislike of 'Lycidas,'
and a good many instances of critical incapacity might be added, is merely a misapplication
of a very sound principle. The hatred of cant and humbug and affectation of all vanity is a
most salutary ingredient even in poetical criticism. Johnson, with his natural ignorance of
that historical method, the exaltation of which threatens to become a part of our contemporary
cant, made the pardonable blunder of supposing that what would have been gross affectation
in Gray must have been affectation in Milton. His ear had been too much corrupted by the contemporary
school to enable him to recognise beauties which would even have shone through some conscious
affectation. He had the rare courage--for, even then, Milton was one of the tabooed poets--to
say what he thought as forcibly as he could say it; and he has suffered the natural punishment
of plain speaking. It must, of course, be admitted that a book embodying such principles is
doomed to become more or less obsolete, like his political pamphlets. And yet, as significant
of the writer's own character, as containing many passages of sound judgment, expressed in
forcible language, it is still, if not a great book, really impressive within the limits of
its capacity.

After this imperfect survey of Johnson's writings, it only remains to be noticed that all the
most prominent peculiarities are the very same which give interest to his spoken utterances.
The doctrine is the same, though the preacher's manner has changed. His melancholy is not so
heavy-eyed and depressing in his talk, for we catch him at moments of excitement; but it is
there, and sometimes breaks out emphatically and unexpectedly. The prospect of death often
clouds his mind, and he bursts into tears when he thinks of his past sufferings. His hearty
love of truth, and uncompromising hatred of cant in all its innumerable transmutations, prompt
half his most characteristic sayings. His queer prejudices take a humorous form, and give a
delightful zest to his conversation. His contempt for abstract speculation comes out when he
vanquishes Berkeley, not with a grin, but by 'striking his foot with mighty force against a
large stone.' His arguments, indeed, never seem to have owed much to such logic as implies
systematic and continuous thought. He scarcely waits till his pistol misses fire to knock you
down with the butt-end. The merit of his best sayings is not that they compress an argument
into a phrase, but that they are vivid expressions of an intuitive judgment. In other words,
they are always humorous rather than witty. He holds his own belief with so vigorous a grasp
that all argumentative devices for loosening it seem to be thrown away. As Boswell says, he
is through your body in an instant without any preliminary parade; he gives a deadly lunge,
but cares little for skill of fence. 'We know we are free and there's an end of it,' is his
characteristic summary of a perplexed bit of metaphysics; and he would evidently have no patience
to wander through the labyrinths in which men like Jonathan Edwards delighted to perplex themselves.
We should have been glad to see a fuller report of one of those conversations in which Burke
'wound into a subject like a serpent,' and contrast his method with Johnson's downright hitting.
Boswell had not the power, even if he had the will, to give an adequate account of such a 'wit
combat.'

That such a mind should express itself most forcibly in speech is intelligible enough. Conversation
was to him not merely a contest, but a means of escape from himself. 'I may be cracking my
joke,' he said to Boswell,'and cursing the sun: Sun, how I hate thy beams!' The phrase sounds
exaggerated, but it was apparently his settled conviction that the only remedy for melancholy,
except indeed the religious remedy, was in hard work or in the rapture of conversational strife.
His little circle of friends called forth his humour as the House of Commons excited Chatham's
eloquence; and both of them were inclined to mouth too much when deprived of the necessary
stimulus. Chatham's set speeches were as pompous as Johnson's deliberate writing. Johnson and
Chatham resemble the chemical bodies which acquire entirely new properties when raised beyond
a certain degree of temperature. Indeed, we frequently meet touches of the conversational Johnson
in his controversial writing. 'Taxation no Tyranny' is at moments almost as pithy as Swift,
though the style is never so simple. The celebrated Letter to Chesterfield, and the letter
in which he tells MacPherson that he will not be 'deterred from detecting what he thinks a
cheat by the menaces of a ruffian,' are as good specimens of the smashing repartee as anything
in Boswell's reports. Nor, indeed, does his pomposity sink to mere verbiage so often as might
be supposed. It is by no means easy to translate his ponderous phrases into simple words without
losing some of their meaning. The structure of the sentences is compact, though they are too
elaborately balanced and stuffed with superfluous antitheses. The language might be simpler,
but it is not a mere sham aggregation of words. His written style, however faulty in other
respects, is neither slipshod nor ambiguous, and passes into his conversational style by imperceptible
degrees. The radical identity is intelligible, though the superficial contrast is certainly
curious. We may perhaps say that his century, unfavourable to him as a writer, gave just what
he required for talking. If, as is sometimes said, the art of conversation is disappearing,
it is because society has become too large and diffuse. The good talker, as indeed the good
artist of every kind, depends upon the tacit co-operation of the social medium. The chorus,
as Johnson has himself shown very well in one of the 'Ramblers,' is quite as essential as the
main performer. Nobody talks well in London, because everybody has constantly to meet a fresh
set of interlocutors, and is as much put out as a musician who has to be always learning a
new instrument. A literary dictator has ceased to be a possibility, so far as direct personal
influence is concerned. In the club, Johnson knew how every blow would tell, and in the rapid
thrust and parry dropped the heavy style which muffled his utterances in print. He had to deal
with concrete illustrations, instead of expanding into platitudinous generalities. The obsolete
theories which impair the value of his criticism and his politics, become amusing in the form
of pithy sayings, though they weary us when asserted in formal expositions. His greatest literary
effort, the 'Dictionary,' has of necessity become antiquated in use, and, in spite of the intellectual
vigour indicated, can hardly be commended for popular reading. And thus but for the inimitable
Boswell, it must be admitted that Johnson would probably have sunk very deeply into oblivion.
A few good sayings would have been preserved by Mrs. Thrale and others, or have been handed
down by tradition, and doubtless assigned in process of time to Sydney Smith and other conversational
celebrities. A few couplets from the 'Vanity of Human Wishes' would not yet have been submerged,
and curious readers would have recognised the power of 'Rasselas,' and been delighted with
some shrewd touches in the 'Lives of the Poets.' But with all desire to magnify critical insight,
it must be admitted that that man would have shown singular penetration, and been regarded
as an eccentric commentator, who had divined the humour and the fervour of mind which lay hid
in the remains of the huge lexicographer. And yet when we have once recognised his power, we
can see it everywhere indicated in his writings, though by an unfortunate fatality the style
or the substance was always so deeply affected by the faults of the time, that the product
is never thoroughly sound. His tenacious conservatism caused him to cling to decaying materials
for the want of anything better, and he has suffered the natural penalty. He was a great force
half wasted, so far as literature was concerned, because the fashionable costume of the day
hampered the free exercises of his powers, and because the only creeds to which he could attach
himself were in the phase of decline and inanition. A century earlier or later he might have
succeeded in expressing himself through books as well as through his talk; but it is not given
to us to choose the time of our birth, and some very awkward consequences follow.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] See, for example, the great debate on February 13, 1741.

CRABBE

It is nearly a century since George Crabbe, then a young man of five-and-twenty, put three
pounds in his pocket and started from his native town of Aldborough, with a box of clothes
and a case of surgical instruments, to make his fortune in London. Few men have attempted that
adventure with less promising prospects. Any sensible adviser would have told him to prefer
starvation in his native village to starvation in the back lanes of London. The adviser would,
perhaps, have been vexed, but would not have been confuted, by Crabbe's good fortune. We should
still recommend a youth not to jump into a river, though, of a thousand who try the experiment,
one may happen to be rescued by a benevolent millionaire, and be put in the road to fortune.
The chances against Crabbe were enormous. Literature, considered as a trade, is a good deal
better at the present day than it was towards the end of the last century, and yet anyone who
has an opportunity of comparing the failures with the successes, would be more apt to quote
Chatterton than Crabbe as a precedent for youthful aspirants. Crabbe, indeed, might say for
himself that literature was the only path open to him. His father was collector of salt duties
at Aldborough, a position, as one may imagine, of no very great emolument. He had, however,
given his son the chance of acquiring a smattering of 'scholarship,' in the sense in which
that word is used by the less educated lower classes. To the slender store of learning acquired
in a cheap country school, the lad managed to add such medical training as could be picked
up during an apprenticeship in an apothecary's shop. With this provision of knowledge he tried
to obtain practice in his native town. He failed to get any patients of the paying variety.
Crabbe was clumsy and absent-minded to the end of his life. He had, moreover, a taste for botany,
and the shrewd inhabitants of Aldborough, with that perverse tendency to draw inferences which
is characteristic of people who cannot reason, argued that as he picked up his samples in the
ditches, he ought to sell the medicines presumably compounded from them for nothing. In one
way or other, poor Crabbe had sunk to the verge of distress. Of course, under these circumstances,
he had fallen in love and engaged himself at the age of eighteen to a young lady, apparently
as poor as himself. Of course, too, he called Miss Elmy 'Mira,' and addressed her in verses
which occasionally appeared in the poet's corner of a certain 'Wheble's Magazine.' My Mira,
said the young surgeon, in a style which must have been rather antiquated even in Aldborough--

    My Mira, shepherds, is as fair
      As sylvan nymphs who haunt the vale;
    As sylphs who dwell in purest air,
      As fays who skim the dusky dale.

Moreover, he won a prize for a poem on Hope, and composed an 'Allegorical Fable' and a piece
called 'The Atheist reclaimed;' and, in short, added plentifully to the vast rubbish-heap of
old-world verses, now decayed beyond the industry of the most persevering of Dryasdusts. Nay,
he even succeeded by some mysterious means in getting one of his poems published separately.
It was called 'Inebriety,' and was an unblushing imitation of Pope. Here is a couplet by way
of sample:--

    Champagne the courtier drinks the spleen to chase,
    The colonel Burgundy, and Port his Grace.

The interstices of the box of clothing which went with him from Aldborough to London were doubtless
crammed with much waste paper scribbled over with these feeble echoes of Pope's Satires, and
with appeals to nymphs, muses, and shepherds. Crabbe was one of those men who are born a generation
after their natural epoch, and was as little accessible to the change of fashion in poetry
as in costume. When, therefore, he finally resolved to hazard his own fate and Mira's upon
the results of his London adventure, the literary goods at his disposal were already somewhat
musty in character. The year 1780, in which he reached London, marks the very nadir of English
poetry. From the days of Elizabeth to our own there has never been so absolutely barren a period.
People had become fairly tired of the jingle of Pope's imitators, and the new era had not dawned.
Goldsmith and Gray, both recently dead, serve to illustrate the condition in which the most
exquisite polish and refinement of language has been developed until there is a danger of sterility.
The 'Elegy' and the 'Deserted Village' are in their way inimitable poems: but we feel that
the intellectual fibre of the poets has become dangerously delicate. The critical faculty could
not be stimulated further without destroying all spontaneous impulse. The reaction to a more
masculine and passionate school was imminent; and if the excellent Crabbe could have put into
his box a few of Burns's lyrics, or even a copy of Cowper's 'Task,' one might have augured
better for his prospects. But what chance was there for a man who could still be contentedly
invoking the muse and stringing together mechanic echoes of Pope's couplets? How could he expect
to charm the jaded faculties of a generation which was already beginning to heave and stir
with a longing for some fresh excitement? For a year the fate which has overtaken so many rash
literary adventurers seemed to be approaching steadily. One temporary gleam of good fortune
cheered him for a time. He persuaded an enterprising publisher to bring out a poem called 'The
Candidate,' which had some faint success, though ridiculed by the reviewers. Unluckily the
publisher became bankrupt and Crabbe was thrown upon his resources--the poor three pounds and
box of surgical instruments aforesaid. How he managed to hold out for a year is a mystery.
It was lucky for him, as he intimates, that he had never heard of the fate of Chatterton, who
had poisoned himself just ten years before. A Journal which he wrote for Mira is published
in his Life, and gives an account of his feelings during three months of his cruel probation.
He applies for a situation as amanuensis offered in an advertisement, and comforts himself
on failing with the reflection that the advertiser was probably a sharper. He writes piteous
letters to publishers, and gets, of course, the stereotyped reply with which the most amiable
of publishers must damp the ardour of aspiring genius. The disappointment is not much softened
by the publisher's statement that 'he does not mean by this to insinuate any want of merit
in the poem, but rather a want of attention in the public.' Bit by bit his surgical instruments
go to the pawnbroker. When one publisher sends his polite refusal poor Crabbe has only sixpence-farthing
in the world, which, by the purchase of a pint of porter, is reduced to fourpence-halfpenny.
The exchequer fills again by the disappearance of his wardrobe and his watch; but ebbs under
a new temptation. He buys some odd volumes of Dryden for three-and-sixpence, and on coming
home tears his only coat, which he manages to patch tolerably with a borrowed needle and thread,
pretending, with a pathetic shift, that they are required to stitch together manuscripts instead
of broadcloth. And so for a year the wolf creeps nearer the door, whilst Crabbe gallantly keeps
up appearances and spirits, and yet he tries to preserve a show of good spirits in the Journal
to Mira, and continues to labour at his versemaking. Perhaps, indeed, it may be regarded as
a bad symptom that he is reduced to distracting his mind by making an analysis of a dull sermon.
'There is nothing particular in it,' he admits, but at least it is better, he thinks, to listen
to a bad sermon than to the blasphemous rant of deistical societies. Indeed, Crabbe's spirit
was totally unlike the desperate pride of Chatterton. He was of the patient enduring tribe,
and comforts himself by religious meditations, which are, perhaps, rather commonplace in expression,
but when read by the light of the distresses he was enduring, show a brave unembittered spirit,
not to be easily respected too highly. Starvation seemed to be approaching; or, at least, the
only alternative was the abandonment of his ambition, and acceptance, if he could get it, of
the post of druggist's assistant. He had but one resource left; and that not of the most promising
kind. Crabbe, amongst his other old-fashioned notions, had a strong belief in the traditional
patron. Johnson might have given him some hints upon the subject; but luckily, as it turned
out, he pursued what Chesterfield's correspondent would have thought the most hopeless of all
courses. He wrote to Lord North, who was at that moment occupied in contemplating the final
results of the ingenious policy by which America was lost to England, and probably consigned
Crabbe's letter to the waste-paper basket. Then he tried the effect of a copy of verses, beginning:--

    Ah! Shelburne, blest with all that's good or great,
    T' adorn a rich or save a sinking State.

He added a letter saying that, as Lord North had not answered him, Lord Shelburne would probably
be glad to supply the needs of a starving apothecary turned poet. Another copy of verses was
enclosed, pointing out that Shelburne's reputed liberality would be repaid in the usual coin:

    Then shall my grateful strains his ear rejoice,
    His name harmonious thrilled on Mira's voice;
    Round the reviving bays new sweets shall spring,
    And Shelburne's fame through laughing valleys ring!

Nobody can blame North and Shelburne for not acting the part of Good Samaritans. He, at least,
may throw the first stone who has always taken the trouble to sift the grain from the chaff
amidst all the begging letters which he has received, and who has never lamented that his benevolence
outran his discretion. But there was one man in England at the time who had the rare union
of qualities necessary for Crabbe's purpose. Burke is a name never to be mentioned without
reverence; not only because Burke was incomparably the greatest of all English political writers,
and a standing refutation of the theory which couples rhetorical excellence with intellectual
emptiness, but also because he was a man whose glowing hatred of all injustice and sympathy
for all suffering never evaporated in empty words. His fine literary perception enabled him
to detect the genuine excellence which underlay the superficial triviality of Crabbe's verses.
He discovered the genius where men like North and Shelburne might excusably see nothing but
the mendicant versifier; and a benevolence still rarer than his critical ability forbade him
to satisfy his conscience by the sacrifice of a five-pound note. When, by the one happy thought
of his life, Crabbe appealed to Burke's sympathy, the poet was desperately endeavouring to
get a poem through the press. But he owed fourteen pounds, and every application to friends
as poor as himself, and to patrons upon whom he had no claims, had been unsuccessful. Nothing
but ruin was before him. After writing to Burke he spent the night in pacing Westminster Bridge.
The letter on which his fate hung is the more pathetic because it is free from those questionable
poetical flourishes which had failed to conciliate his former patrons. It tells his story frankly
and forcibly. Burke, however, was not a rich man, and was at one of the most exciting periods
of his political career. His party was at last fighting its way to power by means of the general
resentment against the gross mismanagement of their antagonists. A perfunctory discharge of
the duty of charity would have been pardonable; but from the moment when Crabbe addressed Burke
the poor man's fortune was made. Burke's glory rests upon services of much more importance
to the world at large than even the preservation to the country of a man of genuine power.
Yet there are few actions on which he could reflect with more unalloyed satisfaction; and the
case is not a solitary one in Burke's history. A political triumph may often be only hastened
a year or two by the efforts of even a great leader; but the salvage of a genius which would
otherwise have been hopelessly wrecked in the deep waters of poverty is so much clear gain
to mankind. One circumstance may be added as oddly characteristic of Crabbe. He always spoke
of his benefactor with becoming gratitude: and many years afterwards Moore and Rogers thought
that they might extract some interesting anecdotes of the great author from the now celebrated
poet. Burke, as we know, was a man whom you would discover to be remarkable if you stood with
him for five minutes under a haystack in a shower. Crabbe stayed in his house for months under
circumstances most calculated to be impressive. Burke was at the height of his power and reputation;
he was the first man of any distinction whom the poet had ever seen; the two men had long and
intimate conversations, and Crabbe, it may be added, was a very keen observer of character.
And yet all that Rogers and Moore could extract from him was a few 'vague generalities.' Moore
suggests some explanation; but the fact seems to be that Crabbe was one of those simple, homespun
characters, whose interests are strictly limited to their own peculiar sphere. Burke, when
he pleased, could talk of oxen as well as politics, and doubtless adapted his conversation
to the taste of the young poet. Probably, much more was said about the state of Burke's farm
than about the prospects of the Whig party. Crabbe's powers of vision were as limited as they
were keen, and the great qualities to which Burke owed his reputation could only exhibit themselves
in a sphere to which Crabbe never rose. His attempt to draw a likeness of Burke under the name
of 'Eugenius,' in the 'Borough,' is open to the objection that it would be nearly as applicable
to Wilberforce, Howard, or Dr. Johnson. It is a mere complimentary daub, in which every remarkable
feature of the original is blurred or altogether omitted.

The inward Crabbe remained to the end of his days what nature and education had already made
him; the outward Crabbe, by the help of Burke, rapidly put on a more prosperous appearance.
His poems were published and achieved success. He took orders and found patrons. Thurlow gave
him £100, and afterwards presented him to two small livings, growling out with an oath that
he was 'as like Parson Adams as twelve to a dozen.' The Duke of Rutland appointed him chaplain,
a position in which he seems to have been singularly out of his element. Further patronage,
however, made him independent, and he married his Mira and lived very happily ever afterwards.
Perhaps, with his old-fashioned ideas, he would not quite have satisfied some clerical critics
of the present day. His views about non-residence and pluralities seem to have been lax for
the time; and his hearty dislike for dissent was coupled with a general dislike for enthusiasm
of all kinds. He liked to ramble about after flowers and fossils, and to hammer away at his
poems in a study where chaos reigned supreme. For twenty-two years after his first success
as an author, he never managed to get a poem into a state fit for publication, though periodical
conflagrations of masses of manuscript--too vast to be burnt in the chimney--testified to his
continuous industry. His reappearance seems to have been caused chiefly by his desire to send
a son to the University. His success was repeated, though a new school had arisen which knew
not Pope. The youth who had been kindly received by Burke, Reynolds, and Johnson, came back
from his country retreat to be lionised at Holland House, and be petted by Brougham and Moore,
and Rogers and Campbell, and all the rising luminaries. He paid a visit to Scott contemporaneously
with George IV., and pottered about the queer old wynds and closes of Edinburgh, which he preferred
to the New Town, and apparently to Arthur's Seat, with a judicious caddie following to keep
him out of mischief. A more tangible kind of homage was the receipt of £3,000 from Murray for
his 'Tales of the Hall,' which so delighted him that he insisted on carrying the bills loose
in his pocket till he could show them 'to his son John' in the country.[2] There, no doubt,
he was most at home; and his parishioners gradually became attached to their 'Parson Adams,'
in spite of his quaintnesses and some manful defiance of their prejudices. All women and children
loved him, and he died at a good old age in 1832, having lived into a new order in many things,
and been as little affected by the change as most men. The words with which he concludes the
sketch of the Vicar in his 'Borough' are not inappropriate to himself:--

    Nor one so old has left this world of sin
    More like the being that he entered in.

The peculiar homeliness of Crabbe's character and poetry is excellently hit off in the 'Rejected
Addresses,' and the lines beginning

    John Richard William Alexander Dwyer
    Was footman to Justinian Stubbs, Esquire,

