'Who is there?' a voice replied to his knock.

'From Kresty, the Brekhunovs, dear fellow,' answered Nikita. 'Just come out for a minute.'

Someone moved from the window, and a minute or two later there was the sound of the passage
door as it came unstuck, then the latch of the outside door clicked and a tall white-bearded
peasant, with a sheepskin coat thrown over his white holiday shirt, pushed his way out holding
the door firmly against the wind, followed by a lad in a red shirt and high leather boots.

'Is that you, Andreevich?' asked the old man.

'Yes, friend, we've gone astray,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'We wanted to get to Goryachkin but
found ourselves here. We went a second time but lost our way again.'

'Just see how you have gone astray!' said the old man. 'Petrushka, go and open the gate!' he
added, turning to the lad in the red shirt.

'All right,' said the lad in a cheerful voice, and ran back into the passage.

'But we're not staying the night,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'Where will you go in the night? You'd better stay!'

'I'd be glad to, but I must go on. It's business, and it can't be helped.'

'Well, warm yourself at least. The samovar is just ready.'

'Warm myself? Yes, I'll do that,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'It won't get darker. The moon will
rise and it will be lighter. Let's go in and warm ourselves, Nikita.'

'Well, why not? Let us warm ourselves,' replied Nikita, who was stiff with cold and anxious
to warm his frozen limbs.

Vasili Andreevich went into the room with the old man, and Nikita drove through the gate opened
for him by Petrushka, by whose advice he backed the horse under the penthouse. The ground was
covered with manure and the tall bow over the horse's head caught against the beam. The hens
and the cock had already settled to roost there, and clucked peevishly, clinging to the beam
with their claws. The disturbed sheep shied and rushed aside trampling the frozen manure with
their hooves. The dog yelped desperately with fright and anger and then burst out barking like
a puppy at the stranger.

Nikita talked to them all, excused himself to the fowls and assured them that he would not
disturb them again, rebuked the sheep for being frightened without knowing why, and kept soothing
the dog, while he tied up the horse.

'Now that will be all right,' he said, knocking the snow off his clothes. 'Just hear how he
barks!' he added, turning to the dog. 'Be quiet, stupid! Be quiet. You are only troubling yourself
for nothing. We're not thieves, we're friends....'

'And these are, it's said, the three domestic counsellors,' remarked the lad, and with his
strong arms he pushed under the pent-roof the sledge that had remained outside.

'Why counsellors?' asked Nikita.

'That's what is printed in Paulson. A thief creeps to a house--the dog barks, that means "Be
on your guard!" The cock crows, that means, "Get up!" The cat licks herself--that means, "A
welcome guest is coming. Get ready to receive him!"' said the lad with a smile.

Petrushka could read and write and knew Paulson's primer, his only book, almost by heart, and
he was fond of quoting sayings from it that he thought suited the occasion, especially when
he had had something to drink, as to-day.

'That's so,' said Nikita.

'You must be chilled through and through,' said Petrushka.

'Yes, I am rather,' said Nikita, and they went across the yard and the passage into the house.

IV

The household to which Vasili Andreevich had come was one of the richest in the village. The
family had five allotments, besides renting other land. They had six horses, three cows, two
calves, and some twenty sheep. There were twenty-two members belonging to the homestead: four
married sons, six grandchildren (one of whom, Petrushka, was married), two great-grandchildren,
three orphans, and four daughters-in-law with their babies. It was one of the few homesteads
that remained still undivided, but even here the dull internal work of disintegration which
would inevitably lead to separation had already begun, starting as usual among the women. Two
sons were living in Moscow as water-carriers, and one was in the army. At home now were the
old man and his wife, their second son who managed the homestead, the eldest who had come from
Moscow for the holiday, and all the women and children. Besides these members of the family
there was a visitor, a neighbour who was godfather to one of the children.

Over the table in the room hung a lamp with a shade, which brightly lit up the tea-things,
a bottle of vodka, and some refreshments, besides illuminating the brick walls, which in the
far corner were hung with icons on both sides of which were pictures. At the head of the table
sat Vasili Andreevich in a black sheepskin coat, sucking his frozen moustache and observing
the room and the people around him with his prominent hawk-like eyes. With him sat the old,
bald, white-bearded master of the house in a white homespun shirt, and next him the son home
from Moscow for the holiday--a man with a sturdy back and powerful shoulders and clad in a
thin print shirt--then the second son, also broad-shouldered, who acted as head of the house,
and then a lean red-haired peasant--the neighbour.

Having had a drink of vodka and something to eat, they were about to take tea, and the samovar
standing on the floor beside the brick oven was already humming. The children could be seen
in the top bunks and on the top of the oven. A woman sat on a lower bunk with a cradle beside
her. The old housewife, her face covered with wrinkles which wrinkled even her lips, was waiting
on Vasili Andreevich.

As Nikita entered the house she was offering her guest a small tumbler of thick glass which
she had just filled with vodka.

'Don't refuse, Vasili Andreevich, you mustn't! Wish us a merry feast. Drink it, dear!' she said.

The sight and smell of vodka, especially now when he was chilled through and tired out, much
disturbed Nikita's mind. He frowned, and having shaken the snow off his cap and coat, stopped
in front of the icons as if not seeing anyone, crossed himself three times, and bowed to the
icons. Then, turning to the old master of the house and bowing first to him, then to all those
at table, then to the women who stood by the oven, and muttering: 'A merry holiday!' he began
taking off his outer things without looking at the table.

'Why, you're all covered with hoar-frost, old fellow!' said the eldest brother, looking at
Nikita's snow-covered face, eyes, and beard.

Nikita took off his coat, shook it again, hung it up beside the oven, and came up to the table.
He too was offered vodka. He went through a moment of painful hesitation and nearly took up
the glass and emptied the clear fragrant liquid down his throat, but he glanced at Vasili Andreevich,
remembered his oath and the boots that he had sold for drink, recalled the cooper, remembered
his son for whom he had promised to buy a horse by spring, sighed, and declined it.

'I don't drink, thank you kindly,' he said frowning, and sat down on a bench near the second
window.

'How's that?' asked the eldest brother.

'I just don't drink,' replied Nikita without lifting his eyes but looking askance at his scanty
beard and moustache and getting the icicles out of them.

'It's not good for him,' said Vasili Andreevich, munching a cracknel after emptying his glass.

'Well, then, have some tea,' said the kindly old hostess. 'You must be chilled through, good
soul. Why are you women dawdling so with the samovar?'

'It is ready,' said one of the young women, and after flicking with her apron the top of the
samovar which was now boiling over, she carried it with an effort to the table, raised it,
and set it down with a thud.

Meanwhile Vasili Andreevich was telling how he had lost his way, how they had come back twice
to this same village, and how they had gone astray and had met some drunken peasants. Their
hosts were surprised, explained where and why they had missed their way, said who the tipsy
people they had met were, and told them how they ought to go.

'A little child could find the way to Molchanovka from here. All you have to do is to take
the right turning from the high road. There's a bush you can see just there. But you didn't
even get that far!' said the neighbour.

'You'd better stay the night. The women will make up beds for you,' said the old woman persuasively.

'You could go on in the morning and it would be pleasanter,' said the old man, confirming what
his wife had said.

'I can't, friend. Business!' said Vasili Andreevich. 'Lose an hour and you can't catch it up
in a year,' he added, remembering the grove and the dealers who might snatch that deal from
him. 'We shall get there, shan't we?' he said, turning to Nikita.

Nikita did not answer for some time, apparently still intent on thawing out his beard and moustache.

'If only we don't go astray again,' he replied gloomily. He was gloomy because he passionately
longed for some vodka, and the only thing that could assuage that longing was tea and he had
not yet been offered any.

'But we have only to reach the turning and then we shan't go wrong. The road will be through
the forest the whole way,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'It's just as you please, Vasili Andreevich. If we're to go, let us go,' said Nikita, taking
the glass of tea he was offered.

'We'll drink our tea and be off.'

Nikita said nothing but only shook his head, and carefully pouring some tea into his saucer
began warming his hands, the fingers of which were always swollen with hard work, over the
steam. Then, biting off a tiny bit of sugar, he bowed to his hosts, said, 'Your health!' and
drew in the steaming liquid.

'If somebody would see us as far as the turning,' said Vasili Andreevich.

'Well, we can do that,' said the eldest son. 'Petrushka will harness and go that far with you.'

'Well, then, put in the horse, lad, and I shall be thankful to you for it.'

'Oh, what for, dear man?' said the kindly old woman. 'We are heartily glad to do it.'

'Petrushka, go and put in the mare,' said the eldest brother.

'All right,' replied Petrushka with a smile, and promptly snatching his cap down from a nail
he ran away to harness.

While the horse was being harnessed the talk returned to the point at which it had stopped
when Vasili Andreevich drove up to the window. The old man had been complaining to his neighbour,
the village elder, about his third son who had not sent him anything for the holiday though
he had sent a French shawl to his wife.

'The young people are getting out of hand,' said the old man.

'And how they do!' said the neighbour. 'There's no managing them! They know too much. There's
Demochkin now, who broke his father's arm. It's all from being too clever, it seems.'

Nikita listened, watched their faces, and evidently would have liked to share in the conversation,
but he was too busy drinking his tea and only nodded his head approvingly. He emptied one tumbler
after another and grew warmer and warmer and more and more comfortable. The talk continued
on the same subject for a long time--the harmfulness of a household dividing up--and it was
clearly not an abstract discussion but concerned the question of a separation in that house;
a separation demanded by the second son who sat there morosely silent.

It was evidently a sore subject and absorbed them all, but out of propriety they did not discuss
their private affairs before strangers. At last, however, the old man could not restrain himself,
and with tears in his eyes declared that he would not consent to a break-up of the family during
his lifetime, that his house was prospering, thank God, but that if they separated they would
all have to go begging.

'Just like the Matveevs,' said the neighbour. 'They used to have a proper house, but now they've
split up none of them has anything.'

'And that is what you want to happen to us,' said the old man, turning to his son.

The son made no reply and there was an awkward pause. The silence was broken by Petrushka,
who having harnessed the horse had returned to the hut a few minutes before this and had been
listening all the time with a smile.

'There's a fable about that in Paulson,' he said. 'A father gave his sons a broom to break.
At first they could not break it, but when they took it twig by twig they broke it easily.
And it's the same here,' and he gave a broad smile. 'I'm ready!' he added.

'If you're ready, let's go,' said Vasili Andreevich. 'And as to separating, don't you allow
it, Grandfather. You got everything together and you're the master. Go to the Justice of the
Peace. He'll say how things should be done.'

'He carries on so, carries on so,' the old man continued in a whining tone. 'There's no doing
anything with him. It's as if the devil possessed him.'

Nikita having meanwhile finished his fifth tumbler of tea laid it on its side instead of turning
it upside down, hoping to be offered a sixth glass. But there was no more water in the samovar,
so the hostess did not fill it up for him. Besides, Vasili Andreevich was putting his things
on, so there was nothing for it but for Nikita to get up too, put back into the sugar-basin
the lump of sugar he had nibbled all round, wipe his perspiring face with the skirt of his
sheepskin, and go to put on his overcoat.

Having put it on he sighed deeply, thanked his hosts, said good-bye, and went out of the warm
bright room into the cold dark passage, through which the wind was howling and where snow was
blowing through the cracks of the shaking door, and from there into the yard.

Petrushka stood in his sheepskin in the middle of the yard by his horse, repeating some lines
from Paulson's primer. He said with a smile:

     'Storms with mist the sky conceal,
     Snowy circles wheeling wild.
     Now like savage beast 'twill howl,
     And now 'tis wailing like a child.'

Nikita nodded approvingly as he arranged the reins.

The old man, seeing Vasili Andreevich off, brought a lantern into the passage to show him a
light, but it was blown out at once. And even in the yard it was evident that the snowstorm
had become more violent.

'Well, this is weather!' thought Vasili Andreevich. 'Perhaps we may not get there after all.
But there is nothing to be done. Business! Besides, we have got ready, our host's horse has
been harnessed, and we'll get there with God's help!'

Their aged host also thought they ought not to go, but he had already tried to persuade them
to stay and had not been listened to.

'It's no use asking them again. Maybe my age makes me timid. They'll get there all right, and
at least we shall get to bed in good time and without any fuss,' he thought.

Petrushka did not think of danger. He knew the road and the whole district so well, and the
lines about 'snowy circles wheeling wild' described what was happening outside so aptly that
it cheered him up. Nikita did not wish to go at all, but he had been accustomed not to have
his own way and to serve others for so long that there was no one to hinder the departing travellers.

V

Vasili Andreevich went over to his sledge, found it with difficulty in the darkness, climbed
in and took the reins.

'Go on in front!' he cried.

Petrushka kneeling in his low sledge started his horse. Mukhorty, who had been neighing for
some time past, now scenting a mare ahead of him started after her, and they drove out into
the street. They drove again through the outskirts of the village and along the same road,
past the yard where the frozen linen had hung (which, however, was no longer to be seen), past
the same barn, which was now snowed up almost to the roof and from which the snow was still
endlessly pouring past the same dismally moaning, whistling, and swaying willows, and again
entered into the sea of blustering snow raging from above and below. The wind was so strong
that when it blew from the side and the travellers steered against it, it tilted the sledges
and turned the horses to one side. Petrushka drove his good mare in front at a brisk trot and
kept shouting lustily. Mukhorty pressed after her.

After travelling so for about ten minutes, Petrushka turned round and shouted something. Neither
Vasili Andreevich nor Nikita could hear anything because of the wind, but they guessed that
they had arrived at the turning. In fact Petrushka had turned to the right, and now the wind
that had blown from the side blew straight in their faces, and through the snow they saw something
dark on their right. It was the bush at the turning.

'Well now, God speed you!'

'Thank you, Petrushka!'

'Storms with mist the sky conceal!' shouted Petrushka as he disappeared.

'There's a poet for you!' muttered Vasili Andreevich, pulling at the reins.

'Yes, a fine lad--a true peasant,' said Nikita.

They drove on.

Nikita, wrapping his coat closely about him and pressing his head down so close to his shoulders
that his short beard covered his throat, sat silently, trying not to lose the warmth he had
obtained while drinking tea in the house. Before him he saw the straight lines of the shafts
which constantly deceived him into thinking they were on a well-travelled road, and the horse's
swaying crupper with his knotted tail blown to one side, and farther ahead the high shaft-bow
and the swaying head and neck of the horse with its waving mane. Now and then he caught sight
of a way-sign, so that he knew they were still on a road and that there was nothing for him
to be concerned about.

Vasili Andreevich drove on, leaving it to the horse to keep to the road. But Mukhorty, though
he had had a breathing-space in the village, ran reluctantly, and seemed now and then to get
off the road, so that Vasili Andreevich had repeatedly to correct him.

'Here's a stake to the right, and another, and here's a third,' Vasili Andreevich counted,
'and here in front is the forest,' thought he, as he looked at something dark in front of him.
But what had seemed to him a forest was only a bush. They passed the bush and drove on for
another hundred yards but there was no fourth way-mark nor any forest.

'We must reach the forest soon,' thought Vasili Andreevich, and animated by the vodka and the
tea he did not stop but shook the reins, and the good obedient horse responded, now ambling,
now slowly trotting in the direction in which he was sent, though he knew that he was not going
the right way. Ten minutes went by, but there was still no forest.

'There now, we must be astray again,' said Vasili Andreevich, pulling up.

Nikita silently got out of the sledge and holding his coat, which the wind now wrapped closely
about him and now almost tore off, started to feel about in the snow, going first to one side
and then to the other. Three or four times he was completely lost to sight. At last he returned
and took the reins from Vasili Andreevich's hand.

'We must go to the right,' he said sternly and peremptorily, as he turned the horse.

'Well, if it's to the right, go to the right,' said Vasili Andreevich, yielding up the reins
to Nikita and thrusting his freezing hands into his sleeves.

Nikita did not reply.

'Now then, friend, stir yourself!' he shouted to the horse, but in spite of the shake of the
reins Mukhorty moved only at a walk.

The snow in places was up to his knees, and the sledge moved by fits and starts with his every
movement.

Nikita took the whip that hung over the front of the sledge and struck him once. The good horse,
unused to the whip, sprang forward and moved at a trot, but immediately fell back into an amble
and then to a walk. So they went on for five minutes. It was dark and the snow whirled from
above and rose from below, so that sometimes the shaft-bow could not be seen. At times the
sledge seemed to stand still and the field to run backwards. Suddenly the horse stopped abruptly,
evidently aware of something close in front of him. Nikita again sprang lightly out, throwing
down the reins, and went ahead to see what had brought him to a standstill, but hardly had
he made a step in front of the horse before his feet slipped and he went rolling down an incline.

'Whoa, whoa, whoa!' he said to himself as he fell, and he tried to stop his fall but could
not, and only stopped when his feet plunged into a thick layer of snow that had drifted to
the bottom of the hollow.

The fringe of a drift of snow that hung on the edge of the hollow, disturbed by Nikita's fall,
showered down on him and got inside his collar.

'What a thing to do!' said Nikita reproachfully, addressing the drift and the hollow and shaking
the snow from under his collar.

'Nikita! Hey, Nikita!' shouted Vasili Andreevich from above.

But Nikita did not reply. He was too occupied in shaking out the snow and searching for the
whip he had dropped when rolling down the incline. Having found the whip he tried to climb
straight up the bank where he had rolled down, but it was impossible to do so: he kept rolling
down again, and so he had to go along at the foot of the hollow to find a way up. About seven
yards farther on he managed with difficulty to crawl up the incline on all fours, then he followed
the edge of the hollow back to the place where the horse should have been. He could not see
either horse or sledge, but as he walked against the wind he heard Vasili Andreevich's shouts
and Mukhorty's neighing, calling him.

'I'm coming! I'm coming! What are you cackling for?' he muttered.

Only when he had come up to the sledge could he make out the horse, and Vasili Andreevich standing
beside it and looking gigantic.

'Where the devil did you vanish to? We must go back, if only to Grishkino,' he began reproaching
Nikita.

'I'd be glad to get back, Vasili Andreevich, but which way are we to go? There is such a ravine
here that if we once get in it we shan't get out again. I got stuck so fast there myself that
I could hardly get out.'

'What shall we do, then? We can't stay here! We must go somewhere!' said Vasili Andreevich.

Nikita said nothing. He seated himself in the sledge with his back to the wind, took off his
boots, shook out the snow that had got into them, and taking some straw from the bottom of
the sledge, carefully plugged with it a hole in his left boot.

Vasili Andreevich remained silent, as though now leaving everything to Nikita. Having put his
boots on again, Nikita drew his feet into the sledge, put on his mittens and took up the reins,
and directed the horse along the side of the ravine. But they had not gone a hundred yards
before the horse again stopped short. The ravine was in front of him again.

Nikita again climbed out and again trudged about in the snow. He did this for a considerable
time and at last appeared from the opposite side to that from which he had started.

'Vasili Andreevich, are you alive?' he called out.

'Here!' replied Vasili Andreevich. 'Well, what now?'

'I can't make anything out. It's too dark. There's nothing but ravines. We must drive against
the wind again.'

They set off once more. Again Nikita went stumbling through the snow, again he fell in, again
climbed out and trudged about, and at last quite out of breath he sat down beside the sledge.

'Well, how now?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'Why, I am quite worn out and the horse won't go.'

'Then what's to be done?'

'Why, wait a minute.'

Nikita went away again but soon returned.

'Follow me!' he said, going in front of the horse.

Vasili Andreevich no longer gave orders but implicitly did what Nikita told him.

'Here, follow me!' Nikita shouted, stepping quickly to the right, and seizing the rein he led
Mukhorty down towards a snow-drift.

At first the horse held back, then he jerked forward, hoping to leap the drift, but he had
not the strength and sank into it up to his collar.

'Get out!' Nikita called to Vasili Andreevich who still sat in the sledge, and taking hold
of one shaft he moved the sledge closer to the horse. 'It's hard, brother!' he said to Mukhorty,
'but it can't be helped. Make an effort! Now, now, just a little one!' he shouted.

The horse gave a tug, then another, but failed to clear himself and settled down again as if
considering something.

'Now, brother, this won't do!' Nikita admonished him. 'Now once more!'

Again Nikita tugged at the shaft on his side, and Vasili Andreevich did the same on the other.

Mukhorty lifted his head and then gave a sudden jerk.

'That's it! That's it!' cried Nikita. 'Don't be afraid--you won't sink!'

One plunge, another, and a third, and at last Mukhorty was out of the snow-drift, and stood
still, breathing heavily and shaking the snow off himself. Nikita wished to lead him farther,
but Vasili Andreevich, in his two fur coats, was so out of breath that he could not walk farther
and dropped into the sledge.

'Let me get my breath!' he said, unfastening the kerchief with which he had tied the collar
of his fur coat at the village.

'It's all right here. You lie there,' said Nikita. 'I will lead him along.' And with Vasili
Andreevich in the sledge he led the horse by the bridle about ten paces down and then up a
slight rise, and stopped.

The place where Nikita had stopped was not completely in the hollow where the snow sweeping
down from the hillocks might have buried them altogether, but still it was partly sheltered
from the wind by the side of the ravine. There were moments when the wind seemed to abate a
little, but that did not last long and as if to make up for that respite the storm swept down
with tenfold vigour and tore and whirled the more fiercely. Such a gust struck them at the
moment when Vasili Andreevich, having recovered his breath, got out of the sledge and went
up to Nikita to consult him as to what they should do. They both bent down involuntarily and
waited till the violence of the squall should have passed. Mukhorty too laid back his ears
and shook his head discontentedly. As soon as the violence of the blast had abated a little,
Nikita took off his mittens, stuck them into his belt, breathed onto his hands, and began to
undo the straps of the shaft-bow.

'What's that you are doing there?' asked Vasili Andreevich.

'Unharnessing. What else is there to do? I have no strength left,' said Nikita as though excusing
himself.

'Can't we drive somewhere?'

'No, we can't. We shall only kill the horse. Why, the poor beast is not himself now,' said
Nikita, pointing to the horse, which was standing submissively waiting for what might come,
with his steep wet sides heaving heavily. 'We shall have to stay the night here,' he said,
as if preparing to spend the night at an inn, and he proceeded to unfasten the collar-straps.
The buckles came undone.

'But shan't we be frozen?' remarked Vasili Andreevich.

'Well, if we are we can't help it,' said Nikita.

VI

Although Vasili Andreevich felt quite warm in his two fur coats, especially after struggling
in the snow-drift, a cold shiver ran down his back on realizing that he must really spend the
night where they were. To calm himself he sat down in the sledge and got out his cigarettes
and matches.

