Memories of Childhood's
                             Slavery Days

                                  By

                           Annie L. Burton

                                BOSTON

                       ROSS PUBLISHING COMPANY

                                 1909

RECOLLECTIONS OF A HAPPY LIFE

The memory of my happy, care-free childhood days on the plantation, with my little white and
black companions, is often with me. Neither master nor mistress nor neighbors had time to bestow
a thought upon us, for the great Civil War was raging. That great event in American history
was a matter wholly outside the realm of our childish interests. Of course we heard our elders
discuss the various events of the great struggle, but it meant nothing to us.

On the plantation there were ten white children and fourteen colored children. Our days were
spent roaming about from plantation to plantation, not knowing or caring what things were going
on in the great world outside our little realm. Planting time and harvest time were happy days
for us. How often at the harvest time the planters discovered cornstalks missing from the ends
of the rows, and blamed the crows! We were called the "little fairy devils." To the sweet potatoes
and peanuts and sugar cane we also helped ourselves.

Those slaves that were not married served the food from the great house, and about half-past
eleven they would send the older children with food to the workers in the fields. Of course,
I followed, and before we got to the fields, we had eaten the food nearly all up. When the
workers returned home they complained, and we were whipped.

The slaves got their allowance every Monday night of molasses, meat, corn meal, and a kind
of flour called "dredgings" or "shorts." Perhaps this allowance would be gone before the next
Monday night, in which case the slaves would steal hogs and chickens. Then would come the whipping-post.
Master himself never whipped his slaves; this was left to the overseer.

We children had no supper, and only a little piece of bread or something of the kind in the
morning. Our dishes consisted of one wooden bowl, and oyster shells were our spoons. This bowl
served for about fifteen children, and often the dogs and the ducks and the peafowl had a dip
in it. Sometimes we had buttermilk and bread in our bowl, sometimes greens or bones.

Our clothes were little homespun cotton slips, with short sleeves. I never knew what shoes
were until I got big enough to earn them myself.

If a slave man and woman wished to marry, a party would be arranged some Saturday night among
the slaves. The marriage ceremony consisted of the pair jumping over a stick. If no children
were born within a year or so, the wife was sold.

At New Year's, if there was any debt or mortgage on the plantation, the extra slaves were taken
to Clayton and sold at the court house. In this way families were separated.

When they were getting recruits for the war, we were allowed to go to Clayton to see the soldiers.

I remember, at the beginning of the war, two colored men were hung in Clayton; one, Cæsar King,
for killing a blood hound and biting off an overseer's ear; the other, Dabney Madison, for
the murder of his master. Dabney Madison's master was really shot by a man named Houston, who
was infatuated with Madison's mistress, and who had hired Madison to make the bullets for him.
Houston escaped after the deed, and the blame fell on Dabney Madison, as he was the only slave
of his master and mistress. The clothes of the two victims were hung on two pine trees, and
no colored person would touch them. Since I have grown up, I have seen the skeleton of one
of these men in the office of a doctor in Clayton.

After the men were hung, the bones were put in an old deserted house. Somebody that cared for
the bones used to put them in the sun in bright weather, and back in the house when it rained.
Finally the bones disappeared, although the boxes that had contained them still remained.

At one time, when they were building barns on the plantation, one of the big boys got a little
brandy and gave us children all a drink, enough to make us drunk. Four doctors were sent for,
but nobody could tell what was the matter with us, except they thought we had eaten something
poisonous. They wanted to give us some castor oil, but we refused to take it, because we thought
that the oil was made from the bones of the dead men we had seen. Finally, we told about the
big white boy giving us the brandy, and the mystery was cleared up.

Young as I was then, I remember this conversation between master and mistress, on master's
return from the gate one day, when he had received the latest news: "William, what is the news
from the seat of war?" "A great battle was fought at Bull Run, and the Confederates won," he
replied. "Oh, good, good," said mistress, "and what did Jeff Davis say?" "Look out for the
blockade. I do not know what the end may be soon," he answered. "What does Jeff Davis mean
by that?" she asked. "Sarah Anne, I don't know, unless he means that the niggers will be free."
"O, my God, what shall we do?" "I presume," he said, "we shall have to put our boys to work
and hire help." "But," she said, "what will the niggers do if they are free? Why, they will
starve if we don't keep them." "Oh, well," he said, "let them wander, if they will not stay
with their owners. I don't doubt that many owners have been good to their slaves, and they
would rather remain with their owners than wander about without home or country."

My mistress often told me that my father was a planter who owned a plantation about two miles
from ours. He was a white man, born in Liverpool, England. He died in Lewisville, Alabama,
in the year 1875.

I will venture to say that I only saw my father a dozen times, when I was about four years
old; and those times I saw him only from a distance, as he was driving by the great house of
our plantation. Whenever my mistress saw him going by, she would take me by the hand and run
out upon the piazza, and exclaim, "Stop there, I say! Don't you want to see and speak to and
caress your darling child? She often speaks of you and wants to embrace her dear father. See
what a bright and beautiful daughter she is, a perfect picture of yourself. Well, I declare,
you are an affectionate father." I well remember that whenever my mistress would speak thus
and upbraid him, he would whip up his horse and get out of sight and hearing as quickly as
possible. My mistress's action was, of course, intended to humble and shame my father. I never
spoke to him, and cannot remember that he ever noticed me, or in any way acknowledged me to
be his child.

My mother and my mistress were children together, and grew up to be mothers together. My mother
was the cook in my mistress's household. One morning when master had gone to Eufaula, my mother
and my mistress got into an argument, the consequence of which was that my mother was whipped,
for the first time in her life. Whereupon, my mother refused to do any more work, and ran away
from the plantation. For three years we did not see her again.

Our plantation was one of several thousand acres, comprising large level fields, upland, and
considerable forests of Southern pine. Cotton, corn, sweet potatoes, sugar cane, wheat, and
rye were the principal crops raised on the plantation. It was situated near the P---- River,
and about twenty-three miles from Clayton, Ala.

One day my master heard that the Yankees were coming our way, and he immediately made preparations
to get his goods and valuables out of their reach. The big six-mule team was brought to the
smoke-house door, and loaded with hams and provisions. After being loaded, the team was put
in the care of two of the most trustworthy and valuable slaves that my master owned, and driven
away. It was master's intention to have these things taken to a swamp, and there concealed
in a pit that had recently been made for the purpose. But just before the team left the main
road for the by-road that led to the swamp, the two slaves were surprised by the Yankees, who
at once took possession of the provisions, and started the team toward Clayton, where the Yankees
had headquarters. The road to Clayton ran past our plantation. One of the slave children happened
to look up the road, and saw the Yankees coming, and gave warning. Whereupon, my master left
unceremoniously for the woods, and remained concealed there for five days. The niggers had
run away whenever they got a chance, but now it was master's and the other white folks' turn
to run.

The Yankees rode up to the piazza of the great house and inquired who owned the plantation.
They gave orders that nothing must be touched or taken away, as they intended to return shortly
and take possession. My mistress and the slaves watched for their return day and night for
more than a week, but the Yankees did not come back.

One morning in April, 1865, my master got the news that the Yankees had left Mobile Bay and
crossed the Confederate lines, and that the Emancipation Proclamation had been signed by President
Lincoln. Mistress suggested that the slaves should not be told of their freedom; but master
said he would tell them, because they would soon find it out, even if he did not tell them.
Mistress, however, said she could keep my mother's three children, for my mother had now been
gone so long.

All the slaves left the plantation upon the news of their freedom, except those who were feeble
or sickly. With the help of these, the crops were gathered. My mistress and her daughters had
to go to the kitchen and to the washtub. My little half-brother, Henry, and myself had to gather
chips, and help all we could. My sister, Caroline, who was twelve years old, could help in
the kitchen.

After the war, the Yankees took all the good mules and horses from the plantation, and left
their old army stock. We children chanced to come across one of the Yankees' old horses, that
had "U. S." branded on him. We called him "Old Yank" and got him fattened up. One day in August,
six of us children took "Old Yank" and went away back on the plantation for watermelons. Coming
home, we thought we would make the old horse trot. When "Old Yank" commenced to trot, our big
melons dropped off, but we couldn't stop the horse for some time. Finally, one of the big boys
went back and got some more melons, and left us eating what we could find of the ones that
had been dropped. Then all we six, with our melons, got on "Old Yank" and went home. We also
used to hitch "Old Yank" into a wagon and get wood. But one sad day in the fall, the Yankees
came back again, and gathered up their old stock, and took "Old Yank" away.

One day mistress sent me out to do some churning under a tree. I went to sleep and jerked the
churn over on top of me, and consequently got a whipping.

My mother came for us at the end of the year 1865, and demanded that her children be given
up to her. This, mistress refused to do, and threatened to set the dogs on my mother if she
did not at once leave the place. My mother went away, and remained with some of the neighbors
until supper time. Then she got a boy to tell Caroline to come down to the fence. When she
came, my mother told her to go back and get Henry and myself and bring us down to the gap in
the fence as quick as she could. Then my mother took Henry in her arms, and my sister carried
me on her back. We climbed fences and crossed fields, and after several hours came to a little
hut which my mother had secured on a plantation. We had no more than reached the place, and
made a little fire, when master's two sons rode up and demanded that the children be returned.
My mother refused to give us up. Upon her offering to go with them to the Yankee headquarters
to find out if it were really true that all negroes had been made free, the young men left,
and troubled us no more.

The cabin that was now our home was made of logs. It had one door, and an opening in one wall,
with an inside shutter, was the only window. The door was fastened with a latch. Our beds were
some straw.

There were six in our little family; my mother, Caroline, Henry, two other children that my
mother had brought with her upon her return, and myself.

The man on whose plantation this cabin stood, hired my mother as cook, and gave us this little
home. We children used to sell blueberries and plums that we picked. One day the man on whom
we depended for our home and support, left. Then my mother did washing by the day, for whatever
she could get. We were sent to get cold victuals from hotels and such places. A man wanting
hands to pick cotton, my brother Henry and I were set to help in this work. We had to go to
the cotton field very early every morning. For this work, we received forty cents for every
hundred pounds of cotton we picked.

Caroline was hired out to take care of a baby.

In 1866, another man hired the plantation on which our hut stood, and we moved into Clayton,
to a little house my mother secured there. A rich lady came to our house one day, looking for
some one to take care of her little daughter. I was taken, and adopted into this family. This
rich lady was Mrs. E. M. Williams, a music teacher, the wife of a lawyer. We called her "Mis'
Mary."

Some rich people in Clayton who had owned slaves, opened the Methodist church on Sundays, and
began the work of teaching the negroes. My new mistress sent me to Sunday school every Sunday
morning, and I soon got so that I could read. Mis' Mary taught me every day at her knee. I
soon could read nicely, and went through Sterling's Second Reader, and then into McGuthrie's
Third Reader. The first piece of poetry I recited in Sunday school was taught to me by Mis'
Mary during the week. Mis' Mary's father-in-law, an ex-judge, of Clayton, Alabama, heard me
recite it, and thought it was wonderful. It was this:

    "I am glad to see you, little bird,
    It was your sweet song I heard.
    What was it I heard you say?
    Give me crumbs to eat today?
    Here are crumbs I brought for you.
    Eat your dinner, eat away,
    Come and see us every day."

After this Mis' Mary kept on with my studies, and taught me to write. As I grew older, she
taught me to cook and how to do housework. During this time Mis' Mary had given my mother one
dollar a month in return for my services; now as I grew up to young womanhood, I thought I
would like a little money of my own. Accordingly, Mis' Mary began to pay me four dollars a
month, besides giving me my board and clothes. For two summers she "let me out" while she was
away, and I got five dollars a month.

While I was with Mis' Mary, I had my first sweetheart, one of the young fellows who attended
Sunday school with me. Mis' Mary, however, objected to the young man's coming to the house
to call, because she did not think I was old enough to have a sweetheart.

I owe a great deal to Mis' Mary for her good training of me, in honesty, uprightness and truthfulness.
She told me that when I went out into the world all white folks would not treat me as she had,
but that I must not feel bad about it, but just do what I was employed to do, and if I wasn't
satisfied, to go elsewhere; but always to carry an honest name.

One Sunday when my sweetheart walked to the gate with me, Mis' Mary met him and told him she
thought I was too young for him, and that she was sending me to Sunday school to learn, not
to catch a beau. It was a long while before he could see me again,--not until later in the
season, in watermelon time, when Mis' Mary and my mother gave me permission to go to a watermelon
party one Sunday afternoon. Mis' Mary did not know, however, that my sweetheart had planned
to escort me. We met around the corner of the house, and after the party he left me at the
same place. After that I saw him occasionally at barbecues and parties. I was permitted to
go with him some evenings to church, but my mother always walked ahead or behind me and the
young man.

We went together for four years. During that time, although I still called Mis' Mary's my home,
I had been out to service in one or two families.

Finally, my mother and Mis' Mary consented to our marriage, and the wedding day was to be in
May. The winter before that May, I went to service in the family of Dr. Drury in Eufaula. Just
a week before I left Clayton I dreamed that my sweetheart died suddenly. The night before I
was to leave, we were invited out to tea. He told me he had bought a nice piece of poplar wood,
with which to make a table for our new home. When I told him my dream, he said, "Don't let
that trouble you, there is nothing in dreams." But one month from that day he died, and his
coffin was made from the piece of poplar wood he had bought for the table.

After his death, I remained in Clayton for two or three weeks with my people, and then went
back to Eufaula, where I stayed two years.

My sweetheart's death made a profound impression on me, and I began to pray as best I could.
Often I remained all night on my knees.

Going on an excursion to Macon, Georgia, one time, I liked the place so well that I did not
go back to Eufaula. I got a place as cook in the family of an Episcopal clergyman, and remained
with them eight years, leaving when the family moved to New Orleans.

During these eight years, my mother died in Clayton, and I had to take the three smallest children
into my care. My oldest sister was now married, and had a son.

I now went to live with a Mrs. Maria Campbell, a colored woman, who adopted me and gave me
her name. Mrs. Campbell did washing and ironing for her living. While living with her, I went
six months to Lewis' High School in Macon. Then I went to Atlanta, and obtained a place as
first-class cook with Mr. E. N. Inman. But I always considered Mrs. Campbell's my home. I remained
about a year with Mr. Inman, and received as wages ten dollars a month.

One day, when the family were visiting in Memphis, I chanced to pick up a newspaper, and read
the advertisement of a Northern family for a cook to go to Boston. I went at once to the address
given, and made agreement to take the place, but told the people that I could not leave my
present position until Mr. Inman returned home. Mr. and Mrs. Inman did not want to let me go,
but I made up my mind to go North. The Northern family whose service I was to enter had returned
to Boston before I left, and had made arrangements with a friend, Mr. Bullock, to see me safely
started North.

After deciding to go North, I went to Macon, to make arrangements with Mrs. Campbell for the
care of my two sisters who lived with her. One sister was now about thirteen and the other
fifteen, both old enough to do a little for themselves. My brother was dead. He went to Brunswick
in 1875, and died there of the yellow fever in 1876. One sister I brought in later years to
Boston. I stayed in Macon two weeks, and was in Atlanta three or four days before leaving for
the North.

About the 15th of June, 1879, I arrived at the Old Colony Station in Boston, and had my first
glimpse of the country I had heard so much about. From Boston I went to Newtonville, where
I was to work. The gentleman whose service I was to enter, Mr. E. N. Kimball, was waiting at
the station for me, and drove me to his home on Warner Street. For a few days, until I got
somewhat adjusted to my new circumstances, I had no work to do. On June 17th the family took
me with them to Auburndale. But in spite of the kindness of Mrs. Kimball and the colored nurse,
I grew very homesick for the South, and would often look in the direction of my old home and cry.

The washing, a kind of work I knew nothing about, was given to me; but I could not do it, and
it was finally given over to a hired woman. I had to do the ironing of the fancy clothing for
Mrs. Kimball and the children.

About five or six weeks after my arrival, Mrs. Kimball and the children went to the White Mountains
for the summer, and I had more leisure. Mr. Kimball went up to the mountains every Saturday
night, to stay with his family over Sunday; but he and his father-in-law were at home other
nights, and I had to have dinner for them.

To keep away the homesickness and loneliness as much as possible, I made acquaintance with
the hired girl across the street.

One morning I climbed up into the cherry tree that grew between Mr. Kimball's yard and the
yard of his next-door neighbor, Mr. Roberts. I was thinking of the South, and as I picked the
cherries, I sang a Southern song. Mr. Roberts heard me, and gave me a dollar for the song.

By agreement, Mrs. Kimball was to give me three dollars and a half a week, instead of four,
until the difference amounted to my fare from the South; after that, I was to have four dollars.
I had, however, received but little money. In the fall, after the family came home, we had
a little difficulty about my wages, and I left and came into Boston. One of my Macon acquaintances
had come North before me, and now had a position as cook in a house on Columbus Avenue. I looked
this girl up. Then I went to a lodging-house for colored people on Kendall Street, and spent
one night there. Mrs. Kimball had refused to give me a recommendation, because she wanted me
to stay with her, and thought the lack of a recommendation would be an inducement. In the lodging-house
I made acquaintance with a colored girl, who took me to an intelligence office. The man at
the desk said he would give me a card to take to 24 Springfield Street, on receipt of fifty
cents. I had never heard of an office of this kind, and asked a good many questions. After
being assured that my money would be returned in case I did not accept the situation, I paid
the fifty cents and started to find the address on the card. Being ignorant of the scheme of
street numbering, I inquired of a woman whom I met, where No. 24 was. This woman asked me if
I was looking for work, and when I told her I was, she said a friend of hers on Springfield
Street wanted a servant immediately. Of course I went with this lady, and after a conference
with the mistress of the house as to my ability, when I could begin work, what wages I should
want, etc., I was engaged as cook at three dollars and a half a week.

From this place I proceeded to 24 Springfield Street, as directed, hoping that I would be refused,
so that I might go back to the intelligence office and get my fifty cents. The lady at No.
24 who wanted a servant, said she didn't think I was large and strong enough, and guessed I
wouldn't do. Then I went and got my fifty cents.

Having now obtained a situation, I sent to Mr. Kimball's for my trunk. I remained in my new
place a year and a half. At the end of that time the family moved to Dorchester, and because
I did not care to go out there, I left their service.

From this place, I went to Narragansett Pier to work as a chambermaid for the summer. In the
fall, I came back to Boston and obtained a situation with a family, in Berwick Park. This family
afterward moved to Jamaica Plain, and I went with them. With this family I remained seven years.
They were very kind to me, gave me two or three weeks' vacation, without loss of pay.

In June, 1884, I went with them to their summer home in the Isles of Shoals, as housekeeper
for some guests who were coming from Paris. On the 6th of July I received word that my sister
Caroline had died in June. This was a great blow to me. I remained with the Reeds until they
closed their summer home, but I was not able to do much work after the news of my sister's death.

I wrote home to Georgia, to the white people who owned the house in which Caroline had lived,
asking them to take care of her boy Lawrence until I should come in October. When we came back
to Jamaica Plain in the fall, I was asked to decide what I should do in regard to this boy.
Mrs. Reed wanted me to stay with her, and promised to help pay for the care of the boy in Georgia.
Of course, she said, I could not expect to find positions if I had a child with me. As an inducement
to remain in my present place and leave the boy in Georgia, I was promised provision for my
future days, as long as I should live. It did not take me long to decide what I should do.
The last time I had seen my sister, a little over a year before she died, she had said, when
I was leaving, "I don't expect ever to see you again, but if I die I shall rest peacefully
in my grave, because I know you will take care of my child."

I left Jamaica Plain and took a room on Village Street for the two or three weeks until my
departure for the South. During this time, a lady came to the house to hire a girl for her
home in Wellesley Hills. The girl who was offered the place would not go. I volunteered to
accept the position temporarily, and went at once to the beautiful farm. At the end of a week,
a man and his wife had been engaged, and I was to leave the day after their arrival. These
new servants, however, spoke very little English, and I had to stay through the next week until
the new ones were broken in. After leaving there I started for Georgia, reaching there at the
end of five days, at five o'clock.

I took a carriage and drove at once to the house where Lawrence was being taken care of. He
was playing in the yard, and when he saw me leave the carriage he ran and threw his arms around
my neck and cried for joy. I stayed a week in this house, looking after such things of my sister's
as had not been already stored. One day I had a headache, and was lying down in the cook's
room. Lawrence was in the dining-room with the cook's little girl, and the two got into a quarrel,
in the course of which my nephew struck the cook's child. The cook, in her anger, chased the
boy with a broom, and threatened to give him a good whipping at all costs. Hearing the noise,
I came out into the yard, and when Lawrence saw me he ran to me for protection. I interceded
for him, and promised he should get into no more trouble. We went at once to a neighbor's house
for the night. The next day I got a room in the yard of a house belonging to some white people.
Here we stayed two weeks. The only return I was asked to make for the room was to weed the
garden. Lawrence and I dug out some weeds and burned them, but came so near setting fire to
the place that we were told we need not dig any more weeds, but that we might have the use
of the room so long as we cared to stay.

In about a week and a half more we got together such things as we wanted to keep and take away
with us.

The last time I saw my sister, I had persuaded her to open a bank account, and she had done
so, and had made small deposits from time to time. When I came to look for the bankbook, I
discovered that her lodger, one Mayfield, had taken it at her death, and nobody knew where
it might be now. I found out that Mayfield had drawn thirty dollars from the account for my
sister's burial, and also an unknown amount for himself. He had done nothing for the boy. I
went down to the bank, and was told that Mayfield claimed to look after my sister's burial
and her affairs. He had made one Reuben Bennett, who was no relation and had no interest in
the matter, administrator for Lawrence, until his coming of age. But Bennett had as yet done
nothing for him. The book was in the bank, with some of the account still undrawn, how much
I did not know. I next went to see a lawyer, to find out how much it would cost me to get this
book. The lawyer said fifteen dollars. I said I would call again. In the meantime, I went to
the court house, and when the case on trial was adjourned I went to the judge and stated my
case. The judge, who was slightly acquainted with my sister and me, told me to have Reuben
Bennett in court next morning at nine o'clock, and to bring Lawrence with me. When we had all
assembled before the judge, he told Bennett to take Lawrence and go to the bank and get the
money belonging to my sister. Bennett went and collected the money, some thirty-five dollars.
The boy was then given into my care by the judge. For his kindness, the judge would accept
no return. Happy at having obtained the money so easily, we went back to our room, and rested
until our departure the next night for Jacksonville, Florida. I had decided to go to this place
for the winter, on account of Lawrence, thinking the Northern winter would be too severe for him.

My youngest sister, who had come to Macon from Atlanta a few days before my arrival, did not
hear of Caroline's death until within a few days of our departure. "How I should act is not the case,
But how would Brutus in my place."

"And now," cries Mr. Johnson, laughing with obstreperous violence, "if these two foolish lines
can be equalled in folly, except by the two succeeding ones--show
them me."

Modern politics fared no better. I was one time extolling the character of a statesman, and
expatiating on the skill required to direct the different currents, reconcile the jarring interests,
etc. "Thus," replies he, "a mill is a complicated piece of mechanism enough, but the water is
no part of the workmanship." On another occasion, when some one lamented the weakness of a
then present minister, and complained that he was dull and tardy, and knew little of affairs:
"You may as well complain, sir," says Johnson, "that the accounts of time are kept by the clock;
for he certainly does stand still upon the stair-head--and we all know that he is no great chronologer."
In the year 1777, or thereabouts, when all the talk was of an invasion, he said most pathetically
one afternoon, "Alas! alas! how this unmeaning stuff spoils all my comfort in my friends'
conversation! Will the people have done with it; and shall I never hear a sentence again without
the French in it? Here is no invasion coming, and you know there is none. Let the vexatious and
frivolous talk alone, or suffer it at least to teach you one truth; and learn by this perpetual
echo of even unapprehended distress how historians magnify events
expected or calamities endured; when you know they are at this very
moment collecting all the big words they can find, in which to describe
a consternation never felt, for a misfortune which never happened.

Among all your lamentations, who eats the less--who sleeps the worse, for one general's ill-success,
or another's capitulation? Oh, pray let us hear no more of it!" No man, however, was more zealously
attached to his party; he not only loved a Tory himself, but he loved a man the better if he heard
he hated a Whig.

Some one mentioned a gentleman of that party for having behaved oddly
on an occasion where faction was not concerned: "Is he not a citizen
of London, a native of North America, and a Whig?" says Johnson.

"Let him be absurd, I beg you of you; when a monkey is too like a man, it shocks one."

Severity towards the poor was, in Dr. Johnson's opinion (as is visible in his "Life of Addison"
particularly), an undoubted and constant attendant or consequence
upon Whiggism; and he was not contented with giving them relief, he
wished to add also indulgence.

He loved the poor as I never yet saw any one else do, with an earnest desire to make them happy. Life
is a pill which none of us can bear to swallow without gilding; yet for the poor we delight
in stripping it still barer, and are not ashamed to show even visible displeasure if ever the bitter
taste is taken from their mouths."

While Dr. Johnson possessed, however, the strongest compassion for poverty or illness, he did not
even pretend to feel for those who lamented the loss of a child, a parent, or a friend. "These
are the distresses of sentiment," he would reply, "which a man who is really to be pitied has
no leisure to feel. No man, therefore, who smarted from the ingratitude of his friends, found
any sympathy from our philosopher. "Let him do good on higher motives next time," would be the answer;
"he will then be sure of his reward." It is easy to observe that the justice of such sentences made
them offensive; but we must be careful how we condemn a man for saying what we know to be
true, only because it is so. I hope that the reason our hearts rebelled a little against his
severity was chiefly because it came from a living mouth. Books were invented to take off the odium
of immediate superiority, and soften the rigour of duties prescribed by the teachers and censors
of human kind--setting at least those who are acknowledged wiser than ourselves at a distance.
When we recollect, however, that for this very reason they are seldom consulted and little
obeyed, how much cause shall his contemporaries have to rejoice that their living Johnson forced
them to feel there proofs due to vice and folly, while Seneca and Tillotson were no longer able
to make impression--except on our shelves! Few things, indeed, which pass well enough with
others would do with him: he had been a great reader of Mandeville, and was ever on the watch
to spy out those stains of original corruption so easily discovered by a penetrating observer even
in the purest minds.

I mentioned an event, which if it had happened would greatly have injured Mr. Thrale and his
family--"and then, dear sir," said I, "how sorry you would have been!" "I hope," replied he, after
a long pause, "I should have been very sorry; but remember Rochefoucault's maxim."

"I would rather," answered I, "remember Prior's verses, and ask--

'What need of books these truths to tell, Which folks perceive that cannot spell? And must we
spectacles apply, To see what hurts our naked eye?'

Will anybody's mind bear this eternal microscope that you place upon your own so?" "I never,"
replied he, "saw one that would, except that of my dear Miss Reynolds--and hers is very near
to purity itself."

Of slighter evils, and friends more distant than our own household,
he spoke less cautiously.

An acquaintance lost the almost certain hope of a good estate that had been long expected.
"Such a one will grieve," said I, "at her friend's disappointment." "She will suffer as much,
perhaps," said he, "as your horse did when your cow miscarried."

I professed myself sincerely grieved when accumulated distresses crushed Sir George Colebrook's
family; and I was so. "Your own prosperity," said he, "may possibly have so far increased the
natural tenderness of your heart, that for aught I know you may be a little sorry; but it is
sufficient for a plain man if he does not laugh when he sees a fine new house tumble down all
on a sudden, and a snug cottage stand by ready to receive the owner,
whose birth entitled him to nothing better, and whose limbs are left
him to go to work again with."

I tried to tell him in jest that his morality was easily contented, and when I have said something
as if the wickedness of the world gave me concern, he would cry out aloud against canting,
and protest that he thought there was very little gross wickedness in the world, and still less of
extraordinary virtue. Nothing, indeed, more surely disgusted Dr. Johnson than hyperbole; he loved
not to be told of sallies of excellence, which he said were seldom valuable, and seldom true.
"Heroic virtues," said he, "are the bons mots of life; they do not appear often, and when
they do appear are too much prized, I think, like the aloe-tree,
which shoots and flowers once in a hundred years.

But life is made up of little things; and that character is the best which does little but
repeated acts of beneficence; as that conversation is the best which consists in elegant and
pleasing thoughts expressed in natural and pleasing terms. With regard to my own notions of moral
virtue," continued he, "I hope I have not lost my sensibility of wrong; but I hope, likewise,
that I have lived long enough in the world to prevent me from expecting to find any action of
which both the original motive and all the parts were good."

The piety of Dr. Johnson was exemplary and edifying; he was punctiliously
exact to perform every public duty enjoined by the Church, and his
spirit of devotion had an energy that affected all who ever saw him
pray in private.

The coldest and most languid hearer of the Word must have felt themselves animated by his
manner of reading the Holy Scriptures; and to pray by his sick-bed required strength of body as
well as of mind, so vehement were his manners, and his tones of voice so pathetic. I have many
times made it my request to Heaven that I might be spared the sight of his death; and I was spared
it.

Mr. Johnson, though in general a gross feeder, kept fast in Lent,
particularly the Holy Week, with a rigour very dangerous to his general
health; but though he had left off wine (for religious motives, as
I always believed, though he did not own it), yet he did not hold
the commutation of offences by voluntary penance, or encourage others
to practise severity upon themselves.

He even once said "that he thought it an error to endeavour at pleasing God by taking the rod
of reproof out of His hands." And when we talked of convents, and the hardships suffered in them:
"Remember always," said he, "that a convent is an idle place, and where there is nothing to be
done something must be endured: mustard has a bad taste per se, you may observe, but very insipid
food cannot be eaten without it."

His respect, however, for places of religious retirement was carried to the greatest degree of
earthly veneration; the Benedictine convent at Paris paid him all possible honours in return,
and the Prior and he parted with tears of tenderness. Two of that college being sent to England
on the mission some years after, spent much of their time with him at Bolt Court, I know, and
he was ever earnest to retain their friendship; but though beloved by all his Roman Catholic
acquaintance, particularly Dr. Nugent, for whose esteem he had a
singular value, yet was Mr. Johnson a most unshaken Church of England
man; and I think, or at least I once did think, that a letter written
by him to Mr. Barnard, the King's Librarian, when he was in Italy
collecting books, contained some very particular advice to his friend
to be on his guard against the seductions of the Church of Rome.

The settled aversion Dr. Johnson felt towards an infidel he expressed to all ranks, and at all times,
without the smallest reserve; for though on common occasions he paid great deference to birth
or title, yet his regard for truth and virtue never gave way to meaner considerations. We
talked of a dead wit one evening, and somebody praised him. "Let us never praise talents so
ill employed, sir; we foul our mouths by commending such infidels," said he. "Allow him the lumieres
at least," entreated one of the company. "I do allow him, sir," replied Johnson, "just enough
to light him to hell." Of a Jamaica gentleman, then lately dead: "He will not, whither he is
now gone," said Johnson, "find much difference, I believe, either
in the climate or the company."

The Abbe Reynal probably remembers that, being at the house of a common friend in London, the
master of it approached Johnson with that gentleman so much celebrated in his hand, and this
speech in his mouth: "Will you permit me, sir, to present to you the Abbe Reynal?" "No, sir," replied
the Doctor very loud, and suddenly turned away from them both.

Though Mr. Johnson had but little reverence either for talents or fortune when he found them
unsupported by virtue, yet it was sufficient to tell him a man was
very pious, or very charitable, and he would at least begin with him
on good terms, however the conversation might end.

He would sometimes, too, good-naturedly enter into a long chat for the instruction or entertainment
of people he despised. I perfectly recollect his condescending to delight my daughter's dancing-master
with a long argument about his art, which the man protested, at the close of the discourse,
the Doctor knew more of than himself, who remained astonished, enlightened, and amused by
the talk of a person little likely to make a good disquisition upon dancing. I have sometimes,
indeed, been rather pleased than vexed when Mr. Johnson has given a rough answer to a man who
perhaps deserved one only half as rough, because I knew he would repent of his hasty reproof,
and make us all amends by some conversation at once instructive and entertaining, as in the
following cases. A young fellow asked him abruptly one day, "Pray, sir, what and where is Palmyra?
I heard somebody talk last night of the ruins of Palmyra." "'Tis a hill in Ireland," replies
Johnson, "with palms growing on the top, and a bog at the bottom, and so they call it Palm-mira."
Seeing, however, that the lad thought him serious, and thanked him for the information, he undeceived
him very gently indeed: told him the history, geography, and chronology of Tadmor in the wilderness,
with every incident that literature could furnish, I think, or eloquence express, from the building
of Solomon's palace to the voyage of Dawkins and Wood. He repented just as certainly, however,
if he had been led to praise any person or thing by accident more than he thought it deserved;
and was on such occasions comically earnest to destroy the praise
or pleasure he had unintentionally given.

Such speeches may appear offensive to many, but those who knew he was too blind to discern the
perfections of an art which applies itself immediately to our eyesight must acknowledge he was not
in the wrong. His dislike to the French was well known to both nations, I believe; but he applauded
the number of their books and the graces of their style.

"They have few sentiments," said he, "but they express them neatly; they have little meat,
too, but they dress it well." With regard to drink, his liking was for the strongest, as it was
not the flavour, but the effect, he sought for, and professed to desire; and when I first knew him,
he used to pour capillaire into his port wine. For the last twelve years, however, he left off
all fermented liquors. To make himself some amends, indeed, he took his chocolate liberally, pouring
in large quantities of cream, or even melted butter; and was so fond
of fruit, that though he usually ate seven or eight large peaches
of a morning before breakfast began, and treated them with proportionate
attention after dinner again, yet I have heard him protest that he
never had quite as much as he wished of wall-fruit, except once in
his life, and that was when we were all together at Ombersley, the
seat of my Lord Sandys.

I was saying to a friend one day, that I did not like goose; "one
smells it so while it is roasting," said I. "But you, madam," replies
the Doctor, "have been at all times a fortunate woman, having always
had your hunger so forestalled by indulgence, that you never experienced
the delight of smelling your dinner beforehand."

"Which pleasure," answered I pertly, "is to be enjoyed in perfection by such as have the happiness
to pass through Porridge Island of a morning." "Come, come," says he, gravely, "let's have no sneering
at what is serious to so many. Hundreds of your fellow-creatures, dear lady, turn another way,
that they may not be tempted by the luxuries of Porridge Island to wish for gratifications
they are not able to obtain. You are certainly not better than all of them; give God thanks
that you are happier."

I received on another occasion as just a rebuke from Mr. Johnson, for an offence of the same nature,
and hope I took care never to provoke a third; for after a very long summer, particularly hot and
dry, I was wishing naturally but thoughtlessly for some rain to lay the dust as we drove along
the Surrey roads. "I cannot bear," replied he, with much asperity and an altered look, "when
I know how many poor families will perish next winter for want of that bread which the present
drought will deny them, to hear ladies sighing for rain, only that their complexions may not
suffer from the heat, or their clothes be incommoded by the dust. For shame! leave off such foppish
lamentations, and study to relieve those whose distresses are real."

With advising others to be charitable, however, Dr. Johnson did not content himself. He gave
away all he had, and all he ever had gotten, except the two thousand pounds he left behind; and the
very small portion of his income which he spent on himself, with all our calculation, we never
could make more than seventy, or at most four-score pounds a year, and he pretended to allow
himself a hundred. He had numberless dependents out of doors as well as in, who, as he expressed
it, "did not like to see him latterly unless he brought 'em money." For those people he used
frequently to raise contributions on his richer friends; "and this," says he, "is one of the
thousand reasons which ought to restrain a man from drony solitude and useless retirement.
It was on this principle that Johnson encouraged parents to carry their daughters early and
much into company: "for what harm can be done before so many witnesses? Solitude is the surest
nurse of all prurient passions, and a girl in the hurry of preparation, or tumult of gaiety,
has neither inclination nor leisure to let tender expressions soften or sink into her heart. The
ball, the show, are not the dangerous places: no, it is the private friend, the kind consoler,
the companion of the easy, vacant hour, whose compliance with her opinions can flatter her vanity,
and whose conversation can just soothe, without ever stretching her mind, that is the lover to
be feared. He who buzzes in her ear at court or at the opera must be contented to buzz in vain."
These notions Dr. Johnson carried so very far, that I have heard him say, "If you shut up any
man with any woman, so as to make them derive their whole pleasure from each other, they would
inevitably fall in love, as it is called, with each other; but at six months' end, if you would
throw them both into public life, where they might change partners at pleasure, each would soon
forget that fondness which mutual dependence and the paucity of general amusement alone had
caused, and each would separately feel delighted by their release."

In these opinions Rousseau apparently concurs with him exactly; and Mr. Whitehead's poem, called
"Variety," is written solely to elucidate this simple proposition. Prior likewise advises the
husband to send his wife abroad, and let her see the world as it really stands:--

"Powder, and pocket-glass, and beau." He hated the way of leaving a company without taking notice
to the lady of the house that he was going, and did not much like
any of the contrivances by which ease had lately been introduced into
society instead of ceremony, which had more of his approbation.

Cards, dress, and dancing, however, all found their advocate in Dr. Johnson, who inculcated, upon
principle, the cultivation of those arts which many a moralist thinks himself bound to reject,
and many a Christian holds unfit to be practised. "No person," said he one day, "goes under-dressed
till he thinks himself of consequence enough to forbear carrying the badge of his rank upon
his back." Let us all conform in outward customs, which are of no consequence, to the manners
of those whom we live among, and despise such paltry distinctions.

Though no man, perhaps, made such rough replies as Dr. Johnson, yet nobody had a more just aversion
to general satire; he always hated and censured Swift for his unprovoked bitterness against
the professors of medicine, and used to challenge his friends, when they lamented the exorbitancy
of physicians' fees, to produce him one instance of an estate raised by physic in England.
 Put those plates upon the table." We immediately obeyed orders, and took
our seats again around the fire. "One of you go and pull that straw out of the corner and get
ready to go to bed." We all lay down on the straw, the white children with us, and my mother
covered us over with the blanket. We were soon in the "Land of Nod," forgetting our empty stomachs.
The two mothers still continued to talk, sitting down on the only seats, a couple of blocks.
A little back against the wall my mother and the white woman slept.

Bright and early in the morning we were called up, and the rest of the hoe cake was eaten for
breakfast, with a little meat, some coffee sweetened with molasses. The little wanderers and
their mother shared our meal, and then they started again on their journey towards their home
among their kinsfolk, and we never saw them again. My mother said, "God bless you! I wish you
all good luck. I hope you will reach your home safely." Then mother said to us, "You young
ones put away that straw and sweep up the place, because I have to go to my work." But she
came at noon and brought us a nice dinner, more satisfactory than the supper and breakfast
we had had. We children were delighted that there were no little white children to share our
meal this time.

In time, my older sister, Caroline, and myself got work among good people, where we soon forgot
all the hard times in the little log cabin by the roadside in Clayton, Alabama.

Up to my womanhood, even to this day, these memories fill my mind. Some kind friends' eyes
may see these pages, and may they recall some fond memories of their happy childhood, as what
I have written brings back my young life in the great Sunny South.

I am something of the type of Moses on this 49th birthday; not that I am wrapped in luxuries,
but that my thoughts are wrapped in the luxuries of the heavenly life in store for me, when
my life work is done, and my friends shall be blessed by the work I shall have done. For God
has commanded me to write this book, that some one may read and receive comfort and courage
to do what God commands them to do. God bless every soul who shall read this true life story
of one born in slavery.

It is now six years since the inspiration to write this book came to me in the Franklin evening
school. I have struggled on, helped by friends. God said, "Write the book and I will help you."
And He has.

It was through a letter of my life that the principal of the Franklin
school said, "Write the book and I will help you." But he died before
the next term, and I worked on. On this, my 49th birthday, I can say I
believe that the book is close to the finish.
    But none, alas, shall mourn for me.

A VISION

There remains to be told the story of my conversion and how I came to write the foregoing history
of my life.

In 1875 I was taken sick. I thought I was going to die, and I promised the Lord I would serve
Him if he would only spare my life. When I got well again, however, I forgot all about my promise.
Then I was taken sick again. It seemed I had to go through a dark desert place, where great
demons stood on either side. In the distance I could just see a dim light, and I tried to get
to this light, but could not reach it. Then I found myself in a great marsh, and was sinking.
I threw up my hands and said, "Lord, if Thou wilt raise me from this pit, I will never fail
to serve Thee." Then it seemed as if I mounted on wings into the air, and all the demons that
stood about made a great roaring. My flight ended on the top of a hill. But I was troubled
because I could not find the light. All at once, at the sound of a loud peal of thunder, the
earth opened, and I fell down into the pits of hell. Again I prayed to God to save me from
this, and again I promised to serve Him. My prayer was answered, and I was able to fly out
of the pit, on to a bank. At the foot of the little hill on which I sat were some little children,
and they called to me to come down. But I could not get down. Then the children raised a ladder
for me, and I came down among them. A little cherub took me by the hand and led me in the River
of Badjied of Jordan. I looked at my ankles and shoulders and discovered I had little wings.
On the river was a ship. The children, the cherub and I got into the ship. When we reached
a beautiful spot, the little cherub made the ship fast, and there opened before us pearly gates,
and we all passed through into the golden street. The street led to the throne of God, about
which we marched. Then the cherub conducted us to a table where a feast was spread. Then the
children vanished. The cherub took me by the hand, and said, "Go back into the world, and tell
the saints and sinners what a Savior you have found, and if you prove faithful I will take
you to Heaven to live forever, when I come again."

When I recovered from my sickness, I was baptized by the Rev. Dr. Pope, and joined the church
in Macon. When I came North, I brought my letter. Not finding any church for colored people,
I came among the white people, and was treated so kindly that I became very much attached to
them. The first church I became connected with in the North, was in Newtonville. When I came
to Boston, I went to the Warren Avenue Baptist Church. Before my marriage I joined Tremont
Temple, when Dr. Lorimer was its pastor. When the church was burned, my letter was destroyed,
but when I went South on a visit I had the letter duplicated, and took it to the new Temple.
I am still a member of the Temple, and hope to remain there as long as God gives me life.

Five years ago, I began to go to the Franklin evening school. Mr. Guild was the master. At
one time he requested all the pupils to write the story of their lives, and he considered my
composition so interesting he said he thought if I could work it up and enlarge upon it, I
could write a book. He promised to help me. My teacher was Miss Emerson, and she was interested
in me. But the next year Miss Emerson gave up teaching, and Mr. Guild died.

In each of the terms that I have attended, I have received the certificates showing that I
have been regular and punctual in attendance, have maintained good deportment, and shown general
proficiency in the studies. I would have graduated in 1907, had it not been for sickness. The
following was to have been my graduating composition.

ABRAHAM LINCOLN

BY

ANNIE L. BURTON

In a little clearing in the backwoods of Harding County, Kentucky, there stood years ago a
rude cabin within whose walls Abraham Lincoln passed his childhood. An "unaccountable" man
he has been called, and the adjective was well chosen, for who could account for a mind and
nature like Lincoln's with the ancestry he owned? His father was a thriftless, idle carpenter,
scarcely supporting his family, and with but the poorest living. His mother was an uneducated
woman, but must have been of an entirely different nature, for she was able to impress upon
her boy a love of learning. During her life, his chief, in fact his only book, was the Bible,
and in this he learned to read. Just before he was nine years old, the father brought his family
across the Ohio River into Illinois, and there in the unfloored log cabin, minus windows and
doors, Abraham lived and grew. It was during this time that the mother died, and in a short
time the shiftless father with his family drifted back to the old home, and here found another
for his children in one who was a friend of earlier days. This woman was of a thrifty nature,
and her energy made him floor the cabin, hang doors, and open up windows. She was fond of the
children and cared for them tenderly, and to her the boy Abraham owed many pleasant hours.

As he grew older, his love for knowledge increased and he obtained whatever books he could,
studying by the firelight, and once walking six miles for an English Grammar. After he read
it, he walked the six miles to return it. He needed the book no longer, for with this as with
his small collection of books, what he once read was his. He absorbed the books he read.

During these early years he did "odd jobs" for the neighbors. Even at this age, his gift of
story telling was a notable one, as well as his sterling honesty. His first knowledge of slavery
in all its horrors came to him when he was about twenty-one years old. He had made a trip to
New Orleans, and there in the old slave market he saw an auction. His face paled, and his spirits
rose in revolt at the coarse jest of the auctioneer, and there he registered a vow within himself,
"If ever I have a chance to strike against slavery, I will strike and strike hard." To this
end he worked and for this he paid "the last full measure of devotion."

His political life began with a defeat for the Illinois Legislature in 1830, but he was returned
in 1834, 1836, 1838, and declined re-election in 1840, preferring to study law and prepare
for his future. "Honest Abe" he has been called, and throughout Illinois that characteristic
was the prominent one known of him. From this time his rise was rapid. Sent to the Congress
of the nation, he seldom spoke, but when he did his terse though simple expression always won
him a hearing. His simplicity and frankness was deceptive to the political leaders, and from
its very fearlessness often defeated them.

His famous debates with Senator Douglas, the "Little Giant," spread his reputation from one
end of the country to the other, and at their close there was no question as to Lincoln's position
in the North, or on the vital question of the day.

The spirit of forbearance he carried with him to the White House, "with malice toward none,
with charity for all." This was the spirit that carried him through the four awful years of
the war. The martyr's crown hovered over him from the outset. The martyr's spirit was always
his. The burden of the war always rested on his shoulders. The fathers, sons and brothers,
the honored dead of Gettysburg, of Antietam, all lay upon his mighty heart.

He never forgot his home friends, and when occasionally one dropped in on him, the door was
always open. They frequently had tea in the good old-fashioned way, and then Lincoln listened
to the news of the village, old stories were retold, new ones told, and the old friendships
cemented by new bonds.

Then came the end, swift and sudden, and gloom settled upon the country; for in spite of ancestry,
self-education, ungainly figure, ill-fitting clothes, the soul of the man had conquered even
the stubborn South, while the cold-blooded North was stricken to the heart. The noblest one
of all had been taken.

THE RACE QUESTION IN AMERICA

BY

DR. P. THOMAS STANFORD

AUTHOR OF THE "TRAGEDY OF THE NEGRO IN AMERICA"

As a member of the negro race, I myself have suffered as a child whose parents were born in
slavery, deprived of all influences of the ennobling life, made obedient to the will of the
white man by the lash and chain, and sold to the highest bidder when there was no more use
for them.

The first negro fact for white thought is--that my clients, the colored people here in America,
are not responsible for being here any more than they are responsible for their conditions
of ignorance and poverty. They suddenly emerge from their prison house poor, without a home,
without food or clothing, and ignorant. Now the enemies of God and of the progress of civilization
in our country are to-day introducing a system of slavery with which they hope to again enslave
the colored people. To carry out their evil designs they retain able politicians, lawyers and
newspapers to represent them, such as Senator Tillman, the Hon. John Temple Graves of Georgia
and the Baltimore Sun, and they are trying the negro on four counts which allege that the race
is ignorant, cannot be taught, is lazy and immoral.

Now, are the negroes, as a whole, guilty of these charges? In the first place, the negro race
of America is not ignorant. In the year 1833 John C. Calhoun, senator from South Carolina,
is reported to have said that if he could find a single negro who understood the Greek syntax,
he would believe the negro was human and would treat him as such. At that time it was a very
safe test. God accepted the challenge in behalf of the negro race, and inspired his white sons
and daughters both in the North and South to teach their brothers in black; and a few years
afterward black men were examined and the world pronounced them scholars, while later still
the schools were using a Greek grammar written by a black man, W. S. Scarborough of Wilberforce,
O. In his class were Frederick Douglas, Henry Highland Garnett, Robert Elliot, the Rev. J.
C. Price and John M. Langstone, as defenders of the race. Bishop Allen Payne, Bishop Hood and
John B. Reaver will ever be remembered for their godly piety and Christian example, as we shall
also remember Bishop, Sumner and Bubois for their great literary productions, William Washington
Brown as the greatest organizer and financier of the century, Prof. Booker Washington as the
greatest industrial educator of the world, and last, but not least, Thomas Condon, the greatest
crank for the spiritual training and higher education of the negro race.

Under the leadership of such men, assisted by our white friends and backed up by our colored
race journals--the Christian Banner of Philadelphia, the Christian Recorder, the Star of Zion
and the Afro-American Ledger of Baltimore, Ind., the National Baptist Union of Pennsylvania,
the Age of New York, the Christian Organizer of Virginia and the Guardian of Boston--our onward
march to civilization is phenomenal and by these means we have reduced illiteracy 50 per cent.

In the South we have over $12,000,000 worth of school property, 3,000 teachers, 50 high schools,
17 academies, 125 colleges, 10 law and medical schools, 25 theological seminaries, all doing
a mighty work for God and humanity.

Now as to laziness. We have now in practice 14,000 lawyers and doctors, and have accumulated
over $150,000,000 worth of church property. In the South we have over 150,000 farms and houses,
valued at $900,000,000, and personal property at $170,000,000. We have raised over $11,000,000
for educational purposes. The property per capita for every colored man, woman and child in
the United States is estimated at $75, and we are operating successfully several banks and
factories; we have 7,500,000 acres of land, and the business activity of the colored people
was never as thoroughly aroused as it is to-day.

When I come to deal with the charge of immorality I bow my head and blush for shame, first
because if the charge be true, I see they are getting like the white man every day. I know
that at the close of the American civil war the 4,000,000 negroes had more than 25 per cent.
of white blood coursing through their veins.

What about this new educated negro? Just ask the Pullman Car Company, which employs hundreds
of negroes, into whose care thousands of women and children of our best American families are
entrusted every day.

Now, you cannot do without the negro, because if you send him away, you will run after him.
He is here to stay. The only way to deal successfully with the colored race is God's way. First,
recognize that he is your guest; second, recognize that you have robbed him of his birthplace,
home, family and savings. It is these facts that are causing so much unrest on the part of
the whites in this country. The negro loves his country, which he has proved beyond a doubt
in every American battle, in every act of loyalty to his country, and in his long and patient
suffering. Pay him what you owe him by educating him. Give him an opportunity to live. Allow
him to live in decent parts of your city. Pay wages sufficient to support his children. Do
this and God will remove the objectionable negro from the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Negro stands to-day upon an eminence that overlooks more than two decades spent in efforts
to ameliorate the condition of seven million immortal souls by opening before their hitherto
dark and cheerless lives possibilities of development into a perfect and symmetrical manhood
and womanhood.

The retrospect presents to us a picture of a people's moral degradation and mental gloom caused
by slavery. A people absolutely sunk in the lowest depth of a poverty which reduced them to
objects of charity and surrounded them with difficulties which have ever stood as impregnable
barriers in their way to speedy advancement in all those qualities that make the useful citizen.
Every influence of state and society life seems to be against their progress and like some
evil genius, these Negro hating ghosts are forever hunting them with the idea that their future
must be one of subserviency to the white race.

Hated and oppressed by the combined wisdom, wealth and statesmanship of a mighty confederacy
who watched and criticised their mistakes which were strongly magnified by those who fain would
write destruction upon the Emancipation; they are expected to rise from this condition.

The idea of giving to the newly enfranchised a sound, practical education was considered at
the dawn of freedom, an easy solution of what as an unsolved problem threatened the perpetuity
of republican institutions. Within a year from the firing on Sumter, benevolent and farsighted
Northern friends had established schools from Washington to the Gulf of Mexico, which became
centers of light penetrating the darkness and scattering the blessings of an enlightened manhood
far and wide.

The history of the world cannot produce a more affecting spectacle than the growth of this
mighty Christian philanthropy which, in beginning amid the din of battle, has steadily marched
on through every opposing influence, and lifted a race from weakness to strength, from poverty
to wealth, from moral and intellectual nonentity to place and power among the nations of the earth.

We have ten millions of colored people in the United States whose condition is much better
to-day than it was fifty years ago. Then he had nothing, not even a name. To-day he has 160,000
farms under good cultivation and valued at $4,000,000 and has personal property valued at $200,000,000.
In the Southland the negroes own 160 first-class drug stores, nine banks, 13 building associations,
and 100 insurance and benefit companies, two street railways and an electric at Jacksonville,
Fla., which they started some few years ago when the white people passed the Jim Crow law for
that state.

Now it is reckoned that the negroes in the United States are paying about $700,000,000 property
taxes and this is only one-fifth of all they have accumulated, for the negro is getting more
like the white people every day and has learned from him that it is not a sign of loyalty and
patriotism to publish his property at its full taxable value.

In education and morals the progress is still greater. As you all know, at the close of the
war the whole race was practically illiterate. It was a rare thing, indeed, to find a man of
the race who even knew his letters. In 1880 the illiteracy had fallen to 70 per cent. and rapid
strides along that line have been made ever since.

To-day there are 37,000 negro teachers in America, of which number 23,000 are regular graduates
of high and normal schools and colleges, 23 are college presidents, 169 are principals of seminaries
and many are principals of higher institutions. At present there are 369 negro men and women
taking courses in the universities of Europe. The negro ministry, together with these teachers
have been prepared for their work by our schools and are the greatest factors the North has
produced for the uplift of the colored man.

To-day there are those who wish to impede the negro's progress and lessen his educational advantages
by industrializing such colleges as Howard University of Washington by placing on their Boards
of Trustees and Managers the pronounced leaders of industrialism, giving as a reason that the
better he is educated the worse he is; in other words, they say crime has increased among educated
negroes. While stern facts show the opposite, the exact figures from the last census show that
the greater proportion of the negro criminals are from the illiterate class. To-day the marriage
vow, which by the teaching of the whites the negro held to be of so little importance before
the war, is guarded more sacredly. The one room cabin, with its attendant evils, is passing
away, and the negro woman, the mightiest moral factor in the life of her people, is beginning
to be more careful in her deportment and is no longer the easy victim of the unlicensed passion
of certain white men. This is a great gain and is a sign of real progress, for no race can
rise higher than its women.

Let me plead with the friends of the negro. Please continue to give him higher ideals of a
better life and stand by him in the struggle. He has done well with the opportunities given
him and is doing something along all the walks of life to help himself, which is gratitude
of the best sort. What he needs to-day is moral sympathy, which in his condition years ago
he could hardly appreciate. The sympathy must be moral, not necessarily social. It must be
the sympathy of a soul set on fire for righteousness and fair play in a republic like ours.
A sympathy which will see to it that every man shall have a man's chance in all the affairs
of this great nation which boasts of being the land of the free and the home of the brave for
which the black man has suffered and done so much in every sense of the word.

Let this great Christian nation of eighty millions of people do justice to the Black Battalion,
and seeing President Roosevelt acknowledges that he overstepped the bounds of his power in
discharging and renouncing them before they had a fair trial, and now that they are vindicated
before the world, to take back what he called them, Cutthroats, Brutal Murderers, Black Midnight
Assassins, and Cowards. This and this alone will to some extent atone for the wrong he has
done and help him to regain the respect and confidence of the world.

Now in order to change the condition of things, I would suggest: First, that an international,
industrial association be formed to help Afro-Americans to engage in manufacturing and commercial
pursuits, assist them to buy farms, erect factories, open shops in which their young men and
women can enter and produce what the world requires every day for its inhabitants.

If they were able to-day to produce the articles in common use as boots, shoes, hats, cotton
and woolen goods, made-up clothing and enterprises such as farming, mining, forging, carpentering,
etc., negroes would find a ready sale in preference to all others, because of its being a race
enterprise, doing what no other corporation does, giving employment to members of the race
as tradesmen, and teaching others to become skilled workers. These enterprises should be started
in the southern, northern and western states, where the negro population will warrant such
an undertaking.

I would suggest "A School History of the Negro Race" to be placed in our public schools as
a text book. The general tone of all the histories taught in our public schools points to the
inferiority of the negro and the superiority of the white. It must be indeed a stimulus to
any people to be able to refer to their ancestry as distinguished in deeds of valor, and particularly
so to the colored people. With what eyes can the white child look upon the colored child and
the colored child look upon himself, when they have completed the assigned course of United
States history, and in it found not one word of credit, not one word of favorable comment for
even one among the millions of his fore-parents who have lived through nearly three centuries
of his country's history. In them he is credited with no heritage of valor, he is mentioned
only as a slave, while true historical records prove him to have been among the bravest of
soldiers and a faithful producer of the nation's wealth. Though then a slave to the government,
the negro's was the first blood shed in its defence in those days when a foreign foe threatened
its destruction. In each and all of the American wars the negro was faithful, yes, faithful
in battle while members of his race were being lynched to death; faithful to a land not his
own in points of rights and freedom, all and that after he had enriched with his own life's
blood, shouldered his musket to defend, when all this was done, regarded him with renewed terms,
Black, Negro.

Last but not least the negro needs a daily newspaper in every large city, managed and edited
by members of the race.

Such papers are needed to deal with questions of state and reflect the thoughts of the social
world, to enter the province of ethics and tread the domain of morals and to give their opinion
on the varying phases of religious truths and pass judgment on matters of a political nature.

There are hidden wrongs perpetrated by the whites against the negro race that will never be
brought to light until the race owns and controls its own daily newspapers which alone have
the power to discover and enthrone truth, thus becoming a safe guide to all honest seekers
of facts respecting the race whether from a moral, educational, political or religious field.
To carry out the plans suggested, whether viewed from an intellectual, industrial, commercial,
or editorial standpoint, the world must acknowledge that to-day the negro race has the men
and women, who are true to their race and all that stands for negro progress.

HISTORICAL COMPOSITION

BY

ANNIE L. BURTON

It is only 132 years ago to-day that the British troops, who had occupied Boston, made a riding
school of the Old South church, and otherwise sacrilegiously disported themselves, were persuaded
to get out under the compulsion of the batteries set up on Dorchester Heights. But when the
last company embarked for Halifax, it carried the last British flag ever unfurled by a military
organization on Massachusetts soil. That was the end of foreign domination in Massachusetts.
And by a happy coincidence this is the legendary anniversary of the birth of St. Patrick, the
patron saint of Ireland, whose memory has been an inspiration in the struggle of another race
for Liberty.

A QUESTION OF ETHICS

New York, Dec. 17.--Andrew Carnegie declared yesterday in a speech on the negro question that
the negroes are a blessing to America, and that their presence in the South makes this country
impregnable and without need of a navy to defend itself.

"Suppose," said Mr. Carnegie, "Great Britain were to send her war fleets to America. It would
amount to nothing. All that the President of the United States would have to do would be to
say, 'Stop exporting cotton.' The war would be ended in four days, for England cannot do without
our cotton.

"We don't need a navy; we are impregnable. Because we have 9,000,000 colored men anxious and
willing to work we hold this strong position, and I am interested in the negro from this material
standpoint, as well as from the more humane point of view."

MY FAVORITE POEMS

Verses

    On a green slope, most fragrant with the Spring,
      One sweet, fair day I planted a red rose,
    That grew, beneath my tender nourishing,
      So tall, so riotous of bloom, that those
    Who passed the little valley where it grew
      Smiled at its beauty. All the air was sweet
    About it! Still I tended it, and knew
      That he would come, e'en as it grew complete.

    And a day brought him! Up I led him, where
      In the warm sun my rose bloomed gloriously--
    Smiling and saying, Lo, is it not fair?
      And all for thee--all thine! But he passed by
    Coldly, and answered, Rose? I see no rose,--
      Leaving me standing in the barren vale
    Alone! alone! feeling the darkness close
      Deep o'er my heart, and all my being fail.

    Then came one, gently, yet with eager tread,
      Begging one rose-bud--but my rose was dead.

Verses

    The old, old Wind that whispers to old trees,
      Round the dark country when the sun has set,
    Goes murmuring still of unremembered seas
      And cities of the dead that men forget--
    An old blind beggar-man, distained and gray,
      With ancient tales to tell,
    Mumbling of this and that upon his way,
      Strange song and muttered spell--
    Neither to East or West, or South or North,
      His habitation lies,
    This roofless vagabond who wanders forth
      Aye under alien skies--
    A gypsy of the air, he comes and goes
      Between the tall trees and the shadowed grass,
    And what he tells only the twilight knows ...
      The tall trees and the twilight hear him pass.

    To him the Dead stretch forth their strengthless hands,
      He who campaigns in other climes than this,
    He who is free of the Unshapen Lands,
      The empty homes of Dis.

Verses

    Out of the scattered fragments
      Of castles I built in the air
    I gathered enough together
      To fashion a cottage with care;
    Thoughtfully, slowly, I planned it,
      And little by little it grew--
    Perfect in form and in substance,
      Because I designed it for you.

    The castles that time has shattered
      Gleamed spotless and pearly white
    As they stood in the misty distance
      That borders the Land of Delight;
    Sleeping and waking I saw them
      Grow brighter and fairer each day;
    But, alas! at the touch of a finger
      They trembled and crumbled away!

    Then out of the dust I gathered
      A bit of untarnished gold,
    And a gem unharmed by contact
      With stones of a baser mold;
    For sometimes a priceless jewel
      Gleams wondrously pure and fair
    From glittering paste foundations
      Of castles we see in the air.

    So, I turned from the realms of fancy,
      As remote as the stars above,
    And into the land of the living
      I carried the jewel of love;
    The mansions of dazzling brightness
      Have crumbled away, it is true;
    But firm upon gold foundations
      Stands the cottage I built for you!

Verses

    You do but jest, sir, and you jest not well.
    How could the hand be enemy of the arm,
    Or seed and sod be rivals? How could light
    Feel jealousy of heat, plant of the leaf,
    Or competition dwell 'twixt lip and smile?
    Are we not part and parcel of yourselves?
    Like strands in one great braid we intertwine
    And make the perfect whole. You could not be
    Unless we gave you birth: we are the soil
    From which you sprang, yet sterile were that soil
    Save as you planted. (Though in the Book we read
    One woman bore a child with no man's aid,
    We find no record of a man-child born
    Without the aid of woman! Fatherhood
    Is but a small achievement at the best,
    While motherhood is heaven and hell.)
    This ever-growing argument of sex
    Is most unseemly, and devoid of sense.
    Why waste more time in controversy, when
    There is not time enough for all of love,
    Our rightful occupation in this life?
    Why prate of our defects--of where we fail,
    When just the story of our worth would need
    Eternity for telling; and our best
    Development comes ever through your praise,
    As through our praise you reach your highest self?
    Oh! had you not been miser of your praise
    And let our virtues be their own reward,
    The old established order of the world
    Would never have been changed. Small blame is ours
    For this unsexing of ourselves, and worse
    Effeminizing of the male. We were
    Content, sir, till you starved us, heart and brain.
    All we have done, or wise or otherwise,
    Traced to the root, was done for love of you.
    Let us taboo all vain comparisons,
    And go forth as God meant us, hand in hand,
    Companions, mates and comrades evermore;
    Two parts of one divinely ordained whole.

Verses

    A widow had two sons,
      And one knelt at her knees,
    And sought to give her joy
      And toiled to give her ease;
    He heard his country's call
      And longed to go, to die
    If God so willed, but saw
    Her tears and heard her sigh.

    A widow had two sons,
      One filled her days with care
    And creased her brow and brought
      Her many a whitened hair
    His country called--he went.
      Nor thought to say good-by,
    And recklessly he fought,
      And died as heroes die.

    A widow had two sons,
      One fell as heroes fall,
    And one remained and toiled,
      And gave to her his all.
    She watched "her hero's" grave
      In dismal days and fair,
    And told the world her love,
      Her heart was buried there.

Our Mission

    In the legends of the Norsemen,
      Stories quaint and weird and wild,
    There's a strange and thrilling story,
      Of a mother and her child. Poor
    Coil gaped with astonishment; for
      never before had his performance on
    the bagpipe been heard but with admiration
      and applause.
    
      "A bonny bargain, indeed, that
    canna stand the pipes," said the old
      gentleman, as he went puffing up and down the room.
    And within her humble dwelling,
      Strong in faith and brave of soul,
    With her love-song low and tender
      Rocked and sang the fragments whole.
    Such the mission of the Christian,
      Taught by Christ so long ago;
    This the mark that bids us stay not,
      This the spirit each should know:
    Rent and torn by sin the race is,
      Heart from heart, and soul from soul;
    This our task with Christ's sweet love-song,
      Join, and heal, and make them whole.

--Rev. E. M. Bartlett

Verses

    Lord over all! When Mr. Johnson had a mind to compliment
      any one he did it with more dignity to himself,
    and better effect upon the company, than any
      man. I can recollect but few instances, indeed, though perhaps that
may be more my fault than his.

    When all shall cease--the universe be o'er,
      In awful greatness He alone will reign,
    Who was, Who is, and Who will evermore
      In glory most refulgent still remain.

    Sole God! unequalled and beyond compare,
      Without division or associate;
    Without commencing date, or final year,
      Omnipotent He reigns in awful state.

    He is my God! my living Savior He!
      My sheltering Rock in sad misfortune's hour!
    My standard, refuge, portion, still shall be,
      My lot's disposer when I seek His power.

    Into His hands my spirit I consign
      Whilst wrapped in sleep, that I again may wake,
    And with my soul, my body I resign;
      The Lord's with me--no fears my soul can shake.

THE CREATION

BY

ANNIE L. BURTON

    The earth, the firmament on high,
    With all the blue ethereal sky,
    Were made by God's creative power
    Six thousand years ago or more.
    Man, too, was formed to till the ground;
    Birds, beasts, and fish to move around;
    The fish to swim, the birds to fly,
    And all to praise the Love most high.
    This world is round, wise men declare,
    And hung on nothing in the air.
    The moon around the earth doth run;
      The earth moves on its center, too;
    The earth and moon around the sun
      As wheels and tops and pulleys do.
    Water and land make up the whole,
      From East to West, from pole to pole.
    Vast mountains rear their lofty heads,
      Rivers roll down their sandy beds;
    And all join in one grand acclaim
      To praise the Lord's almighty name.

My Faith looks up to Thee

    My faith looks up to Thee,
    Thou Lamb of Calvary,
       Saviour divine!
    Now hear me while I pray,
    Take all my guilt away,
    O, let me from this day
       Be wholly Thine. 

    "And is this really all? And
    have you got no money? And are
       we not going away?"
    gasped the disappointed Lady
    Juliana, as she gave way
    to a violent burst of tears, that
       terminated in a fit of hysterics; at sight of which, the good spinsters
entirely forgot their wrath; and while one burnt feathers under her
nose, and another held her hands, a third drenched her in floods of
Lady Maclaughlan'shysteric water.

    After going through the regular routine,
    the lady's paroxysm subsided; and
       being carried to bed,
    she soon sobbed herself into
    a feverish slumber; in which
    state the harassed husband
       left her to attend a summons from his father.

    
      CHAPTER XII.
    
      "See what delight in sylvan scenes appear!"

    
      
    Pope.
      

    Let sorrow's rudest tempest blow,
      Each cord on earth to sever;
    Our King says, "Come!" and there's our home,
      Forever, O forever.

Over the Line

    O tender and sweet was the Master's voice
      As he lovingly call'd to me,
    "Come over the line, it is only a step--
      I am waiting my child, for thee."

Refrain

    "Over the line," hear the sweet refrain,
      Angels are chanting the heavenly strain:
    "Over the line,"--Why should I remain
      With a step between me and Jesus?

    But my sins are many, my faith is small,
      Lo! the answer came quick and clear;
    "Thou needest not trust in thyself at all,
      Step over the line, I am here."

    But my flesh is weak, I tearfully said,
      And the way I cannot see;
    I fear if I try I may sadly fail,
      And thus may dishonor Thee.

    Ah, the world is cold, and I cannot go back
      Press forward I surely must;
    I will place my hand in his wounded palm
      Step over the line, and trust.

O could I speak the Matchless Worth

    O could I speak the matchless worth,
    O could I sound the glories forth,
      Which in my Saviour shine,
    I'd soar, and touch the heav'nly strings,
    And vie with Gabriel while he sings,
      In notes almost divine.

    I'd sing the precious blood He spilt,
    My ransom from the dreadful guilt
      Of sin and wrath divine;
    I'd sing His glorious righteousness,
    In which all-perfect, heavenly dress
      My soul shall ever shine.

    I'd sing the characters He bears,
    And all the forms of love He wears,
      Exalted on His throne;
    In loftiest songs of sweetest praise,
    I would to everlasting days
      Make all His glories known. 

    "Indeed I do," answered Mary earnestly.
    "I have been taught to consider it as
      such; and----"
    
    "Pshaw! nonsense! these are some
      of your stiff-necked Presbyterian notions. I shall really begin to
suspect you are a Methodist and yet you are not at all like one."

O God, beneath Thy Guiding Hand

    O God, beneath Thy guiding hand,
      Our exiled fathers cross'd the sea;
    And when they trod the wintry strand,
      With pray'r and psalm they worshipp'd Thee.

    Thou heard'st, well pleased, the song, the prayer:
      Thy blessing came and still its power
    Shall onward through all ages bear
      The memory of that holy hour.

    Laws, freedom, truth, and faith in God
      Came with those exiles o'er the waves;
    And where their pilgrim feet have trod,
      The God they trusted guards their graves. 

    See him! oh, God help me! I shall
      never see him more!" And she wept in
    all the agony of contending emotions,
    suddenly and powerful excited.

    
      "But you will hear him--you will
    hold him to your heart--you will
      be conscious that he is beside you," said Mary.

    When the sun of bliss is beaming
      Light and love upon my way,
    From the cross the radiance streaming,
      Add more luster to the day.

    Bane and blessing, pain and pleasure,
      By the cross are sanctified;
    Peace is there that knows no measure,
      Joys that through all time abide.

    When I tread the verge of Jordan,
      Bid my anxious fears subside;
    Bear me through the swelling current,
      Land me safe on Canaan's side;
        Songs of praises
    I will ever give to Thee.

Christ receiveth Sinful Men

    Sinners Jesus will receive;
      Sound this word of grace to all
    Who the heav'nly pathway leave,
      All who linger, all who fall.

Chorus

    Sing it o'er and o'er again:
      Christ receiveth sinful men;
    Make the message clear and plain:
      Christ receiveth sinful men.

    Come, and He will give you rest;
      Trust Him, for His word is plain;
    He will take the sinfulest;
      Christ receiveth sinful men.

    Christ receiveth sinful men,
      Even me with all my sin;
    Purged from ev'ry spot and stain,
      Heav'n with Him I enter in. 

No--it's not the least distressing.

    How can a thing be distressing that
      does no harm? He's much the better
    of it--it's the only exercise he
      gets."

    
    "Oh! well, indeed, if that's the case, it would be a thousand pities
to stop it," replied the accommodating spinster.

    Some day my earthly house will fall,
      I cannot tell how soon 'twill be,
    But this I know--my All in All
      Has now a place in heaven for me.

    Some day; till then I'll watch and wait,
      My lamp all trimmed and burning bright,
    That when my Saviour ope's the gate.
      My soul to Him may take its flight.

