This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive, and used to paste obituaries and accidents
and cases of patient suffering in it out of the Presbyterian Observer, and write poetry after
them out of her own head. It was very good poetry.  This is what she wrote about a boy by the
name of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded:

ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS, DEC'D

And did young Stephen sicken, And did young Stephen die? And did the sad hearts thicken, And
did the mourners cry?

No; such was not the fate of Young Stephen Dowling Bots; Though sad hearts round him thickened,
'Twas not from sickness' shots.

No whooping-cough did rack his frame, Nor measles drear with spots; Not these impaired the
sacred name Of Stephen Dowling Bots.

Despised love struck not with woe That head of curly knots, Nor stomach troubles laid him low,
Young Stephen Dowling Bots.

O no.  Then list with tearful eye, Whilst I his fate do tell. His soul did from this cold world
fly By falling down a well.

They got him out and emptied him; Alas it was too late; His spirit was gone for to sport aloft
In the realms of the good and great.

If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was fourteen, there ain't no
telling what she could a done by and by.  Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing.
She didn't ever have to stop to think.  He said she would slap down a line, and if she couldn't
find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down another one, and go
ahead. She warn't particular; she could write about anything you choose to give her to write
about just so it was sadful. Every time a man died, or a woman died, or a child died, she would
be on hand with her "tribute" before he was cold.  She called them tributes. The neighbors
said it was the doctor first, then Emmeline, then the undertaker--the undertaker never got
in ahead of Emmeline but once, and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person's name,
which was Whistler.  She warn't ever the same after that; she never complained, but she kinder
pined away and did not live long.  Poor thing, many's the time I made myself go up to the little
room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures
had been aggravating me and I had soured on her a little.  I liked all that family, dead ones
and all, and warn't going to let anything come between us.  Poor Emmeline made poetry about
all the dead people when she was alive, and it didn't seem right that there warn't nobody to
make some about her now she was gone; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two myself, but I
couldn't seem to make it go somehow.  They kept Emmeline's room trim and nice, and all the
things fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when she was alive, and nobody ever
slept there.  The old lady took care of the room herself, though there was plenty of niggers,
and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there mostly.

Well, as I was saying about the parlor, there was beautiful curtains on the windows:  white,
with pictures painted on them of castles with vines all down the walls, and cattle coming down
to drink.  There was a little old piano, too, that had tin pans in it, I reckon, and nothing
was ever so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing "The Last Link is Broken" and play "The
Battle of Prague" on it.  The walls of all the rooms was plastered, and most had carpets on
the floors, and the whole house was whitewashed on the outside.

It was a double house, and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and floored, and sometimes
the table was set there in the middle of the day, and it was a cool, comfortable place.  Nothing
couldn't be better.  And warn't the cooking good, and just bushels of it too!

CHAPTER XVIII.

COL.  GRANGERFORD was a gentleman, you see.  He was a gentleman all over; and so was his family. "Oh,
Gregory, I am so sorry," said Karen, taking upon herself the responsibility for Victor's mischance.
"I am afraid they are broken to bits. See, this is the largest piece of all. They can't be
mended. No, Tante, they were not wedding-presents; they belonged to Gregory and we were very fond
of them."

"Alas!" said Madame von Marwitz above her chocolate, and on a deeper note.

Gregory was convinced that she had known they were not wedding-presents.
But her manner was flawless and he saw that she intended to keep it
so. She dined with them alone and at the table addressed her talk
to him, fixing, as ill-luck would have it, on the theatre as her theme,
and on La Gaine d'Or as the piece which, in Paris, had particularly
interested her.  His forehead was high, and his hair was black and straight
and hung to his shoulders. His hands was long and thin, and every day of his life he put on
a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes
to look at it; and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it.  He carried
a mahogany cane with a silver head to it.  There warn't no frivolishness about him, not a bit,
and he warn't ever loud.  He was as kind as he could be--you could feel that, you know, and
so you had confidence.  Sometimes he smiled, and it was good to see; but when he straightened
himself up like a liberty-pole, and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows,
you wanted to climb a tree first, and find out what the matter was afterwards.  He didn't ever
have to tell anybody to mind their manners --everybody was always good-mannered where he was.
Everybody loved to have him around, too; he was sunshine most always--I mean he made it seem
like good weather.  When he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute, and
that was enough; there wouldn't nothing go wrong again for a week.

When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up out of their chairs
and give them good-day, and didn't set down again till they had set down.  Then Tom and Bob
went to the sideboard where the decanter was, and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to
him, and he held it in his hand and waited till Tom's and Bob's was mixed, and then they bowed
and said, "Our duty to you, sir, and madam;" and THEY bowed the least bit in the world and
said thank you, and so they drank, all three, and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on
the sugar and the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers, and give
it to me and Buck, and we drank to the old people too.

Bob was the oldest and Tom next--tall, beautiful men with very broad shoulders and brown faces,
and long black hair and black eyes.  They dressed in white linen from head to foot, like the
old gentleman, and wore broad Panama hats.

Then there was Miss Charlotte; she was twenty-five, and tall and proud and grand, but as good
as she could be when she warn't stirred up; but when she was she had a look that would make
you wilt in your tracks, like her father.  She was beautiful.

So was her sister, Miss Sophia, but it was a different kind.  She was gentle and sweet like
a dove, and she was only twenty.

Each person had their own nigger to wait on them--Buck too.  My nigger had a monstrous easy
time, because I warn't used to having anybody do anything for me, but Buck's was on the jump
most of the time.

This was all there was of the family now, but there used to be more --three sons; they got
killed; and Emmeline that died.

The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers. Sometimes a stack of people
would come there, horseback, from ten or fifteen mile around, and stay five or six days, and
have such junketings round about and on the river, and dances and picnics in the woods daytimes,
and balls at the house nights.  These people was mostly kinfolks of the family.  The men brought
their guns with them.  It was a handsome lot of quality, I tell you.

There was another clan of aristocracy around there--five or six families --mostly of the name
of Shepherdson.  They was as high-toned and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords.
The Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing, which was about two mile
above our house; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot of our folks I used to see a
lot of the Shepherdsons there on their fine horses.

One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting, and heard a horse coming.  We was crossing
the road.  Buck says:

"Quick!  Jump for the woods!"

We done it, and then peeped down the woods through the leaves.  Pretty soon a splendid young
man come galloping down the road, setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier.  He had
his gun across his pommel.  I had seen him before.  It was young Harney Shepherdson.  I heard
Buck's gun go off at my ear, and Harney's hat tumbled off from his head.  He grabbed his gun
and rode straight to the place where we was hid.  But we didn't wait.  We started through the
woods on a run.  The woods warn't thick, so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet,
and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun; and then he rode away the way he come--to
get his hat, I reckon, but I couldn't see.  We never stopped running till we got home.  The
old gentleman's eyes blazed a minute--'twas pleasure, mainly, I judged--then his face sort
of smoothed down, and he says, kind of gentle:

"I don't like that shooting from behind a bush.  Why didn't you step into the road, my boy?"

"The Shepherdsons don't, father.  They always take advantage."

Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling his tale, and her nostrils
spread and her eyes snapped.  The two young men looked dark, but never said nothing.  Miss
Sophia she turned pale, but the color come back when she found the man warn't hurt. 

Was there any truth in her sudden statement that this was the only
week she could give them?

"Oh! Really," was all that he found to say to Karen's explanations,
and then, "Where is Madame von Marwitz going when she leaves us then?"



"Why, nothing--only it's on account of the feud."

"What's a feud?"

"Why, where was you raised?  Don't you know what a feud is?"

"Never heard of it before--tell me about it."

"Well," says Buck, "a feud is this way:  A man has a quarrel with another man, and kills him;
then that other man's brother kills HIM; then the other brothers, on both sides, goes for one
another; then the COUSINS chip in--and by and by everybody's killed off, and there ain't no
more feud.  But it's kind of slow, and takes a long time."

"Has this one been going on long, Buck?"

"Well, I should RECKON!  It started thirty year ago, or som'ers along there.  There was trouble
'bout something, and then a lawsuit to settle it; and the suit went agin one of the men, and
so he up and shot the man that won the suit--which he would naturally do, of course.  Anybody
would."

"What was the trouble about, Buck?--land?"

"I reckon maybe--I don't know."

"Well, who done the shooting?  Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson?"

"Laws, how do I know?  It was so long ago."

"Don't anybody know?"

"Oh, yes, pa knows, I reckon, and some of the other old people; but they don't know now what
the row was about in the first place."

"Has there been many killed, Buck?"

"Yes; right smart chance of funerals.  But they don't always kill.  Pa's got a few buckshot
in him; but he don't mind it 'cuz he don't weigh much, anyway.  Bob's been carved up some with
a bowie, and Tom's been hurt once or twice."

"Has anybody been killed this year, Buck?"

