May 8th.-I had now been six weeks at Wanumbai, but for more than half the time was laid up
in the house with ulcerated feet. My stores being nearly exhausted, and my bird and insect
boxes full, and having no immediate prospect of getting the use of my legs again, I determined
on returning to Dobbo. Birds had lately become rather scarce, and the Paradise birds had not
yet become as plentiful as the natives assured me they would be in another month. The Wanumbai
people seemed very sorry at my departure; and well they might be, for the shells and insects
they picked up on the way to and from their plantations, and the birds the little boys shot
with their bows and arrows, kept them all well supplied with tobacco and gambir, besides enabling
them to accumulate a stock of beads and coppers for future expenses. The owner of the house
was supplied gratis with a little rice, fish, or salt, whenever he asked for it, which I must
say was not very often. On parting, I distributed among them my remnant stock of salt and tobacco,
and gave my host a flask of arrack, and believe that on the whole my stay with these simple
and good-natured people was productive of pleasure and profit to both parties. I fully intended
to come back; and had I known that circumstances would have prevented my doing so, shoed have
felt some sorrow in leaving a place where I had first seen so many rare and beautiful living
things, and bad so fully enjoyed the pleasure which fills the heart of the naturalist when
he is so fortunate as to discover a district hitherto unexplored, and where every day brings
forth new and unexpected treasures. We loaded our boat in the afternoon, and, starting before
daybreak, by the help of a fair wind reached Dobbo late the same evening.

CHAPTER XXXII. THE ARU ISLANDS.--SECOND RESIDENCE AT DOBBO.

(MAY AND JUNE 1857.)

DOBBO was full to overflowing, and I was obliged to occupy the court-house where the Commissioners
hold their sittings. They had now left the island, and I found the situation agreeable, as
it was at the end of the village, with a view down the principal street. It was a mere shed,
but half of it had a roughly boarded floor, and by putting up a partition and opening a window
I made it a very pleasant abode. In one of the boxes I had left in charge of Herr Warzbergen,
a colony of small ants had settled and deposited millions of eggs. It was luckily a fine hot
day, and by carrying the box some distance from the house, and placing every article in the
sunshine for an hour or two, I got rid of them without damage, as they were fortunately a harmless
species.

Dobbo now presented an animated appearance. Five or six new houses had been added to the street;
the praus were all brought round to the western side of the point, where they were hauled up
on the beach, and were being caulked and covered with a thick white lime-plaster for the homeward
voyage, making them the brightest and cleanest looking things in the place. Most of the small
boats had returned from the "blakang-tana" (back country), as the side of the islands towards
New Guinea is called. Piles of firewood were being heaped up behind the houses; sail-makers
and carpenters were busy at work; mother-of-pearl shell was being tied up in bundles, and the
black and ugly smoked tripang was having a last exposure to the sun before loading. The spare
portion of the crews were employed cutting and squaring timber, and boats from Ceram and Goram
were constantly unloading their cargoes of sago-cake for the traders' homeward voyage. The
fowls, ducks, and goats all looked fat and thriving on the refuse food of a dense population,
and the Chinamen's pigs were in a state of obesity that foreboded early death. Parrots and
Tories and cockatoos, of a dozen different binds, were suspended on bamboo perches at the doors
of the houses, with metallic green or white fruit-pigeons which cooed musically at noon and
eventide. His ideal is ultimately
not the regulatory order and symmetry, but the bubbling life, the Force of expression and the
power of humor.

THE FATHER AND THE CITY PARENTS

The native city of Basel is still in the second half of the 19th Century, an admirer Böcklin, hingewallfahrtet
was to explore the home of the prophet, unspeakably narrow and musty been published by him and
dishonored it. As unpleasant travel experiences like the verdict clouded, but have previously,
in Böcklin youth, had a fleeting visitor does not really may suspect
that an enthusiastic artist grew up in the walls of the fauna and
fetch Nymphs, Tritons and Nereids and the foam-born Aphrodite from
Hades will.

The city was indeed at the time of humanism and the Reformation, the spiritual center Life for
all was West Germany. She had also a thriving art scene had. Dürer had on the tramp found work here
and twenty years later Holbein a second home and great and rewarding jobs. The printers then dated
her prints from the "far-famed city of Basel and in the small border strip with which Holbein
the title decorated, played even then, the Tritons and Nereids a role. It was the city as one of
the happiest on the Rhine, especially the Venus hold. But with the Reformation was a puritan
spirit has been the to the 19th Century has received, and many of the most respected old family
goes, as I suggest the name refugees to return to because of their faith from Italy, France and from
Germany had emigrated. These have now, however, transplanted here and other industries that promoted
the wealth and it was the Alemannic tribe of the population and through them a strange and
good rice grafted. But since the 17th Century was the influx of outside, only a very weak
and the community has not increased. The population received by a sharply pronounced face, as in
today's cities no longer possible and that face looked a bit different than in the beginning
of the 16th Century.

The city was literally for their acquisitiveness and wealth, but also for the old-fashioned
Practices, in the sense of family, piety, the sense of community and charity. Commercial virtues
gave next to the colored pietistic religiosity of physiognomy neighbors
their characteristic traits.

But it by no means lacking in intellectual life, but the prosperity was more of the science as
the art and the arts most of the music and architecture benefit. Through all Periods of stagnation
and decline, the University had received and so have next Böcklin in the sixties of the 19th
Century some of Jakob Burckhardt and Nietzsche worked. But the paintings and drawings by Holbein,
who from the days of Splendor in the possession of the city were received, always appreciated, though
perhaps not often been seen and exercised their silent action. In the second half of the 18th Century
also started the interest in the cathedral and other medieval churches in the city to awaken.
In particular, but since the beginning of the 18th Century, a rising
to monitor developments in the field of architecture. But true genius triumphs over difficulties. Although there was no hair
proper on the chin; there happened to be, rather on one side of it, a small mole or freckle
which contained (as such things frequently do) a few stray hairs. These had been made the most
of. They had reached four or five inches in length, and formed another black thread dangling
from the left angle of the chin. The owner carried this as if it were something remarkable
(as it certainly was); he often felt it affectionately, passed it between his fingers, and
was evidently extremely proud of his moustaches and beard!

One of the most surprising things connected with Aru was the excessive cheapness of all articles
of European or native manufacture. We were here two thousand miles beyond Singapore and Batavia,
which are themselves emporiums of the "far east," in a place unvisited by, and almost unknown
to, European traders; everything reached us through at least two or three hands, often many
more; yet English calicoes and American cotton cloths could be bought for 8s. the piece, muskets
for 15s., common scissors and German knives at three-halfpence each, and other cutlery, cotton
goods, and earthenware in the same proportion. The natives of this out-of-the-way country can,
in fact, buy all these things at about the same money price as our workmen at home, but in
reality very much cheaper, for the produce of a few hours' labour enables the savage to purchase
in abundance what are to him luxuries, while to the European they are necessaries of life.
The barbarian is no happier and no better off for this cheapness. On the contrary, it has a
most injurious effect on him. He wants the stimulus of necessity to force him to labour; and
if iron were as dear as silver, and calico as costly as satin, the effect would be beneficial
to him. As it is, he has more idle hours, gets a more constant supply of tobacco, and can intoxicate
himself with arrack more frequently and more thoroughly; for your Aru man scorns to get half
drunk-a tumbler full of arrack is but a slight stimulus, and nothing less than half a gallon
of spirit will make him tipsy to his own satisfaction.

It is not agreeable to reflect on this state of things. At least half of the vast multitudes
of uncivilized peoples, on whom our gigantic manufacturing system, enormous capital, and intense
competition force the produce of our looms and workshops, would be not a whit worse off physically,
and would certainly be improved morally, if all the articles with which w e supply them were
double or treble their present prices. If at the same time the difference of cost, or a large
portion of it, could find its way into the pockets of the manufacturing workmen, thousands
would be raised from want to comfort, from starvation to health, and would be removed from
one of the chief incentives to crime. It is difficult for an Englishman to avoid contemplating
with pride our gigantic and ever-increasing manufactures and commerce, and thinking everything
good that renders their progress still more rapid, either by lowering the price at which the
articles can be produced, or by discovering new markets to which they may be sent. If, however,
the question that is so frequently asked of the votaries of the less popular sciences were
put here--"Cui bono?"--it would be found more difficult to answer than had been imagined. The
advantages, even to the few who reap them, would be seen to be mostly physical, while the wide-spread
moral and intellectual evils resulting from unceasing labour, low wages, crowded dwellings,
and monotonous occupations, to perhaps as large a number as those who gain any real advantage,
might be held to show a balance of evil so great, as to lead the greatest admirers of our manufactures
and commerce to doubt the advisability of their further development. It will be said: "We cannot
stop it; capital must be employed; our population must be kept at work; if we hesitate a moment,
other nations now hard pressing us will get ahead, and national ruin will follow." Some of
this is true, some fallacious. It is undoubtedly a difficult problem which we have to solve;
and I am inclined to think it is this difficulty that makes men conclude that what seems a
necessary and unalterable state of things must be good-that its benefits must be greater than
its evils. This was the feeling of the American advocates of slavery; they could not see an
easy, comfortable way out of it. In our own case, however, it is to be hoped, that if a fair
consideration of the matter in all its hearings shows that a preponderance of evil arises from
the immensity of our manufactures and commerce-evil which must go on increasing with their
increase-there is enough both of political wisdom and true philanthropy in Englishmen, to induce
them to turn their superabundant wealth into other channels. The fact that has led to these
remarks is surely a striking one: that in one of the most remote corners of the earth savages
can buy clothing cheaper than the people of the country where it is made; that the weaver's
child should shiver in the wintry wind, unable to purchase articles attainable by the wild
natives of a tropical climate, where clothing is mere ornament or luxury, should make us pause
ere we regard with unmixed admiration the system which has led to such a result, and cause
us to look with some suspicion on the further extension of that system. It must be remembered
too that our commerce is not a purely natural growth. It has been ever fostered by the legislature,
and forced to an unnatural luxuriance by the protection of our fleets and armies. The wisdom
and the justice of this policy have been already doubted. So soon, therefore, as it is seen
that the further extension of our manufactures and commerce would be an evil, the remedy is
not far to seek.

After six weeks' confinement to the house I was at length well, and could resume my daily walks
in the forest. I did not, however, find it so productive as when I had first arrived at Dobbo.
There was a damp stagnation about the paths, and insects were very scarce. In some of my best
collecting places I now found a mass of rotting wood, mingled with young shoots, and overgrown
with climbers, yet I always managed to add something daily to my extensive collections. I one
day met with a curious example of failure of instinct, which, by showing it to be fallible,
renders it very doubtful whether it is anything more than hereditary habit, dependent on delicate
modifications of sensation. Some sailors cut down a good-sized tree, and, as is always my practice,
I visited it daily for some time in search of insects. Among other beetles came swarms of the
little cylindrical woodborers (Platypus, Tesserocerus, &c.), and commenced making holes in
the bark. After a day or two I was surprised to find hundreds of them sticking in the holes
they had bored, and on examination discovered that the milky sap of the tree was of the nature
of gutta-percha, hardening rapidly on exposure to the air, and glueing the little animals in
self-dug graves. The habit of boring holes in trees in which to deposit their eggs, was not
accompanied by a sufficient instinctive knowledge of which trees were suitable, and which destructive
to them. If, as is very probable, these trees have an attractive odour to certain species of
borers, it might very likely lead to their becoming extinct; while other species, to whom the
same odour was disagreeable, and who therefore avoided the dangerous trees, would survive,
and would be credited by us with an instinct, whereas they would really be guided by a simple
sensation.

Those curious little beetles, the Brenthidae, were very abundant in Aru. The females have a
pointed rostrum, with which they bore deep holes in the bark of dead trees, often burying the
rostrum up to the eyes, and in these holes deposit their eggs. The males are larger, and have
the rostrum dilated at the end, and sometimes terminating in a good-sized pair of jaws. I once
saw two males fighting together; each had a fore-leg laid across the neck of the other, and
the rostrum bent quite in an attitude of defiance, and looking most ridiculous. The small one,
however, soon ran away, acknowledging himself vanquished. In most Coleoptera the female is
larger than the male, and it is therefore interesting, as bearing on the question of sexual
selection, that in this case, as in the stag-beetles where the males fight together, they should
be not only better armed, but also much larger than the females. Just as we were going away,
a handsome tree, allied to Erythrina, was in blossom, showing its masses of large crimson flowers
scattered here and there about the forest. Could it have been seen from an elevation, it would
have had a fine effect; from below I could only catch sight of masses of gorgeous colour in
clusters and festoons overhead, about which flocks of blue and orange lories were fluttering
and screaming.

A good many people died at Dobbo this season; I believe about twenty. They were buried in a
little grove of Casuarinas behind my house. Among the traders was a. Mahometan priest, who
superintended the funerals, which were very simple. The body was wrapped up in new white cotton
cloth, and was carried on a bier to the grave. All the spectators sat down on the ground, and
the priest chanted some verses from the Koran. The graves were fenced round with a slight bamboo
railing, and a little carved wooden head-post was put to mark the spot. There was also in the
village a small mosque, where every Friday the faithful went to pray. This is probably more
remote from Mecca than any other mosque in the world, and marks the farthest eastern extension
of the Mahometan religion. The Chinese here, as elsewhere, showed their superior wealth and
civilization by tombstones of solid granite brought from Singapore, with deeply-cut inscriptions,
the characters of which are painted in red, blue, and gold. No people have more respect for
the graves of their relations and friends than this strange, ubiquitous, money-getting people.

Soon after we had returned to Dobbo, my Macassar boy, Baderoon, took his wages and left me,
because I scolded him for laziness. He then occupied himself in gambling, and at first had
some luck, and bought ornaments, and had plenty of money. Then his luck turned; he lost everything,
borrowed money and lost that, and was obliged to become the slave of his creditor till he had
worked out the debt. He was a quick and active lad when he pleased, but was apt to be idle,
and had such an incorrigible propensity for gambling, that it will very likely lead to his
becoming a slave for life.

The end of June was now approaching, the east monsoon had set in steadily, and in another week
or two Dobbo would be deserted. Preparations for departure were everywhere visible, and every
sunny day (rather rare now) the streets were as crowded and as busy as beehives. Heaps of tripang
were finally dried and packed up in sacks; mother-of-pearl shell, tied up with rattans into
convenient bundles, was all day long being carried to the beach to be loaded; water-casks were
filled, and cloths and mat-sails mended and strengthened for the run home before the strong
east wind. Almost every day groups of natives arrived from the most distant parts of the islands,
with cargoes of bananas and sugar-cane to exchange for tobacco, sago, bread, and other luxuries,
before the general departure. The Chinamen killed their fat pig and made their parting feast,
and kindly sent me some pork, and a basin of birds' nest stew, which had very little more taste
than a dish of vermicelli. My boy Ali returned from Wanumbai, where I had sent him alone for
a fortnight to buy Paradise birds and prepare the skins; he brought me sixteen glorious specimens,
and had he not been very ill with fever and ague might have obtained twice the number. He had
lived with the people whose house I had occupied, and it is a proof of their goodness, if fairly
treated, that although he took with him a quantity of silver dollars to pay for the birds they
caught, no attempt was made to rob him, which might have been done with the most perfect impunity.
He was kindly treated when ill, and was brought back to me with the balance of the dollars
he had not spent.

The Wanumbai people, like almost all the inhabitants of the Aru Islands, are perfect savages,
and I saw no signs of any religion. There are, however, three or four villages on the coast
where schoolmasters from Amboyna reside, and the people are nominally Christians, and are to
some extent educated and civilized. I could not get much real knowledge of the customs of the
Aru people during the short time I was among them, but they have evidently been considerably
influenced by their long association with Mahometan traders. They often bury their dead, although
the national custom is to expose the body an a raised stage till it decomposes. Though there
is no limit to the number of wives a man may have, they seldom exceed one or two. A wife is
regularly purchased from the parents, the price being a large assortment of articles, always
including gongs, crockery, and cloth. They told me that some of the tribes kill the old men
and women when they can no longer work, but I saw many very old and decrepid people, who seemed
pretty well attended to. No doubt all who have much intercourse with the Bugis and Ceramese
traders gradually lose many of their native customs, especially as these people often settle
in their villages and marry native women.

The trade carried on at Dobbo is very considerable. This year there were fifteen large praus
from Macassar, and perhaps a hundred small boats from Ceram, Goram, and Ke. The Macassar cargoes
are worth about £1,000. each, and the other boats take away perhaps about £3,000, worth, so
that the whole exports may be estimated at £18,000. per annum. The largest and most bulky items
are pearl-shell and tripang, or "beche-de-mer," with smaller quantities of tortoise-shell,
edible birds' nests, pearls, ornamental woods, timber, and Birds of Paradise. These are purchased
with a variety of goods. Of arrack, about equal in strength to ordinary West India rum, 3,000
boxes, each containing fifteen half-gallon bottles, are consumed annually. Native cloth from
Celebes is much esteemed for its durability, and large quantities are sold, as well as white
English calico and American unbleached cottons, common crockery, coarse cutlery, muskets, gunpowder,
gongs, small brass cannon, and elephants' tusks. These three last articles constitute the wealth
of the Aru people, with which they pay for their wives, or which they hoard up as "real property."
Tobacco is in immense demand for chewing, and it must be very strong, or an Aru man will not
look at it. Knowing how little these people generally work, the mass of produce obtained annually
shows that the islands must be pretty thickly inhabited, especially along the coasts, as nine-tenths
of the whole are marine productions.

It was on the 2d of July that we left Aru, followed by all the Macassar praus, fifteen in number,
who had agreed to sail in company. We passed south of Banda, and then steered due west, not
seeing land for three days, till we sighted some low islands west of Bouton. We had a strong
and steady south-east wind day and night, which carried us on at about five knots an hour,
where a clipper ship would have made twelve. The sky was continually cloudy, dark, and threatening,
with occasional drizzling showers, till we were west of Bouru, when it cleared up and we enjoyed
the bright sunny skies of the dry season for the rest of our voyage. It is about here, therefore
that the seasons of the eastern and western regions of the Archipelago are divided. West of
this line from June to December is generally fine, and often very dry, the rest of the year
being the wet season. East of it the weather is exceedingly uncertain, each island, and each
side of an island, having its own peculiarities. The difference seems to consist not so much
in the distribution of the rainfall as in that of the clouds and the moistness of the atmosphere.
In Aru, for example, when we left, the little streams were all dried up, although the weather
was gloomy; while in January, February, and March, when we had the hottest sunshine and the
finest days, they were always flowing. The driest time of all the year in Aru occurs in September
and October, just as it does in Java and Celebes. The rainy seasons agree, therefore, with
those of the western islands, although the weather is very different. The Molucca sea is of
a very deep blue colour, quite distinct from the clear light blue of the Atlantic. In cloudy
and dull weather it looks absolutely black, and when crested with foam has a stern and angry
aspect. The wind continued fair and strong during our whole voyage, and we reached Macassar
in perfect safety on the evening of the 11th of July, having made the passage from Aru (more
than a thousand miles) in nine and a half days.

My expedition to the Aru Islands had been eminently successful. Although I had been for months
confined to the house by illness, and had lost much time by the want of the means of locomotion,
and by missing the right season at the right place, I brought away with me more than nine thousand
specimens of natural objects, of about sixteen hundred distinct species. I had made the acquaintance
of a strange and little-known race of men; I had become familiar with the traders of the far
East; I had revelled in the delights of exploring a new fauna and flora, one of the most remarkable
and most beautiful and least-known in the world; and I had succeeded in the main object for
which I had undertaken the journey-namely, to obtain fine specimens of the magnificent Birds
of Paradise, and to be enabled to observe them in their native forests. By this success I was
stimulated to continue my researches in the Moluccas and New Guinea for nearly five years longer,
and it is still the portion of my travels to which I look back with the most complete satisfaction.

CHAPTER XXXIII. THE ARU ISLANDS--PHYSICAL GEOGRAPHY AND ASPECTS OF NATURE.

IN this chapter I propose to give a general sketch of the physical geography of the Aru Islands,
and of their relation to the surrounding countries; and shall thus be able to incorporate the
information obtained from traders, and from the works of other naturalists with my own observations
in these exceedingly interesting and little-known regions.

The Aru group may be said to consist of one very large central island with a number of small
ones scattered round it. The great island is called by the natives and traders "Tang-busar"
(great or mainland), to distinguish it as a whole from Dobbo, or any of the detached islands.
It is of an irregular oblong form, about eighty miles from north to south, and forty or fifty
from east to west, in which direction it is traversed by three narrow channels, dividing it
into four portions. These channels are always called rivers by the traders, which puzzled me
much till I passed through one of them, and saw how exceedingly applicable the name was. The
northern channel, called the river of Watelai, is about a quarter of a mile wide at its entrance,
but soon narrows to abort the eighth of a mile, which width it retains, with little variation,
during its whole, length of nearly fifty miles, till it again widens at its eastern mouth.
Its course is moderately winding, and the hanks are generally dry and somewhat elevated. In
many places there are low cliffs of hard coralline limestone, more or less worn by the action
of water; while sometimes level spaces extend from the banks to low ranges of hills a little
inland. A few small streams enter it from right and left, at the mouths of which are some little
rocky islands. The depth is very regular, being from ten to fifteen fathoms, and it has thus
every feature of a true river, but for the salt water and the absence of a current. The other
two rivers, whose names are Vorkai and Maykor, are said to be very similar in general character;
but they are rather near together, and have a number of cross channels intersecting the flat
tract between them. On the south side of Maykor the banks are very rocky, and from thence to
the southern extremity of Aru is an uninterrupted extent of rather elevated and very rocky
country, penetrated by numerous small streams, in the high limestone cliffs bordering which
the edible birds' nests of Aru are chiefly obtained. All my informants stated that the two
southern rivers are larger than Watelai.

The whole of Aru is low, but by no means so flat as it has been represented, or as it appears
from the sea. Most of it is dry rocky ground, with a somewhat undulating surface, rising here
and there into abrupt hillocks, or cut into steep and narrow ravines. Except the patches of
swamp which are found at the mouths of most of the small rivers, there is no absolutely level
ground, although the greatest elevation is probably not more than two hundred feet. The rock
which everywhere appears in the ravines and brooks is a coralline limestone, in some places
soft and pliable, in others so hard and crystalline as to resemble our mountain limestone.

The small islands which surround the central mass are very numerous; but most of them are on
the east side, where they form a fringe, often extending ten or fifteen miles from the main
islands. On the west there are very few, Wamma and Palo Pabi being the chief, with Ougia, and
Wassia at the north-west extremity. On the east side the sea is everywhere shallow, and full
of coral; and it is here that the pearl-shells are found which form one of the chief staples
of Aru trade. All the islands are covered with a dense and very lofty forest.

The physical features here described are of peculiar interest, and, as far as I am aware, are
to some extent unique; for I have been unable to find any other record of an island of the
size of Aru crossed by channels which exactly resemble true rivers. How these channels originated
were a complete puzzle to me, till, after a long consideration of the whole of the natural
phenomena presented by these islands, I arrived at a conclusion which I will now endeavour
to explain. There are three ways in which we may conceive islands which are not volcanic to
have been formed, or to have been reduced to their present condition, by elevation, by subsidence,
or by separation from a continent or larger island. The existence of coral rock, or of raised
beaches far inland, indicates recent elevation; lagoon coral-islands, and such as have barrier
or encircling reefs, have suffered subsidence; while our own islands, whose productions are
entirely those of the adjacent continent, have been separated from it. Now the Aru Islands
are all coral rock, and the adjacent sea is shallow and full of coral, it is therefore evident
that they have been elevated from beneath the ocean at a not very distant epoch. But if we
suppose that elevation to be the first and only cause of their present condition, we shall
find ourselves quite unable to explain the curious river-channels which divide them. Fissures
during upheaval would not produce the regular width, the regular depth, or the winding curves
which characterise them; and the action of tides and currents during their elevation might
form straits of irregular width and depth, but not the river-like channels which actually exist. Crown: 322940 15642102

In terms of population U. takes place among European countries, the eighth spot. After the last
census (1880/81) was the civilian population 15,642,102 souls (at 15,417,324 souls in the
year 1870). The number of active soldiers and Honveds (militia) was to 97.157 men, hence the total
population is of 15,739,259 souls. From 1870 to 1881 has the same increased by only 1.44 per cent
and mainly only in W. and in the middle of the country. In the earlier surveys, there were:
1850: 13.1 1857: 13.7 1869: 15.4 million Inh causes of this increase was small at first, the
aftermath of the wars of liberation and repeated cholera epidemics, most recently, however, plagues,
bad harvests, huge mortality and emigration of children (up to 55 per cent). The density of population
is an average, because it accounts for on an average of 48 sq km Inhabitants are the most populated
and less fertile mountainous areas in the W. and NW., most evenly inside the country, at the
thinnest the northeast, east and southeast.

Of the civilian population accounts for the two sexes:

Men Women

in
Hungary (including Transylvania) 6,749,646 6,978,976

- Fiume area
including 9598 11383

- Croatia-Slavonia 589615 604800

- The former
Military Frontier 354051 344033

Total: 7702910 7939192

In U., where
accounts for 10 marriages per 1000 inhabitants, 45 births and 37 deaths,
there are 163 Cities, 1872 Markets, 15.394 villages and 4152 Pußten
what to U. Only (with Transylvania) 143 cities, 1822 Markets, 10.873
villages and 3917 Pußten omitted.

The most populous cities (With over 20,000 inhabitants) are: Budapest,
Szeged, Maria-Subotica, Debrecen, Hódmezö-Vásárhely, Bratislava, Kecskemét,
Arad, Temesvár, Oradea, Mako, Cluj, Brasov, Szentes, five churches,
Agram, Kosice, White Castle, Czegled, Zombor, Miskolc, Nyíregyháza,
Kiskun-Félegyháza, Sopron, Nagy-Koros, Werschetz, Jászberény, Novi
Sad, Mezötur, Zenta, Raab and Fiume.

The most beautiful Villages are those of the Germans, Hungarians
and Slovaks, the Romanians living in the worst and Ruth.

Rationality. Religious relations.

Among the various nationalities take Hungary (Magyars, sd) as a nation, the ruling first.
Excess weight due not only their greater number (45 per cent: 6,445,487 inhabitants), but
also the fact that They inhabit the middle and that the most fertile part of the country in
an undivided mass. The Magyar tribe living close between the Danube and Tisza in the Great Plain (70.9
per cent of the local Population), on the right bank of the Danube and in the other plane land in the
true U.; in the Transylvanian Magyars live in the counties on the other hand (called Székely)
the highest parts of the eastern counties. The weakest are on the left bank of the Danube (25.7 percent),
in the Tisza Maroswinkel (15.6 percent) and in Croatia-Slavonia (3.9 percent) represented.
Of the other nationalities, the Slavs are most numerous.

Of the Serbo-Croats (2,352,339 Inhabitants living in) the Serbs half in SO. U., half in Croatia-Slavonia
and the former military frontier, but most of the Croats in Croatia, and the Slovaks (1,864,529
inhabitants) form a compact population in the N. and NW., according to various offshoots to the
deep South (Békés and Csanád) in the Eastern Carpathians of Marmaros Sáros up to and into The
Zips have the Ruthenians (356.062 inhabitants) is established. The Romanians (2,405,085 inhabitants),
also a compact tribe inhabiting the east, northeast, and Transylvania. The Germans (1,953,911
inhabitants) are scattered almost all over the country and mostly in the western counties
below the Danube (Wieselburg, Sopron, iron castle), in the southern regions (Tolna, Baranya, Bács-Bodrog,
Torontál, Temes), and in southern Transylvania (Sibiu, wholesale Kokelburg, Kronstadt) and established
in the counties of Zips and Bistrita-Naszód. In the counties Wieselburg Sopron, iron

1002

Hungary (national character, religion, relationships, spiritual culture).

burg, in some cases in Bratislava, they have been since Charlemagne. located, in the other regions are
mostly German colonists in all strains, first under Geisa II from Flanders to Cologne and the Zips
and the mining towns (see Gründner, Krikerhäuer), partly in droves from Swabia and Franconia,
smaller, etc. (mostly in the 17th and 18th century) immigrated. The rest of the Hungarian population
(264.639 inhabitants) are Albanians, Armenians, Bulgarians, Greeks, Italians and Makedowalachen
or Tzintzars that in SO. live and in the S., the Armenians and Greeks
live mostly in the commercial cities.

The Gypsies (75.911, Magyars, and Romanians) are Country scattered
and usually spend their time in the vicinity of small towns, most
numerous in the Gomori County and Transylvania on.

Among the varied costumes, the Hungarian National the most beautiful.

It consists of close-fitting trousers, jacket or tied Attila (Rock) a fur cap or Kalpak. Over
his shoulder hangs a coat or dolman. As covering are high, often decorated with lace boots (Zischmen)
or short boots (Topanken). The Slavic peasant usually wears a white camisole of coarse cloth
trousers blautuchene and large, high boots, in summer a short, with a belt attached shirt, a
linen In trousers (Gaty) and a big hat. The everyday dress of the Hungarian compatriot is here
and there from that of the Slavs is not significantly different. As with the footwear Slav federation
Shoes (krpec), the mountain folk high felt boots. In cold weather raises the Slavic peasant
a coat-like garment made of coarse white cloth (szurowicza) for, while the Ungar grobtuchenes
into a brown robe (guba) or in a sheepskin coat (Hungarian Kodmon, Kozuch slaw) wraps. Main pieces
of clothing are still the fur cap and a large, further with goat-skins worn out sheep's clothing
(juhászbunda). The female sex clothes almost universally in a skirt and jacket of blue or green half-cloth,
the Hungarian girl also contribute blue, reaching below the knees, rich with cords occupied fur.
A popular dish of porridge is Karpathenbauers (kasa), the Hungarian Gulyás (with onions and Paprika
spiced by shepherds as cooked meat). The Hungarian is mostly medium tall, muscular, built well
proportioned, has a clear-cut countenance, a dark, fiery eyes and black hair. The women develop
early and have regular features. The Hungarian is very good natured and hospitable, has a
fiery, excitable temperament; much oratorical talent and great love of country is, as a soldier
is very brave and most like a horse (as Husar). Happiness and love for music and dance are
the inheritance almost all Hungarian peoples. Very beautiful and extremely characteristic of the
Hungarian National Dance (Czardas) and former folk, sometimes seriously, sometimes extremely
bright and lively (and Lassu Friss), the latter mostly dark and gloomy. Strangely, the national
songs The Slovaks and Serbs. The Magyars are concerned mostly with agriculture, livestock and
fishing or are self-employed craftsmen. The Slovaks drive agriculture or live as nomadic Shepherds,
workers in the mining and metallurgical plants, rafters, carters, peddlers or tinkers. When absorbed.
Rastelbinder by dragging them across Europe and even America. The Ruthenians are the cattle trade
whether, teamsters or trade in iron goods. The Slovenes and Croats driven Agriculture and
trade, the German trade, commerce, agriculture, mining, etc. The Armenians are mostly traders,
farmer and cattle dealer, and the Greeks and Jews occupy almost exclusively with trade and
the Gypsies are musicians, and blacksmiths. By religion are U. in the Roman Catholic majority
(7,849,692) and are on the right bank of the Danube and in the NW. the absolute majority, the
Croats are almost exclusively Roman Catholic. Greek Catholic are Ruthenians and Romanians (1,497,268),
Greek-Oriental, the Serbs and part of the Romanians (2,434,890). The Protestant Church of
the Augsburg Confession are mostly Slovaks and German in the N. and W. An (1,122,849) and the Transylvanian
Saxons, the Evangelical Helvetic Confession (2,031,803) are headquartered in preferably Hungarian areas;
the Unitarians (55.792) live almost exclusively in Transylvania. The Jews finally (638.314) are
Exception of the southwest and southeast ubiquitous and inhabit the most densely at the Galicia
bordering north-eastern counties and the commercial courts. Until 1848 they were out mining
and some royal free cities enjoy excluded, but since 1868 full Equality.

Education and teaching.

The spiritual culture of the country is in a pleasing progress, and public education the Germans
and Hungarians in Austria that is not according to. In U. (including Transylvania) without Croatia-Slavonia
there were 13,749,603 inhabitants in 1887 to 2,377,558 school-age children (17.29 percent),
1,929,377 of them actually attended the school (against 1,152,115 in the year 1869). The number
of primary schools was 16.538 (at 13.798 in the year 1869), that of teacher 24.148 (against 17.792
in the year 1869). The latter are in 71 teachers and teachers-Präparandien (1869 there were only
46) trained in which 683 professors are active (1869 only 271). The child-care institutions,
that we counted 532 (against 215 in 1876) visited, 49.051 children (1876 only 18.624). Of
the 179 existing high schools are 151 high schools (including 89 upper secondary schools)
with 2356 teachers and 35.803 pupils and 28 secondary schools (including 21 upper secondary
schools) with 557 professors and 6816 students.

Theological schools are there 53, law academies 11th U. currently
has two universities and one in Budapest with 173 professors and 3679
handsets and is in Cluj with 65 professors and 535 listeners (one
third university soon be built).

Moreover, Croatia-Slavonia is a university in Zagreb. In Budapest There is also the royal Joseph's
Polytechnic, with 47 professors and over 600 listeners and a rabbinical seminary. Special educational
institutions are: the Ludoviceum (military college for Honved), the National Theater and Academy
of Music, the Master School for painting and sculpture, the state-pattern characters, along
with the school art teacher seminar, School of Arts and the Business Academy in Budapest, also
the Mining and Forestry Academy in Banská Štiavnica, the nautical Academy in Fiume, the Agricultural
Academy in Hungarian-Altenburg, 6 midwives Schools and several commercial, agricultural, agriculture,
viticulture, mining, Kunstschnitzerei- domestic industry and schools in different places. To philanthropic
asylums-

Hungary (mixed farming).

1003

th deaf are 3 stations, an institution for the blind, an idiot asylum, 67 orphans and Rescue homes,
etc. Among the scientific and art institutions are mentioned: Built in 1830 Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
the Kisfaludy that Petösi, the Geographical, the Geological and Historical Society, those
of natural scientists and physicians, the geological and the Meteorological Institute, the Royal Hungarian
statistical Landesbüreau and Budapest statistical Büreau, the National Museum with its collections
and galleries, the Land Arts Museum, the Commercial Museum (the Industrial Palace), the National
Archives, the National Art Gallery, the historical portrait gallery, the National Council
of Fine Arts, the artists' house, and the National Commission for
the Conservation of Monuments (all in Budapest) specifying the Bruckenthal
Museum in Sibiu, the Municipal Museum in Bratislava, the southern
Hungarian Museum in Timisoara, the Croatian-Slavonian National Museum
in Zagreb, the museums in Deva, Cluj, Maros Vásárhely etc., and numerous
scientific associations, collections, libraries and archives in almost
all, even in smaller cities.

In the theaters at the top is the Hungarian National Theater and
the Royal Opera House in Budapest, there are also four Hungarian Theater
(Primary, fortresses and two summer theater) and a German theater
and also many permanent Theater in the larger provincial towns of
Arad, Sibiu, Kosice, Cluj, Sopron, Bratislava, Raab, Székesfehérvár,
Szeged, Timisoara etc. (in Sibiu, Sopron, Bratislava and Timisoara
German is also played.) appear in U. 760 periods, including 94 political,
magazines (525 Hungarian, 133 German, 34 Croatian, 11 Slav, 11 Serbian,
15 Romanian, etc.).

Agriculture and forestry.

U., the agrarian situation by a series of discharge laws in the years were regulated 1847/48, 1853,
1868, 1871 and 1873 is preferably a Agrikulturstaat. The Reason usually is either owned by large
landowners or small rural property. In Transylvania U. and the leasehold system or the administration
is by economy officials very developed, in addition to the almost entirely foreign countries. More recently,
both state and gentlemen often the English "farm system" was introduced. On large estates
the agriculture operated efficiently, less of the farmers, in which especially the "three-field" is common.
Since the lifting of a subject association, the lack of rural workers always sensible, and this
promotes large estates, the use of machinery. In order to develop agriculture, the country Agrikulturverein
in the county and many other agricultural societies supported significantly contributed. For
individual branches also peripatetic teacher ordered. The productive land area of ​​the whole country
is 53.3 million Cadastral (formerly only 47.1) or 30.7 million hectares (95.1 percent), this
will be spent on Arable land 22.4, 0.7 to wine country, the gardens of 0.7, 6.0 in meadows, pastures
7.5, on reeds 0.1 and 15.8 million on forest land acres. Unproductive or 3.1 million acres. U., regulated
since 1877 when the existing, often inadequate land was temporary, is such a rich corn country that
has utterly not only his own need of cereals covers, but also can release significant quantities abroad.
You build wheat, rye, Barley, oats, corn, millet, buckwheat, also
potatoes, asparagus, cabbage, turnips, beets for sugar production,
poppy seed, water and sugar melons, pumpkins, cucumbers.

Pulses of Article fruit culture is operated diligently in many areas,
the fruit is dried Sopron undeingemacht an important article of commerce.

In W. There are whole chestnuts, in S., where Figs and almonds are drawn, plum woods. Particularly
numerous are walnut trees. Regard of viticulture, one of the most important branches of production
in Hungary, it takes into France first in Europe (see Hungarian wines). The yield amounts to about
9, in good years 16 million hl. The care of the mulberry tree for silk cultivation, in which for a Szegszard
Royal Seidenbauinspektorat there (in Novi Sad State Pancsova and silk spinning and teaching),
is particularly in Sopron, Eisenburg, Tolna, Bács-Bodrog and in the former military frontier
operated. Of manufacturing and commercial plants to build hemp, especially in Bacs-Bodrog, flax,
mostly in the Zips and Saros, safflower, Waid, Wau, madder and other color plants, some Safran, especially
linseed oil crops except canola and turnip; also hops, some spices, such as caraway, fennel,
mustard, anise, red pepper Turkish (peppers) and licorice. The Hungarian Tobacco is the quantity
and quality according to a major product whose annual income 1 / 2 - 2 / 3 million metric. Is
cwt. The most famous varieties of tobacco provide the resorts: Vitnyéd (Sopron County) Veg
(Komarno), and Verpelét Debro (Heves), Glogovacz (Arad), Pereszleny (Hont), Nagysalu (Iron
Castle) Csetnek (Gomori), Szendro (Borsod), etc. wins in the vast forests to large quantities
Acorns for the pigs, galls, Knopp, bark, resins, coal, potash, etc. In the ebony-poor areas
to burn reed, cane, straw and dried cow dung. The large Expansion of meadows and pastures, especially
in N. make U. for livestock particularly suitable solvents. Recently, the excellent breeding
horses for centuries, has lifted significantly, including the famous state studs to Mezöhegyes
(in Csanád), Kisber and Babolna (Komorn County) and Fogaras (in Transylvania) with 2800 Arabic
and English horses, 4 colts depots 100 858 3968 Beschälstationen with horses worth a total of
16.8 million guilders, and oversized Private stud farms and the race in Budapest, Bratislava,
Sopron, Kosice, Arad, Debrecen Cluj and help with state awards and state awards for horse breeders
not a little. Most breeding is found in the area of ​​Bekes on Csanad Torontal and up to the southern
border, in Bacs-Bodrog, in Srem, in the former and Haidukendistrikt Transylvania. The total
number of horses was 1881: 1.8 million (including 96.600 stallions). The Hungarian cattle (white-haired,
with long, curved horns), in terms of work force Speed, weight gain, especially meat wealth,
whereas the yield and Quality of milk is lower. Most of the beef cattle in the counties is on the right bank
of the Danube and in the northern counties had enough, however, the once-rich land between
the Danube and Tisza vieharm now. found in the valleys and on mountain slopes in the kleinhörnige
kurzfüßige and beef, in the County So-

1004

Hungary (forestry, mining, industry).
 To do this he must
act in a different way from other men, not trading and taking advantage of the necessities
of those who want to sell, but rather giving to those who are in distress. It would be well
if he conformed himself in some degree to native customs, and then endeavoured to show how
these customs might be gradually modified, so as to be more healthful and more agreeable. A
few energetic and devoted men acting in this way might probably effect a decided moral improvement
on the lowest savage tribes, whereas trading missionaries, teaching what Jesus said, but not
doing as He did, can scarcely be expected to do more than give them a very little of the superficial
varnish of religion.

Dorey harbour is in a fine bay, at one extremity of which an elevated point juts out, and,
with two or three small islands, forms a sheltered anchorage. The only vessel it contained
when we arrived was a Dutch brig, laden with coals for the use of a war-steamer, which was
expected daily, on an exploring expedition along the coasts of New Guinea, for the purpose
of fixing on a locality for a colony. In the evening we paid it a visit, and landed at the
village of Dorey, to look out for a place where I could build my house. Mr. Otto also made
arrangements for me with some of the native chiefs, to send men to cut wood, rattans, and bamboo
the next day.

The villages of Mansinam and Dorey presented some features quite new to me. The houses all
stand completely in the water, and are reached by long rude bridges. They are very low, with
the roof shaped like a large boat, bottom upwards. The posts which support the houses, bridges,
and platforms are small crooked sticks, placed without any regularity, and looking as if they
were tumbling down. The floors are also formed of sticks, equally irregular, and so loose and
far apart that I found it almost impossible to walls on them. The walls consist of bits of
boards, old boats, rotten mats, attaps, and palm-leaves, stuck in anyhow here and there, and
having altogether the most wretched and dilapidated appearance it is possible to conceive.
Under the eaves of many of the houses hang human skulls, the trophies of their battles with
the savage Arfaks of the interior, who often come to attack them. A large boat-shaped council-house
is supported on larger posts, each of which is grossly carved to represent a naked male or
female human figure, and other carvings still more revolting are placed upon the platform before
the entrance. The view of an ancient lake-dweller's village, given as the frontispiece of Sir
Charles Lyell's "Antiquity of Man," is chiefly founded on a sketch of this very village of
Dorey; but the extreme regularity of the structures there depicted has no place in the original,
any more than it probably had in the actual lake-villages.

The people who inhabit these miserable huts are very similar to the Ke and Aru islanders, and
many of them are very handsome, being tall and well-made, with well-cut features and large
aquiline noses. Their colour is a deep brown, often approaching closely to black, and the fine
mop-like heads of frizzly hair appear to be more common than elsewhere, and are considered
a great ornament, a long six-pronged bamboo fork being kept stuck in them to serve the purpose
of a comb; and this is assiduously used at idle moments to keep the densely growing mass from
becoming matted and tangled. The majority have short woolly hair, which does not seem capable
of an equally luxuriant development. A growth of hair somewhat similar to this, and almost
as abundant, is found among the half-breeds between the Indian and Negro in South America.
Can this be an indication that the Papuans are a mixed race?

For the first three days after our arrival I was fully occupied from morning to night building
a house, with the assistance of a dozen Papuans and my own men. It was immense trouble to get
our labourers to work, as scarcely one of them could speak a word of Malay; and it was only
by the most energetic gesticulations, and going through a regular pantomime of what was wanted,
that we could get them to do anything. If we made them understand that a few more poles were
required, which two could have easily cut, six or eight would insist upon going together, although
we needed their assistance in other things. One morning ten of them came to work, bringing
only one chopper between them, although they knew I had none ready for use.

I chose a place about two hundred yards from the beach, on an elevated ground, by the side
of the chief path from the village of Dorey to the provision-grounds and the forest. Within
twenty yards was a little stream; which furnished us with excellent water and a nice place
to bathe. There was only low underwood to clear away, while some fine forest trees stood at
a short distance, and we cut down the wood for about twenty yards round to give us light and
air. The house, about twenty feet by fifteen; was built entirely of wood, with a bamboo floor,
a single door of thatch, and a large window, looking over the sea, at which I fixed my table,
and close beside it my bed, within a little partition. I bought a number of very large palm-leaf
mats of the natives, which made excellent walls; while the mats I had brought myself were used
on the roof, and were covered over with attaps as soon as we could get them made. Outside,
and rather behind, was a little hut, used for cooking, and a bench, roofed over, where my men
could sit to skin birds and animals. When all was finished, I had my goods and stores brought
up, arranged them conveniently inside, and then paid my Papuans with knives and choppers, and
sent them away. The next day our schooner left for the more eastern islands, and I found myself
fairly established as the only European inhabitant of the vast island of New Guinea.

As we had some doubt about the natives, we slept at first with loaded guns beside us and a
watch set; but after a few days, finding the people friendly, and feeling sure that they would
not venture to attack five well-armed men, we took no further precautions. We had still a day
or two's work in finishing up the house, stopping leaks, putting up our hanging shelves for
drying specimens inside and out, and making the path down to the water, and a clear dry space
in front of the horse.

On the 17th, the steamer not having arrived, the coal-ship left, having lain here a month,
according to her contract; and on the same day my hunters went out to shoot for the first time,
and brought home a magnificent crown pigeon and a few common birds. The next day they were
more successful, and I was delighted to see them return with a Bird of Paradise in full plumage,
a pair of the fine Papuan lories (Lorius domicella), four other lories and parroquets, a grackle
(Gracula dumonti), a king-hunter (Dacelo gaudichaudi), a racquet-tailed kingfisher (Tanysiptera
galatea), and two or three other birds of less beauty.

I went myself to visit the native village on the hill behind Dorey, and took with me a small
present of cloth, knives, and beads, to secure the good-will of the chief, and get him to send
some men to catch or shoot birds for me. The houses were scattered about among rudely cultivated
clearings. Two which I visited consisted of a central passage, on each side of which opened
short passages, admitting to two rooms, each of which was a house accommodating a separate
family. They were elevated at least fifteen feet above the ground, on a complete forest of
poles, and were so rude and dilapidated that some of the small passages had openings in the
floor of loose sticks, through which a child might fall. The inhabitants seemed rather uglier
than those at Dorey village. They are, no doubt, the true indigenes of this part of New Guinea,
living in the interior, and subsisting by cultivation and hunting. The Dorey men, on the other
hand, are shore-dwellers, fishers and traders in a small way, and have thus the character of
a colony who have migrated from another district. These hillmen or "Arfaks" differed much in
physical features. They were generally black, but some were brown like Malays. Their hair,
though always more or less frizzly, was sometimes short and matted, instead of being long,
loose, and woolly; and this seemed to be a constitutional difference, not the effect of care
and cultivation. Nearly half of them were afflicted with the scurfy skin-disease. The old chief
seemed much pleased with his present, and promised (through an interpreter I brought with me)
to protect my men when they came there shooting, and also to procure me some birds and animals.
While conversing, they smoked tobacco of their own growing, in pipes cut from a single piece
of wood with a long upright handle.

We had arrived at Dorey about the end of the wet season, when the whole country was soaked
with moisture The native paths were so neglected as to be often mere tunnels closed over with
vegetation, and in such places there was always a fearful accumulation of mud. To the naked
Papuan this is no obstruction. He wades through it, and the next watercourse makes him clean
again; but to myself, wearing boots and trousers, it was a most disagreeable thing to have
to go up to my knees in a mud-hole every morning. The man I brought with me to cut wood fell
ill soon after we arrived, or I would have set him to clear fresh paths in the worst places.
For the first ten days it generally rained every afternoon and all night r but by going out
every hour of fine weather, I managed to get on tolerably with my collections of birds and
insects, finding most of those collected by Lesson during his visit in the Coquille, as well
as many new ones. It appears, however, that Dorey is not the place for Birds of Paradise, none
of the natives being accustomed to preserve them. Those sold here are all brought from Amberbaki,
about a hundred miles west, where the Doreyans go to trade.

The islands in the bay, with the low lands near the coast, seem to have been formed by recently
raised coral reef's, and are much strewn with masses of coral but little altered. The ridge
behind my house, which runs out to the point, is also entirely coral rock, although there are
signs of a stratified foundation in the ravines, and the rock itself is more compact and crystalline.
It is therefore, probably older, a more recent elevation having exposed the low grounds and
islands. On the other side of the bay rise the great mass of the Arfak mountains, said by the
French navigators to be about ten thousand feet high, and inhabited by savage tribes. These
are held in great dread by the Dorey people, who have often been attacked and plundered by
them, and have some of their skulls hanging outside their houses. If I was seem going into
the forest anywhere in the direction of the mountains, the little boys of the village would
shout after me, "Arfaki! Arfaki?" just as they did after Lesson nearly forty years before.

On the 15th of May the Dutch war-steamer Etna arrived; but, as the coals had gone, it was obliged
to stay till they came back. The captain knew when the coalship was to arrive, and how long
it was chartered to stay at Dorey, and could have been back in time, but supposed it would
wait for him, and so did not hurry himself. The steamer lay at anchor just opposite my house,
and I had the advantage of hearing the half-hourly bells struck, which was very pleasant after
the monotonous silence of the forest. The captain, doctor, engineer, and some other of the
officers paid me visits; the servants came to the brook to wash clothes, and the son of the
Prince of Tidore, with one or two companions, to bathe; otherwise I saw little of them, and
was not disturbed by visitors so much as I had expected to be. About this time the weather
set in pretty fine, but neither birds nor insects became much more abundant, and new birds-were
very scarce. None of the Birds of Paradise except the common one were ever met with, and we
were still searching in vain for several of the fine birds which Lesson had obtained here.
Insects were tolerably abundant, but were not on the average so fine as those of Amboyna, and
I reluctantly came to the conclusion that Dorey was not a good collecting locality. Butterflies
were very scarce, and were mostly the same as those which I had obtained at Aru.

Among the insects of other orders, the most curious and novel were a group of horned flies,
of which I obtained four distinct species, settling on fallen trees and decaying trunks. These
remarkable insects, which have been described by Mr. W. W. Saunders as a new genus, under the
name of Elaphomia or deer-flies, are about half an inch long, slender-bodied, and with very
long legs, which they draw together so as to elevate their bodies high above the surface they
are standing upon. The front pair of legs are much shorter, and these are often stretched directly
forwards, so as to resemble antenna. The horns spring from beneath the eye, and seem to be
a prolongation of the lower part of the orbit. In the largest and most singular species, named
Elaphomia cervicornis or the stag-horned deer-fly, these horns are nearly as long as the body,
having two branches, with two small snags near their bifurcation, so as to resemble the horns
of a stag. They are black, with the tips pale, while the body and legs are yellowish brown,
and the eyes (when alive) violet and green. The next species (Elaphomia wallacei) is of a dark
brown colour, banded and spotted with yellow. The horns are about one-third the length of the
insect, broad, flat, and of an elongated triangular foam. The front part of the head is also
pink, and the eyes violet pink, with a green stripe across them, giving the insect a very elegant
and singular appearance. The third species (Elaphomia alcicornis, the elk-horned deer-fly)
is a little smaller than the two already described, but resembling in colour Elaphomia wallacei.
The horns are very remarkable, being suddenly dilated into a flat plate, strongly toothed round
the outer margin, and strikingly resembling the horns of the elk, after which it has been named.
They are of a yellowish colour, margined with brown, and tipped with black on the three upper
teeth. The fourth species (Elaphomia brevicornis, the short-horned deer-fly) differs considerably
from the rest. It is stouter in form, of a nearly black colour, with a yellow ring at the base
of the abdomen; the wings have dusky stripes, and the head is compressed and dilated laterally,
with very small flat horns; which are black with a pale centre, and look exactly like the rudiment
of the horns of the two preceding species. None of the females have any trace of the horns,
and Mr. Saunders places in the same genus a species which has no horns in either sex (Elaphomia
polita). It is of a shining black colour, and resembles Elaphomia cervicornis in form, size,
and general appearance. The figures above given represent these insects of their natural size
and in characteristic attitudes.

The natives seldom brought me anything. They are poor creatures, and, rarely shoot a bird,
pig, or kangaroo, or even the sluggish opossum-like Cuscus. The tree-kangaroos are found here,
but must be very scarce, as my hunters, although out daily in the forest, never once saw them.
Cockatoos, lories, and parroquets were really the only common birds. Even pigeons were scarce,
and in little variety, although we occasionally got the fine crown pigeon, which was always
welcome as an addition to our scantily furnished larder.

Just before the steamer arrived I had wounded my ankle by clambering among the trunks and branches
of fallen trees (which formed my best hunting grounds for insects), and, as usual with foot
wounds in this climate, it turned into an obstinate ulcer, keeping me in the house for several
days. When it healed up it was followed by an internal inflammation of the foot, which by the
doctor's advice I poulticed incessantly for four or five days, bringing out a severe inflamed
swelling on the tendon above the heel. This had to be leeched, and lanced, and doctored with
ointments and poultices for several weeks, till I was almost driven to despair,--for the weather
was at length fine, and I was tantalized by seeing grand butterflies flying past my door, and
thinking of the twenty or thirty new species of insects that I ought to be getting every day.
And this, too, in New Guinea--a country which I might never visit again,--a country which no
naturalist had ever resided in before,--a country which contained more strange and new and
beautiful natural objects than any other part of the globe. The naturalist will be able to
appreciate my feelings, sitting from morning to night in my little hut, unable to move without
a crutch, and my only solace the birds my hunters brought in every afternoon, and the few insects
caught by my Ternate man, Lahagi, who now went out daily in my place, but who of course did
not get a fourth part of what I should have obtained. Gemma Cantoggi, the
child, fresh from the country, married the Lanti, a viveurs on the march. Clean this

If one demands of one, she should make that one forgets himself - probably should you know nothing
about her? In floor sat a stranger, a beautiful, strong profile in the velvet bow of the big
hat.

Waving a tie wrapped it up to her mouth in pink Gauze. . . "

Mario Malvolto still dreamed, as he turned to the place of Settignano.

The low, flat curly gables church was powdered lunar blue. A solitary lantern went blind in the
wide, starry night, asleep in the middle on his hilltop town.

A sound was lost somewhere. Mario Malvolto saw back there in the long
lane somewhat dark move.

Certainly, the car was there from before, the roof was installed. A lunar grazing suddenly fell
over, something white had bowed out. Where was this in the neighborhood Vehicle at home? Nowhere,
"said the coachman.

It disappeared into the shadows.

They left the alley and drove a bit downhill. Mario Malvolto got out, took a few Steps ascend between
hedges, eleven steps, as he stood outside his door.

It was open. His Servant was asleep before.

Mario Malvolto walked over him, he took the lamp in the vestibule from the table, the stairs
up and walked into his study. On the library's wife busts in their narrow smiling old white dress,
locked in steep dreams, and on their foreheads the great Perle seemed
to sway in the moonlight on her chain.

The room was so bright that Malvolto extinguished the lamp. He leaned
into the open patio door.

How white was the garden! All this heavy dark foliage on the hill back down and up under the
wall with their canopy of oak trees, everything was shining in pale and precious Enchantment.
As a silver jacket hung the wisteria to the stiff, dead cypress. And Camellias in the depths
of the sunken bushes bleeding just like ghosts.

He looked back into the room, and he was frightened.

For a moment it had seemed to him, the larger than life Man there on the bright wall tore his sword
into the air. Mario Malvolto said in thought to him, to this picture, the only one that herniedersah
daily to his work:

"So we find ourselves. When I leave you tonight, I was battle-happy, tense by a loud victory
or a defeat rough. It's been victory. For wine and speeches He swollen. I go, be sure of it.
I need him only from the breast to draw and to consider, right? And along the way, in a full moon
night ghostly recollection, will defeat it - o, a silent, pale defeat, and a worse than I
would be booed loudly.

Did you also once a victory when he rang the loudest turn around suddenly and drive off seen? War
and art, this is the same on human debauchery. Do you know the disgust after the orgy? Answer,
Pippo Spano!

There you stand, erect, the iron legs spread apart, the huge sword across it in Hands, which are
bronze. You're narrow joints, easy, ready to jump, hunt, heated hugs and cold knife pushes to wine
and blood. In the sounds of your name even done a whistle from a curved weapon, and then a
wider impact. About your broad chest bulges iron to your fine hips circles a golden belt, on the
cheerful blue skirt. You have a short, two-pointed beard, your mouth is violent lean out of
your face, and dark blonde hair, it umzotteln. It looks thrown back over the shoulder, wide-eyed,
alert, and terrible.

If you look longer, smiles it. The abundance of cruel self-confidence brings out the smile that
is not can prove that you only suspect that plunges deep confusion,
in horror, ties, which one is opposed, and this is finally honored!

As you know to triumph so outrageous - how terrible you must sometimes beaten be! Yes! as you must
have suffered, you and your painter who was as strong as you are great works of art - Your
life or your picture - have as glowing heights only because they are so gruesome depths have. Oh,
conqueror of the Turks, adjustable thee not - I still hear your great outcry when a blow occurred
up. I see you bleed, when a friend betrayed you. I try knowing the noise of pain you have experienced
so often a woman in her pointed finger digging your heart! "

Mario Malvolto folded his arms.

He came closer, his eyes on the face of condottiere. He whispered:

"You see, after such a frenzy now I languish! I'm too fragile for it and too sober; therefore I
have forged a people who are different. Why are you standing here, as my conscience, as my compulsion
to size. You shall make me weary of the moderate pleasure and undiscriminating Suffering,
which we poor late-born us humble. Our art inspired each with a dull colored rococo suffering,
and adorned with no size. Insignificant neurasthenic-fate stretch out over a bourgeois life of
seventy years, during which they continually eaten for a few copper coins and suffering for
a nickel-being.

The artist digs cumbersome blocked in his soul about, only in his own, and came up with sadness,
he shows around the vanity. With hostile irony he blinks away of all that is strong and lives in all
colors.

But now I want to live! I want to waste, in my short years to my art
I create a second, more powerful life.

I want nothing to do with me, the weak; He teaches me still enough
on its own.

I want to experience strange beauty, strange pain. Quite strange.

Sacrificed women, nobles who seek too much, Master, the one full
of pain let off steam on a piece of marble.

They beat the hell out the forms from the block, and their pain is the whirlwind that is driving
the purple souls through darkness. . . To Which I want to emigrate, in the inside, listen
not to the whims of their nerves; whose fate has not caught up in her poor blood sits. No,
out there in the free world expected them to fight, and they may hinstürmen!

In her life, I penetrate, as surrounded with a thorn hedges, abundant and sudden world where violence
is practiced and drunken devotion, where nameless sunsets are savored
and incomprehensible Glories, and where one lives and dies all at
once.

And the woman who could love you, Pippo Spano, which is the price of all my desires. The confronts
me as the last of the disenchanted world of me. Not true - "

And Mario Malvolto forgot himself, he spoke louder.

"Not true, she confronts me?

Do you believe it, Pippo Spano?

It occurs - "

He broke off, so she stood.

She stood suddenly in the doorway of the little white salons, some moonbeams his shadow lifted.
She herself was white and covered with moon.

Her pale, short-nosed Face with thick lips framed heavy black lichen. From their small, narrow
Shape of the shoulders and neck are silver embroidered flowers detached at each of their breaths;
they lived with their breath. She raised her arm to the curtain at the door - and the sheer
sleeves Flowers goblets fell apart in many pale leaves. Her arm was in it as pistils, shimmer
of the moon.

Mario Malvolto had receded. He clutched his forehead. A hallucination?

He had I drank a lot and even more raving. But his heart was calm and strong, he felt freer
brighter, more spirit than usual. Wanted there not disappear forever? . . . He took two quick
steps towards it.

But it was there, it even spoke.

The girl said quietly and simply:

Mario Malvolto, I love you.

I came here, so we love each other.

"

II

The miracle

He recognized Gemma Cantoggi.

"You here?

But a word, Contessa would have been enough, "he stammered.

"I would be rushed to you."

"Now I'm already here," she said.

"But you compromise yourself!"

"No, no. We have a country house nearby. It is believed that I was there for the night. I leave
sometimes at night our townhouse, I have such whims. My partner is with me driven, it is dedicated.
"

He looked at her doubtfully. That was the Cantoggi that would marry the Lanti, a viveurs on the
march, one of the beautiful women who desire a time of all the men
be hated by all women, to a boy commits suicide, the twenty years
sashay to the forefront of fashion, and if they are over, countless
happiness promised a few mistress kept her promise, and in the memory
of some old the remains of a heady scent left behind.

What they themselves?

What they experienced? He knew Their effect, the martyrdom of the
man and the applause of the crowd.

Did this because as a colleague, as actress on the artist? Did she want to get advice on how to
very high success does?

He had gathered from her words, nothing, no thought, and he asked
excitedly:

"But what brings you here?"

"Love to you, Mario Malvolto," she repeated, her voice trembling slightly.

»Contessina,

you are a child. If you loved me, why did not one of your friends
asked to introduce myself?

I would have you under his feet. "

"At home we would not have been free.

To love us, may we would have to marry us. "

"Ah!"

He felt an evil satisfaction.

"The Contessina Cantoggi I would not want to be a man!"

And she, not understanding:

"She would have promised me, Mario, not
knowing who I am.

They would have assured to love me, and might have feigned. When
I realized that would be all over.

I wants us to love us, and no one knows about it.

You can not imagine I shall from the beautiful Cantoggi loved, and
all of Florence knows.

Do you hear? You can not. "

He murmured:

"Do you think I was as low vain?"

"No, I do not believe it. Forgive! I am jealous in advance. I would like to include up here! "

She
stepped lively to him in his room inside.

"And I could not stand that we are in front of strangers, we spoke with restraint would. I always
want from you - you, I love you!

"

Opened it, leaping across a last shyness, his arms quickly:

"I always want to be naked in front of you!"

A flush came over him, he grabbed her.

"If I could believe that you are really there in my arms!"

The mouth on her hair, he groaned. The rare woman with reckless passion for him wanted to make
you rich: there she was, there was the miracle.

One of the young girl, peeping out klaräugig from their world into which was no way: there it was,
there was the miracle.

"If I could believe it!"

"You feel me, yes," she said, trembling.

"And that I love you, but you must feel." I feel, "he said, more
compassionately with themselves than with it.

"And you want to love me?"

"I want to. If I want, "he said sadly. She asked, her face hidden on his neck.

"Have you ever found me beautiful? have you had me? do "

"Always up!"

And he knew he was lying and yet sincere. He had desired all, would always all . Covet But he
did not think anything in that? Maybe, maybe.

"I, too," she said and looked at large.

"Always up!"

"Then you knew that you met today evening through the hole in the
curtain an eye, and whose eyes?"

"No."

"Not? Have you seen me many times in the stalls? "

"No. I knew to just not how you looked.

As you entered, I hesitated. It could be a stranger, a friend of yours. "

He was speechless.

"We have so long lived in San Gimignano," she said.

"First, since Papa is dead and my Brother is stationed in Florence, I live here. "

"So you come because I'm famous."

"Famous? I do not know. Maybe you have some stupid things in my presence
about you spoken, and I did not know that you were meant.

I had read your books, but without having to look after your name. "

Mario Malvolto thought: "That's the glory."

"There were people in it, which I understood.

I told myself I would have done so would I feel if - "

"If -"

"If I could find this man. With my fiance, I knew I could do anything like this. "

"Yes, you're engaged."

"It was me. I have before I came to you, it depreciated. "

"I do not grasp it all."

"It's that simple. This evening, in your piece, I saw the same people live and die, I knew from your
books. They were stronger than the people with whom I dimeric and parade ride. They did not smile
so much, and I could not believe them - because they died, yes, "

"Because
they died."

»At home, I looked for the name of the author of the novels.

It was yours, as I drove her. "

"Since fuhrst are you from!"

He
was delighted. What trust, determined passion! That is the look on
him was allowed to grope! But he changed his mind: they wanted more
from him. He was suddenly afraid to . Suppress

"Do you believe that
I am like my creatures? I have probably created because I'm not. "

"But
you've created it. Thou must surely have worn in the heart. . . This
is so simple, it's become clear to me last night at a time. If the
people who could love us, live in our world - if they live nowhere
- we look for them yet in the heart of that who has dreamed of it!
Why do not the women? It would have been stupid not to you to come.
"

"I'm not that strong. . . "

It seemed to him as he rings with
seventeen-year-olds, it was regarded as his self-preservation.

"Her
fiance, Contessina is a hero to me. He has more artificial than real
power, I know, more tension and Fechter Douchenlebendigkeit as muscles
and nerves. But at least the exterior points to an enterprising gentleman.
You have to expect much from him after all. "

"I know pretty much
what I would have expected," she replied, shaking his shoulders. She
sat down at his table in his stools. She played with pen, threw a
notebook with notes on the floor and rested his head on his hand.

"When
he visited me in San Gimignano, when I was with him in the garden
on the crumbling tower stood high in the ivy and below us the blue
country - you know, as he seemed to me? So strange as an Englishman,
who photographed it. What I had everything there felt what we in sixteen
Years can feel everything at the base of these nests and ivy on these
perforated, warm Walls, in lizards - you mean, he had known of what?
I would have been ashamed a word to betray him. . . You - "

"I,"
asked Mario Malvolto and attacked with a guilty conscience for the
gift she held out.

"To you I say it!"

And she jumped.

"Rather,
you just know. You too have felt this way, I've even learned about
yourself! "

He resisted.

"We're a suspicious trade, we drive poet.
We lead you to joy, so are But not ours. . . "

"You want to play
the humble. You are flirtatious. "

And when he made a motion:

"Or
do you believe me?"

They stretched out their arms to each other simultaneously.

You
"do not believe!"

That was impossible. Her breath, her eyes, the
lines of her body self-proclaimed truth. The delicate lines of this
body, this soul of flesh flooded him, singing with passion. He shook
under them, he wished vehemently that they should embrace his heart
to break it with all the artifice is to rape and enslave it forever.
Nothing will feel more than them! What a goal - and the powerlessness
to achieve it!

"Listen," he asked, hoarse with anguish, "you are
mistaken about me up, Gemma. I'm not so honest as I du it can not
be. "

"Would you say if you do not it'd be?"

"I am trying at this
moment to be. But you do must not try too hard. Think your fiance,
he may be cold - he still has more good sense than I do. He is you
still have relatives. You still have more to hope from him. "

"I
know what I would have hoped."

"He may in your children's dreams
can not look back. Be glad that he is not to go. He will love you
so much good faith as you are now, if he does not have the talent
in you , Hineinzulügen which is no longer or never was. "

They went
away from him, she sat on the ottoman crossed their arms over the
pillow and leaned her chest against it.

"Not only because I know
about him," she said slowly, looking deeper perception in the moonlight.
"I know it by his mistress."

"From the Traffetti" he asked quickly.

"I
went to her. Does that surprise you? She is a great singer and a beautiful
woman. I thought she has no reason to me not to tell the truth. And
it is the only one they can tell me. . . Well, he is weak, he - can
do little. How am I to you the ? Call "

He started back. "Does it
for me for a bull?" She interpreted his movement.

"I'm not a child,
I can judge. He uses artificial irritation and aids asked his mistresses
services -. which I had to explain the first Traffetti "

"Ah! Ah!
She's explained to you? "

He thought: "A young girl who goes to a
prostitute to find out about the performance to teach her fiance!
No, I would not have invented, inventing no! "

You looked at him.

"And
the - you need not."

He admitted surprise:

"No."

They picked up.

"You
see, you have credited me very low desires, I do not deny it. You
know I still do not. . . The trouble is not that he is not a strong
man. But he has no love. The Traffetti loves him, she cried when she
told me! "

"But he has recently fought for them," said Malvolto before
he's considered.

"I do not like that one was beating so for me. He
has all the time cold and quiet claimed his place, his angry opponents
kept at a distance - the eye always on the Epee tip of the other -
until he finally was able to meet him. . . Person who offended lover
revenge is challenging, different! He does not love, I tell you. "

"So
no," thought Malvolto and gave it up to save this groom. He watched
as the young girl on her corsage fumbled. A few pieces of jewelry
were rolling on the carpet. Between the peaks shimmered a little blue-veined
flesh. She behaved like a child of long walk has found home, tired
and happy.

"I'll never get to feel his soul. Your have I often felt.
I bring you mean. "

She stood up.

"And my body."

He stormed up
to her, fell to his knees, threw kisses on her dress and hands. As we got out from the land the wind increased, and
there was a considerable sea, which made my short little vessel plunge and roll about violently.
By sunset we had not got halfway across, but could see Mysol distinctly. All night we went
along uneasily, and at daybreak, on looking out anxiously, I found that we had fallen much
to the westward during the night, owing, no doubt, to the pilot being sleepy and not keeping
the boat sufficiently close to the wind. We could see the mountains distinctly, but it was
clear we should not reach Silinta, and should have some difficulty in getting to the extreme
westward point of the island. The sea was now very boisterous, and our prau was continually
beaten to leeward by the waves, and after another weary day we found w e could not get to Mysol
at all, but might perhaps reach the island called Pulo Kanary, about ten miles to the north-west.
Thence we might await a favourable wind to reach Waigamma, on the north side of the island,
and visit Allen by means of a small boat.

About nine o'clock at night, greatly to my satisfaction, we got under the lea of this island,
into quite smooth water--for I had been very sick and uncomfortable, and had eaten scarcely
anything since the preceding morning. We were slowly nearing the shore, which the smooth dark
water told us we could safely approach; and were congratulating ourselves on soon being at
anchor, with the prospect of hot coffee, a good supper, and a sound sleep, when the wind completely
dropped, and we had to get out the oars to row. We were not more than two hundred yards from
the shore, when I noticed that we seemed to get no nearer although the men were rowing hard,
but drifted to the westward, and the prau would not obey the helm, but continually fell off,
and gave us much trouble to bring her up again. Soon a laud ripple of water told us we were
seized by one of those treacherous currents which so frequently frustrate all the efforts of
the voyager in these seas; the men threw down the oars in despair, and in a few minutes we
drifted to leeward of the island fairly out to sea again, and lost our last chance of ever
reaching Mysol! Hoisting our jib, we lay to, and in the morning found ourselves only a few
miles from the island, but wit, such a steady wind blowing from its direction as to render
it impossible for us to get back to it.

We now made sail to the northward, hoping soon to get a more southerly wind. Towards noon the
sea was much smoother, and with a S.S.E. wind we were laying in the direction of Salwatty,
which I hoped to reach, as I could there easily get a boat to take provisions and stores to
my companion in Mysol. This wind did not, however, last long, but died away into a calm; and
a light west wind springing up, with a dark bank of clouds, again gave us hopes of reaching
Mysol. We were soon, however, again disappointed. The E.S.E. wind began to blow again with
violence, and continued all night in irregular gusts, and with a short cross sea tossed us
about unmercifully, and so continually took our sails aback, that we were at length forced
to run before it with our jib only, to escape being swamped by our heavy mainsail. After another
miserable and anxious night, we found that we had drifted westward of the island of Poppa,
and the wind being again a little southerly, we made all sail in order to reach it. This we
did not succeed in doing, passing to the north-west, when the wind again blew hard from the
E.S.E., and our last hope of finding a refuge till better weather was frustrated. This was
a very serious matter to me, as I could not tell how Charles Allen might act, if, after waiting
in vain for me, he should return to Wahai, and find that I had left there long before, and
had not since been heard of. Such an event as our missing an island forty miles long would
hardly occur to him, and he would conclude either that our boat had foundered, or that my crew
had murdered me and run away with her. However, as it was physically impossible now for me
to reach him, the only thing to be done was to make the best of my way to Waigiou, and trust
to our meeting some traders, who might convey to him the news of my safety.

Finding on my map a group of three small islands, twenty-five miles north of Poppa, I resolved,
if possible, to rest there a day or two. We could lay our boat's head N.E. by N.; but a heavy
sea from the eastward so continually beat us off our course, and we made so much leeway, that
I found it would be as much as we could do to reach them. It was a delicate point to keep our
head in the best direction, neither so close to the wind as to stop our way, or so free as
to carry us too far to leeward. I continually directed the steersman myself, and by incessant
vigilance succeeded, just at sunset, in bringing our boat to an anchor under the lee of the
southern point of one of the islands. The anchorage was, however, by no means good, there being
a fringing coral reef, dry at low water, beyond which, on a bottom strewn with masses of coral,
we were obliged to anchor. We had now been incessantly tossing about for four days in our small
undecked boat, with constant disappointments and anxiety, and it was a great comfort to have
a night of quiet and comparative safety. My old pilot had never left the helm for more than
an hour at a time, when one of the others would relieve him for a little sleep; so I determined
the next morning to look out for a secure and convenient harbour, and rest on shore for a day.

In the morning, finding it would be necessary for us to get round a rocky point, I wanted my
men to go on shore and cut jungle-rope, by which to secure us from being again drafted away,
as the wind was directly off shore. I unfortunately, however, allowed myself to be overruled
by the pilot and crew, who all declared that it was the easiest thing possible, and that they
would row the boat round the point in a few minutes. They accordingly got up the anchor, set
the jib, and began rowing; but, just as I had feared, we drifted rapidly off shore, and had
to drop anchor again in deeper water, and much farther off. The two best men, a Papuan and
a Malay now swam on shore, each carrying a hatchet, and went into the jungle to seek creepers
for rope. After about an hour our anchor loosed hold, and began to drag. This alarmed me greatly,
and we let go our spare anchor, and, by running out all our cable, appeared tolerably secure
again. We were now most anxious for the return of the men, and were going to fire our muskets
to recall them, when we observed them on the beach, some way off, and almost immediately our
anchors again slipped, and we drifted slowly away into deep water. We instantly seized the
oars, but found we could not counteract the wind and current, and our frantic cries to the
men were not heard till we had got a long way off; as they seemed to be hunting for shell-fish
on the beach. Very soon, however, they stared at us, and in a few minutes seemed to comprehend
their situation; for they rushed down into the water, as if to swim off, but again returned
on shore, as if afraid to make the attempt. We had drawn up our anchors at first not to check
our rowing; but now, finding we could do nothing, we let them both hang down by the full length
of the cables. This stopped our way very much, and we drifted from shore very slowly, and hoped
the men would hastily form a raft, or cut down a soft-wood tree, and paddle out, to us, as
we were still not more than a third of a mile from shore. They seemed, however, to have half
lost their senses, gesticulating wildly to us, running along the beach, then going unto the
forest; and just when we thought they had prepared some mode of making an attempt to reach
us, we saw the smoke of a fire they had made to cook their shell-fish! They had evidently given
up all idea of coming after us, and we were obliged to look to our own position.

We were now about a mile from shore, and midway between two of the islands, but we were slowly
drifting out, to sea to the westward, and our only chance of yet saving the men was to reach
the opposite shore. We therefore sot our jib and rowed hard; but the wind failed, and we drifted
out so rapidly that we had some difficulty in reaching the extreme westerly point of the island.
Our only sailor left, then swam ashore with a rope, and helped to tow us round the point into
a tolerably safe and secure anchorage, well sheltered from the wind, but exposed to a little
swell which jerked our anchor and made us rather uneasy. We were now in a sad plight, having
lost our two best men, and being doubtful if we had strength left to hoist our mainsail. We
had only two days' water on board, and the small, rocky, volcanic island did not promise us
much chance of finding any. The conduct of the men on shore was such as to render it doubtful
if they would make any serious attempt to reach us, though they might easily do so, having
two good choppers, with which in a day they could male a small outrigger raft on which they
could safely cross the two miles of smooth sea with the wind right aft, if they started from
the east end of the island, so as to allow for the current. I could only hope they would be
sensible enough to make the attempt, and determined to stay as long as I could to give them
the chance.

We passed an anxious night, fearful of again breaking our anchor or rattan cable. In the morning
(23d), finding all secure, I waded on shore with my two men, leaving the old steersman and
the cook on board, with a loaded musketto recall us if needed. We first walked along the beach,
till stopped by the vertical cliffs at the east end of the island, finding a place where meat
had been smoked, a turtle-shell still greasy, and some cut wood, the leaves of which were still
green, showing that some boat had been here very recently. We then entered the jungle, cutting
our way up to the top of the hill, but when we got there could see nothing, owing to the thickness
of the forest. Returning, we cut some bamboos, and sharpened them to dig for water in a low
spot where some sago-trees were growing; when, just as we were going to begin, Hoi, the Wahai
man, called out to say he had found water. It was a deep hole among the Sago trees, in stiff
black clay, full of water, which was fresh, but smelt horribly from the quantity of dead leaves
and sago refuse that had fallen in. Hastily concluding that it was a spring, or that the water
had filtered in, we baled it all out as well as a dozen or twenty buckets of mud and rubbish,
hoping by night to have a good supply of clean water. I then went on board to breakfast, leaving
my two men to make a bamboo raft to carry us on shore and back without wading. I had scarcely
finished when our cable broke, and we bumped against the rocks. Luckily it was smooth and calm,
and no damage was done. We searched for and got up our anchor, and found teat the cable had
been cut by grating all night upon the coral. Had it given way in the night, we might have
drifted out to sea without our anchor, or been seriously damaged. In the evening we went to
fetch water from the well, when, greatly to our dismay, we found nothing but a little liquid
mud at the bottom, and it then became evident that the hole was one which had been made to
collect rain water, and would never fill again as long as the present drought continued. As
we did not know what we might suffer for want of water, we filled our jar with this muddy stuff
so that it might settle. In the afternoon I crossed over to the other side of the island, and
made a large fire, in order that our men might see we were still there.

The next day (24th) I determined to have another search for water; and when the tide was out
rounded a rocky point and went to the extremity of the island without finding any sign of the
smallest stream. On our way back, noticing a very small dry bed of a watercourse, I went up
it to explore, although everything was so dry that my men loudly declared it was useless to
expect water there; but a little way up I was rewarded by finding a few pints in a small pool.
We searched higher up in every hole and channel where water marks appeared, but could find
not a drop more. Sending one of my men for a large jar and teacup, we searched along the beach
till we found signs of another dry watercourse, and on ascending this were so fortunate as
to discover two deep sheltered rock-holes containing several gallons of water, enough to fill
all our jars. When the cup came we enjoyed a good drink of the cool pure water, and before
we left had carried away, I believe, every drop on the island.

In the evening a good-sized prau appeared in sight, making apparently for the island where
our men were left, and we had some hopes they might be seen and picked up, but it passed along
mid-channel, and did not notice the signals we tried to make. I was now, however, pretty easy
as to the fate of the men. There was plenty of sago on our rocky island, and there world probably
be some on the fiat one they were left on. They had choppers, and could cut down a tree and
make sago, and would most likely find sufficient water by digging. Shell-fish were abundant,
and they would be able to manage very well till some boat should touch there, or till I could
send and fetch them. The next day we devoted to cutting wood, filling up our jars with all
the water we could find, and making ready to sail in the evening. I shot a small lory closely
resembling a common species at Ternate, and a glossy starling which differed from the allied
birds of Ceram and Matabello. Large wood-pigeons and crows were the only other birds I saw,
but I did not obtain specimens.

About eight in the evening of June 25th we started, and found that with all hands at work we
could just haul up our mainsail. We had a fair wind during the night and sailed north-east,
finding ourselves in the morning about twenty miles west of the extremity of Waigiou with a
number of islands intervening. About ten o'clock we ran full on to a coral reef, which alarmed
us a good deal, but luckily got safe off again. About two in the afternoon we reached an extensive
coral reef, and were sailing close alongside of it, when the wind suddenly dropped, and we
drifted on to it before we could get in our heavy mainsail, which we were obliged to let run
down and fall partly overboard. We had much difficulty in getting off, but at last got into
deep water again, though with reefs and islands all around us. At night we did not know what
to do, as no one on board could tell where we were or what dangers might surround us, the only
one of our crew who was acquainted with the coast of Waigiou having been left on the island.
We therefore took in all sail and allowed ourselves to drift, as we were some miles from the
nearest land. A light breeze, however, sprang up, and about midnight we found ourselves again
bumping over a coral reef. As it was very dark, and we knew nothing of our position, we could
only guess how to get off again, and had there been a little more wind we might have been knocked
to pieces. However, in about half an hour we did get off, and then thought it best to anchor
on the edge of the reef till morning. Soon after daylight on the 7th, finding our prau had
received no damage, we sailed on with uncertain winds and squalls, threading our way among
islands and reefs, and guided only by a small map, which was very incorrect and quite useless,
and by a general notion of the direction we ought to take. In the afternoon we found a tolerable
anchorage under a small island and stayed for the night, and I shot a large fruit-pigeon new
to me, which I have since named Carpophaga tumida. I also saw and shot at the rare white-headed
kingfisher (Halcyon saurophaga), but did not kill it. The next morning we sailed on, and having
a fair wind reached the shores of the large island of Waigiou. On rounding a point we again
ran full on to a coral reef with our mainsail up, but luckily the wind had almost died away,
and with a good deal of exertion we managed get safely off.

We now had to search for the narrow channel among islands, which we knew was somewhere hereabouts,
and which leads to the villages on the south side of Waigiou. Entering a deep bay which looked
promising, we got to the end of it, but it was then dusk, so we anchored for the night, and
having just finished all our water could cook no rice for supper. Next morning early (29th)
we went on shore among the mangroves, and a little way inland found some water, which relieved
our anxiety considerably, and left us free to go along the coast in search of the opening,
or of some one who could direct us to it. During the three days we had now been among the reefs
and islands, we had only seen a single small canoe, which had approached pretty near to us,
and then, notwithstanding our signals, went off in another direction. The shores seemed all
desert; not a house, or boat, or human being, or a puff of smoke was to be seen; and as we
could only go on the course that the ever-changing wind would allow us (our hands being too
few to row any distance), our prospects of getting to our destination seemed rather remote
and precarious. Having gone to the eastward extremity of the deep bay we had entered, without
finding any sign of an opening, we turned westward; and towards evening were so fortunate as
to find a small village of seven miserable houses built on piles in the water. Luckily the
Orang-kaya, or head man, could speak a little. Malay, and informed us that the entrance to
the strait was really in the bay we had examined, but that it was not to be seen except when
close inshore. He said the strait was often very narrow, and wound among lakes and rocks and
islands, and that it would take two days to reach the large village of Muka, and three more
to get to Waigiou. I succeeded in hiring two men to go with us to Muka, bringing a small boat
in which to return; but we had to wait a day for our guides, so I took my gun and made a little
excursion info the forest. The day was wet and drizzly, and I only succeeded in shooting two
small birds, but I saw the great black cockatoo, and had a glimpse of one or two Birds of Paradise,
whose loud screams we had heard on first approaching the coast. Leaving the village the next
morning (July 1st) with a light wind, it took us all day to reach the entrance to the channel,
which resembled a small river, and was concealed by a projecting point, so that it was no wonder
we did not discover it amid the dense forest vegetation which everywhere covers these islands
to the water's edge. A little way inside it becomes bounded by precipitous rocks, after winding
among which for about two miles, we emerged into what seemed a lake, but which was in fact
a deep gulf having a narrow entrance on the south coast. This gulf was studded along its shores
with numbers of rocky islets, mostly mushroom shaped, from the `eater having worn away the
lower part of the soluble coralline limestone, leaving them overhanging from ten to twenty
feet. Every islet was covered will strange-looping shrubs and trees, and was generally crowned
by lofty and elegant palms, which also studded the ridges of the mountainous shores, forming
one of the most singular and picturesque landscapes I have ever seen. The current which had
brought us through the narrow strait now ceased, and we were obliged to row, which with our
short and heavy prau was slow work. I went on shore several times, but the rocks were so precipitous,
sharp, and honeycombed, that I found it impossible to get through the tangled thicket with
which they were everywhere clothed. It took us three days to get to the entrance of the gulf,
and then the wind was such as to prevent our going any further, and we might have had to wait
for days or weeps, when, much to my surprise and gratification, a boat arrived from Muka with
one of the head men, who had in some mysterious manner heard I was on my way, and had come
to my assistance, bringing a present of cocoa-nuts and vegetables. Being thoroughly acquainted
with the coast, and having several extra men to assist us, he managed to get the prau along
by rowing, poling, or sailing, and by night had brought us safely into harbour, a great relief
after our tedious and unhappy voyage. We had been already eight days among the reefs and islands
of Waigiou, coming a distance of about fifty miles, and it was just forty days since we had
sailed from Goram.

Immediately on our arrival at Muka, I engaged a small boat and three natives to go in search
of my lost men, and sent one of my own men with them to make sure of their going to the right
island. In ten days they returned, but to my great regret and disappointment, without the men.
The weather had been very bad, and though they had reached an island within sight of that in
which the men were, they could get no further. They had waited there six days for better weather,
and then, having no more provisions, and the man I had sent with them being very ill and not
expected to live, they returned. As they now knew the island, I was determined they should
make another trial, and (by a liberal payment of knives, handkerchiefs, and tobacco, with plenty
of provisions) persuaded them to start back immediately, and make another attempt. They did
not return again till the 29th of July, having stayed a few days at their own village of Bessir
on the way; but this time they had succeeded and brought with them my two lost men, in tolerable
health, though thin and weak. They had lived exactly a month on the island had found water,
and had subsisted on the roots and tender flower-stalks of a species of Bromelia, on shell-fish
and on a few turtles' eggs. Having swum to the island, they had only a pair of trousers and
a shirt between them, but had made a hut of palm-leaves, and had altogether got on very well.
They saw that I waited for them three days at the opposite island, but had been afraid to cross,
lest the current should have carried them out to sea, when they would have been inevitably
lost. They had felt sure I would send for them on the first opportunity, and appeared more
grateful than natives usually are for my having done so; while I felt much relieved that my
voyage, though sufficiently unfortunate, had not involved loss of life.

CHAPTER XXXVI. WAIGIOU.

(JULY TO SEPTEMBER 1860.)

THE village of Muka, on the south coast of Waigiou, consists of a number of poor huts, partly
in the water and partly on shore, and scattered irregularly over a space of about half a mile
in a shallow bay. Around it are a few cultivated patches, and a good deal of second-growth
woody vegetation; while behind, at the distance of about half a mile, rises the virgin forest,
through which are a few paths to some houses and plantations a mile or two inland. The country
round is rather flat, and in places swampy, and there are one or two small streams which run
behind the village into the sea below it. Finding that no house could be had suitable to my
purpose, and hawing so often experienced the advantages of living close to or just within the
forest, I obtained the assistance of half-a-dozen men; and having selected a spot near the
path and the stream, and close to a fine fig-tree, which stood just within the forest, we cleared
the ground and set to building a house. As I did not expect to stay here so long as I had done
at Dorey, I built a long, low, narrow shed, about seven feet high on one side and four on the
other, which required but little wood, and was put up very rapidly. Our sails, with a few old
attaps from a deserted but in the village, formed the walls, and a quantity of "cadjans," or
palm-leaf mats, covered in the roof. On the third day my house was finished, and all my things
put in and comfortably arranged to begin work, and I was quite pleased at having got established
so quickly and in such a nice situation.

It had been so far fine weather, but in the night it rained hard, and we found our mat roof
would not keep out water. It first began to drop, and then to stream over everything. I had
to get up in the middle of the night to secure my insect-boxes, rice, and other perishable
articles, and to find a dry place to sleep in, for my bed was soaked. Fresh leaks kept forming
as the rain continued, and w e all passed a very miserable and sleepless night. In the morning
the sun shone brightly, and everything was put out to dry. We tried to find out why the mats
leaked, and thought we had discovered that they had been laid on upside down. Having shifted
there all, and got everything dry and comfortable by the evening, we again went to bed, and
before midnight were again awaked by torrent of rain and leaks streaming in upon us as bad
as ever. There was no more sleep for us that night, and the next day our roof was again taken
to pieces, and we came to the conclusion that the fault was a want of slope enough in the roof
for mats, although it would be sufficient for the usual attap thatch. I therefore purchased
a few new and some old attaps, and in the parts these would not cover we put the mats double,
and then at last had the satisfaction of finding our roof tolerably water-tight.

I was now able to begin working at the natural history of the island. When I first arrived
I was surprised at being told that there were no Paradise Birds at Muka, although there were
plenty at Bessir, a place where the natives caught them and prepared the skins. I assured the
people I had heard the cry of these birds close to the village, but they world not believe
that I could know their cry. However, the very first time I went into the forest I not only
heard but saw them, and was convinced there were plenty about; but they were very shy, and
it was some time before we got any. My hunter first shot a female, and I one day got very close
to a fine male. He was, as I expected, the rare red species, Paradisea rubra, which alone inhabits
this island, and is found nowhere else. He was quite low down, running along a bough searching
for insects, almost like a woodpecker, and the long black riband-like filaments in his tail
hung down in the most graceful double curve imaginable. I covered him with my gun, and was
going to use the barrel which had a very small charge of powder and number eight shot, so as
not to injure his plumage, but the gun missed fire, and he was off in an instant among the
thickest jungle. Another day we saw no less than eight fine males at different times, and fired
four times at them; but though other birds at the same distance almost always dropped, these
all got away, and I began to think we were not to get this magnificent species. At length the
fruit ripened on the fig-tree close by my house, and many birds came to feed on it; and one
morning, as I was taking my coffee, a male Paradise Bird was seen to settle on its top. I seized
my gun, ran under the tree, and, gazing up, could see it flying across from branch to branch,
seizing a fruit here and another there, and then, before I could get a sufficient aim to shoot
at such a height (for it was one of the loftiest trees of the tropics), it was away into the
forest. They now visited the tree every morning; but they stayed so short a time, their motions
were so rapid, and it was so difficult to see them, owing to the lower trees, which impeded
the view, that it was only after several days' watching, and one or two misses, that I brought
down my bird--a male in the most magnificent plumage.

This bird differs very much from the two large species which I had already obtained, and, although
it wants the grace imparted by their long golden trains, is in many respects more remarkable
and more beautiful. The head, back, and shoulders are clothed with a richer yellow, the deep
metallic green colour of the throat extends further over the head, and the feathers are elongated
on the forehead into two little erectile crests. The side plumes are shorter, but are of a
rich red colour, terminating in delicate white points, and the middle tail-feathers are represented
by two long rigid glossy ribands, which are black, thin, and semi-cylindrical, and droop gracefully
in a spiral curve. Several other interesting birds were obtained, and about half-a-dozen quite
new ones; but none of any remarkable beauty, except the lovely little dove, Ptilonopus pulchellus,
which with several other pigeons I shot on the same fig-tree close to my house. It is of a
beautiful green colour above, with a forehead of the richest crimson, while beneath it is ashy
white and rich yellow, banded with violet red.

On the evening of our arrival at Muka I observed what appeared like a display of Aurora Borealis,
though I could hardly believe that this was possible at a point a little south of the equator.
The night was clear and calm, and the northern sky presented a diffused light, with a constant
succession of faint vertical flashings or flickerings, exactly similar to an ordinary aurora
in England. The next day was fine, but after that the weather was unprecedentedly bad, considering
that it ought to have been the dry monsoon. For near a month we had wet weather; the sun either
not appearing at all, or only for an hour or two about noon. Morning and evening, as well as
nearly all night, it rained or drizzled, and boisterous winds, with dark clouds, formed the
daily programme. With the exception that it was never cold, it was just such weather as a very
bad English November or February.

The people of Waigiou are not truly indigenes of the island, which possesses no "Alfuros,"
or aboriginal inhabitants. They appear to be a mixed race, partly from Gilolo, partly from
New Guinea. Malays and Alfuros from the former island have probably settled here, and many
of them have taken Papuan wives from Salwatty or Dorey, while the influx of people from those
places, and of slaves, has led to the formation of a tribe exhibiting almost all the transitions
from a nearly pure Malayan to an entirely Papuan type. The language spoken by them is entirely
Papuan, being that which is used on all the coasts of Mysol, Salwatty, the north-west of New
Guinea, and the islands in the great Geelvink Bay,--a fact which indicates the way in which
the coast settlements have been formed. The fact that so many of the islands between New Guinea
and the Moluccas--such as Waigiou, Guebe, Poppa, Obi, Batchian, as well as the south and east
peninsulas of Gilolo--possess no aboriginal tribes, but are inhabited by people who are evidently
mongrels and wanderers, is a remarkable corroborative proof of the distinctness of the Malayan
and Papuan races, and the separation of the geographical areas they inhabit. If these two great
races were direct modifications, the one of the other, we should expect to find in the intervening
region some homogeneous indigenous race presenting intermediate characters. For example, between
the whitest inhabitants of Europe and the black Klings of South India, there are in the intervening
districts homogeneous races which form a gradual transition from one to the other; while in
America, although there is a perfect transition from the Anglo-Saxon to the negro, and from
the Spaniard to the Indian, there is no homogeneous race forming a natural transition from
one to the other. In the Malay Archipelago we have an excellent example of two absolutely distinct
races, which appear to have approached each other, and intermingled in an unoccupied territory
at a very recent epoch in the history of man; and I feel satisfied that no unprejudiced person
could study them on the spot without being convinced that this is the true solution of the
problem, rather than the almost universally accepted view that they are but modifications of
one and the same race.

The people of Muka live in that abject state of poverty that is almost always found where the
sago-tree is abundant. Very few of them take the trouble to plant any vegetables or fruit,
but live almost entirely on sago and fish, selling a little tripang or tortoiseshell to buy
the scanty clothing they require. Almost all of them, however, possess one or more Papuan slaves,
on whose labour they live in almost absolute idleness, just going out on little fishing or
trading excursions, as an excitement in their monotonous existence. They are under the rule
of the Sultan of Tidore, and every year have to pay a small tribute of Paradise birds, tortoiseshell,
or sago. To obtain these, they go in the fine season on a trading voyage to the mainland of
New Guinea, and getting a few goods on credit from some Ceram or Bugis trader, make hard bargains
with the natives, and gain enough to pay their tribute, and leave a little profit for themselves.

Such a country is not a very pleasant one to live in, for as there are no superfluities, there
is nothing to sell; and had it not been for a trader from Ceram who was residing there during
my stay, who had a small vegetable garden, and whose men occasionally got a few spare fish,
I should often have had nothing to eat. Fowls, fruit, and vegetables are luxuries very rarely
to be purchased at Muka; and even cocoa-nuts, so indispensable for eastern cookery, are not
to be obtained; for though there are some hundreds of trees in the village, all the fruit is
eaten green, to supply the place of the vegetables the people are too lazy to cultivate. Without
eggs, cocoa-nuts, or plantains, we had very short commons, and the boisterous weather being
unpropitious for fishing, we had to live on what few eatable birds we could shoot, with an
occasional cuscus, or eastern opossum, the only quadruped, except pigs, inhabiting the island.

I had only shot two male Paradiseas on my tree when they ceased visiting it, either owing to
the fruit becoming scarce, or that they were wise enough to know there was danger. We continued
to hear and see them in the forest, but after a month had not succeeded in shooting any more;
and as my chief object in visiting Waigiou was to get these birds, I determined to go to Bessir,
where there are a number of Papuans who catch and preserve them. I hired a small outrigger
boat for this journey, and left one of my men to guard my house and goods. We had to wait several
days for fine weather, and at length started early one morning, and arrived late at night,
after a rough and disagreeable passage. The village of Bessir was built in the water at the
point of a small island. The chief food of the people was evidently shell-fish, since great
heaps of the shells had accumulated in the shallow water between the houses and the land, forming
a regular "kitchen-midden" for the exploration of some future archeologist. We spent the night
in the chief's house, and the next morning went over to the mainland to look out for a place
where I could reside. This part of Waigiou is really another island to the south of the narrow
channel we had passed through in coming to Muka. It appears to consist almost entirely of raised
coral, whereas the northern island contains hard crystalline rocks. The shores were a range
of low limestone cliffs, worn out by the water, so that the upper part generally overhung.
At distant intervals were little coves and openings, where small streams came down from the
interior; and in one of these we landed, pulling our boat up on a patch of white sandy beach.
Immediately above was a large newly-made plantation of yams and plantains, and a small hot,
which the chief said we might have the use of, if it would do for me. It was quite a dwarf's
house, just eight feet square, raised on posts so that the floor was four and a half feet above
the ground, and the highest part of the ridge only five feet above the flour. As I am six feet
and an inch in my stockings, I looked at this with some dismay; but finding that the other
houses were much further from water, were dreadfully dirty, and were crowded with people, I
at once accepted the little one, and determined to make the best of it. At first I thought
of taking out the floor, which would leave it high enough to walk in and out without stooping;
but then there would not be room enough, so I left it just as it was, had it thoroughly cleaned
out, and brought up my baggage. The upper story I used for sleeping in, and for a store-room.
In the lower part (which was quite open all round) I fixed up a small table, arranged my boxes,
put up hanging-shelves, laid a mat on the ground with my wicker-chair upon it, hung up another
mat on the windward side, and then found that, by bending double and carefully creeping in,
I could sit on my chair with my head just clear of the ceiling. Here I lived pretty comfortably
for six weeks, taking all my meals and doing all my work at my little table, to and from which
I had to creep in a semi-horizontal position a dozen times a day; and, after a few severe knocks
on the head by suddenly rising from my chair, learnt to accommodate myself to circumstances.
We put up a little sloping cooking-but outside, and a bench on which my lads could skin their
birds. At night I went up to my little loft, they spread their mats on the floor below, and
we none of us grumbled at our lodgings.

My first business was to send for the men who were accustomed to catch the Birds of Paradise.
Several came, and I showed them my hatchets, beads, knives, and handkerchiefs; and explained
to them, as well as I could by signs, the price I would give for fresh-killed specimens. It
is the universal custom to pay for everything in advance; but only one man ventured on this
occasion to take goods to the value of two birds. The rest were suspicious, and wanted to see
the result of the first bargain with the strange white man, the only one who had ever come
to their island. After three days, my man brought me the first bird--a very fine specimen,
and alive, but tied up in a small bag, and consequently its tail and wing feathers very much
crushed and injured. I tried to explain to him, and to the others that came with him, that
I wanted them as perfect as possible, and that they should either kill them, or keep them on
a perch with a string to their leg. As they were now apparently satisfied that all was fair,
and that I had no ulterior designs upon them, six others took away goods; some for one bird,
some for more, and one for as many as six. They said they had to go a long way for them, and
that they would come back as soon as they caught any. At intervals of a few days or a week,
some of them would return, bringing me one or more birds; but though they did not bring any
more in bags, there was not much improvement in their condition. As they caught them a long
way off in the forest, they would scarcely ever come with one, but would tie it by the leg
to a stick, and put it in their house till they caught another. The poor creature would make
violent efforts to escape, would get among the ashes, or hang suspended by the leg till the
limb was swollen and half-putrefied, and sometimes die of starvation and worry. One had its
beautiful head all defiled by pitch from a dammar torch; another had been so long dead that
its stomach was turning green. Luckily, however, the skin and plumage of these birds is so
firm and strong, that they bear washing and cleaning better than almost any other sort; and
I was generally able to clean them so well that they did not perceptibly differ from those
I had shot myself.

Some few were brought me the same day they were caught, and I had an opportunity of examining
them in all their beauty and vivacity. As soon as I found they were generally brought alive,
I set one of my men to make a large bamboo cage with troughs for food and water, hoping to
be able to keep some of them. I got the natives to bring me branches of a fruit they were very
fond of, and I was pleased to find they ate it greedily, and would also take any number of
live grasshoppers I gave them, stripping off the legs and wings, and then swallowing them.
They drank plenty of water, and were in constant motion, jumping about the cage from perch
to perch, clinging on the top and sides, and rarely resting a moment the first day till nightfall.
The second day they were always less active, although they would eat as freely as before; and
on the morning of the third day they were almost always found dead at the bottom of the cage,
without any apparent cause. Some of them ate boiled rice as well as fruit and insects; but
after trying many in succession, not one out of ten lived more than three days. The second
or third day they would be dull, and in several cases they were seized with convulsions, and
fell off the perch, dying a few hours afterwards. I tried immature as well as full-plumaged
birds, but with no better success, and at length gave it up as a hopeless task, and confined
my attention to preserving specimens in as good a condition as possible.

The Red Birds of Paradise are not shot with blunt arrows, as in the Aru Islands and some parts
of New Guinea, but are snared in a very ingenious manner. A large climbing Arum bears a red
reticulated fruit, of which the birds are very fond. The hunters fasten this fruit on a stout
forked stick, and provide themselves with a fine but strong cord. They then seep out some tree
in the forest on which these birds are accustomed to perch, and climbing up it fasten the stick
to a branch and arrange the cord in a noose so ingeniously, that when the bird comes to eat
the fruit its legs are caught, and by pulling the end of the cord, which hangs down to the
ground, it comes free from the branch and brings down the bird. Sometimes, when food is abundant
elsewhere, the hunter sits from morning till night under his tree with the cord in his hand,
and even for two or three whole days in succession, without even getting a bite; while, on
the other hand, if very lucky, he may get two or three birds in a day. There are only eight
or ten men at Bessir who practise this art, which is unknown anywhere else in the island. I
determined, therefore, to stay as long as possible, as my only chance of getting a good series
of specimens; and although I was nearly starved, everything eatable by civilized man being
scarce or altogether absent, I finally succeeded.

The vegetables and fruit in the plantations around us did not suffice for the wants of the
inhabitants, and were almost always dug up or gathered before they were ripe. It was very rarely
we could purchase a little fish; fowls there were none; and we were reduced to live upon tough
pigeons and cockatoos, with our rice and sago, and sometimes we could not get these. Having
been already eight months on this voyage, my stock of all condiments, spices and butter, was
exhausted, and I found it impossible to eat sufficient of my tasteless and unpalatable food
to support health. I got very thin and weak, and had a curious disease known (I have since
heard) as brow-ague. Directly after breakfast every morning an intense pain set in on a small
spot on the right temple. It was a severe burning ache, as bad as the worst toothache, and
lasted about two hours, generally going off at noon. When this finally ceased, I had an attack
of fever, which left me so weak and so unable to eat our regular food, that I feel sure my
life was saved by a couple of tins of soup which I had long reserved for some such extremity.
I used often to go out searching after vegetables, and found a great treasure in a lot of tomato
plants run wild, and bearing little fruits about the size of gooseberries. I also boiled up
the tops of pumpkin plants and of ferns, by way of greens, and occasionally got a few green
papaws. The natives, when hard up for food, live upon a fleshy seaweed, which they boil till
it is tender. I tried this also, but found it too salt and bitter to be endured.

Towards the end of September it became absolutely necessary for me to return, in order to make
our homeward voyage before the end of the east monsoon. Most of the men who had taken payment
from me had brought the birds they had agreed for. One poor fellow had been so unfortunate
as not to get one, and he very honestly brought back the axe he had received in advance; another,
who had agreed for six, brought me the fifth two days before I was to start, and went off immediately
to the forest again to get the other. He did not return, however, and we loaded our boat, and
were just on the point of starting, when he came running down after us holding up a bird, which
he handed to me, saying with great satisfaction, "Now I owe you nothing." These were remarkable
and quite unexpected instances of honesty among savages, where it would have been very easy
for them to have been dishonest without fear of detection or punishment.

The country round about Bessir was very hilly and rugged, bristling with jagged and honey-combed
coralline rocks, and with curious little chasms and ravines. The paths often passed through
these rocky clefts, which in the depths of the forest were gloomy and dark in the extreme,
and often full of fine-leaved herbaceous plants and curious blue-foliaged Lycopodiaceae. It
was in such places as these that I obtained many of my most beautiful small butterflies, such
as Sospita statira and Taxila pulchra, the gorgeous blue Amblypodia hercules, and many others.
On the skirts of the plantations I found the handsome blue Deudorix despoena, and in the shady
woods the lovely Lycaena wallacei. Here, too, I obtained the beautiful Thyca aruna, of the
richest orange on the upper side; while below it is intense crimson and glossy black; and a
superb specimen of a green Ornithoptera, absolutely fresh and perfect, and which still remains
one of the glories of my cabinet.

My collection of birds, though not very rich in number of species, was yet very interesting.
I got another specimen of the rare New Guinea kite (Henicopernis longicauda), a large new goatsucker
(Podargus superciliaris), and a most curious ground-pigeon of an entirely new genus, and remarkable
for its long and powerful bill. It has been named Henicophaps albifrons. I was also much pleased
to obtain a fine series of a large fruit-pigeon with a protuberance on the bill (Carpophaga
tumida), and to ascertain that this was not, as had been hitherto supposed, a sexual character,
but was found equally in male and female birds. I collected only seventy-three species of birds
in Waigiou, but twelve of them were entirely new, and many others very rare; and as I brought
away with me twenty-four fine specimens of the Paradisea rubra, I did not regret my visit to
the island, although it had by no means answered my expectations.

CHAPTER XXXVII. VOYAGE FROM WAIGIOU TO TERNATE.

(SEPTEMBER 29 To NOVEMBER 5, 1860.)

I HAD left the old pilot at Waigiou to take care of my house and to get the prau into sailing
order--to caulk her bottom, and to look after the upper works, thatch, and ringing. When I
returned I found it nearly ready, and immediately began packing up and preparing for the voyage.
Our mainsail had formed one side of our house, but the spanker and jib had been put away in
the roof, and on opening them to see if any repairs were wanted, to our horror we found that
some rats had made them their nest, and had gnawed through them in twenty places. We had therefore
to buy matting and make new sails, and this delayed us till the 29th of September, when we
at length left Waigiou.

It took us four days before we could get clear of the land, having to pass along narrow straits
beset with reefs and shoals, and full of strong currents, so that an unfavourable wind stopped
us altogether. One day, when nearly clear, a contrary tide and head wind drove us ten miles
back to our anchorage of the night before. This delay made us afraid of running short of water
if we should be becalmed at sea, and we therefore determined, if possible, to touch at the
island where our men had been lost, and which lay directly in our proper course. The wind was,
however, as usual, contrary, being S.S.W. instead of S.S.E., as it should have been at this
time of the year, and all we could do was to reach the island of Gagie, where we came to an
anchor by moonlight under bare volcanic hills. In the morning we tried to enter a deep bay,
at the head of which some Galela fishermen told us there was water, but a head-wind prevented
us. For the reward of a handkerchief, however, they took us to the place in their boat, and
we filled up our jars and bamboos. We then went round to their camping-place on the north coast
of the island to try and buy something to eat, but could only get smoked turtle meat as black
and as hard as lumps of coal. A little further on there was a plantation belonging to Guebe
people, but under the care of a Papuan slave, and the next morning we got some plantains and
a few vegetables in exchange for a handkerchief and some knives. On leaving this place our
anchor had got foul in some rock or sunken log in very deep water, and after many unsuccessful
attempts, we were forced to cut our rattan cable and leave it behind us. We had now only one
anchor left.

Starting early, on the 4th of October, the same S.S.W wind continued, and we began to fear
that we should hardly clear the southern point of Gilolo. The night of the 5th was squally,
with thunder, but after midnight it got tolerably fair, and we were going along with a light
wind and looking out for the coast of Gilolo, which we thought we must be nearing, when we
heard a dull roaring sound, like a heavy surf, behind us. In a short time the roar increased,
and we saw a white line of foam coming on, which rapidly passed us without doing any harm,
as our boat rose easily over the wave. At short intervals, ten or a dozen others overtook us
with bleat rapidity, and then the sea became perfectly smooth, as it was before. I concluded
at once that these must be earthquake waves; and on reference to the old voyagers we find that
these seas have been long subject to similar phenomena. Some time afterwards, I learnt that
an earthquake had been felt on the coast of Gilolo the very day we had encountered these curious
waves.

When daylight came, we saw the land of Gilolo a few miles off, but the point was unfortunately
a little to windward of us. We tried to brace up all we could to round it, but as we approached
the shore we got into a strong current setting northward, which carried us so rapidly with
it that we found it necessary to stand off again, in order to get out of its influence. Sometimes
we approached the point a little, and our hopes revived; then the wind fell, and we drifted
slowly away. Night found us in nearly the same position as we had occupied in the morning,
so we hung down our anchor with about fifteen fathoms of cable to prevent drifting. On the
morning of the 7th we were however, a good way up the coast, and we now thought our only chance
would be to got close in-shore, where there might be a return current, and we could then row.
The prau was heavy, and my men very poor creatures for work, so that it took us six hours to
get to the edge of the reef that fringed the shore; and as the wind might at any moment blow
on to it, our situation was a very dangerous one. Luckily, a short distance off there was a
sandy bay, where a small stream stopped the growth of the coral; and by evening we reached
this and anchored for the night. Here we found some Galela men shooting deer and pigs; but
they could not or would not speak Malay, and we could get little information from them. Also, I will die here, that's all what the two of us the freedom of the country has
entered. And it's enough. "

"You had the love," she said stubbornly Raminga, and learned from
their dog on the Face licking.

"If I had Lino can get married," said Gioconda.

"But we are too poor, we are the Freedom of the country sacrificed, and it has not repaid to
us, like you, Mama.

You had what you wanted. "

"Do you think, darling? . . .

You are right, I was happy with your father. This prevents not that Oreste was beautiful. "

Her eyes were very small, their wrinkles shifted, no one knew whether she laughed. It was back there in
the white light unsicherm, disturbing grimace of an idol.

"Who was Oreste," asked the Marchesa Grimi.

"Oreste Gatti, the nephew of the Cardinal Legate. He had blue eyes, he was my childhood friend.
We played in the garden of the archbishop's palace, I was often at
the Conversazioni ladies and gentlemen.

There was sugar water or sugar water, but cooled according to the season. The rooms had an echo.
An old Contessa, whose name I do not remember, had a silver Ball was in the hot water on constantly,
by a hand fall into the other.

When I was sixteen years old, he came from Rome, from the university, and I began the court
to make. On the promenade, he was twenty times very slowly past me and even greeted my maid
behind me. In the evening he stood with his friends under my balcony and played and sang.
He had a voice, I can still hear.

But one evening when I returned home from a walk, was the city quite full and loud. Man had just
closed the ghetto, his goal was right at the large square. I saw a young Man on the tower to
climb up near the gate and swing up an ax. Then climb many others the wall and the door fell
on the stones and planks and ripped it. The Jews should come out. I learned this done in the name of
freedom. In that time I was a great feeling on that has never left me more. It seems to me it
is still in my chest, and it has the shape of the youth, who was the first on the tower of the
Ghetto swung the ax. That was, daughters, your father.

He was not handsome, he was rather weak, and I see it as a miracle that I made it through have,
until the seventy-sixth year. . . I saw him the day after on the Promenade and nodded to him, even
though our parents are not known. I forced my dad to the go to his. Claudio also gave me the
farm, but mostly he spoke of freedom, yes, the freedom of the country, and Rome. He was a great
speaker, and his arms were working Sun here that I understood everything, and sympathizing. He
woke up late on books when they are found on him, would have had
him jailed.

He drank a lot of hot coffee to after ice-cold water, so he also
later all the teeth still intact and healthy, from his mouth dropped.

Oreste in turn told me he wanted to marry me. Once when he was one of my maid Note had slipped,
I answered him, I will only marry a friend of freedom, and one that
will drive away the priest.

Oreste said this letter was very dangerous, and tore it in front of my eyes. I implored him to
love freedom. He said he was collided with Claudio Galanti already
in Rome.

That was among the liberal students The most brazen was he, Oreste,
could it be any minute off my back.

"You are a coward," I cried.

He frowned.

"I do not fear him, he will remain what it is. But I will stay this "

"Faith, my Oreste, to this great cause, the freedom! Feel with us, with your land, this fine,
old country, that trembles in the yoke of foreigners, priests to shame! "

"I am Count Oreste Gatti, the nephew of the legate. I am one of the
men. What would I do with the insurgents?

Your freedom, lives only in the gossip ehrsüchtiger plebeians. "

"Oh, you, you would not have dared to pursue the goal of the ghetto!"

"If I had not? We will see what I dare! "

He snatched at me, we drove, we joked. I remember it was strange to me dizzy when he caught me
in between the two camellia bushes full of red flowers, where the
base of the great stone image ran a source.

He breathed quietly in his brief, blond curls, and looked at the neck of his velvet coat a piece
of his lace collar. I well understood, he was count Oreste, the nephew of the legate.

We walked slowly back from the cut trees below the window of the palace. There was a fountain,
a large, mechanical movement, where strength of many artificial water Figures moved, worked
or exaggerated joke. A man on a donkey ride around the Edge of the well. At the top threw several
to a heavy ball. Oreste suddenly jumped up the ass and put her head between the hands of those who
played ball. I cried; He moved his head back laughing. A moment later, and the heavy ball would crush
him.

At the portal, a servant came to meet us with the command of the Cardinal, have Oreste until
tomorrow evening to stay in his room. The Cardinal had seen his nephew's head between the ball
launcher was, and he was furious.

I stood that night at my window, very sad, because not allowed to come and Oreste sing, and I
constantly looked over at him. The back of my house went to gardens, and behind it was the palace
and his room. The moon rose, we realized. He joined on his balcony, we greeted us from afar.
We left our towels fluttering gently, It was only in the moonlight like a little silver, the rippled.
I heard the step of the Guard in the courtyard beneath him.

Suddenly he leaped over the balconies of decorative wrought iron,
hung himself with his hands two bent bars and rocked.

The item was just averted, at the other end of the long courtyard wall. Oreste looked behind
him and the wall was ten feet away and almost as high as the first floor, where it hung. He rocked
more, and I pressed my whole cloth into the mouth. So he let loose,
he flew over the wall.

I fell down. When I got up, he was already gone through the soft earth of the garden. He found a
door, he disappeared in the shadow of the little street, on the road to me. I do not know how I
get down the stairs could without being discovered, and slide the
bar at the front door without being rattled.

For I trembled and felt the heart in the throat. We crowded into a corner by the door only a few
minutes without speaking.

Very soon after I married Claudio. Two years after the storming of the ghetto, on 12 May 1848, we
set out against the Germans.

I went with my husband, he was in the Freikorps. The Pope himself was with us, because his
brother, a conspirator, was caught. The Pope himself our flag was blessed. The Germans beat
us everywhere, in Vicenza, in Cornuda, in Venice. In Vicenza, we thought they would invade the city,
we could in the Windows with paving stones to crush and burn it with oil, the poor. But she
shot us from the mountains. What you want, we were inexperienced. In Venice, they locked us
We lived on donkey meat, and that cost an eye from the head.

We were always full of joy and confidence.

I was wearing a tricolor sash, you see them in that glass case, and
my House was full of wounded, which I used.

My husband was shot through the cheek, and half the Mustache was
gone.

The right half has been on hair after getting poorer than the left.

But when we returned to Ferrara, the Pope had long since got scared
of the Germans.

His brother was out of prison. The Pope was now the friend of our enemies. Now we were traitors,
we were pulled out his blessings on our banners.

Claudio wanted to pursue the legal profession, they banned him.

He sometimes came home and said, he was surprised that he was not
arrested.

Most of his friends had been arrested by order of the triumvirate. One of the three henchmen
of the Pope was Oreste Gatti.

However, they searched our house. We would have been lost, they would
have found the weapons.

But they were in a kitchen table from which the feet were unscrewed, and in the wall folded into
it was, it seemed, as though just a board on the wall. They found papers that Claudio should sign
it. He refused. Also as Oreste Gatti sent for him, refused he says.

I felt very uneasy, I decided to talk to the legate. He had me often painted on the cheek when
I was little. As I entered, they saw me concern at. I wore old clothes, Claudio earned nothing.
I had to go through the ghetto, an oily dirt was on my shoes. They picked me up from the hall
by the other Supplicants away and led me into a cabinet, where I was alone. As the door opened
and Oreste came.

"How did you become brown," he said.

"You're much more beautiful."

He wanted to reach out for me as before, he slipped his hand my shoulder.

"There

has located the tricolor," I said, and stepped away from him. He folded his eyebrows.

"You will soon be free, your husband is not alive for long."

"I know," I replied, "and those that have signed and are hung. But Claudio not sign. "

"Those would have been hanged without a signature."

"You'd have my husband at that time will tell how he as a student
for Freedom said.

You could have your cowardice not to save for so long. "

He remained calm.

"I know you'll be mine," he said. "I want nothing, you give everything of themselves"

He changed his mind.

"Your man has to flee, it is not in my power to protect him.

He is tonight drive at seven as a farmer by the gate. "

I went home. Claudio came, his friends had advised him to flee. I let him wear the clothes of the
man who brought us vegetables, and he escaped.

I stayed behind, Claudio did not want to take me on his uncertain journey. By the way, did I,
we would not have been omitted. I was all alone in our home, I had nothing more to eat for myself,
much less for a servant. And for what the window I Head was, I always looked into the face
of a spy. They let in no one to me.

But one evening I heard the front door go. I peered out of my room.

Down in the hallway Everything was dark.

But in the darkness approached solid steps.

I do not shut my Door, I found it all useless. A sudden, feverish anxiety jumped in my veins -
not before the man who now came up the stairs, not before it. It was hot, my throat was bare. And
I was afraid of my own heart and from the blows it.

I was looking for help; I took my tri-color sash and placed it on
my naked chest.

So I got up and waited.

He entered, and he twisted his mouth.

"As you stand and know well that you are mine - and with a colored cloth, you want defy me and
you. How foolish you are! "

But I now felt courage. An oil lamp with three burning beaks flickered on the table behind me,
from my face he saw only the outline.

But I could see how pale he was. Large shadows danced around us on the walls. He said:

"But it always was.

You've tied the freedom only as a sheet, because you I wanted to deny your beauty. And you
love me, you always loved me!

Is it true that you cried when I was jumped from the balcony over the wall? "

"It's true," I said. "And I would have loved you.

But I could not, because there was some Larger, which I had seen and could not forget: Those
who steps on the tower to the Ghetto was his ax and struck into the goal. "

"How much of a conscience," he said. "Now we are alone in this house, no one in the foot sets.
That other is far away, disappeared, who knows where.

What now lives around the world? The freedom is dead, that phantom.

We are alone now you will have the courage to our love. And you have
not got it, then I find him for you with!

"

He threw his arms around my neck, I felt it tremble.

I pushed him away and ran from the Door, down the stairs. He was always behind me. Down in one
of the dark room took it me again, and we rushed over, snatched up
on us, stumbled on.

Sometimes separated our furniture that we did not see and which he overthrew. Then again he
whispered close to my Face, "You love me"

And I gagged "in a" No! ".

At last we arrived, we did not know how, in the garden.

There was no moon there. We staggered dumb and breathless in a row here, with black bushes. In
a bower, in the dead of night He caught me and threw me on the bench. His hand was on my bare
chest, the tri-color Cloth I had forgotten long ago, somewhere in
a dark home.

We felt that we each other in the eyes have seen that while none of the other different face.
Also, I could feel his heart knock and he mine. A leaf rustled over our heads. Once I said
that behind the Garden wall, a step-human. We were guarded. House and garden and town were
black and banned. It was in the world, only our hearts beating.

I was frightened again, so scared as never before.

A bell began to bang on, with some bells a excited voice.

I was, I heard it again? "

The old Fulvia listened. But over the roofs of Rome, the night was
quite silent.

"As we remember," she murmured. "How little is needed."

"I said there in the gazebo with a sad voice:

"Listen, Oreste, it is strange to me dizzy, like in between those shrubs camellia garden Cardinal,
where have you caught me. Even then we had another hunt. But we were better back then. "

"It's your fault," he said, and I, without listening to him:

"We
were very young, and all the trees in the garden were hung full of
our dreams.

Do you remember as we sat by the Conversazioni between the old people, and spoke a language quite
for us? "

"And on the promenade," he added, "if we had met each other and us in the Eyes had looked, then I counted
my steps: five, ten, twenty. Now thou wert been around and I could go to meet you again, and
my feet as easily as if the road to you through the air led. "

We were silent. Then he said firmly:

"And now I'm finally completely with you. Now I can have you.

You wanted it so? And our destiny has us out here? "

Suddenly he let go of me, stepped away from me, in the leaves in, that I do not even saw his silhouette.

"No,
not here," he said. I whispered:

"I wish they would have shot me in Vicenza. . . O, Oreste, you do not know how well it is dying for
this great cause, for freedom! "

"Yes. Since I knew you out there, I also know this and I wish we could cooperate through a city
walk, fall to the bullets. Tell me, Fulvia, have you ever thought that the same ball would
have on both of us can fall down? "

"If you had been with me, yes, and with freedom. . . I'm with my hands the paving stones dug,
we wanted to throw out the windows. Why you were not there to help me? "

"You also have wounds cared for. If I get a fatal and would have died
in it!

Only your lips, they would have to strip the end! "

"There are other battles," I said softly after a pause.

"I am going," he shouted, stamping. "I also belong to this land and it will make you free!"

"When are you going?"

"DC. Tonight! "

I was shocked, I cried.

"No! You will not leave me. Claudio also has disappeared. Am I always in this Stay at home,
where nothing breathes? Where to me it seems, not a day will rise more? Oreste! "

I slid off the bench, I sank down in front of him, felt for his knees. All my senses was away, a
sick fool I was.
"Take me to her," I said. "Take me back dear! But do not go away!
Do not leave me! "

He picked me up like a brother.

"We'll go together,
I'll take you to Turin, to safety."

The sky was a gray appearance.
We distinguished our figures. We waited silently until we saw our
eyes. How much Stormy had to be done in them in this Night, without
that we had seen it. Now they were quiet as ghosts.

Oreste broke
out in the town that he kidnaps me to his summer house, outside the
gate. We fled across the border and came to Turin. There we found
Claudio. He still suffered from his wounds, a disease worse was I
had to stay there and take care of him. Oreste alone pulled out. He
was killed for freedom, in Varese. "

The Marchesa Grimi said with
a sigh after a while:

"But he's died for you, for you!"

"Yes, mamma,"
said Raminga, and let their dog lick on the face. "You all have Good
had. He died for you. "

"Silence," commanded Fulvia. "He fell for
liberty!"

Three-Minute Novel

When I was twenty-one, I did pay me
my inheritance, took it to Paris and brought it without any special
effort in a very short time at the woman. My key idea behind this
course of action was: I wanted the life from the perspective of your
own car, for a Opernloge, a enormously expensive beds have seen. This
I promised myself literary advantages. Soon provided, however, been
a mistake. I took advantage of that is nothing that I had everything
I continued to do it to me. I led the strong sense of existence as
in a dream, wherein you know you dream, and yearns for reality. I
walked to the side of a chiken, coveted all around me just as gracious
lady next to the dissolving veil of my desire . . .

Few thousands
were still in my wallet, I opened it carelessly one At night on a
public ball in the eyes of a young girl. She invited me and I followed
her far away in a basement house with a slippery stairs and walls
of where it was dripping. I had just hung my coat over a chair, and
then worked out the rug, where I stood, along with a piece of plank
to the bottom, and I slid down a shaft into it. He was pretty far.
A projection made it possible for me, three or four feet below to
take the room just left a residence and the joy of a female and a
male voice to witness about my legacy. . . That was a perspective.
It was not above those mundane, the sake I had come to Paris. It was
a dream of strange, worse dream of depth. But you still end something
suitable.

At that time I had hardly any desire to get back into the
light. By the way, went in the door the height. I closed my eyes and
let me slide down further. Contrary to expectations, I broke not the
neck but escaped through a channel. Escaped to Florence - where I
wished to love the powdered Pierrot, a mime of the Teatro Pagliano
every night before a cap stock sank to his knees because he was too
shy in front of it to his beloved do, they got cheated, made poor,
who played steel, and his childlike hingetändelten Crime always melt
more careful circles around his eyes covered innocent sinners. Died
last he, at the end of a somewhat chilly April day, in all its rosy
depravity, the slight tears of a thin, flexible music. . . I wish
to love him. Only he was when he left the stage, a courtesan and significant
cost alone Conte So-thousand lire a month, which in Florence is very,
very much money. So I went to their Hairdresser and gave him my last
purchase ticket for having me and with make-up Desboutins and powder
sent to her in the wardrobe. My services are not always satisfied,
and the first touch of her beautiful, full and sharp hand I learned
in my face. A At night when I was tried on her new wig, I ventured
out with all and was dismissed from her. I further wish to love them.
. .

Our relationship developed suddenly. The Conte-so, by whom she
had a thousand lire, withdrew suddenly and in protest of her. He already
had most of his Family made unhappy by their sins, as he claimed.
Other declared themselves injured in their good, thanks to her. So
she was even dismissed by all as me was released, also by its Director.
Soon they had to, attached or escaped from the hospital, despised
and hunted around, make do with what is found on the street. And so
often, even one of them led them through it to destruction, even while
she suffered the most ridiculous pain. . . This was the time when
she allowed me to their camp one turn over in my attic at the end
of the close and populous Via dell 'Agnolo. Lay Now in the moonlit
nights, her head on the dark wall, only the hands always on the road
to ghostly flash tricks and turns, like sick, moody flowers for insects
. Snatch I was sitting at the table with a tallow candle, and wrote.
It was a resounding, glittering, steel-blue silence in the distance,
and the young Pierrot was mondgepudert and sterbensmüd from his sin
hergetaumelt trips, grad 'in my room. How I wished to love him! .
. . She opened her eyes, melting of mild surprise at the fate. She
had reluctantly care of me, always looked in through the eyes of me.
They despised me, because I still could stand with her. She wanted
me because she did not understand. She had sometimes Gray, sometimes
tempestuous desire, sometimes hatred. The first change is the acquisition of the yellow and green
colour on the head and throat, and at the same time the two middle tail feathers grow a few
inches longer than the rest, but remain webbed on both sides. At a later period these feathers
are replaced by the long bare shafts of the full length, as in the adult bird; but there is
still no sign of the magnificent orange side-plumes, which later still complete the attire
of the perfect male. To effect these changes there must be at least three successive moultings;
and as the birds were found by me in all the stages about the same time, it is probable that
they moult only once a year, and that the full plumage is not acquired till the bird is four
years old. It was long thought that the fine train of feathers was assumed for a short time
only at the breeding season, but my own experience, as well as the observation of birds of
an allied species which I brought home with me, and which lived two years in this country,
show that the complete plumage is retained during the whole year, except during a short period
of moulting as with most other birds.

The Great Bird of Paradise is very active and vigorous and seems to be in constant motion all
day long. It is very abundant, small flocks of females and young male being constantly met
with; and though the full-plumaged birds are less plentiful, their loud cries, which are heard
daily, show that they also are very numerous. Their note is, "Wawk-wawk-wawk-Wok-wok-wok,"
and is so loud and shrill as to be heard a great distance, and to form the most prominent and
characteristic animal sound in the Aru Islands. The mode of nidification is unknown; but the
natives told me that the nest was formed of leaves placed on an ant's nest, or on some projecting
limb of a very lofty tree, and they believe that it contains only one young bird. The egg is
quite unknown, and the natives declared they had never seen it; and a very high reward offered
for one by a Dutch official did not meet with success. They moult about January or February,
and in May, when they are in full plumage, the males assemble early in the morning to exhibit
themselves in the singular manner already described at p. 252. This habit enables the natives
to obtain specimens with comparative ease. As soon as they find that the birds have fled upon
a tree on which to assemble, they build a little shelter of palm leaves in a convenient place
among the branches, and the hunter ensconces himself in it before daylight, armed with his
bow and a number of arrows terminating in a round knob. A boy waits at the foot of the tree,
and when the birds come at sunrise, and a sufficient number have assembled, and have begun
to dance, the hunter shoots with his blunt arrow so strongly as to stun the bird, which drops
down, and is secured and killed by the boy without its plumage being injured by a drop of blood.
The rest take no notice, and fall one after another till some of them take the alarm. (See
Frontispiece.)

The native mode of preserving them is to cut off the wings and feet, and then skin the body
up to the beak, taking out the skull. A stout stick is then run up through the specimen coming
out at the mouth. Round this some leaves are stuffed, and the whole is wrapped up in a palm
spathe and dried in the smoky hut. By this plan the head, which is really large, is shrunk
up almost to nothing, the body is much reduced and shortened, and the greatest prominence is
given to the flowing plumage. Some of these native skins are very clean, and often have wings
and feet left on; others are dreadfully stained with smoke, and all hive a most erroneous idea
of the proportions of the living bird.

The Paradisea apoda, as far as we have any certain knowledge, is confined to the mainland of
the Aru Islands, never being found in the smaller islands which surround the central mass.
It is certainly not found in any of the parts of New Guinea visited by the Malay and Bugis
traders, nor in any of the other islands where Birds of Paradise are obtained. But this is
by no means conclusive evidence, for it is only in certain localities that the natives prepare
skins, and in other places the same birds may be abundant without ever becoming known. It is
therefore quite possible that this species may inhabit the great southern mass of New Guinea,
from which Aru has been separated; while its near ally, which I shall next describe, is confined
to the north-western peninsula.

The Lesser Bird of Paradise (Paradisea papuana of Bechstein), "Le petit Emeraude" of French
authors, is a much smaller bird than the preceding, although very similar to it. It differs
in its lighter brown colour, not becoming darker or purpled on the breast; in the extension
of the yellow colour all over the upper part of the back and on the wing coverts; in the lighter
yellow of the side plumes, which have only a tinge of orange, and at the tips are nearly pure
white; and in the comparative shortness of the tail cirrhi. The female differs remarkably front
the same sex in Paradisea apoda, by being entirely white on the under surface of the body,
and is thus a much handsomer bird. The young males are similarly coloured, and as they grow
older they change to brown, and go through the same stages in acquiring the perfect plumage
as has already been described in the allied species. It is this bird which is most commonly
used in ladies' head-dresses in this country, and also forms an important article of commerce
in the East.

The Paradisea papuana has a comparatively wide range, being the common species on the mainland
of New Guinea, as well as on the islands of Mysol, Salwatty, Jobie, Biak and Sook. On the south
coast of New Guinea, the Dutch naturalist, Muller, found it at the Oetanata river in longitude
136° E. I obtained it myself at Dorey; and the captain of the Dutch steamer Etna informed me
that he had seen the feathers among the natives of Humboldt Bay, in 141° E. longitude. It is
very probable, therefore, that it ranges over the whole of the mainland of New Guinea.

The true Paradise Birds are omnivorous, feeding on fruits and insects--of the former preferring
the small figs; of the latter, grasshoppers, locusts, and phasmas, as well as cockroaches and
caterpillars. When I returned home, in 1862, I was so fortunate as to find two adult males
of this species in Singapore; and as they seemed healthy, and fed voraciously on rice, bananas,
and cockroaches, I determined on giving the very high price asked for them--£100.--and to bring
them to England by the overland route under my own care. On my way home I stayed a week at
Bombay, to break the journey, and to lay in a fresh stock of bananas for my birds. I had great
difficulty, however, in supplying them with insect food, for in the Peninsular and Oriental
steamers cockroaches were scarce, and it was only by setting traps in the store-rooms, and
by hunting an hour every night in the forecastle, that I could secure a few dozen of these
creatures,--scarcely enough for a single meal. At Malta, where I stayed a fortnight, I got
plenty of cockroaches from a bake-house, and when I left, took with me several biscuit-tins'
full, as provision for the voyage home. We want to enjoy, "she whispered, the
lids closed.

He tore off the ground with such ferocity in their first night. Yes, it was the great Sensual:
through their all lush and precipitous world, they chased him down
to the last thicket where the deepest pleasures were celebrated, were
drowned in blood!

He dragged her, furiously under the whip of death in the bedroom.

When they returned, the moon had risen. They held each other includes, they rejected the Temples together,
and were tired. As they entered the bright streak of light from the Her wide terrace swept through
the room, she started up as if they were doused cold and separated. Gemma went to the door, rested
his arm against the post and put his forehead against it. She heard
Mario restlessly wander about the carpet.

He looked around. As this space changes had!

He was already no longer love her, he should see them both die, that
same Space!

The vast Ottoman offered no longer represent their embraces, she
looked like an operating table!

Gemma turned suddenly and said briefly:

"So do it."

He stopped, with ill-exasperation:

"I want - you want me -?"

"Yes, because I want to do?"

They looked each other straight in the eyes, and saw it in it flare up of animosity.

In the next second they walked towards each other, fell on his chest.

One felt the another tear on the cheek.

"We, we only have a life!"

"I have your blood in me," said Gemma. "Only yours!"

"And yet we have to kill us, you me, I do."

"We are unhappy!"

They remained motionless for long. Da Gemma sobbed.

"I want you never have more -.

Never again"

"I will never kiss your hips," said Mario, "and their small mines with the Lips measure. No
more face in your hair root, never your knees - "

He kept clinging to them, a painful devotion.

He filled her tender, red ear again with the burden of his whispered desires, she complained,
limb by limb, from, because they betrayed him, because they would
donate to him no joy.

They finally got away, went with her to the ottoman, gliding step, was based it and smiled at him:

"I'm
ready."

He ran his hand across his forehead, then stepped quickly to his desk. She saw away, she heard
anything metallic clatter.

He came up to her, one hand on the back.

"Your Darkness," he stammered. He creeps up. "

He collapsed in front of her forehead on her knees.

"I can not!

You are stronger, Gemma - "

He handed her the gun.

"You do not
love me as I love you -. Until the trembling of the hand"

"I love
you so," she said, and wrapped his head in her arms again - "so that
there is no happiness for me any more than to die because of you!
Just think, death is only up my memory. He makes us inseparable you,
kiss me, while you happen to. "

But he tore himself away.

"You shall
live," he said. "What is my destiny in you! I, I am content, and thank
you! "

She fell into her arms, she was deathly pale. "What did you
want to do. You got me alone want to leave? That you could? "

And
she sobbed bitterly.

"Your vest is cut, the shirt also. Heaven help
us, you're bleeding! "

"A Hautriß," he muttered. "It will be different."

"Dearest,"
she whispered, and she pulled him to him on the couch when she asked
for a Embrace.

"Everything good I have always had of you, every beautiful
sun. Do not you know what I am San Gimignano had dreamed as a child,
my Epheumauern? From you, dear. "

His head dreamily in the neck,
with an uncertain smile of pleasure, she led the dagger the hesitation
his hand followed it to herself, her body, he should enter in, and
their heroic gesture was from the greedy grace of her unchaste. 

As
he pushed, pressed his eyelids, go on it - horrified, though he's
wanted and before she's had expected. She screamed.

As he opened
his eyes, he found his way anymore. Where was she? He sought her head.
Hanging over the edge. He picked up the pillow. But a piece of white
meat rolled him against his stomach. What was that? The limb of a
finger. He had cut her finger. He jumped up, horribly frightened.
The iron clattered to the ground.

"What have I done. That's what
I did? I? There lies the woman - she has blood on his lips, What do
I see everything at once. It is distorted, she rolls around. Why?
My God, her chest yawns! . . . Gemma! "

He bent over her, howling.
You looked into his eyes, clouded look that asked. In accordance with these facts,
we find the scale-formed plumes of the throat, the crests of the head, and the long cirrhi
of the tail, all fully developed before the plumes which spring from the side of the body begin
to mane their appearance. If, on the other hand, the male Paradise Birds have not acquired
their distinctive plumage by successive variations, but have been as they are mow from the
moment they first appeared upon the earth, this succession becomes at the least unintelligible
to us, for we can see no reason why the changes should not take place simultaneously, or in
a reverse order to that in which they actually occur.

What is known of the habits of this bird, and the way in which it is captured by the natives,
have already been described at page 362.

The Red Bird of Paradise offers a remarkable case of restricted range, being entirely confined
to the small island of Waigiou, off the north-west extremity of New Guinea, where it replaces
the allied species found in the other islands.

The three birds just described form a well-marked group, agreeing in every point of general
structure, in their comparatively large size, the brown colour of their bodies, wings, and
tail, and in the peculiar character of the ornamental plumage which distinguishes the male
bird. The group ranges nearly over the whole area inhabited by the family of the Paradiseidae,
but each of the species has its own limited region, and is never found in the same district
with either of its close allies. To these three birds properly belongs the generic title Paradisea,
or true Paradise Bird.

The next species is the Paradisea regia of Linnaeus, or Ding Bird of Paradise, which differs
so much from the three preceding species as to deserve a distinct generic name, and it has
accordingly been called Cicinnurus regius. By the Malays it is called "Burong rajah," or King
Bird, and by the natives of the Aru Islands "Goby-goby."

This lovely little bird is only about six and a half inches long, partly owing to the very
short tail, which does not surpass the somewhat square wings. The head, throat, and entire
upper surface are of the richest glossy crimson red, shading to orange-crimson on the forehead,
where the feathers extend beyond the nostrils more than half-way down the beak. The plumage
is excessively brilliant, shining in certain lights with a metallic or glassy lustre. The breast
and belly are pure silky white, between which colour and the red of the throat there is a broad
band of rich metallic green, and there is a small spot of the same colour close above each
eye. From each side of the body beneath the wing, springs a tuft of broad delicate feathers
about an inch and a half long, of an ashy colour, but tipped with a broad band of emerald green,
bordered within by a narrow line of buff: These plumes are concealed beneath the wing, but
when the bird pleases, can be raised and spread out so as to form an elegant semicircular fan
on each shoulder. But another ornament still more extraordinary, and if possible more beautiful,
adorns this little bird. The two middle tail feathers are modified into very slender wirelike
shafts, nearly six inches long, each of which bears at the extremity, on the inner side only,
a web of an emerald green colour, which is coiled up into a perfect spiral disc, and produces
a most singular and charming effect. The bill is orange yellow, and the feet and legs of a
fine cobalt blue. (See upper figure on the plate at the commencement of this chapter.)

The female of this little gem is such a plainly coloured bird, that it can at first sight hardly
be believed to belong to the same species. The upper surface is of a dull earthy brown, a slight
tinge of orange red appearing only on the margins of the quills. Beneath, it is of a paler
yellowish brown, scaled and banded with narrow dusky markings. The young males are exactly
like the female, and they no doubt undergo a series of changes as singular as those of Paradisea
rubra; but, unfortunately, I was unable to obtain illustrative specimens.

This exquisite little creature frequents the smaller trees in the thickest parts of the forest,
feeding on various fruits; often of a very large size for so small a bird. It is very active
both on its wings and feet, and makes a whirring sound while flying, something like the South
American manakins. It often flutters its wings and displays the beautiful fan which adorns
its breast, while the star-bearing tail wires diverge in an elegant double curve. It is tolerably
plentiful in the Aru Islands, which led to it, being brought to Europe at an early period along
with Paradisea apoda. It also occurs in the island of Mysol and in every part of New Guinea
which has been visited by naturalists.

We now come to the remarkable little bird called the "Magnificent," first figured by Buffon,
and named Paradisea speciosa by Boddaert, which, with one allied species, has been formed into
a separate genus by Prince Buonaparte, under the name of Diphyllodes, from the curious double
mantle which clothes the back.

The head is covered with short brown velvety feathers, which advance on the back so as to cover
the nostrils. From the nape springs a dense mass of feathers of a straw-yellow colour, and
about one and a half inches long, forming a mantle over the upper part of the back. Beneath
this, and forming a band about one-third of an inch beyond it, is a second mantle of rich,
glossy, reddish-brown fathers. The rest of the bath is orange-brown, the tail-coverts and tail
dark bronzy, the wings light orange-buff: The whole under surface is covered with an abundance
of plumage springing from the margins of the breast, and of a rich deep green colour, with
changeable hues of purple. Down the middle of the breast is a broad band of scaly plumes of
the same colour, while the chin and throat are of a rich metallic bronze. From the middle of
the tail spring two narrow feathers of a rich steel blue, and about ten inches long. These
are webbed on the inner side only, and curve outward, so as to form a double circle.

From what we know of the habits of allied species, we may be sure that the greatly developed
plumage of this bird is erected and displayed in some remarkable manner. The mass of feathers
on the under surface are probably expanded into a hemisphere, while the beautiful yellow mantle
is no doubt elevated so as to give the bird a very different appearance from that which it
presents in the dried and flattened skins of the natives, through which alone it is at present
known. The feet appear to be dark blue.

This rare and elegant little bird is found only on the mainland of New Guinea, and in the island
of Mysol.

A still more rare and beautiful species than the last is the Diphyllodes wilsoni, described
by Mr. Cassin from a native skin in the rich museum of Philadelphia. The same bird was afterwards
named "Diphyllodes respublica" by Prince Buonaparte, and still later, "Schlegelia calva," by
Dr. Bernstein, who was so fortunate as to obtain fresh specimens in Waigiou.

In this species the upper mantle is sulphur yellow, the lower one and the wings pure red, the
breast plumes dark green, and the lengthened middle tail feathers much shorter than in the
allied species.

It is about the same size as Diphyllodes speciosa, and is no doubt entirely confined to the
island of Waigiou. The female, as figured and described by Dr. Bernstein, is very like that
of Cicinnurus regius, being similarly banded beneath; and we may therefore conclude that its
near ally, the "Magnificent," is at least equally plain in this sex, of which specimens have
not yet been obtained.

The Superb Bird of Paradise was first figured by Buffon, and was named by Boddaert, Paradisea
atra, from the black ground colour of its plumage. It forms the genus Lophorina of Viellot,
and is one of the rarest and most brilliant of the whole group, being only known front mutilated
native skins. This bird is a little larger than the Magnificent. The ground colour of the plumage
is intense black, but with beautiful bronze reflections on the neck, and the whole head scaled
with feathers of brilliant metallic green and blue. Over its breast it bears a shield formed
of narrow and rather stiff feathers, much elongated towards the sides, of a pure bluish-green
colour, and with a satiny gloss. But a still more extraordinary ornament is that which springs
from the back of the neck,--a shield of a similar form to that on the breast, but much larger,
and of a velvety black colour, glossed with bronze and purple. The outermost feathers of this
shield are half an inch longer than the wing, and when it is elevated it must, in conjunction
with the breast shield, completely change the form and whole appearance of the bird. The bill
is black, and the feet appear to be yellow.

This wonderful little bird inhabits the interior of the northern peninsula of New Guinea only.
Neither I nor Mr. Allen could hear anything of it in any of the islands or on any part of the
coast. It is true that it was obtained from the coast-natives by Lesson; but when at Sorong
in 1861, Mr. Allen learnt that it is only found three days' journey in the interior. Owing
to these "Black Birds of Paradise," as they are called, not being so much valued as articles
of merchandise, they now seem to be rarely preserved by the natives, and it thus happened that
during several years spent on the coasts of New Guinea and in the Moluccas I was never able
to obtain a skin. We are therefore quite ignorant of the habits of this bird, and also of its
female, though the latter is no doubt as plain and inconspicuous as in all the other species
of this family.

The Golden, or Six-shafted, Paradise Bird, is another rare species, first figured by Buffon,
and never yet obtained in perfect condition. It was named by Boddaert, Paradisea sexpennis,
and forms the genus Parotia of Viellot. This wonderful bird is about the size of the female
Paradisea rubra. The plumage appear, at first sight black, but it glows in certain light with
bronze and deep purple. The throat and breast are scaled with broad flat feathers of an intense
golden hue, changing to green and blue tints in certain lights. On the back of the head is
a broad recurved band of feathers, whose brilliancy is indescribable, resembling the sheen
of emerald and topaz rather than any organic substance. Over the forehead is a large patch
of pure white feathers, which shine like satin; and from the sides of the head spring the six
wonderful feathers from which the bird receives its name. These are slender wires, six inches
long, with a small oval web at the extremity. In addition to these ornaments, there is also
an immense tuft of soft feathers on each side of the breast, which when elevated must entirely
hide the wings, and give the bird au appearance of being double its real bulk. The bill is
black, short, and rather compressed, with the feathers advancing over the nostrils, as in Cicinnurus
regius. This singular and brilliant bird inhabits the same region as the Superb Bird of Paradise,
and nothing whatever is known about it but what we can derive from an examination of the skins
preserved by the natives of New Guinea.

The Standard Wing, named Semioptera wallacei by Mr. G. R. Gray, is an entirely new form of
Bird of Paradise, discovered by myself in the island of Batchian, and especially distinguished
by a pair of long narrow feathers of a white colour, which spring from among the short plumes
which clothe the bend of the wing, and are capable of being erected at pleasure. The general
colour of this bird is a delicate olive-brown, deepening to a loud of bronzy olive in the middle
of the back, and changing to a delicate ashy violet with a metallic gloss, on the crown of
the head. The feathers, which cover the nostrils and extend half-way down the beak, are loose
and curved upwards. Beneath, it is much more beautiful. The scale-like feathers of the breast
are margined with rich metallic blue-green, which colour entirely covers the throat and sides
of the neck, as well as the long pointed plumes which spring from the sides of the breast,
and extend nearly as far as the end of the wings. The most curious feature of the bird, however,
and one altogether unique in the whole class, is found in the pair of long narrow delicate
feathers which spring from each wing close to the bend. On lifting the wing-coverts they are
seen to arise from two tubular horny sheaths, which diverge from near the point of junction
of the carpal bones. As already described at p. 41, they are erectile, and when the bird is
excited are spread out at right angles to the wing and slightly divergent. They are from six
to six and a half inches long, the upper one slightly exceeding the lower. The total length
of the bird is eleven inches. The bill is horny olive, the iris deep olive, and the feet bright
orange.

The female bird is remarkably plain, being entirely of a dull pale earthy brown, with only
a slight tinge of ashy violet on the head to relieve its general monotony; and the young males
exactly resemble her. (See figures at p. 41.)

This bird, frequents the lower trees of the forests, and, like most Paradise Birds, is in constant
motion--flying from branch to branch, clinging to the twigs and even to the smooth and vertical
trunks almost as easily as a woodpecker. It continually utters a harsh, creaking note, somewhat
intermediate between that of Paradisea apoda, and the more musical cry of Cicinnurus regius.
The males at short intervals open and flutter their wings, erect the long shoulder feathers,
and spread out the elegant green breast shields.

The Standard Wing is found in Gilolo as well as in Batchian, and all the specimens from the
former island have the green breast shield rather longer, the crown of the head darker violet,
and the lower parts of the body rather more strongly scaled with green. This is the only Paradise
Bird yet found in the Moluccan district, all the others being confined to the Papuan Islands
and North Australia.

We now come to the Epimachidae, or Long-billed Birds of Paradise, which, as before stated,
ought not to be separated from the Paradiseidae by the intervention of any other birds. One
of the most remarkable of these is the Twelve-wired Paradise Bird, Paradises alba of Blumenbach,
but now placed in the genus Seleucides of Lesson.

This bird is about twelve inches long, of which the compressed and curved beak occupies two
inches. The colour of the breast and upper surface appears at first sight nearly black, but
a close examination shows that no part of it is devoid of colour; and by holding it in various
lights, the most rich and glowing tints become visible. The head, covered with short velvety
feathers, which advance on the chic much further than on the upper part of the beak, is of
a purplish bronze colour; the whole of the back and shoulders is rich bronzy green, while the
closed wings and tail are of the most brilliant violet purple, all the plumage having a delicate
silky gloss. The mass of feathers which cover the breast is really almost black, with faint
glosses of green and purple, but their outer edges are margined with glittering bands of emerald
green. The whole lower part of the body is rich buffy yellow, including the tuft of plumes
which spring from the sides, and extend an inch and a half beyond the tail. When skins are
exposed to the light the yellow fades into dull white, from which circumstance it derived its
specific name. About six of the innermost of these plumes on each side have the midrib elongated
into slender black wires, which bend at right angles, and curve somewhat backwards to a length
of about ten inches, forming one of those extraordinary and fantastic ornaments with which
this group of birds abounds. The bill is jet black, and the feet bright yellow. (See lower
figure on the plate at the beginning of this chapter).

The female, although not quite so plain a bird as in some other species, presents none of the
gay colours or ornamental plumage of the male. The top of the head and back of the neck are
black, the rest of the upper parts rich reddish brown; while the under surface is entirely
yellowish ashy, somewhat blackish on the breast, and crossed throughout with narrow blackish
wavy bands.

The Seleucides alba is found in the island of Salwatty, and in the north-western parts of New
Guinea, where it frequents flowering trees, especially sago-palms and pandani, sucking the
flowers, round and beneath which its unusually large and powerful feet enable it to cling.
Its motions are very rapid. It seldom rests more than a few moments on one tree, after which
it flies straight off, and with great swiftness, to another. It has a loud shrill cry, to be
heard a long way, consisting of "Cah, cah," repeated five or six times in a descending scale,
and at the last note it generally flies away. The males are quite solitary in their habits,
although, perhaps, they assemble at pertain times like the true Paradise Birds. All the specimens
shot and opened by my assistant Mr. Allen, who obtained this fine bird during his last voyage
to New Guinea, had nothing in their stomachs but a brown sweet liquid, probably the nectar
of the flowers on which they had been feeding. They certainly, however, eat both fruit and
insects, for a specimen which I saw alive on board a Dutch steamer ate cockroaches and papaya
fruit voraciously. This bird had the curious habit of resting at noon with the bill pointing
vertically upwards. It died on the passage to Batavia, and I secured the body and formed a
skeleton, which shows indisputably that it is really a Bird of Paradise. The tongue is very
long and extensible, but flat and little fibrous at the end, exactly like the true Paradiseas.

In the island of Salwatty, the natives search in the forests till they find the sleeping place
of this bird, which they know by seeing its dung upon the ground. It is generally in a low
bushy tree. At night they climb up the trap, and either shoot the birds with blunt arrows,
or even catch them alive with a cloth. In New Guinea they are caught by placing snares on the
trees frequented by them, in the same way as the Red Paradise birds are caught in Waigiou,
and which has already been described at page 362.

The great Epimaque, or Long-tailed Paradise Bird (Epimachus magnus), is another of these wonderful
creatures, only known by the imperfect skins prepared by the natives. In its dark velvety plumage,
glowed with bronze and purple, it resembles the Seleucides alba, but it bears a magnificent
tail more than two feet long, glossed on the upper surface with the most intense opalescent
blue. Its chief ornament, however, consists in the group of broad plumes which spring from
the sides of the breast, and which are dilated at the extremity, and banded with the most vivid
metallic blue and green. The bill is long and curved, and the feet black, and similar to those
of the allied forms. The total length of this fine bird is between three and four feet.

This splendid bird inhabits the mountains of New Guinea, in the same district with the Superb
and the Six-shafted Paradise Birds, and I was informed is sometimes found in the ranges near
the coast. I was several times assured by different natives that this bird makes its nest in
a hole under ground, or under rocks, always choosing a place with two apertures, so that it
may enter at one and go out at the other. This is very unlike what we should suppose to be
the habits of the bird, but it is not easy to conceive how the story originated if it is not
true; and all travellers know that native accounts of the habits of animals, however strange
they may seem, almost invariably turn out to be correct.

The Scale-breasted Paradise Bird (Epimachus magnificus of Cuvier) is now generally placed with
the Australian Rifle birds in the genus Ptiloris. Though very beautiful, these birds are less
strikingly decorated with accessory plumage than the other species we have been describing,
their chief ornament being a more or less developed breastplate of stiff metallic green feathers,
and a small tuft of somewhat hairy plumes on the sides of the breast. The back and wings of
this species are of an intense velvety black, faintly glossed in certain lights with rich purple.
The two broad middle tail feathers are opalescent green-blue with a velvety surface, and the
top of the head is covered with feathers resembling scales of burnished steel. A large triangular
space covering the chin, throat, and breast, is densely scaled with feathers, having a steel-blue
or green lustre, and a silky feel. This is edged below with a narrow band of black, followed
by shiny bronzy green, below which the body is covered with hairy feathers of a rich claret
colour, deepening to black at the tail. The tufts of side plumes somewhat resemble those of
the true Birds of Paradise, but are scanty, about as long as the tail, and of a black colour.
The sides of the head are rich violet, and velvety feathers extend on each side of the beak
over the nostrils.

I obtained at Dorey a young male of this bird, in a state of plumage which is no doubt that
of the adult female, as is the case in all the allied species. The upper surface, wings, and
tail are rich reddish brown, while the under surface is of a pale ashy colour, closely barred
throughout with narrow wavy black bands. His
smile was terrible, the show never was, now it said in a clear Words:

"Is the strength to which I, your conscience should compel you? A woman comes to worship at you.
Your blood pulls up to her. And the concerns of health's sake you send the hot on life? Tu's
- but never try again, you steal away from the world of the weak in my inside, where you love, steals,
and, if need be, die for it! "

Mario Malvolto Gemma pulled from the ground.

All the blood on his face, like a warrior, be captured to the Woman
with white zuschnürt hug his neck, he carried her in his bedroom.

III

Faith

Mario Malvolto stood alone on the terrace and saw the open day.

Gemma was gone, he listened to the last vibrations of happiness that they had lost to him. DC
It would have been resolved. When they came back tonight as exactly the same, always in the
same Glory of passion - how they found him? He did not know. Twenty hours were him who shall
know where to go. He would make an effort back to her. It would perhaps . Succeed

"No, no. We split the same. I do not see her again. This is widely traded, Nor do I desire for them
and they will still often desirable. . .

I will write to her.

You will suffer greatly. This will have been a quick pain as soon as the happiness was. If you not
died, so it's just over. If I now pity and tried to deceive - That would be a long, long fears,
the shaking revivals, but what must die. "

He climbed down into the garden, walked through the paths to their bowers bowed him often,
and wrote in mind:

"My beloved Gemma!

Today I have the right to call you so. If you wiederkämest the evening, it might has become a
lie - for the first of all the lies, that I love our deadlines would.

I do not want that, but we were just too strong and too happy. I want you Your true feeling of reward
with the truth, I can give.

Listen, my Gemma.

You love me forever, right? You are convinced you loved me forever. And you would keep a sense
of void, which foresees his death. But that Gemma does mine. Oh, I'm gonna herwünschen in years to come
so hard to me, as now at this moment! But you would come in two hours, maybe you would come too late.
Maybe, sweetheart, I am I'll even our last night in the middle of solid, strong embraces been
unfaithful. Who knows if I did not think of a word that embraces INCAPABLE to paint these? The
Art, Gemma, you have a rival, and you must not take lightly.

Sometimes, if you, will connect the open arms, into my room, she keeps me on their hard Chest.
"

Mario Malvolto watched as a grape wisteria slipped through his palm, and wondered: "Hard breast?
Art has a hard heart? "He had it provisionally be good.

"You do not understand me, I foresee it. You mean, a job they could but leave when a woman enters.
The Lanti when you married him, would send away his horse, as soon as you wanted. An initial
public art would clear his client. Money is a passion, which was rarely stops in front of the
woman. With art, Gemma, it is different. Only they, the war and power are unnatural debauchery,
some people do completely. But the Art is the most destructive of the three, it contains the other
two.

You only undermined their sacrifice in such a way that it remains unable to ever become a real
feeling of an honest Devotion. Remember, my world is only material to form sentences to it. All you
see and enjoy - your walls of San Gimignano, scurried about your childhood dreams like lizards: I would
not be located at their pleasure, only on the phrase that it reflects. Each golden evening, each
crying friend, all my feelings and yet the pain of that they are so corrupt - it is matter
of words.

You yourself were one. Gemma, which is unbearable.

I will not sit with my wife to look at and be happy. I will meditate, I had to characterize this
profile, see how and in what kind of unheard of I must thus a surprising
picture emerges in me and a strange word.

If I your wonderful meat - I use a fairly meager word: wonderful - if I can be found at feel
my hands, I will look for a more elaborate, according to where your meat, and only yours, completely
trapped.

Oh, I'll be very diligent with you, you'll often see me cheer before feeling before Urge to you,
into you. Do not think it was love!

I have necessary feelings in me , Hineinzuschwindeln so I can represent them. I've got in people,
in beautiful, strong people, like you for, enter, shake with them, revel with them, be damned
with them and perish. For myself, I know the people, for I am not, I 'm a comedian.

Think of all the women you encounter in society, you smile, think of any individual and know this:
I you have already cheated with her and would do it again - in my
Soul.

And yet nothing would happen to her than you! But worse, I'll be connected to cheat with yourself,
with a fake Gemma.

My creatures that you love, for whose sake you to me and fell into
my arms are, Gemma, once they were all real people.

I changed my sake effects lied to them. Thus, 'I umlügen you. I'm at it. This letter is already
the first piece of art, I'm out of you. "

Mario Malvolto had tears in his eyes. He suffered truly, but it was
an advantage for him, to suffer.

"My letter is good," he told himself.

"You, Gemma, a woman would have needed time where you were moody,
sick and sad; for your lover you were looking for help.

I would give you, no doubt.

From Self-interest to learn. Your suffering and my pity, I could take both to . Come . . Yes, if
you would die - my beautiful Gemma, I would despair, certainly.

But before you had exhaled would, in my despair and your death two roles become.

Hate myself for not! I live in severe loneliness behind the lighted ramp separates me from any ill-considered,
unused feeling.

How I wish it were different - and that the heart palpitations, the me to the sound of your warm-blooded
attacks, not just as would apply the emotions that rise from an inkwell.

Could I offer you at once and completely! All abdicate what I've purchased and have become by
long art: everything down before your knees! You should by me only to hear that I'm missing
a woman's sake. And the land where my fame it has covered, I would like a single laurel grove
hinbreiten your little kicks!

All my longing for the strong forces that could, according to the Condottieri of life, the only
ones in an hour to swallow her whole life and die happy. Rather than
sad to leave now, there would be early to die together, O Gemma!

"

Mario Malvolto stopped.

"And why not today evening," he shouted into the shadow-drenched between two rose bushes. "Why
not tomorrow, or every other day we were happy!

Note again, my friend, that you there commit a simple bourgeois meanness! You want be the girl
that you have enjoyed going on in the near future. You reveal her secret poorest, the only concern
you. You have no right to do so.

Since you've taken it once like the mighty; since you like a piece
of loot you dragged in your bedroom - do thy duty and stay strong!

She has come to you as one of the artists from the past, the two women fully satisfied simultaneously,
one on her easel and a canvas on their Bed.

Basically, you're afraid that this or that could get your health
badly.

Sun die in it! The miracle has happened for you. It is this wonder called woman, from a lush
and precipitous world the disenchanted by your desire and forth in your Rooms come. You have welcomed
it and now believe it! Well believe it saved you! And are you to believe too weak, but then die for
it, without betraying your Zweifelmut how a Martyr, without any real conviction, but can silently nailed
to the cross! "

Mario Malvolto resolved. He was rent in the thoughts in my head written letter. Then He went into
the house and stood, arms folded, before the picture of Pippo Spano. No, Pippo Spano did not
smile. Maybe?

But his smile had never been so undetectable.

Gemma was her lover at night, and next again and every night.

He reflected that faith can be acquired. You had to imitate his gestures, in his Rites of life,
follow his dietary requirements and at the end he came.

It was a question of overcoming the art based on the face of love
expressed a mask, them on the edge of the bed to shake; turn things
around one's mind like a horse, his creative curiosity of the world
away and ban on a woman, the only Ambition to create a perfect love
within.

»Occasional riots," he said to himself, "are the favorable conditions of work Artist's less dangerous
than the slow flooding of the organism with small amounts of alcohol. I drink wine every day
now. "

"I will make visits to the work, namely: the poor in spirit."

"That was a mistake," he confessed a few days later. "For what is spoken there, I can Time to
invent a novel between two sets. "

But for more demanding worldwide as he returned unsatisfied.

"The two weeks doing nothing made me hateful awake. All you as an artist experienced in society:
the uneasiness of conscience by a beautiful sight, the bitterness by insensitivity and humiliation
by the success of spirited mediocrity; the hymn for each woman-friendly look and the deep sadness
about it please, do not while it is our business but to please -
I experience violent.

Everything in the attracts us artists active instincts: our revenge, with the will to tame
nature, the world to force us, our ostentation and desire for self-glorification - all what
attracts these instincts to the debauchery, the art is, I notice
it immediately and answer the question.

Let us stay at home. "

He tried to read a book, for the sake of what was in it. So far he had only opened to something
unique to make them. With his new method overcame him gloomy Boredom. Then he would walk.

He proposed a law that the hazy line of mountains on the horizon have no name; and the silver
eyes that opened the olive field when the sun went above correspond, no words. He usually slept
in a landscape under a tree and closed his Eyelids, like a sick,
which is to slow the breath of nature to encourage, and their light
and their confusion can not be frightened.

"You will heal me. I am a sick man, I 'm obsessed with art. "

If he dared even to look at her, she seemed to him gently and new. The world's gave good chaste him
back, like a convalescent. He had never met her so quietly and without desire as now, never has
had as a boy seized him the fear with her to wrestle it under the
to submit to the yoke of words.

Now finally let go of him this fear every day a little more. The earth did not want to be
conquered; mildly waved to him that distance, shook him as a friend this grassy hill to his
chest.

Once, in mid-June, he was in the Pineta of Settignano, on a brown stone paths and needles, and
looked into a valley, after which sprang up rapidly clouds lights.

Now flashed a river on the edge of black fields. Now on the steep wall of a forest suggested
a sudden, green flame. Well broke out of the shadow mass of white cypress ablaze a house.
Mario Malvolto enjoyed the good fortune can afford to watch anything without it have to paint.

At
once there was the light that jumped over distant fields, a herd
hit a rock and a man who was at once a figure from the light.

She came closer. She was white and light. She slipped between the dry branches down at the
foot of the wood from which Malvolto herniedersah. Beat his heart, he knew who had been. Now
lived in the groves them, instead of the words that had long lived in it! Bach played in their
limbs. Flashing was that bird flight, the longing for her beloved in a distance.

"The earth is full of it! Nothing met my feelings more, which would
not do her breathing.

And they, I do not dress in Wortgepränge, no, in kisses. No work of art she creates in me,
only love. I love her, I love her! "

He ran home, and he thought he should find them there.

"I am a fool, she's hardly gone away."

He still hung carefully over the garden wall, to eavesdrop on them. And she was there. You
white and easily jumped from the bushes, hit by flying light, as
he still just seen at the far field boundaries had.

She sat for a young bird, he flew to a Road behind the fountain. They ran upstairs, they circled,
moving step to falter without and without looking at their feet on
the narrow edge of the deep well.

Your fluttering sleeves train shook the branches. And the light from the clouds seemed to be going
with her. She was even a strange winged creature full of wild momentum, and this deep garden invited
them in all of his hiding places. They had already stretched out his hand to the small siskin. . .

But
Mario Malvolto looked in danger and was shocked they had heard his call. You looked around, his
hand over his eyes as a roof. A suppressed cheer, the cry of a soaring bird, and she jumped
from the well. She fluttered up against the wall, they snatched for his hand, her feet looked
at the gaps between the stones, and so they came up up to his kisses.

Their bodies, mounted on the belly, nestles on the edge of the broad, warm wall in Semicircle
around each other like two lizards. Their caresses were playful and suddenly. Gemma bit, dumb and
wild, her lover in the neck, while her eyes fell, with passion dark and without foundation in the back
garden. She wanted there, they let down and pulled him into their violent poor, between bushes
full of red flowers, all of which were bleeding and nodded at the fall of the intertwined.

Mario Malvolto for the first time a woman said to have embraced.

For the first time he was, and with him the world of a woman completely exhausted, caught quite
a strong woman soul been. And from those few seconds of a life without limits, he returned as
full years of power and waste back with bitterness.

No matter - he had loved.

Gemma had made him a comedian to man. She had him with her silent steps of moving as far back
into the nature that he went through hunches! He who takes the life only as a pretext, with all
that suffering or makes tremble with delight, ever made attempts
only believed in nothing and nothing had hung, and he, who had been
sitting in all the work and without a presentiment in the next room,
while his mother died - Gemma had announced to him from a distance!

He was barely conscious as he thanked her, with what words he praised
himself lucky.

He thought none and kept none, only the name, he suddenly knew for them: Santa Venere.

She had come because she brought a great joy.

Her brother had been commanded to to lead his people into the summer
bivouac.

In three days he set off, and perhaps for months they would be all together. Gemma now moved
close to their villa, and all visits bent before it by the news that
she was anemic and always on long walks. What new Hostilities opened
up now! By many a fairy tale filled days they saw at once Throughout,
durchsprenkelt as by long, green leaves with golden sunlight, and
deep into the black marble galleries of their future nights sparkled
bliss!

When she was gone, he suddenly felt empty, once again another
life returned bitter and empty.

He wandered vaguely searching through
the bedrooms. There, drove around one of her gloves and then shredded
flowers. A work with images of crushed leaves was on an angle. A the
Florentine women of the past wore around his neck a huge Damenkravatte
from the latest flavor. Malvolto sat on his hat, as in the cafe, in
any room where you happen to one hours lets go. He was not here at
home, he belonged to her, to the strange creature full of lawless
momentum that aims flew embraced flutters. They had allied themselves
with Pippo Spano, to create this state of war between its walls. On
the strawberry-colored fabric wallpaper covered Pippo Spano again
now so determined to jump. Mario Malvolto felt this ongoing militancy
not grown. He sent a dim view of the devastated bedroom, into the
toilet room, which was dripping with water. And only the small white
room where they had appeared to him in that first moonlit night, was
unaffected. They never entered it, he was too fragile and too soft.
Tina, his great tragic actress, had sat in it, though it sometimes,
just like a friend of mind, take a deep artful sentiments curved with
him. "Ah! which gave me time to work. What I say, we loved, to work.
Was it really that deplorable? "

He put the key in the sighing drawer
of his desk, which may be begun Manuscript barg. It was the only spot
in the room, where Gemma's small, arbitrary hand or Nothing had turned
over.

"My God, how long is it since I've written! I do not know how
I that did this. Neither side would bring more of that I finished,
I have lost all the talent! "

He took his head between his hands.

"When
we are done, the girl and I - we need to call to be ready! - How many
Months of strict hygiene and boredom I shall then need to put right
all I have.

Whether the suspects that they now cost me half a novel?
It is expensive, but it is believed does not evaluate what women themselves,
what they accept everything, without . Wonder This is known, except
that you have moments when man's rediscovered.

Oh well. A lot of
soul food but I draw from history. I had perhaps necessary once again
to experience something strong, you have only other art that even
fertilized. What did the girl use to me, I will learn later. Later.
. . "

And he moved, push away all thoughts that hand.

"I'm too tired.
What is basically the belief that they teach me, to trust them, the
miracle? Now the study of the distribution
of animal life upon the present surface of the earth, causes us to look upon this constant
interchange of land and sea--this making and unmaking of continents, this elevation and disappearance
of islands--as a potent reality, which has always and everywhere been in progress, and has
been the main agent in determining the manner in which living things are now grouped and scattered
over the earth's surface. And when we continually come upon such little anomalies of distribution
as that just now described, we find the only rational explanation of them, in those repeated
elevations and depressions which have left their record in mysterious, but still intelligible
characters on the face of organic nature.

The insects of New Guinea are less known than the birds, but they seem almost equally remarkable
for fine forms and brilliant colours. The magnificent green and yellow Ornithopterae are abundant,
and have most probably spread westward from this point as far as India. Among the smaller butterflies
are several peculiar genera of Nymphalidae and Lycaenidae, remarkable for their large size,
singular markings, or brilliant coloration. The largest and most beautiful of the clear-winged
moths (Cocytia d'urvillei) is found here, as well as the large and handsome green moth (Nyctalemon
orontes). The beetles furnish us with many species of large size, and of the most brilliant
metallic lustre, among which the Tmesisternus mirabilis, a longicorn beetle of a golden green
colour; the excessively brilliant rose-chafers, Lomaptera wallacei and Anacamptorhina fulgida;
one of the handsomest of the Buprestidae, Calodema wallacei; and several fine blue weevils
of the genus Eupholus, are perhaps the most conspicuous. Almost all the other orders furnish
us with large or extraordinary forms. The curious horned flies have already been mentioned;
and among the Orthoptera the great shielded grasshoppers are the most remarkable. The species
here figured (Megalodon ensifer) has the thorax covered by a large triangular horny shield,
two and a half inches long, with serrated edges, a somewhat wavy, hollow surface, and a faun
median line, so as very closely to resemble a leaf. The glossy wing-coverts (when fully expanded,
more than nine inches across) are of a fine green colour and so beautifully veined as to imitate
closely some of the large shining tropical leaves. The body is short, and terminated in the
female by a long curved sword-like ovipositor (not seen in the cut), and the legs are all long
and strongly-spined. These insects are sluggish in their motions, depending for safety on their
resemblance to foliage, their horny shield and wing-coverts, and their spiny legs.

The large islands to the east of New Guinea are very little known, but the occurrence of crimson
lories, which are quite absent from Australia, and of cockatoos allied to those of New Guinea
and the Moluccas, shows that they belong to the Papuan group; and we are thus able to define
the Malay Archipelago as extending eastward to the Solomon's Islands. New Caledonia and the
New Hebrides, on the other hand, seem more nearly allied to Australia; and the rest of the
islands of the Pacific, though very poor in all forms of life, possess a few peculiarities
which compel us to class them as a separate group. Although as a matter of convenience I have
always separated the Moluccas as a distinct zoological group from New Guinea, I have at the
same time pointed out that its fauna was chiefly derived from that island, just as that of
Timor was chiefly derived from Australia. If we were dividing the Australian region for zoological
purposes alone, we should form three great groups: one comprising Australia, Timor, and Tasmania;
another New Guinea, with the islands from Bouru to the Solomon's group; and the third comprising
the greater part of the Pacific Islands.

The relation of the New Guinea fauna to that of Australia is very close. It is best marked
in the Mammalia by the abundance of marsupials, and the almost complete absence of all other
terrestrial forms. In birds it is less striking, although still very clear, for all the remarkable
old-world forms which are absent from the one are equally so from the other, such as Pheasants,
Grouse, Vultures, and Woodpeckers; while Cockatoos, Broad-tailed Parrots, Podargi, and the
great families of the Honeysuckers and Brush-turkeys, with many others, comprising no less
than twenty-four genera of land-birds, are common to both countries, and are entirely confined
to them.

When we consider the wonderful dissimilarity of the two regions in all those physical conditions
which were once supposed to determine the forms of life-Australia, with its open plains, stony
deserts, dried up rivers, and changeable temperate climate; New Guinea, with its luxuriant
forests, uniformly hot, moist, and evergreen--this great similarity in their productions is
almost astounding, and unmistakeably points to a common origin. The resemblance is not nearly
so strongly marked in insects, the reason obviously being, that this class of animals are much
more immediately dependent on vegetation and climate than are the more highly organized birds
and Mammalia. Insects also have far more effective means of distribution, and have spread widely
into every district favourable to their development and increase. The giant Ornithopterae have
thus spread from New Guinea over the whole Archipelago, and as far as the base of the Himalayas;
while the elegant long-horned Anthribidae have spread in the opposite direction from Malacca
to New Guinea, but owing to unfavourable conditions have not been able to establish themselves
in Australia. That country, on the other hand, has developed a variety of flower-haunting Chafers
and Buprestidae, and numbers of large and curious terrestrial Weevils, scarcely any of which
are adapted to the damp gloomy forests of New Guinea, where entirely different forms are to
be found. There are, however, some groups of insects, constituting what appear to be the remains
of the ancient population of the equatorial parts of the Australian region, which are still
almost entirely confined to it. Such are the interesting sub-family of Longicorn coleoptera--Tmesisternitae;
one of the best-marked genera of Buprestidae--Cyphogastra; and the beautiful weevils forming
the genus Eupholus. Among butterflies we have the genera Mynes, Hypocista, and Elodina, and
the curious eye-spotted Drusilla, of which last a single species is found in Java, but in no
other of the western islands.

The facilities for the distribution of plants are still greater than they are for insects,
and it is the opinion of eminent botanists, that no such clearly-defined regions pan be marked
out in botany as in zoology. The causes which tend to diffusion are here most powerful, and
have led to such intermingling of the floras of adjacent regions that none but broad and general
divisions can now be detected. These remarks have an important bearing on the problem of dividing
the surface of the earth into great regions, distinguished by the radical difference of their
natural productions. Such difference we now know to be the direct result of long-continued
separation by more or less impassable barriers; and as wide oceans and great contrast: of temperature
are the most complete barriers to the dispersal of all terrestrial forms of life, the primary
divisions of the earth should in the main serve for all terrestrial organisms. However various
may be the effects of climate, however unequal the means of distribution; these will never
altogether obliterate the radical effects of long-continued isolation; and it is my firm conviction,
that when the botany and the entomology of New Guinea and the surrounding islands become as
well known as are their mammals and birds, these departments of nature will also plainly indicate
the radical distinctions of the Indo-Malayan and Austro-Malayan regions of the great Malay
Archipelago.

CHAPTER XL. THE RACES OF MAN IN THE MALAY ARCHIPELAGO.

PROPOSE to conclude this account of my Eastern travels, with a short statement of my views
as to the races of man which inhabit the various parts of the Archipelago, their chief physical
and mental characteristics, their affinities with each other and with surrounding tribes, their
migrations, and their probable origin.

Two very strongly contrasted races inhabit the Archipelago--the Malays, occupying almost exclusively
the larger western half of it, and the Papuans, whose headquarters are New Guinea and several
of the adjacent islands. Between these in locality, are found tribes who are also intermediate
in their chief characteristics, and it is sometimes a nice point to determine whether they
belong to one or the other race, or have been formed by a mixture of the two.

The Malay is undoubtedly the most important of these two races, as it is the one which is the
most civilized, which has come most into contact with Europeans, and which alone has any place
in history. What may be called the true Malay races, as distinguished from others who have
merely a Malay element in their language, present a considerable uniformity of physical and
mental characteristics, while there are very great differences of civilization and of language.
They consist of four great, and a few minor semi-civilized tribes, and a number of others who
may be termed savages. The Malays proper inhabit the Malay peninsula, and almost all the coast
regions of Borneo and Sumatra. They all speak the Malay language, or dialects of it; they write
in the Arabic character, and are Mahometans in religion. The Javanese inhabit Java, part of
Sumatra, Madura, Bali, and Bart of Lombock. They speak the Javanese and Kawi languages, which
they write in a native character. They are now Mahometans in Java, but Brahmins in Bali and
Lombock. The Bugis are the inhabitants of the greater parts of Celebes, and there seems to
be an allied people in Sumbawa. They speak the Bugis and Macassar languages, with dialects,
and have two different native characters in which they write these. They are all Mahometans.
The fourth great race is that of the Tagalas in the Philippine Islands, about whom, as I did
not visit those Islands, I shall say little. Many of them are now Christians, and speak Spanish
as well as their native tongue, the Tagala. The Moluccan-Malays, who inhabit chiefly Ternate,
Tidore, Batchian, and Amboyna, may be held to form a fifth division of semi-civilized Malays.
They are all Mahometans, but they speak a variety of curious languages, which seem compounded
of Bugis and Javanese, with the languages of the savage tribes of the Moluccas.

The savage Malays are the Dyaks of Borneo; the Battaks and other wild tribes of Sumatra; the
Jakuns of the Malay Peninsula; the aborigines of Northern Celebes, of the Sula island, and
of part of Bouru.

The colour of all these varied tribes is a light reddish brown, with more or less of an olive
tinge, not varying in any important degree over an extent of country as large as all Southern
Europe. The hair is equally constant, being invariably black and straight, and of a rather
coarse texture, so that any lighter tint, or any wave or curl in it, is an almost certain proof
of the admixture of some foreign blood. The face is nearly destitute of beard, and the breast
and limbs are free from hair. The stature is tolerably equal, and is always considerably below
that of the average European; the body is robust, the breast well developed, the feet small,
thick, and short, the hands small and rather delicate. The face is a little broad, and inclined
to be flat; the forehead is rather rounded, the brows low, the eyes black and very slightly
oblique; the nose is rather small, not prominent, but straight and well-shaped, the apex a
little rounded, the nostrils broad and slightly exposed; the cheek-bones are rather prominent,
the mouth large, the lips broad and well cut, but not protruding, the chin round and well-formed.

In this description there seems little to object to on the score of beauty, and yet on the
whole the Malays are certainly not handsome. In youth, however, they are often very good-looking,
and many of the boys and girls up to twelve or fifteen years of age are very pleasing, and
some have countenances which are in their way almost perfect. I am inclined to think they lose
much of their good looks by bad habits and irregular living. At a very early age they chew
betel and tobacco almost incessantly; they suffer much want and exposure in their fishing and
other excursions; their lives are often passed in alternate starvation and feasting, idleness
and excessive labour,--and this naturally produces premature old age and harshness of features.

In character the Malay is impassive. He exhibits a reserve, diffidence, and even bashfulness,
which is in some degree attractive, and leads the observer to thinly that the ferocious and
bloodthirsty character imputed to the race must be grossly exaggerated. He is not demonstrative.
His feelings of surprise, admiration, or fear, are never openly manifested, and are probably
not strongly felt. He is slow and deliberate in speech, and circuitous in introducing the subject
he has come expressly to discuss. These are the main features of his moral nature, and exhibit
themselves in every action of his life.

Children and women are timid, and scream and run at the unexpected sight of a European. In
the company of men they are silent, and are generally quiet and obedient. When alone the Malay
is taciturn; he neither talks nor sings to himself. When several are paddling in a canoe, they
occasionally chant a monotonous and plaintive song. He is cautious of giving offence to his
equals. He does not quarrel easily about money matters; dislikes asking too frequently even
for payment of his just debts, and will often give them up altogether rather than quarrel with
his debtor. Practical joking is utterly repugnant to his disposition; for he is particularly
sensitive to breaches of etiquette, or any interference with the personal liberty of himself
or another. As an example, I may mention that I have often found it very difficult to get one
Malay servant to waken another. He will call as loud as he can, but will hardly touch, much
less shake his comrade. I have frequently had to waken a hard sleeper myself when on a land
or sea journey.

The higher classes of Malays are exceedingly polite, and have all the quiet ease and dignity
of the best-bred Europeans. Yet this is compatible with a reckless cruelty and contempt of
human life, which is the dark side of their character. 2. Version. 1896 "96: Pan with dancing children. 1898/1900

Arnold
  Böcklin is one of those painters who in the twenties and thirties
of the 19th Century broken born in the fifties and sixties with the
tradition of Cornelius School and have brought up out in Germany a
new art, the golden age of painting, as since the days of Durer and
Holbein had not been.

He is a contemporary of Anselm Feuerbach, Viktor Müller (including Piloty, Knaus and Vautier) and went
Lenbach, Hans von Marées Hans Thoma, Toni Stadler, Karl Haider, Max and Gabriel Makart by a decade
or a little more advance. When he turned to painting, Cornelius has the box of the Horsemen
of the Apocalypse created, began Rethel frescoes in the town hall and the woodcuts of the Dance
of Death and it followed the most fragrant plants by Schwind, like the Cinderella and the Wartburg
frescoes and after the most mature of woodcuts by Ludwig Richter soon.

But the leading spirits of the younger generation in this period have their color powerful means
of expression found. They began the colorists among the masters of the earlier Centuries to study.
It directed the new interest mainly to the color composition, the
artistic means by which the coloristic general attitude has been made
in the past was, but also to the mediums, the technical procedures,
the small-scale practice, which the previous time was neglected.

Böcklin said sometimes: who today in the Art wanted to achieve something, the painting had to
invent anew. The growing Generation turned to Belgium and Paris, mainly on couture, she learned from
Delacroix and the masters of Barbizon. The majority, however, just the least important of and influential,
have finally not in France but in Italy in dealing with the works of ancient art, the ultimate
direction for her life and found this trained in dealing with colleagues and students.

Böcklin is one of the oldest, most independent and most remarkable among these artists. He
has done even more than all the rest of his own way, mostly decried and derided been, during
the greatest days of his ministry as Feuerbach, Thoma, Hans von Marées only a few recognized, stood
aside and finally has the greatest abundance of applause harvested.

It belongs to the German art, as good as the others, although he was
born and raised in Basel and is also of Swiss parents, although his
art for a stay in Paris of some importance, and the first seven years
in Italy, was crucial.

The only teacher and the only fellow-student, referring to his direction of deeper influence
was German and had their art home to, as the majority of friends and colleagues, that he saw in the
crucial years around. He is what is usually overlooked, from the heroic landscape painting
grew out of that since Asmus Carstens and Josh. Anton Koch maintained in Germany, and has always
found understanding.

He is the son and heir this whole direction. He also has almost exclusively in German landing first
understanding and then general applause found, and the success he has achieved in Germany,
his Reputation in his native city only fixed right.


The moral characteristics of the Papuan appear to me to separate him as distinctly from the
Malay as do his form and features. He is impulsive and demonstrative in speech and action.
His emotions and passions express themselves in shouts and laughter, in yells and frantic leapings.
Women and children take their share in every discussion, and seem little alarmed at the sight
of strangers and Europeans.

Of the intellect of this race it is very difficult to judge, but I am inclined to rate it somewhat
higher than that of the Malays, notwithstanding the fact that the Papuans have never yet made
any advance towards civilization. It must be remembered, however, that for centuries the Malays
have been influenced by Hindoo, Chinese, and Arabic immigration, whereas the Papuan race has
only been subjected to the very partial and local influence of Malay traders. The Papuan has
much more vital energy, which would certainly greatly assist his intellectual development.
Papuan slaves show no inferiority of intellect, compared with Malays, but rather the contrary;
and in the Moluccas they are often promoted to places of considerable trust. The Papuan has
a greater feeling for art than the Malay. He decorates his canoe, his house, and almost every
domestic utensil with elaborate carving, a habit which is rarely found among tribes of the
Malay race.

In the affections and moral sentiments, on the other hand, the Papuans seem very deficient.
In the treatment of their children they are often violent and cruel; whereas the Malays are
almost invariably kind and gentle, hardly ever interfering at all with their children's pursuits
and amusements, and giving them perfect liberty at whatever age they wish to claim it. But
these very peaceful relations between parents and children are no doubt, in a great measure,
due to the listless and apathetic character of the race, which never leads the younger members
into serious opposition to the elders; while the harsher discipline of the Papuans may be chiefly
due to that greater vigour and energy of mind which always, sooner or later, leads to the rebellion
of the weaker against the stronger,--the people against their rulers, the slave against his
master, or the child against its parent.

It appears, therefore, that, whether we consider their physical conformation, their moral characteristics,
or their intellectual capacities, the Malay and Papuan races offer remarkable differences and
striking contrasts. The Malay is of short stature, brown-skinned, straight-haired, beardless,
and smooth-bodied. The Papuan is taller, is black-skinned, frizzly-haired, bearded, and hairy-bodied.
The former is broad-faced, has a small nose, and flat eyebrows; the latter is long-faced, has
a large and prominent nose, and projecting eyebrows. The Malay is bashful, cold, undemonstrative,
and quiet; the Papuan is bold, impetuous, excitable, and noisy. The former is grave and seldom
laughs; the latter is joyous and laughter-loving,--the one conceals his emotions, the other
displays them.

Having thus described in some detail, the great physical, intellectual, and moral differences
between the Malays and Papuans, we have to consider the inhabitants of the numerous islands
which do not agree very closely with either of these races. The islands of Obi, Batchian, and
the three southern peninsulas of Gilolo, possess no true indigenous population; but the northern
peninsula is inhabited by a native race, the so-called Alfuros of Sahoe and Galela. These people
are quite distinct from the Malays, and almost equally so from the Papuans. They are tall and
well-made, with Papuan features, and curly hair; they are bearded and hairy-limbed, but quite
as light in colour as the Malays. They are an industrious and enterprising race, cultivating
rice and vegetables, and indefatigable in their search after game, fish, tripang, pearls, and
tortoiseshell.

In the great island of Ceram there is also an indigenous race very similar to that of Northern
Gilolo. Bourn seems to contain two distinct races,--a shorter, round-faced people, with a Malay
physiognomy, who may probably have come from Celebes by way of the Sula islands; and a taller
bearded race, resembling that of Ceram.

Far south of the Moluccas lies the island of Timor, inhabited by tribes much nearer to the
true Papuan than those of the Moluccas.

The Timorese of the interior are dusky brown or blackish, with bushy frizzled hair, and the
long Papuan nose. They are of medium height, and rather slender figures. The universal dress
is a long cloth twisted round the waist, the fringed ends of which hang below the knee. The
people are said to be great thieves, and the tribes are always at war with each other, but
they are not very courageous or bloodthirsty. The custom of "tabu," called here "pomali," is
very general, fruit trees, houses, crop, and property of all kinds being protected from depredation
by this ceremony, the reverence for which is very great. A palm branch stuck across an open
door, showing that the house is tabooed, is a more effectual guard against robbery than any
amount of locks and bars. The houses in Timor are different from those of most of the other
islands; they seem all roof, the thatch overhanging the low walls and reaching the ground,
except where it is cut away for an entrance. In some parts of the west end of Timor, and on
the little island of Semau, the houses more resemble those of the Hottentots, being egg-shaped,
very small, and with a door only about three feet high. These are built on the ground, while
those of the eastern districts art, raised a few feet on posts. In their excitable disposition,
loud voices, and fearless demeanour, the Timorese closely resemble the people of New Guinea.

In the islands west of Timor, as far as Flores and Sandalwood Island, a very similar race is
found, which also extends eastward to Timor-laut, where the true Papuan race begins to appear.
The small islands of Savu and Rotti, however, to the west of Timor, are very remarkable in
possessing a different and, in some respects, peculiar race. These people are very handsome,
with good features, resembling in many characteristics the race produced by the mixture of
the Hindoo or Arab with the Malay. They are certainly distinct from the Timorese or Papuan
races, and must be classed in the western rather than the eastern ethnological division of
the Archipelago.

The whole of the great island of New Guinea, the Ke and Aru Islands, with Mysol, Salwatty,
and Waigiou, are inhabited almost exclusively by the typical Papuans. I found no trace of any
other tribes inhabiting the interior of New Guinea, but the coast people are in some places
mixed with the browner races of the Moluccas. The same Papuan race seems to extend over the
islands east of New Guinea as far as the Fijis.

There remain to be noticed the black woolly-haired races of the Philippines and the Malay peninsula,
the former called "Negritos," and the latter "Semangs." I have never seen these people myself,
but from the numerous accurate descriptions of them that have been published, I have had no
difficulty in satisfying myself that they have little affinity or resemblance to the Papuans,
with which they have been hitherto associated. In most important characters they differ more
from the Papuan than they do from the Malay. They are dwarfs in stature, only averaging four
feet six inches to four feet eight inches high, or eight inches less than the Malays; whereas
the Papuans are decidedly taller than the Malays. The nose is invariably represented as small,
flattened, or turned up at the apex, whereas the most universal character of the Papuan race
is to have the nose prominent and large, with the apex produced downwards, as it is invariably
represented in their own rude idols. The hair of these dwarfish races agrees with that of the
Papuans, but so it does with that of the negroes of Africa. The Negritos and the Semangs agree
very closely in physical characteristics with each other and with the Andaman Islanders, while
they differ in a marked manner from every Papuan race.

A careful study of these varied races, comparing them with those of Eastern Asia, the Pacific
Islands, and Australia, has led me to adopt a comparatively simple view as to their origin
and affinities.

If we draw a line (see Physical Map, Vol. 1. p. 14), commencing to the east of the Philippine
Islands, thence along the western coast of Gilolo, through the island of Bouru, and curving
round the west end of Mores, then bending back by Sandalwood Island to take in Rotti, we shall
divide the Archipelago into two portions, the races of which have strongly marked distinctive
peculiarities. This line will separate the Malayan and all the Asiatic races, from the Papuans
and all that inhabit the Pacific; and though along the line of junction intermigration and
commixture have taken place, yet the division is on the whole almost as well defined and strongly
contrasted, as is the corresponding zoological division of the Archipelago, into an Indo-Malayan
and Austro-Malayan region.

I must briefly explain the reasons that have led me to consider this division of the Oceanic
races to be a true and natural one. The Malayan race, as a whole, undoubtedly very closely
resembles the East Asian populations, from Siam to Mandchouria. I was much struck with this,
when in the island of Bali I saw Chinese traders who had adopted the costume of that country,
and who could then hardly be distinguished from Malays; and, on the other hand, I have seen
natives of Java who, as far as physiognomy was concerned, would pass very well for Chinese.
Then, again, we have the most typical of the Malayan tribes inhabiting a portion of the Asiatic
continent itself, together with those great islands which, possessing the same species of large
Mammalia with the adjacent parts of the continent, have in all probability formed a connected
portion of Asia during the human period. The Negritos are, no doubt, quite a distinct race
from the Malay; but yet, as some of them inhabit a portion of the continent, and others the
Andaman Islands in the Bay of Bengal, they must be considered to have had, in all probability,
an Asiatic rather than a Polynesian origin.

Now, turning to the eastern parts of the Archipelago, I find, by comparing my own observations
with those of the most trustworthy travellers and missionaries, that a race identical in all
its chief features with the Papuan, is found in all the islands as far east as the Fijis; beyond
this the brown Polynesian race, or some intermediate type, is spread everywhere over the Pacific. As was the Bohush not close
the eyelids tears waiting behind it, and many tears. - It was at once so festive in the room.
Things to two poor people around were a twinkle, as they had never possessed not even in their
princely days. Each jug, each Glass in the rigid Etagère had suddenly be light and bragged and
wanted Stars play. As you can imagine that it was very light in the room.

Then the clock struck, carefully, as they regretted having to do. But she beat it five times,
and was the mother.

"Where?" Feared the hunchback.

"I have to get the Frantishka.

Then came the Bohush everything again. He hesitated and said, then almost sadly: "Oh, yes, you
have to get the Frantishka."

This was the farewell.

When the Bohun was alone, he resumed the nervous and restless below. Here and there, as in passing,
he put a little handle, the dust swept from the table and got unexpectedly is to organize his
writings and books. In this case it was quite warm. And when he found his hot face somewhere
in a mirror, he was astonished. He contributed to the Nestled shoulders, the bright yellow silk
cloth of the mother. That was funny. He wanted laugh, but forgot it, and with involuntary movements
of comfort he buried his Back even more in the gentle folds. He felt tired and sat in the parlor,
heavy and wide, in the fall of the rigid geblumten cushion sofa, which with the oval Table just filled
the center of the room. He pondered and pondered. The poor festive canapé complained under him.
Then he jumped up, stroked with a certain tenderness to crochet Schutzdeckchen smooth and
stayed in one of the chairs, which were at the part. His face, which sometimes could be boyish
outdated now by the minute under the influence of his strenuous Reflection, it was almost eaten
by the folds, which hinkrochen about it and einbohrten like beads in a diseased fruit. Did
he have also all what he would say? A vague fear hanging over him. He felt so abandoned, dizzy,
like one that I have forgotten on a high tower. He groped for a hold. And in the next little while
he was one himself, he also disturbs the order, the grand order of the room, by that he was waiting
for = this = place. He was shocked at his presumption. He stole more further back and finally
crouching on a high-legged stool in the corner of the room, near at the door. Since peace came
over him. He thought: So, now it's over, I did it all already said and he knew that he had
just cried, and that is something else such as a speech such a cry. Yet he defiantly insisted:
"I have said all the mother knows it all - "And you too," - he added aloud and examined the eyes
of the yellow cat, which he slowly entgegenkam and cunning from the other corner. No claws screeched
on the brown, shiny Hallway. Silently, the animal came closer, it was great, it was larger,
and it was such that the could see it Bohush henceforth no longer in the quiet, solemn office,
there was sleeping he said. And he probably had dreams. For he said in a voice that sounded
far more: "This is It Rezek, please - that's the secret: the painter has to paint the people and
say: you are beautiful. "As his head fell forward and he with difficulty forced him up again.
"The poet the people must be tight and tell him. you're beautiful, "he sighed in his sleep." It
is nice to be " Then a smile began in his mouth, a good, pious smile
that grew on the Face of the sleeper, and made it young again.

He breathed again: "I will" never betray and then his dream was so deep that not a word of it until
more came to his lips.

The door opened. The hunchback, however, struck the eyes only when it Rezek rough grabbed by the
neck close and screamed, "Did you speak out," The Bohush felt that
word on his cheek? very hot.

His hands convulsively repulsed, but in his eyes was still no understanding.

They smiled more. They smiled at the terrible avenger, until they died. And then slid the yellow
cloth over the poor body and covered the Bohun and his secret. -
The siblings.

At noon were in the old house opposite the Maltheserkirche
- three flights of stairs - the new Tenant moved in, and by evening
it was known only that they brought an unusually large furniture had
that would have remained stuck in the tight turns of the spiral staircase,
almost. This is the most simple and natural supposition to make. And if we find any signs
of direct affinity between the inhabitants of any other part of the world and those of Polynesia,
it by no means follows that the latter were derived from the former. For as, when a Pacific
continent existed, the whole geography of the earth's surface would probably be very different
from what it now is, the present continents may not then have risen above the ocean, and, when
they were formed at a subsequent epoch, may have derived some of their inhabitants from the
Polynesian area itself. It is undoubtedly true that there are proofs of extensive migrations
among the Pacific islands, which have led to community of language from the sandwich group
to New Zealand; but there are no proofs whatever of recent migration from any surrounding country
to Polynesia, since there is no people to be found elsewhere sufficiently resembling the Polynesian
race in their chief physical and mental characteristics. Later. . . "

He saw her from the front, on the threshold of the sunny terrace. She had pink outline, and their
shapes disguised a durchgoldete dusk.

She was a precious shell, and their Hair, which disintegrated struck around her like seaweed.

She
was a petite nymph hard to see it went so quickly, just like a ray of light the strawberry-colored
wall hinhuschte a moment peered shyly and wildly over his shoulder,
and the moment later nothing was left but a faint scent, like the
rest of a fabulous dream.

And suddenly rose up over there on the edge of his wide table, untied
her hair up on the opposite profile, with curved neck chaste, one
hand on the chest, the other before the closed legs - the Venus. I have given, in more or less detail, a sketch of my eight years'
wanderings among the largest and the most luxuriant islands which adorn our earth's surface.
I have endeavoured to convey my impressions of their scenery, their vegetation, their animal
productions, and their human inhabitants. I have dwelt at some length on the varied and interesting
problems they offer to the student of nature. Before bidding my reader farewell, I wish to
make a few observations on a subject of yet higher interest and deeper importance, which the
contemplation of savage life has suggested, and on which I believe that the civilized can learn
something from the savage man.

