At eleven o'clock we alighted upon a sign which manifestly referred to billiards.  Joy!  We
had played billiards in the Azores with balls that were not round and on an ancient table that
was very little smoother than a brick pavement--one of those wretched old things with dead
cushions, and with patches in the faded cloth and invisible obstructions that made the balls
describe the most astonishing and unsuspected angles and perform feats in the way of unlooked-for
and almost impossible "scratches" that were perfectly bewildering.  We had played at Gibraltar
with balls the size of a walnut, on a table like a public square--and in both instances we
achieved far more aggravation than amusement.  We expected to fare better here, but we were
mistaken.  The cushions were a good deal higher than the balls, and as the balls had a fashion
of always stopping under the cushions, we accomplished very little in the way of caroms.  The
cushions were hard and unelastic, and the cues were so crooked that in making a shot you had
to allow for the curve or you would infallibly put the "English" on the wrong side of the hall.
Dan was to mark while the doctor and I played.  At the end of an hour neither of us had made
a count, and so Dan was tired of keeping tally with nothing to tally, and we were heated and
angry and disgusted.  We paid the heavy bill--about six cents--and said we would call around
sometime when we had a week to spend, and finish the game.

We adjourned to one of those pretty cafes and took supper and tested the wines of the country,
as we had been instructed to do, and found them harmless and unexciting.  They might have been
exciting, however, if we had chosen to drink a sufficiency of them.

To close our first day in Paris cheerfully and pleasantly, we now sought our grand room in
the Grand Hotel du Louvre and climbed into our sumptuous bed to read and smoke--but alas!

          It was pitiful,
          In a whole city-full,
          Gas we had none.

No gas to read by--nothing but dismal candles.  It was a shame.  We tried to map out excursions
for the morrow; we puzzled over French "guides to Paris"; we talked disjointedly in a vain
endeavor to make head or tail of the wild chaos of the day's sights and experiences; we subsided
to indolent smoking; we gaped and yawned and stretched--then feebly wondered if we were really
and truly in renowned Paris, and drifted drowsily away into that vast mysterious void which
men call sleep.

CHAPTER XIII.

The next morning we were up and dressed at ten o'clock.  We went to the 'commissionaire' of
the hotel--I don't know what a 'commissionaire' is, but that is the man we went to--and told
him we wanted a guide.  He said the national Exposition had drawn such multitudes of Englishmen
and Americans to Paris that it would be next to impossible to find a good guide unemployed.
He said he usually kept a dozen or two on hand, but he only had three now.  He called them.
One looked so like a very pirate that we let him go at once.  The next one spoke with a simpering
precision of pronunciation that was irritating and said:

"If ze zhentlemans will to me make ze grande honneur to me rattain in hees serveece, I shall
show to him every sing zat is magnifique to look upon in ze beautiful Parree.  I speaky ze
Angleesh pairfaitemaw."

He would have done well to have stopped there, because he had that much by heart and said it
right off without making a mistake.  But his self-complacency seduced him into attempting a
flight into regions of unexplored English, and the reckless experiment was his ruin.  Within
ten seconds he was so tangled up in a maze of mutilated verbs and torn and bleeding forms of
speech that no human ingenuity could ever have gotten him out of it with credit.  It was plain
enough that he could not "speaky" the English quite as "pairfaitemaw" as he had pretended he could.

The third man captured us.  He was plainly dressed, but he had a noticeable air of neatness
about him.  He wore a high silk hat which was a little old, but had been carefully brushed.
He wore second-hand kid gloves, in good repair, and carried a small rattan cane with a curved
handle--a female leg--of ivory.  He stepped as gently and as daintily as a cat crossing a muddy
street; and oh, he was urbanity; he was quiet, unobtrusive self-possession; he was deference
itself!  He spoke softly and guardedly; and when he was about to make a statement on his sole
responsibility or offer a suggestion, he weighed it by drachms and scruples first, with the
crook of his little stick placed meditatively to his teeth.  His opening speech was perfect.
It was perfect in construction, in phraseology, in grammar, in emphasis, in pronunciation --everything.
He spoke little and guardedly after that.  We were charmed. We were more than charmed--we were
overjoyed.  We hired him at once.  We never even asked him his price.  This man--our lackey,
our servant, our unquestioning slave though he was--was still a gentleman--we could see that--while
of the other two one was coarse and awkward and the other was a born pirate.  We asked our
man Friday's name.  He drew from his pocketbook a snowy little card and passed it to us with
a profound bow:

                             A. BILLFINGER,
                    Guide to Paris, France, Germany,
                            Spain, &c., &c.
                       Grande Hotel du Louvre.

"Billfinger!  Oh, carry me home to die!"

That was an "aside" from Dan.  The atrocious name grated harshly on my ear, too.  The most
of us can learn to forgive, and even to like, a countenance that strikes us unpleasantly at
first, but few of us, I fancy, become reconciled to a jarring name so easily.  I was almost
sorry we had hired this man, his name was so unbearable.  However, no matter. We were impatient
to start.  Billfinger stepped to the door to call a carriage, and then the doctor said:

"Well, the guide goes with the barbershop, with the billiard-table, with the gasless room,
and may be with many another pretty romance of Paris. I expected to have a guide named Henri
de Montmorency, or Armand de la Chartreuse, or something that would sound grand in letters
to the villagers at home, but to think of a Frenchman by the name of Billfinger! Oh!  This
is absurd, you know.  This will never do.  We can't say Billfinger; it is nauseating.  Name
him over again; what had we better call him?  Alexis du Caulaincourt?"

"Alphonse Henri Gustave de Hauteville," I suggested.

"Call him Ferguson," said Dan.

That was practical, unromantic good sense.  Without debate, we expunged Billfinger as Billfinger,
and called him Ferguson.

The carriage--an open barouche--was ready.  Ferguson mounted beside the driver, and we whirled
away to breakfast.  As was proper, Mr. Ferguson stood by to transmit our orders and answer
questions.  By and by, he mentioned casually--the artful adventurer--that he would go and get
his breakfast as soon as we had finished ours.  He knew we could not get along without him
and that we would not want to loiter about and wait for him.  We asked him to sit down and
eat with us.  He begged, with many a bow, to be excused.  It was not proper, he said; he would
sit at another table.  We ordered him peremptorily to sit down with us.

Here endeth the first lesson.  It was a mistake.

As long as we had that fellow after that, he was always hungry; he was always thirsty.  He
came early; he stayed late; he could not pass a restaurant; he looked with a lecherous eye
upon every wine shop. Suggestions to stop, excuses to eat and to drink, were forever on his
lips.  We tried all we could to fill him so full that he would have no room to spare for a
fortnight, but it was a failure.  He did not hold enough to smother the cravings of his superhuman
appetite.

He had another "discrepancy" about him.  He was always wanting us to buy things.  On the shallowest
pretenses he would inveigle us into shirt stores, boot stores, tailor shops, glove shops--anywhere
under the broad sweep of the heavens that there seemed a chance of our buying anything. Anyone
could have guessed that the shopkeepers paid him a percentage on the sales, but in our blessed
innocence we didn't until this feature of his conduct grew unbearably prominent.  One day Dan
happened to mention that he thought of buying three or four silk dress patterns for presents.
Ferguson's hungry eye was upon him in an instant.  In the course of twenty minutes the carriage
stopped.

"What's this?"

"Zis is ze finest silk magazin in Paris--ze most celebrate."

"What did you come here for?  We told you to take us to the palace of the Louvre."

"I suppose ze gentleman say he wish to buy some silk."

"You are not required to 'suppose' things for the party, Ferguson.  We do not wish to tax your
energies too much.  We will bear some of the burden and heat of the day ourselves.  We will
endeavor to do such 'supposing' as is really necessary to be done.  Drive on."  So spake the
doctor.

Within fifteen minutes the carriage halted again, and before another silk store.  The doctor said:

"Ah, the palace of the Louvre--beautiful, beautiful edifice!  Does the Emperor Napoleon live
here now, Ferguson?"

"Ah, Doctor!  You do jest; zis is not ze palace; we come there directly. But since we pass
right by zis store, where is such beautiful silk--"

"Ah!  I see, I see.  I meant to have told you that we did not wish to purchase any silks to-day,
but in my absent-mindedness I forgot it.  I also meant to tell you we wished to go directly
to the Louvre, but I forgot that also.  However, we will go there now.  Pardon my seeming carelessness,
Ferguson.  Drive on."

Within the half hour we stopped again--in front of another silk store. We were angry; but the
doctor was always serene, always smooth-voiced. He said:

"At last!  How imposing the Louvre is, and yet how small!  How exquisitely fashioned!  How
charmingly situated!--Venerable, venerable pile--"

"Pairdon, Doctor, zis is not ze Louvre--it is--"

"What is it?"

"I have ze idea--it come to me in a moment--zat ze silk in zis magazin--"

"Ferguson, how heedless I am.  I fully intended to tell you that we did not wish to buy any
silks to-day, and I also intended to tell you that we yearned to go immediately to the palace
of the Louvre, but enjoying the happiness of seeing you devour four breakfasts this morning
has so filled me with pleasurable emotions that I neglect the commonest interests of the time.
However, we will proceed now to the Louvre, Ferguson."

"But, doctor," (excitedly,) "it will take not a minute--not but one small minute!  Ze gentleman
need not to buy if he not wish to--but only look at ze silk--look at ze beautiful fabric. 
[Then pleadingly.] Sair--just only one leetle moment!"

Dan said, "Confound the idiot!  I don't want to see any silks today, and I won't look at them.
Drive on."

And the doctor: "We need no silks now, Ferguson.  Our hearts yearn for the Louvre.  Let us
journey on--let us journey on."

"But doctor!  It is only one moment--one leetle moment.  And ze time will be save--entirely
save!  Because zere is nothing to see now--it is too late.  It want ten minute to four and
ze Louvre close at four--only one leetle moment, Doctor!"

The treacherous miscreant!  After four breakfasts and a gallon of champagne, to serve us such
a scurvy trick.  We got no sight of the countless treasures of art in the Louvre galleries
that day, and our only poor little satisfaction was in the reflection that Ferguson sold not
a solitary silk dress pattern.

