CONTEMPORARY
  RUSSIAN NOVELISTS

  Translated from the French of Serge Persky
  By FREDERICK EISEMANN

  JOHN W. LUCE AND COMPANY
  BOSTON 1913

  Copyright, 1912
  BY C. DELAGRAVE

  Copyright, 1913
  BY L. E. BASSETT

  To
  THE MEMORY OF
  F. N. S.

  BY
  THE TRANSLATOR

PREFACE

The principal aim of this book is to give the reader a good general knowledge of Russian literature
as it is to-day. The author, Serge Persky, has subordinated purely critical material, because
he wants his readers to form their own judgments and criticize for themselves. The element
of literary criticism is not, however, by any means entirely lacking.

In the original text, there is a thorough and exhaustive treatment of the "great prophet" of
Russian literature--Tolstoy--but the translator has deemed it wise to omit this essay, because
so much has recently been written about this great man.

As the title of the book is "Contemporary Russian Novelists," the essay on Anton Tchekoff,
who is no longer living, does not rightly belong here, but Tchekoff is such an important figure
in modern Russian literature and has attracted so little attention from English writers that
it seems advisable to retain the essay that treats of his work.

Finally, let me express my sincerest thanks to Dr. G. H. Maynadier of Harvard for his kind
advice; to Miss Edna Wetzler for her unfailing and valuable help, and to Miss Carrie Harper,
who has gone over this work with painstaking care.

CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                               PAGE

      I. A Brief Survey of Russian Literature              1

     II. Anton Tchekoff                                   40

    III. Vladimir Korolenko                               76

     IV. Vikenty Veressayev                              108

      V. Maxim Gorky                                     142

     VI. Leonid Andreyev                                 199

    VII. Dmitry Merezhkovsky                             246

   VIII. Alexander Kuprin                                274

     IX. Writers in Vogue                                289

CONTEMPORARY RUSSIAN NOVELISTS

I

A BRIEF SURVEY OF RUSSIAN LITERATURE

In order to get a clear idea of modern Russian literature, a knowledge of its past is indispensable.
This knowledge will help us in understanding that which distinguishes it from other European
literatures, not only from the viewpoint of the art which it expresses, but also as the historical
and sociological mirror of the nation's life in the course of centuries.

The dominant trait of this literature is found in its very origins. Unlike the literatures
of other European countries, which followed, in a more or less regular way, the development
of life and civilization during historic times, Russian literature passed through none of these
stages. Instead of being a product of the past, it is a protestation against it; instead of
retracing the old successive stages, it appears, intermittently, like a light suddenly struck
in the darkness. Its whole history is a long continual struggle against this darkness, which
has gradually melted away beneath these rays of light, but has never entirely ceased to veil
the general trend of Russian thought.

As a result of the unfortunate circumstances which characterize her history, Russia was for
a long time deprived of any relations with civilized Europe. The necessity of concentrating
all her strength on fighting the Mongolians laid the corner-stone of a sort of semi-Asiatic
political autocracy. Besides, the influence of the Byzantine clergy made the nation hostile
to the ideas and science of the Occident, which were represented as heresies incompatible with
the orthodox faith. However, when she finally threw off the Mongolian yoke, and when she found
herself face to face with Europe, Russia was led to enter into diplomatic relations with the
various Western powers. She then realized that European art and science were indispensable
to her, if only to strengthen her in warfare against these States. For this reason a number
of European ideas began to come into Russia during the reigns of the last Muscovite sovereigns.
But they assumed a somewhat sacerdotal character in passing through the filter of Polish society,
and took on, so to speak, a dogmatic air. In general, European influence was not accepted in
Russia except with extreme repugnance and restless circumspection, until the accession of Peter
I. This great monarch, blessed with unusual intelligence and a will of iron, decided to use
all his autocratic power in impressing, to use the words of Pushkin, "a new direction upon
the Russian vessel;"--Europe instead of Asia.

Peter the Great had to contend against the partisans of ancient tradition, the "obscurists"
and the adversaries of profane science; and this inevitable struggle determined the first character
of Russian literature, where the satiric element, which in essence is an attack on the enemies
of reform, predominates. In organizing grotesque processions, clownish masquerades, in which
the long-skirted clothes and the streaming beards of the honorable champions of times gone
by were ridiculed, Peter himself appeared as a pitiless destroyer of the ancient costumes and
superannuated ideas.

The example set by the practical irony of this man was followed, soon after the death of the
Tsar, by Kantemir, the first Russian author who wrote satirical verses. These verses were very
much appreciated in his time. In them, he mocks with considerable fervor the ignorant contemners
of science, who taste happiness only in the gratification of their material appetites.

At the same time that the Russian authors pursued the enemies of learning with sarcasm, they
heaped up eulogies, which bordered on idolatry, on Peter I, and, after him, on his successors.
In these praises, which were excessively hyperbolical, there was always some sincerity. Peter
had, in fact, in his reign, paved the way for European civilization, and it seemed merely to
be waiting for the sovereigns, Peter's successors, to go on with the work started by their
illustrious ancestor. The most powerful leaders, and the first representatives of the new literature,
strode ahead, then, hand in hand, but their paths before long diverged. Peter the Great wanted
to use European science for practical purposes only: it was only to help the State, to make
capable generals, to win wars, to help savants find means to develop the national wealth by
industry and commerce; he--Peter--had no time to think of other things. But science throws
her light into the most hidden corners, and when it brings social and political iniquities
to light, then the government hastens to persecute that which, up to this time, it has encouraged.

The protective, and later hostile, tendencies of the government in regard to authors manifested
themselves with a special violence during the reign of Catherine II. This erudite woman, an
admirer of Voltaire and of the French "encyclopédistes," was personally interested in writing.
She wrote several plays in which she ridiculed the coarse manners and the ignorance of the
society of her time. Under the influence of this new impulse, which had come from one in such
a high station in life, a legion of satirical journals flooded the country. The talented and
spiritual von Vizin wrote comedies, the most famous of which exposes the ignorance and cruelty
of country gentlemen; in another, he shows the ridiculousness of people who take only the brilliant
outside shell from European civilization. Shortly, Radishchev's "Voyage from Moscow to St.
Petersburg" appeared. Here the author, with the fury of passionate resentment, and with sad
bitterness, exposes the miserable condition of the people under the yoke of the high and mighty.
It was then that the empress, Catherine the Great, so gentle to the world at large and so authoritative
at home, perceiving that satire no longer spared the guardian principles necessary for the
security of the State, any more than they did popular superstitions, manifested a strong displeasure
against it. Consequently, the satirical journals disappeared as quickly as they had appeared.
Von Vizin, who, in his pleasing "Questions to Catherine" had touched on various subjects connected
with court etiquette, and on the miseries of political life, had to content himself with silence.
Radishchev was arrested, thrown into a fortress, and then sent to Siberia. They went so far
as to accuse Derzhavin, the greatest poet of this time, the celebrated "chanter of Catherine,"
in his old age, of Jacobinism for having translated into verse one of the psalms of David;
besides this, the energetic apostle of learning, Novikov, a journalist, a writer, and the founder
of a remarkable society which devoted itself to the publication and circulation of useful books,
was accused of having had relations with foreign secret societies. He was confined in the fortress
at Schluesselburg after all his belongings had been confiscated. The critic and the satirist
had had their wings clipped. But it was no longer possible to check this tendency, for, by
force of circumstances, it had been planted in the very soul of every Russian who compared
the conditions of life in his country with what European civilization had done for the neighboring
countries.

Excluded from journalism, this satiric tendency took refuge in literature, where the novel
and the story trace the incidents of daily life. Since the writers could not touch the evil
at its source, they showed its consequences for social life. They represented with eloquence
the empty and deplorable banality of the existence forced upon most of them. By expressing
in various ways general aspirations towards something better, they let literature continue
its teaching, even in times particularly hostile to freedom of thought, like the reign of Nicholas
I, the most typical and decided adversary of the freedom of the pen that Europe has ever seen.
Literature was, then, considered as an inevitable evil, but one from which the world wanted
to free itself; and every man of letters seemed to be under suspicion. During this reign, not
only criticisms of the government, but also praises of it, were considered offensive and out
of place. Thus, the chief of the secret police, when he found that a writer of that time, Bulgarine,
whose name was synonymous with accuser and like evils, had taken the liberty to praise the
government for some insignificant improvements made on a certain street, told him with severity:
"You are not asked to praise the government, you must only praise men of letters."

Nothing went to print without the authorization of the general censor, an authorization that
had to be confirmed by the various parts of the complex machine, and, finally, by a superior
committee which censored the censors. The latter were themselves so terrorized that they scented
subversive ideas even in cook-books, in technical musical terms, and in punctuation marks.
It would seem that under such conditions no kind of literature, and certainly no satire, could
exist. Nevertheless, it was at this period that Gogol produced his best works. The two most
important are, his comedy "The Revizor," where he stigmatizes the abuses of administration,
and "Dead Souls," that classic work which de Vogüé judges worthy of being given a place in
universal literature, between "Don Quixote" and "Gil Blas," and which, in a series of immortal
types, flagellates the moral emptiness and the mediocrity of life in high Russian society at
that time.

At the same time, Griboyedov's famous comedy, "Intelligence Comes to Grief," which the censorship
forbade to be produced or even published, was being circulated in manuscript form. This comedy,
a veritable masterpiece, has for its hero a man named Chatsky, who was condemned as a madman
by the aristocratic society of Moscow on account of his independent spirit and patriotic sentiments.
It is true that in all of these works the authors hardly attack important personages or the
essential bases of political organization. The functionaries and proprietors of Gogol's works
are "petites gens," and the civic pathos of Chatsky aims at certain individuals and not at
the national institutions. But these attacks, cleverly veiling the general conditions of Russian
life, led the intelligent reader to meditate on certain questions, and it also permitted satire
to live through the most painful periods. Later, with the coming of the reforms of Alexander
II, satire manifested itself more openly in the works of Saltykov, who was not afraid to use
all his talent in scourging, with his biting sarcasm, violence and arbitrariness.

Another salient trait of Russian literature is its tendency toward realism, the germ of which
can be seen even in the most old-fashioned works, when, following the precepts of the West,
they were taken up first with pseudo-classicism, and then with the romantic spirit which followed.

Pseudo-classicism had but few worthy representatives in Russia, if we omit the poet Derzhavin,
whom Pushkin accused of having a poor knowledge of his mother tongue, and whose monotonous
work shows signs of genius only here and there.

As to romanticism! Here we find excellent translations of the German poets by Zhukovsky, and
the poems of Lermontov and Pushkin, all impregnated with the spirit of Byron. But these two
movements came quickly to an end. Soon realism, under the influence of Dickens and Balzac,
installed itself as master of this literature, and, in spite of the repeated efforts of the
symbolist schools, nothing has yet been able to wipe it out. Thus, the triumph of realism was
not, as in the case of earlier tendencies, the simple result of the spirit of imitation which
urges authors to choose models that are in vogue, but it was a response to a powerful instinct.
The truth of this statement is very evident in view of the fact that realism appeared in Russian
literature at a time when it was still a novelty in Europe. The need of representing naked
reality, without any decorations, is, so to speak, innate in the Russian author, who cannot,
for any length of time, be led away from this practice. This is the very reason why the Byronian
influence, at the time of Pushkin and Lermontov, lasted such a short time. After having written
several poems inspired by the English poet, Pushkin soon disdained this model, which was the
sole object of European imitation. "Byron's characters," he says, "are not real people, but
rather incarnations of the various moods of the poet," and he ends by saying that Byron is
"great but monotonous." We find the same thing in Lermontov, who was fond of Byron, not only
in a transient mood of snobbery, but because the very strong and sombre character of his imagination
naturally led him to choose this kind of intense poetry. He was exerting himself to regard
reality seriously and to reproduce it with exactitude, at the very time when he was killed
in a duel at the youthful age of twenty-seven.

Pushkin's best work, his novel in verse, "Evgeny Onyegin," although it came so early, was constructed
according to realistic principles; and although we still distinguish romantic tints, it is
a striking picture of Russian society at the beginning of the 19th century. We find the same
tendency in Lermontov's prose novel, "A Hero of Our Times," in which the hero, Pechorin, has
many traits in common with Evgeny Onyegin. This book immediately made a deep impression. It
was really nothing more than a step taken in a new direction by its author. But it was a step
that promised much. An absurd fatality destroyed this promise, and hindered the poet, according
to the expression of an excellent critic of that time, from "rummaging with his eagle eye,
among the recesses of the world."

The works of writers of secondary rank, contemporaneous with the above mentioned, also reveal
a realistic tendency. Then appeared, to declare it with a master's power, that genius of a
realist, of whom we have already made mention, Gogol. There was general enthusiasm; Gogol absorbed
almost the entire attention of the public and men of letters. The great critic and publicist
Byelinsky, in particular, took it upon himself to elaborate in his works the theories of realism;
he formulated the program about 1850 under the name of the "naturalistic school." Thus the
germs of the past had expanded triumphantly in the work of Gogol, and the way was now clear
for Turgenev, Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Goncharov, Ostrovsky, and Pisemsky, who, while enlarging
the range and perfecting the methods of the naturalistic school, conquered for their native
literature the place which it has definitely assumed in the world.

Although we may infer that Russian realism has its roots in a special spiritual predilection,
we must not nevertheless forget the historical conditions which prepared the way for it and
made its logical development easy. Russian literature, called on to struggle against tremendous
obstacles, could hardly have gone astray in the domain of a nebulous idealism.

The third distinctive trait of this literature is found in its democratic spirit. Most of the
heroes are not titled personages; they are peasants, bourgeois, petty officials, students,
and, finally, "intellectuals." This democratic taste is explained by the very constitution
of Russian society.

The spirit of the literature of a nation is usually a reflection of the social class which
possesses the preponderant influence from a political or economic standpoint or which is marked
by the strength of its numbers. The preponderance of the upper middle class in England has
impressed on all the literature of that country the seal of morality belonging to that class;
while in France, where aristocracy predominated, one still feels the influence of the aristocratic
traditions which are so brilliantly manifested in the pseudo-classic period of its literature.
But many reasons have hindered the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie from developing in Russia.
The Russian bourgeois was, for a long time, nothing but a peasant who had grown rich, while
the noble was distinguished more by the number of his serfs and his authority than by his moral
superiority. Deprived of independence, these two classes blended and still blend with the immense
number of peasants who surround them on all sides and submerge them irresistibly, however they
may wish to free themselves.

Very naturally, the first Russian authors came from the class of proprietors, rural lords,
who were the most intelligent, not to say the only intelligent people. In general, the life
of the lord was barely distinguishable from that of the peasant. As he was usually reared in
the country, he passed his childhood among the village children; the people most dear to his
heart, often more dear to him than his father or mother, were his nurse and the other servants,--simple
people, who took care of him and gave him the pleasures of his youthful existence. Before he
entered the local government school, he had been impregnated with goodness and popular poetry,
drawn from stories, legends, and tales to which he had been an ardent listener. We find the
great Pushkin dedicating his most pathetic verses to his old nurse, and we often see him inspired
by the most humble people. In this way, to the theoretic democracy imported from Europe is
united, in the case of the Russian author, a treasure of ardent personal recollections; democracy
is not for him an abstract love of the people, but a real affection, a tenderness made up of
lasting reminiscences which he feels deeply.

This then was the mental state of the most intelligent part of this Russian nobility, which
showed itself a pioneer of the ideas of progress in literature and life. There were even singular
political manifestations produced. Rostopchin said: "In France the shoemakers want to become
noble; while here, the nobles would like to turn shoemakers." But, in spite of all, the greater
part of this caste, with its essential conservative instincts, was nothing more than an inert
mass, without initiative, and incapable even of defending its own interests except by the aid
of the government.

Rostopchin did not suspect the profound truth of his capricious saying.

This truth burst forth in all its strength about 1870, the time of the great reforms undertaken
by Alexander II, when the interests of the people were, for the first time, the order of the
day. It was at this period that a great deal of studying was being done with great enthusiasm
and that a general infatuation for folklore and for a "union with the masses" was being shown.
The desire to become "simplified," that is to say to have all people live the same kind of
life, the appearance of a type, celebrated under the sarcastic name of "noble penitent" (meaning
the titled man who is ashamed of his privileged position as if it were a humiliating and infamous
thing), the politico-socialistic ideology of the first Slavophiles, still half conservative,
but wholly democratic; all these things were the results of the manifestations which astonished
Rostopchin and made the more intelligent class of Russians fraternize more with the masses.
In our day, this tendency has been eloquently illustrated by the greatest Russian artist and
thinker, Tolstoy, who was the very incarnation of the ideas named above, and who always appears
to us as a highly cultured peasant. The hero of "Resurrection" sums up in a few words this
sympathy for the people: "This is it, the big world, the true world!" he says, on seeing the
crowd of peasants and workingmen packed into a third-class compartment.

In the last half of the 19th century, Russian literature took a further step in the way of
democracy. It passed from the hands of the nobility into the hands of the middle class, as
the conditions under which it existed brought it closer to the people and made it therefore
more accessible to their aspirations. It is no longer the great humanitarians of the privileged
class who paint the miserable conditions among which people vegetate; it is the people themselves
who are beginning to speak of their miseries and of their hopes for a better life. The result
is a deep penetration of the popular mind, in conjunction with an acute, and sometimes sickly,
nervousness, which is shown in the works of the great Uspensky, and, more recently still, in
Tchekoff, Andreyev, and many others.

None of these writers belong to the aristocracy, and two of them--Tchekoff and Gorky--have
come up from the masses: the former was the son of a serf, and the latter the son of a workingman.
Let me add that, among the women of letters, the one who is most distinguished by her talent
in describing scenes from popular life--Mme. Dmitrieva--is the daughter of a peasant woman.

Thus, as we have shown, the Russian writers alone, under the cover of imaginative works which
became expressive symbols, could undertake a truly efficacious struggle against tyranny and
arbitrariness. They found themselves in that way placed in a peculiar social position with
corresponding duties. Men expected from them, naturally, a new gospel and also a plan of conduct
necessary in order to escape from the circle of oppression. The best of the Russian writers
have undertaken a difficult and perilous task; they have become the guides, and, so to speak,
the "masters" of life. This tendency constitutes a new trait in Russian literature, one of
its most characteristic; not that other literatures have neglected it, but no other literature
in the world has proclaimed this mission with such a degree of energy and with such a spirit
of sacrifice. Never, in any other country, have novelists or poets felt with such intensity
the burden on their souls. At this point Gogol, first of all, became the victim of this state
of things.

The enthusiasm stirred up by his works and by the immense hopes that he had evoked suddenly
elevated him to such a height in the minds of his contemporaries that he felt real anguish.
Artist he was, and now he forced himself to become a moralist; he rushed into philosophical
speculations which led him on to a nebulous mysticism, from which his talent suffered severely.
When he realized what had happened, despair seized him, his ideas troubled him, and he died
in terrible intellectual distress.

We see also the great admirer of Gogol--Dostoyevsky--under different pretexts making known
in almost all his novels and especially in his magazine articles, "Recollections of an Author,"
his opinions on the reforms about to be realized. He studies the problems of civilization which
concern humanity in general, and particularly insists upon the mission of the Russian people,
who are destined, he believes, to end all the conflicts of the world by virtue of a system
based upon Christian love and pity.

Turgenev, himself, although above all an artist, does not remain aloof from this educational
work. In his "Annals of a Sportsman," he attacks bondage. And when it was abolished, and when
in the very heart of Russian society, among the younger generation, the revolutionists appeared,
Turgenev attempted to paint these "new men." Thus in his novel, "Fathers and Sons," he sketches
in bold strokes the character of the nihilist Bazarov. This celebrated type cannot, however,
be considered a true representative of the mentality of the "new men," for it gave only a few
aspects of their character, which, besides, did not have Turgenev's sympathy.

They are valued in an entirely different way by Chernyshevsky in his novel, "What Is To Be
Done?" where the author, one of the most powerful representatives of the great movement toward
freedom from 1860 to 1870, carefully studied the bases of the new morals and the means to be
used in struggling against the prejudices of the old society. Finally let us mention Tolstoy,
whose entire literary activity was a constant search for truth, till the day when his mind
found an answer to his doubts in the religion of love and harmony which he preached from then on.

The earnestness which sees an apostle in a writer has not ceased to grow and has almost blinded
the public.

For example, Gorky needed only to write some stories in which he places before us beings belonging
to the most miserable classes of society, to be suddenly, and perhaps against his own will,
elevated to the rôle of prophet of a new gospel, of annunciator from whom they were waiting
for the Word, although one could also find the Word in the anti-socialistic circles which he
depicts. Another contemporaneous author, Tchekoff, once wrote a story about the precarious
position of the workingman in the city; he showed how this man, after he had become old and
had gone back to his native village, suffered even more misery than before instead of getting
the rest he had hoped for. Immediately an ardent controversy took place between the two factions
of the youth of that time, the Populists and the Marxists. The former, defending the rural
population, accused the author of having exaggerated and of having only superficially considered
the question, while the others triumphed, confident in the activity of the people of the city.

The literary critic, however, in carefully studying the works of these authors, tried to get
at the real meaning,--the idea between the lines. Gorky's philosophy has often been discussed;
a great many men of letters have tried to unravel what there was of pessimism, of indifference
or of mystic idealism in the soul of Tchekoff. This everlasting habit, not to say this mania,
of analyzing the mind or soul of an author in order to get at his conception, his personal
doctrine of life, often leads to partial and erroneous conclusions, especially when, as in
most cases, the critic has only a very vague idea of the main current of thought which formed
the genesis of the work.

The hopes and emotions which are aroused by every original expression in literature, show more
than ever what hopes are based upon its rôle, the mission which has devolved on it to serve
life, by formulating the facts of the ideal to be realized.

But what is this ideal? What are these ideal aspirations? Of what elements are they made up?
What is the state of mind of the great majority of Russian "intellectuals" in the midst of
the enmity which compromises and menaces them?

Thanks to the window pierced by Peter the Great in the thick Muscovite wall, the Russian "intellectuals"
have begun to have a general idea of European civilization. They have admired the beauty of
this culture, and the greatness of European political and social institutions, guarantees of
the dignity of human beings; they have endured mental suffering because they have found that
in Russia such independence would be impossible, and, consequently, they have had a feeling
of extreme bitterness, which has forced them either to deny or calumniate the moral forces
of their country, or to formulate very strange theories about this situation. Thus at the end
of the first twenty-five years of the century, Chadayev, one of the most original and brilliant
thinkers of Russia, developed the following thesis in his "Philosophical Letters":--the fatal
course of history having opposed the union of the Russian people with Catholicism, through
which European civilization developed, Russia found herself reduced forever to the existence
of an inert mass, deprived of all interior energy, as can be shown adequately by her history,
her customs, and even the aspect of her national type with its ill-defined traits and apathetic
expression.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the course of the terrible struggle which he waged against the censorship and against influential
persons evilly disposed toward him, Pushkin cried out: "It was the idea of the devil himself
that made me be born in Russia!" And in one of his letters, he says, "Naturally, I despise
my country from east to west, but, nevertheless, I hate to hear a stranger speak of it with
scorn." Lermontov, exiled to the Caucasus, ironically takes leave of his country, which he
calls, "a squalid country of slaves and masters." And he salutes the Caucasian mountains as
the immense screen which may hide him from the eyes of the Russian pachas. The Slavophiles
themselves, the patriots who in their way idealized both Russian orthodoxy and autocracy, and
who were wrongly considered the champions of the existing order of things, showed themselves
no less hostile. One of their most celebrated representatives, Khomyakov, sees in Russia "a
land stigmatized" by serfdom, where all is injustice, lies, morbid laziness and turpitude.

Dostoyevsky, who shared some of the illusions of the Slavophiles, speaks of Europe as "a land
of sacred miracles." Nevertheless, yielding to his desire to heighten the prestige of his country,
he adds: "The Russian is not partially European, but essentially so, in the very largest sense
of the word, because he watches, with an impartial love, the progress achieved by the various
peoples of Europe, while each one of them appreciates, above all, the progress of his own country,
and often does not want to let the others share it."

In spite of the seductive powers which European civilization exercised upon Russia, the Russians
perceived its weak sides, which they studied by the light of the ideal which they promised
themselves to attain in some indefinite future, a future which they nevertheless hoped was
near at hand.

To them, enthusiastic observers that they were, these defects became more apparent than to
the Europeans themselves; as their critical sense was not deadened by the wear of constant
use, they saw in a clear light the inconveniences of certain institutions, they perceived the
sad consequences of the excessive triumph of individualism in its struggle for life, the enfranchisement
of the proletariat, the satisfaction of the few at the cost of the many. At times the bases
of this civilization seemed fragile to the Russians; they had a feeling that it was not finished;
they also aspired more and more to the harmonious equilibrium of society which appealed to
their ideal.

In a word, that which has always been called socialism, has had an irresistible attraction
for the more intelligent Russians; all of Russian literature is permeated with it, and it has
developed all the more easily because it found a favorable basis in Russia's natural democracy.

During the period when this literature was most persecuted--that is to say in the second half
of the 19th century--its most influential representatives were ardent socialists. Among them
should be mentioned the critic Byelinsky, the "Petracheviens,"--adepts in the doctrine of Fourier,--and
that powerful agitator of ideas, Hertzen, who founded the Russian free press in London. Among
Western writers, there were two well liked in Russia: George Sand and Charles Dickens. The
former was a socialist, the latter was a democrat. Their influence was very great in Russia;
their works were read with ardor, and gave rise to thoughts which escaped the severities of
the censor, but betrayed themselves in private conversation, as well as in certain literary
circles.

All the celebrated writers of Europe who professed liberal tendencies met with a greater sympathy
among the Russians of that time than in their own country. Dickens, received with great enthusiasm
in Russia, was not appreciated by the English public. His excellent translator, Vedensky, tried
hard to persuade him to come to Russia to live, where his talents would be valued at their
true worth. We can then readily understand how Dostoyevsky, in his "Memoirs of an Author,"
had the right to say that the European socialistic-democrats had two countries, first their
own, then Russia.

The Russian writers who gave themselves up so passionately to this influence,--still so new
even in Europe,--not able to support their political ideal, with a press, as it were, gagged
by the censor, engaged in the struggle along the line of customs. They attacked the prejudices
which clog the relations among men, and rose up against family despotism and the inferior position
of women from a civil and economic point of view. But, between 1860 and 1870, when the enfranchisement
of the serfs reduced the power of the censor, all that had been confined in the souls of the
Russians burst forth. Chernishevsky wrote economic articles on capital and on the agricultural
community; he studied the system of John Stuart Mill, from which he deduced his socialistic
conclusions, and his reputation grew immediately at home and abroad. He became a leader of
thought among the new generation.

At the same time, the young critic Dobrolyubov, author of an analytical study of Russian customs,
"The Kingdom of Shadows," called the "intellectuals" to a struggle for the rights of the oppressed
people, and was ready himself to "drain the bitter cup intended for those who have been sacrificed."
Also at this time there appeared the poet Nekrasov and the satirist Saltykov. The former, a
profound pessimist, described in his best verses the bitter fate of the lower classes; the
latter with his sarcasm scathed bureaucratic arbitrariness, while from abroad was heard the
free ringing of "The Bell,"--a paper founded by Hertzen,--which seemed to be announcing that
freedom was coming. Two articles by the poet Mikhailov on the situation of women started a
vast movement. The women soon filled the lecture-halls of the university, and the class-rooms,
and organized a veritable campaign to defend their rights in the name of the principle of liberty.
All the partisans of democracy or socialism applauded them. The agitation became general; it
seemed as if they wanted to make up for lost time by this tremendous activity; everywhere Sunday
schools were started and public libraries opened; workingmen's associations were formed on
socialistic principles, and the ardent younger generation spoke to the ignorant masses and
asked them to join them in the coming struggle.

This epoch has been called "the moral springtime" of Russia, and in truth it was a spring with
all of its real splendors and illusions. A sudden wave of life surged from one end of the empire
to the other. Up above, the government was making reforms prudently, as if afraid of going
too far; down below, a great transformation was taking place. It was at this time that certain
bold projects were contemplated at which the government took fright. The "springtime" proved
ephemeral. A triumphant reaction nipped in the bud this movement towards emancipation, with
all its hopes. In 1877, after the Russo-Turkish war, it seemed as if the movement were going
to start again. Less vast and less diverse, but more definite, it immediately put all of its
strength into the popular propaganda and showed its activity by the assassination of the emperor
and by several other crimes. It was a terrible struggle, till finally the leaders again succumbed
under the mighty blows of their adversaries. The years that followed this defeat (1880-1905)
were most inauspicious in Russian life. A profound apathy deadened society, and an atmosphere
of anguish and disillusion--which have left visible traces in Russian literature--weighed it down.

       *       *       *       *       *

In short, it may be said that Russian thought has always been led away by the theories of certain
European parties who are most opposed to political and social organization of the state.

The vigor, the clearness, and the force of negation with which this characteristic manifests
itself in the ideas and customs of the Russian radical-socialists have often distorted, in
the eyes of other countries, opinions or doctrines which it is important to present in their
true light.

Thus, Bazarov, that nihilistic creation of Turgenev, appeared to the English, French, and German
public as a mystical hero not viable in human society, while Pisarev, one of the sanest of
Russian critics, considers him as a model of the really free man. As to Turgenev himself, he
saw that the coming of this type would make concrete a rising force worthy of holding attention
and also of commanding some respect.

In practical life, this negative force has found its most extreme expression in what has already
been pointed out, that is, in the revolutionary anarchism of Bakunin and in Tolstoy's recent
theories of pacific anarchism, which are founded on the gospel. But, while very significant
as great illustrations of certain sides of Russian mentality, neither the one nor the other
of these anarchistic doctrines, so opposed in their substance, can be considered as an expression
of the modern Russian socialistic movement. Having found a basis in the workingman movement
of their country, the Russian socialistic theoreticians have become more practical, and their
activity turns back to the realm of European socialism, which is to be found in the doctrines
of Karl Marx.

There was a time in Europe when they christened with the name "nihilism" this active negation
of civilization and of bourgeois customs, so characteristic of the Russian "intellectuals."
Taken in its literal sense, this word is inexact, since those to whom it was applied were inspired
by a very high ideal. In a loose use of the word, nihilism has, on the contrary, a real significance,
especially if one connects it with most of the Russian "intellectuals." The liberal tendencies
which were brewing in the realistic literature of the period from 1840 to 1850, and which manifested
themselves suddenly with particular strength during the tumultuous decade between 1860 and
1870, made the substance of the new theories and the base of Russian mentality. These theories
were very bold in their negation, and it is for this reason that they have been called "nihilistic."

If this intellectual "élite" should some day triumph in Russia, will it be true to its moral
idea of justice and liberty? It probably will. We may then see the following phenomenon take
place: the realization of the most advanced program of modern civilization in one of the most
backward countries of Europe.

However paradoxical such a prevision may seem at first, it has a fundamental element of truth. I
tell all those small grovelling cells that extra nourishment would not be good for them. And
they shrink back from my moral reproof ashamed of themselves--and become wiry instead of fatty.
Which is as it should be."

"You're a queer chap!" said Helmsley, with a laugh.

"Think so? Well, I daresay I am--all Scotsmen are. There's always the buzzing of the bee in our
bonnets. I come of an ancient Highland stock who were certainly 'queer' as modern ways go,--for
they were famous for their pride, and still more famous for their poverty all the way through. As
far back as I can go in the history of my family, and that's a pretty long way, we were always
at our wit's end to live.

From the days of the founder of our house, a glorious old chieftain who used to pillage his neighbour
chieftain in the usual style of those glorious old times, we never had more than just enough
for the bare necessities of life. My father, as I told you, was a shepherd--a strong, fine-looking
man over six feet in height, and as broad-chested as a Hercules--he herded sheep on the mountains
for a Glasgow dealer, as low-down a rascal as ever lived, a man who,
so far as race and lineage went, wasn't fit to scrape mud off my father's
boots.

But we often see gentlemen of birth obliged to work for knaves of cash. That was the way it
was with my father. As soon as I was old enough--about ten,--I helped him in his work--I used
to tramp backwards and forwards to school in the nearest village, but after school hours I got
an evening job of a shilling a week for bringing home eight Highland bull-heifers from pasture. The
man who owned them valued them highly, but was afraid of them--wouldn't go near them for his
life--and before I'd been with them a fortnight they all knew me.

       I was only a wee laddie, but they answered to my call like friendly
dogs rather than the great powerful splendid beasts they were, with
their rough coats shining like floss silk in the sunset, when I went
to drive them home, singing as I came.

And my father said to me one night--'Laddie, tell me the truth--are ye ever scared at the bulls!'
'No, father!' said I--'It's a bonnie boy I am to the bulls!' And he laughed--by Jove!--how he laughed!
'Ye're a wee raskell!' he said--'An' as full o' conceit as an egg's full o' meat!' I expect
that was true too, for I always thought well of myself. You see, if I hadn't thought well
of myself, no one would ever have thought well of me!"

"There's something in that!" said Helmsley, the smile still lingering
in his eyes--"Courage and self-reliance have often conquered more
than eight bulls!"

"Oh, I don't call it either courage or self-reliance--it was just that I thought myself of too
much importance to be hurt by bulls or anything else,"--and Angus laughed,--then with a sudden knitting
of his brows as though his thoughts were making hard knots in his brain, he added--"Even as a
laddie I had an idea--and I have it now--that there was something in me which God had put there
for a purpose of His own,--something that he would not and could not destroy till His purpose
had been fulfilled!"

Mary stopped working and looked at him earnestly.

Her breath came and went quickly--her eyes shone dewily like stars in a summer haze,--she was deeply
interested.

"That was--and is--a conceited notion, of course,"--went on Angus, reflectively--"And I don't
excuse it. But I'm not one of the 'meek who shall inherit the earth.' I'm a robustious combustious
sort of chap--if a fellow knocks me down, I jump up and give it him back with as jolly good
interest as I can--and if anyone plays me a dirty trick I'll move all the mental and elemental
forces of the universe to expose him.

That's my way--unfortunately----"

"Why 'unfortunately'?" asked Helmsley.

Reay threw back his head and indulged in one of his mellow peals of
laughter.

"Can you ask why? Oh David, good old David!--it's easy to see you don't know much of the world! If you
did, you'd realise that the best way to 'get on' in the usual way of worldly progress, is to make
up to all sorts of social villains and double-dyed millionaire-scoundrels, find out all their
tricks and their miserable little vices and pamper them, David!--pamper them and flatter them
up to the top of their bent till you've got them in your power--and then--then use them--use
them for everything you want. For once you know what blackguards they are, they'll give you
anything not to tell!"

"I should be sorry to think that's true,"--murmured Mary.

"Don't think it, then,"--said Angus--"You needn't,--because millionaires are not likely to
come in your way. Nor in mine--now. I've cut myself adrift from all chance of ever meeting them.
But only a year ago I was on the road to making a good thing out of one or two of the so-called
'kings of finance'--then I suddenly took a 'scunner' as we Scots say, at the whole lot, and hated
and despised myself for ever so much as thinking that it might serve my own ends to become their
tool. So I just cast off ropes like a ship, and steamed out of harbour."

"Into the wide sea!" said Mary, looking at him with a smile that was
lovely in its radiance and sympathy.

 

"Into the wide sea--yes!" he answered--"And sea that was pretty rough at first. But one can
get accustomed to anything--even to the high rock-a-bye tossing of great billows that really don't
want to put you to sleep so much as to knock you to pieces. But I'm galloping along too fast. From
the time I made friends with young bulls to the time I began to scrape
acquaintance with newspaper editors is a far cry--and in the interim
my father died.

I should have told you that I lost my mother when I was born--and I don't think that the great
wound her death left in my father's heart ever really healed. He never seemed quite at one
with the things of life--and his 'bogle tales' of which I was so fond, all turned on the spirits
of the dead coming again to visit those whom they had loved, and from whom they had been taken--and
he used to tell them with such passionate conviction that sometimes I trembled and wondered if
any spirit were standing near us in the light of the peat fire, or
if the shriek of the wind over our sheiling were the cry of some unhappy
soul in torment.

Well! When his time came, he was not allowed to suffer--one day in a great storm he was struck
by lightning on the side of the mountain where he was herding in his flocks--and there he was
found lying as though he were peacefully asleep.

Death must have been swift and painless--and I always thank God for
that!"

He paused a moment--then went on--"When I found myself quite alone
in the world, I hired myself out to a farmer for five years--and worked
faithfully for him--worked so well that he raised my wages and would
willingly have kept me on--but I had the 'bogle tales' in my head
and could not rest.

It was in the days before Andrew Carnegie started trying to rub out the memory of his 'Homestead'
cruelty by planting 'free' libraries, (for which taxpayers are rated) all over the country--and pauperising
Scottish University education by grants of money--I suppose he is a sort of little Pontiff
unto himself, and thinks that money can pacify Heaven, and silence the cry of brothers' blood
rising from the Homestead ground.

In my boyhood a Scottish University education had to be earned by
the would-be student himself--earned by hard work, hard living, patience,
perseverance and grit.

That's the one quality I had--grit--and it served me well in all
I wanted.

I entered at St. Andrews--graduated, and came out an M.A. That helped
to give me my first chance with the press.

But I'm sure I'm boring you by all this chatter about myself! David, you stop me when you think
Miss Deane has had enough!"

Helmsley looked at Mary's figure in its pale lilac gown touched here
and there by the red sparkle of the fire, and noted the attentive
poise of her head, and the passive quietude of her generally busy
hands which now lay in her lap loosely folded over her lace work.

"Have we had enough, Mary, do you think?" he asked, with the glimmering
of a tender little smile under his white moustache.

She glanced at him quickly in a startled way, as though she had been suddenly wakened from a reverie.

"Oh
no!" she answered--"I love to hear of a brave man's fight with the world--it's the finest story
anyone can listen to."

Reay coloured like a boy.

"I'm not a brave man,"--he said--"I hope I haven't given you that idea. I'm an awful funk at times."

"When
are those times?" and Mary smiled demurely, as she put the question.

Again the warm blood rushed up to his brows.

"Well,--please don't laugh! I'm afraid--horribly afraid--of women!"

Helmsley's old eyes sparkled.

"Upon my word!" he exclaimed--"That's a funny thing for you to say!"

"It is, rather,"--and Angus looked meditatively into the fire--"It's not that I'm bashful, at
all--no--I'm quite the other way, really,--only--only--ever since I was a lad I've made such
an ideal of woman that I'm afraid of her when I meet her,--afraid lest she shouldn't come up
to my ideal, and equally afraid lest I shouldn't come up to hers! It's all conceit again! Fear
of anything or anybody is always born of self-consciousness. But I've been disappointed once----"

"In
your ideal?" questioned Mary, raising her eyes and letting them rest observantly upon his face.

"Yes.
I'll come to that presently. I was telling you how I graduated at St. Andrews, and came out
with M.A. tacked to my name, but with no other fortune than those
two letters.

       I had made a few friends, however, and one of them, a worthy old
professor, gave me a letter of recommendation to a man in Glasgow,
who was the proprietor of one of the newspapers there.

He was a warm-hearted, kindly fellow, and gave me a berth at once. It was hard work for little
pay, but I got into thorough harness, and learnt all the ins and outs of journalism. I can't
say that I ever admired the general mechanism set up for gulling the public, but I had to learn how
it was done, and I set myself to master the whole business. I had rather a happy time of it in
Glasgow, for though it's the dirtiest, dingiest and most depressing city in the world, with
its innumerable drunkards and low Scoto-Irish ne'er-do-weels loafing about the streets on Saturday
nights, it has one great charm--you can get away from it into some of the loveliest scenery in
the world. All my spare time was spent in taking the steamer up the Clyde, and sometimes going
as far as Crinan and beyond it--or what I loved best of all, taking a trip to Arran, and there
roaming about the hills to my heart's content. Glorious Arran! It was there I first began to feel
my wings growing!"

"Was it a pleasant feeling?" enquired Helmsley, jocosely.

"Yes--it was!" replied Angus, clenching his right hand and bringing it down on his knee with emphasis;
"whether they were goose wings or eagle wings didn't matter--the pricking of the budding quills
was an alive sensation! The mountains, the burns, the glens, all had something to say to me--or
I thought they had--something new, vital and urgent. God Himself seemed to have some great
command to impose upon me--and I was ready to hear and obey. I began to write--first verse--then
prose--and by and by I got one or two things accepted here and there--not
very much, but still enough to fire me to further endeavours.

Then one summer, when I was taking a holiday at a little village near Loch Lomond, I got the
final dig of the spur of fate--I fell in love."

Mary raised her eyes again and looked at him.

A slow smile parted her lips.

 
 
 "And did the girl fall in love with you?" she asked.

"For a time I believe she did,"--said Reay, and there was an under-tone of whimsical amusement
in his voice as he spoke--"She was spending the summer in Scotland
with her mother and father, and there wasn't anything for her to do.

She didn't care for scenery very much--and I just came in as a sort of handy man to amuse her.
She was a lovely creature in her teens,--I thought she was an angel--till--till I found her out."

"And
then?" queried Helmsley.

"Oh well, then of course I was disillusioned. When I told her that I loved her more than anything
else in the world, she laughed ever so sweetly, and said, 'I'm sure you do!' But when I asked
her if she loved me, she laughed again, and said she didn't know what I was talking about--she
didn't believe in love. 'What do you believe in?' I asked her.

And she looked at me in the prettiest and most innocent way possible, and said quite calmly and
slowly--'A rich marriage.' And my heart gave a great dunt in my side, for I knew it was all
over. 'Then you won't marry me?'--I said--'for I'm only a poor journalist. But I mean to be famous
some day!' 'Do you?' she said, and again that little laugh of hers rippled out like the tinkle
of cold water--'Don't you think famous men are very tiresome? And they're always dreadfully poor!'
Then I took hold of her hands, like the desperate fool I was, and kissed them, and said, 'Lucy,
wait for me just a few years! Wait for me! You're so young'--for she was only seventeen, and
still at school in Brighton somewhere--'You can afford to wait,--give
me a chance!' And she looked down at the water--we were 'on the bonnie
banks of Loch Lomond,' as the song says--in quite a picturesque little
attitude of reflection, and sighed ever so prettily, and said--'I
can't, Angus! You're very nice and kind!--and I like you very much!--but
I am going to marry a millionaire!' Now you know why I hate millionaires."

"Did
you say her name was Lucy?" asked Helmsley.

"Yes. Lucy Sorrel."

A
bright flame leaped up in the fire and showed all three faces to one
another--Mary's face, with its quietly absorbed expression of attentive
interest--Reay's strongly moulded features, just now somewhat sternly
shadowed by bitter memories--and Helmsley's thin, worn, delicately
intellectual countenance, which in the brilliant rosy light flung
upon it by the fire-glow, was like a fine waxen mask, impenetrable
in its unmoved austerity and calm. Not so much as the faintest flicker
of emotion crossed it at the mention of the name of the woman he knew
so well,--the surprise he felt inwardly was not apparent outwardly,
and he heard the remainder of Reay's narration with the most perfectly
controlled imperturbability of demeanour.

"She told me then," proceeded
Reay--"that her parents had spent nearly all they had upon her education,
in order to fit her for a position as the wife of a rich man--and
that she would have to do her best to 'catch'--that's the way she
put it--to 'catch' this rich man as soon as she got a good opportunity.
He was quite an old man, she said--old enough to be her grandfather.
And when I asked her how she could reconcile it to her conscience
to marry such a hoary-headed rascal----"

Here Helmsley interrupted
him.

"Was he a hoary-headed rascal?"

"He must have been," replied
Angus, warmly--"Don't you see he must?"

Helmsley smiled.

"Well--not
exactly!" he submitted, with a gentle air of deference--"I think--perhaps--he
might deserve a little pity for having to be 'caught' as you say just
for his money's sake."

"Not a bit of it!" declared Reay--"Any old
man who would marry a young girl like that condemns himself as a villain.
 This recalls some of the early works of Gogol, but,
we repeat, one finds no moral element in this laughter, and these tiny comedies are in reality
no more than simple vaudeville sketches. Once in a while we find a sad note; less frequently,
we find the sadness accentuated in order to present a terrible drama. Such, then, are the contents
of the first two volumes which came from the pen of Tchekoff.

However, this melancholy little note, met from time to time, gradually grew in intensity in
the third volume, until later on it lost all trace of the old carelessness, and developed,
on the contrary, into a profound sadness. Tchekoff unconsciously gave up the "genre" of pleasant
anecdote in order to concentrate all his attention on facts. This practice made him sad. Russia
was, at this time, going through a period of prostration as a result of the last Russo-Turkish
war. This war, which, at the cost of enormous sacrifices, ended in the liberation of the Bulgarian
people, awakened among the Russians a hope of obtaining their own liberty, and provoked among
the younger generation the most energetic efforts to obtain this liberty, no matter what the
cost might be. Alas, this hope was frustrated! All efforts were in vain, a reaction followed,
and the year 1880 brought the reaction to its height. From then on apathy followed in the steps
of the great enthusiasm. All illusion fled. A kind of disenchantment filled all minds. Those
who had hoped with such ardor, and had counted on their own strength, felt weak and powerless.
Some confined themselves to moaning incessantly. A grey twilight enveloped Russian life and
filled it with melancholy. These are the dreary aspects that Tchekoff describes, and none has
excelled him in portraying the events of this hopeless reaction. His stories and dramas give
us a long procession of people who succumb to the monotony, to the platitudes, to the desolation,
of existence.

It is in the following manner that one of his characters expresses his ideas on the subject
of this moral crisis:

"I was then not more than twenty-six years of age; nevertheless I was conscious not only that
life was senseless, but that it was without any visible goal; that all was illusion and dupery;
that, in its consequences and even in its very essence, the life of the exiled on the island
of Sakhaline was very much the same as the life that was led at Nice; that the difference between
the brain of Kant and the brain of a fly was very small; finally, that no one in this world
was either right or wrong."

This idea of the nothingness of life, with its extremes, monstrous and profitless, is often
found in the work of Tchekoff. His story "The Kiss" is but a variation of this theme,--the
absurdity of life. Lieutenant Riabovich, under the influence of a chance kiss, a kiss that
was not meant for him, dreams of love for an entire summer; he waits impatiently for the return
of the pretty stranger; but alas, his lovely dream cannot be realized, for the simple and cruel
reason that no one is waiting for him, no one is interested in him. One day, on the banks of
a stream, the young officer gives himself up to his reflections:

"The water flows off; one knows not where nor why; it flowed in exactly the same way last May;
from the stream it flows into the river, and then into the sea; then it evaporates, turns into
rain, and perhaps the very same water again flows by before my eyes.... To what good? Why?"
And all life appears to Riabovich an absurd mystification and seems thoroughly senseless.

The hero of "The Bet" absolutely scorns humanity, with its petty and its great deeds, its little
and its great ideas, because he feels that after all everything must disappear, be annihilated,
and the earth itself will turn into a mass of ice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tchekoff has given us innumerable rough sketches typical of people belonging to the most diverse
social classes. He seems to take his readers by the hand and to lead them wherever he can show
them characteristic scenes of modern Russian society,--be it in the country, in the factory,
in princely dwellings, at the post-office, or on the highway. He barely takes the time absolutely
necessary to depict in a few, appropriate words a state of mind or the secret of a gesture.
One would say that he hastens to express the totality of life with the variety of his detached
manifestations of it. That is why his stories are short; often mere allusions stand in place
of actual development. And whatever domains or corners of Russian life the reader, under the
guiding hand of this perspicacious cicerone, may visit, he will almost always go away with
one predominating impression: the lamentable isolation of Russia.

"The Windswept Grain" shows the reader a religious establishment, where a young Jew, recently
converted, has taken refuge. Here is a young man, very impressionable and eager to learn, who
has fled from his home and his family, whose prejudices offended him. His family tries every
means to bring him back and to punish his apostasy.

In order to employ his energies effectively, the young proselyte, who has embraced the new
religion only that he may follow progress, tries to get a position as a school-teacher. But
the apostleship of learning cannot satisfy his versatile mind: he continues to flit from one
thing to another, like a gypsophilia, driven by the wind across the entire stretch of the steppes
of southern Russia.

Then Tchekoff takes us to a postal station to show us another type of the "Windswept Grain."
This man, like the young convert, is a dreamer, who puts heart and soul into any new idea that
comes along. He also has spent his life in searching for an activity corresponding to his ideal.
At present, being a widower, he is obliged to support both himself and his daughter, who, while
loving him devotedly, never ceases to reproach him for the many inconveniences of their uncertain
existence. In the evening, a young widow from a neighboring province gets off at the place
where he and his daughter are living. When she sees the young girl pouting, she consoles her
by caressing her with the tact peculiar to women. Then, at tea time, she starts talking to
the father. The idealist tells of his life, and reveals to the young woman the plans that he
has made. The true sympathy with which she listens, and the respectful and tender feeling that
he has for her, inevitably makes the reader think that fate has not brought these two people
together in vain, and that their lives will be united. This impression persists when on the
next day we find the young woman entering her carriage assisted by her companion of the evening
before. We wait for the word that will unite this couple. But neither of them pronounces the
all-important phrase. The carriage leaves; the man remains for a long time motionless as a
statue, watching with a mingled feeling of joy and suffering the distant road and his disappearing
happiness, which, but a moment ago, he seemed to hold in his hand.

After those who insist on always realizing their temporary ideals, let us take up characters
of a new type, those whom destiny has irredeemably conquered, and who have finally resigned
themselves to their fate.

An example of this type is Sofia Lvovna in "Volodia the Great and Volodia the Small." Married
to a rich colonel, she has no other end in life. The days pass, tiresome, monotonous, filled
only with visits and driving; the nights are interminable and sad near this husband whom she
does not love, and whom she married out of spite and for money. Love for a comrade of her youth,
Volodia by name, fills her heart. But this young man, who has recently finished his studies,
is just as commonplace and just as debauched as her husband and the society which surrounds
her. Sofia Lvovna is not yet resigned to her fate. She speaks of her aspirations to her childhood
friend, who, after getting from her what he desires, leaves her at the end of a week. And Sofia
Lvovna becomes frightened at the thought that for the young girls and women of her station
there is no other alternative than to go on riding in carriages, or to enter a convent and
gain salvation.

"The Attack" gives us an example of the terrible feeling of terror that suddenly enters the
proud soul of a young man at his first contact with certain realities.

The student Vassiliev, a young man of excessively nervous temperament, has visited a house
of ill-fame, and since then, he cannot rid himself of his painful impressions. Sombre thoughts
beset his mind: "Women, living women!" he repeats, his head between his hands. "If I broke
this lamp you would say that it was too bad; but down there it is not lamps that they break,
it is the existence of human creatures! Living women!..."

He dreams of several ways of saving these unfortunates, and he decides childishly to stand
on a street-corner, and say to each passer-by:

"Where are you going? and why? Fear God."

But this desire soon gives place to a general state of anguish and hatred of himself. The evil
seems too great for him, and its vastness crushes him. In the meantime, the people about him
do not suffer; they are indifferent or incredulous. The student feels that he is losing his
mind. They confine him. Later on, when, cured, he leaves the alienist, "he blushes at his anxiety."...
The general indifference has broken down his aspirations, smothered his vague dream.

In "Peter the Bishop," we see a man, good and simple, the son of peasants. This man, thanks
to his intelligence, has raised himself to the rank of bishop. During all his life he has suffocated
in this high ecclesiastical position, the pompous tinsel of which troubles him to such an extent
that the cordial and sincere relationship existing between him and his old mother, who is so
full of respect for her son, is broken off. After his death he is quickly forgotten. The old
mother, now childless, when she walks in the fields with the women of the village, still speaks
of her children, of her grandchildren, and of her son, the bishop. But she speaks timidly of
him, as if she feared that they would not believe her. And, in truth, no one puts any faith
in what she says.

It is among the people and the working classes that man is most completely rid of all traces
of an artificial and untruthful exterior; the struggle against misery does not leave much room
for other preoccupations; life is merciless, it crushes unrelentingly man's dreams of happiness,
and often does not leave any one to share the burden of sorrows or even its simple cares. The
short and very touching story of "The Coachman" gives us an excellent example of this loneliness.
Yona, a poor coachman, has lost his son; he feels that he has not the strength to live through
this sorrow alone; he feels the absolute need of speaking to some one. But he tries in vain
to confide his sorrows to one or the other of his patrons. No one listens to him. Therefore,
once his day's work is over, alone in the stable, he pours out his heart to his horse: "Yes,
my little mare, he is dead, my beloved child.... Let us suppose that you had a colt, and that
this colt should suddenly die, wouldn't that cause you sorrow?" The mare looks at him with
shining eyes, and snuffles the hand of her master, who ends by telling her the entire story
of the sickness and death of his son.

In "The Dreams," a miserable vagabond, whom two constables are taking to the neighboring city,
dreams aloud of the pleasant life he expects to lead in Siberia, whither he hopes to be deported.
His gaolers listen to him not without a certain interest. They also begin to dream ... they
dream of a free country, from which they are separated by an enormous stretch of land, a country
that they can hardly conceive. One of them brusquely interrupts the dreams of the vagabond:
"That's all right, brother, you'll never get to that enchanted land. How are you going to get
there? You are going to travel 300 versts and then you'll give your soul up to God. You are
already almost gone." And then, in the imagination of the vagabond, other scenes present themselves:
the slowness of justice, the temporary jails, the prison, the forced marches and the weary
halts, the hard winters, sickness, the death of comrades.... "A shudder passes through his
whole body, his head trembles and his body contracts like a worm which has been trodden upon...."

Let us now look at those numerous stories of Tchekoff which treat of peasant life: "The Peasants,"
"The Murder," "In the Ravine," and others.

"The Peasants" is one of the most important of the stories which treat of the country, and
was recently conspicuous for bringing up the question, violently discussed by the Marxists
and the Populists, of the life of the people in the city and in the country.

Nicholas Chigueldyev, a waiter in a Moscow hotel, falls sick and has to leave his work. All
his savings go into the hands of the doctor and the druggist. As he does not seem to improve,
he decides to return to his native village, where his family is still living. If the air of
the country does not cure him, he will at least die at home. He had left the village at an
early age, and had never gone back to visit. He goes home with his wife and his little daughter.
There he finds his mother, his father, and his two brothers and their wives in the most abject
misery. The whole family is entombed in a dark and filthy "isba" full of flies. Nicholas and
his wife immediately see that it would have been better for them to have remained in Moscow.
But it is too late. They haven't enough money to return; they must remain. A horrible life
begins for the sick man and his family. There are endless quarrels, blows, abuses. They reproach
one another for eating and even for living. They are angry at Nicholas and his wife for having
come. The latter is soon tired of this existence. In the city Nicholas had broken himself of
country manners. He wants to go back to Moscow. But where find the money for the trip?... His
sickness becomes more acute. An old tailor, a former nurse, who has been called in, promises
to cure him; he bleeds him several times and Nicholas dies. The widow and her little daughter
spend the winter in the village. The young woman, who had watched during those long days of
suffering, is now broken down. When spring comes, the mother and daughter go to the church,
and, after praying at the grave of their dead, they go begging on the highway.

In "The Murder" Tchekoff studies certain manifestations in the spiritual life of the peasants.
Matvey Terekof belongs to a peasant family the members of which are all known for their piety;
in the village they are called "the singing boys." Very orthodox, they hold themselves aloof
and give themselves over to mysticism.

Instead of playing with his little comrades, Matvey is constantly poring over the Gospel. His
piety increases, he prays night and day, hardly eats anything, and experiences "a singular
joy at feeling himself grow weaker through the fasting." One day he notices that the priest
of the village is less pious than he. He enters a convent in the hopes of finding there true
Christians. But even there his disillusionment comes soon. Finally, he decides to found a church
of his own. He hires a little room which he transforms into a chapel. He finds disciples and
soon gains a reputation as a thaumaturgical saint.

A sect, of which he is to be the head, is in process of formation, when, one day, he finds
that he is on the wrong track. He thinks he has committed a mortal sin. Pride has taken possession
of him; it is the Devil and not God who now directs his moves. Conscious of his error, he returns
to orthodoxy, and, in the hopes of expiating his wrong-doing, he humiliates himself everywhere
and on every occasion.

But his cousin Jacob, having become infected with his earlier ideas, practises them with the
fanatic ardor of a neophyte. With his sister and several other religious people, he locks himself
into his house to pray; he sings vespers and matins. In the meanwhile Matvey decides that he
must read Jacob a sermon.

"Be reasonable," he tells him repeatedly, "repent, cousin. You will lose, because you are the
prey of the demon. Repent."

Instead of repenting, Jacob and his sister vow an implacable hatred against Matvey; so extreme
is their feeling, that one day, at the end of an altercation, Jacob, blinded by rage, kills
his cousin.

He is judged and condemned. He is sent to the island of Sakhaline. There, he languishes, suffers,
and despairs. But, little by little, his mind grows peaceful, and he has consoling visions.
In prison he is surrounded by pariahs and criminals, and the sight of all this human suffering
turns him again towards God, towards the religion of Love, the religion of pity for mankind.
And now he wants to return to the country to tell of the miracle that has taken place in him,
and to save souls from ill and ignorance.

In "The Ravine" evil and injustice triumph at times with revolting cynicism. Evil is in everything
and everywhere: "in the great manufacturers who drive along the streets of the village, crushing
men and beasts; in the bailiff and the recorder, who are such bad characters that their very
faces betray their knavery;" and finally, in the central figure of the story, Axinia, the wife
of Stepan, the youngest son of Tzibukine, a usurer and monopolist.

The unhealthy ravine hides a village inhabited by factory workers. The best house belongs to
Gregory Tzibukine, who traffics in everything: brandy, wheat, cattle, lumber, and usury, on
the side. His eldest son, Anissme, is employed at the police station and seldom comes home;
the second son, Stepan, is deaf and sickly; he helps his father both well and badly, and his
wife, the pretty and coquettish Axinia, runs all day between the cellar and the shop. The father
Tzibukine is also friendly to her and respects this young woman, for she is a very good worker
and is most intelligent. Tzibukine, a widower, has married Varvara, an affable and pious soul
who gives alms,--a strange thing in this family who cheat everybody. Anissme often sends home
beautiful letters and presents. One day, he comes unexpectedly; he has an unquiet, and, at
the same time, flippant air. His parents have decided to get him married, and, although he
is a drunkard, ugly and vulgar, they have found him a pretty wife. The girl is Lipa, daughter
of a poor widow, a laborer like her mother. Anissme whistles and looks at the ceiling, and
shows no signs of pleasure at his coming marriage. He leaves the house in a strange manner,
and appears again three days before the wedding, bringing to his parents, as gifts, some newly
coined money. The wedding day has come. The clergy and the well-to-do of the neighborhood are
present at the dinner, which is sumptuously served. Lipa seems petrified with fear, for she
barely knows her husband. The festivities last a long time; at intervals the voices of women
can be heard outside hurling curses at the usurer. Then Anissme, red, drunk, and sweating,
is shoved into the room where Lipa has already disrobed. Five days later, Anissme comes to
his mother and bids her good-bye. He confides in her that some one has given him advice, and
that he has decided either to become rich or to perish. Now that her husband has departed,
Lipa again becomes gay.

Meanwhile, they have arrested a reaper accused of having circulated a bad piece of money which
he says he received from Anissme the night of the wedding. Tzibukine goes home, examines the
money that his son has given him, and decides that it is all counterfeit. He orders Axinia
to throw every bit of it into the well. But, instead of obeying, she pays it out as wages to
the workmen. A week passes; they find out that Anissme has been thrown into prison as a counterfeiter.
Tzibukine despairs; he feels his strength diminishing. Varvara continues to pray and to watch,
while Stepan and Axinia continue to ply their trade as before. When, later on, Anissme is sentenced
to ten years at hard labor in Siberia, Varvara suggests to her husband that he should leave
one of his houses to the child which has just been born to Lipa, so that no one will speak
badly of him after his death. But, at this suggestion, Axinia flies into such a fury, that,
in her homicidal rage, she throws a kettle of boiling water over the child, who dies later
at the hospital. Finally, she drives the young woman out of the house. Lipa returns to her
mother. Soon Axinia reigns as absolute mistress of the house. Tzibukine becomes distracted;
he does not take care of his money any more, because he cannot tell the good from the bad.
Rumor has it that his daughter-in-law is letting him die of hunger. Varvara still goes on with
her good work. Anissme is forgotten. The old man, starving, and driven from home, lodges a
complaint against the young woman. Coming back to the village, the old man, tottering along
the street, meets Lipa and her mother, who are now doing tile work.

"Both bow deeply to him, and he looks at them with tears in his eyes. Lipa offers him a piece
of oatmeal cake, and the two women go on their way, crossing themselves several times...."

The virtuous Varvara is an extremely characteristic type, with a subtle psychology, carefully
worked out; her honesty and goodness form an indispensable contrast to the ambient horrors.

The author himself explains the rôle of Varvara and her action in this system of evil. "Her
alms seem to be something strange, joyous and free, like the red flowers and the lights that
glow before the saintly images." On holidays, and on jubilees, which last three days, when
coarse and rotten meat is sold to the peasants who come to pawn their scythes and hats, or
their wives' shawls; when the workingmen lie in the gutter under the influence of bad brandy,
then "one feels a bit relieved at the thought that down there, in that house, there is a good
and quiet woman, always ready to help unfortunates."

Lipa and her mother are good and timid souls who suffer in silence, and give to the poor the
little that they possess:

"It seemed to them that some one up on high, further up than the azure, there among the stars,
saw what was going on in their village, and watched. Big as the evil is, in spite of it, the
night is beautiful and calm; justice is and will be calm and beautiful on God's earth also;
the universe awaits the moment when it can melt into this justice, as the light of the moon
melts into the night."

       *       *       *       *       *

These, then, are Tchekoff's favorite themes, on which he has traced numerous variations, always
breathing forth a profound melancholy.

"The life of our industrial classes," he says, "is dark, and drags itself along in sort of
a twilight; as to the life of our common people, workingmen and peasants, it is a black night,
made up of ignorance, poverty, and all sorts of prejudices."

But from this ocean of ignorance, of barbarity, of misery which makes up the life of a peasant,
Tchekoff has taken out the things of most importance, things that always happen in the most
solemn moments of their existence.

"All," he says, in describing a religious procession in the country, "the old man, his wife
and the others, all stretch forth their hands to the ikon of the holy Virgin, regard her ardently,
and say through their tears: 'Protectress! Virgin protectress!' And all seem to have understood
that the space between Heaven and Earth is not empty; that the rich and the mighty have not
swallowed up everything; that there is protection against all wrongs, slavery, misery, the
fatal brandy...."

Besides, in a story entitled "My Life," Poloznev, speaking of the peasants, expresses himself
in the following manner:

"They were, for the most part, nervous and irritable people, ignorant, and improvident, who
could think of nothing but the grey earth and black bread; a people who were crafty, but were
stupid about it, like the birds, who, when they want to hide themselves, only hide their heads.
They would not do the mowing for you for twenty rubles, but they would do it for six liters
of brandy, notwithstanding the fact that with twenty rubles they can buy eight times as much.
What vice and foolishness! Nevertheless, one feels that the life of the peasant has a great
deal of depth. It makes no difference that he, behind his plough, resembles an awkward beast,
or that he gets intoxicated. In spite of all, when you look at him closely, you feel that he
possesses the essential thing, the sentiment of justice."

This love of justice Tchekoff has had occasion to observe even among convicts. "The convict,"
he says, in his book on the prison of Sakhaline, of which he made a profound study during his
stay on the island, "the prisoner, completely corrupted and unjust as he himself is, loves
justice more than any one else does, and if he does not find it in his superiors, he becomes
angry, and grows baser and more distrustful from year to year."

       *       *       *       *       *

In the last works of Tchekoff the pessimistic tendency grows greater and greater. It seems
as if the writer had gone through a sort of moral crisis, brought on by the conflict of his
old despair and his new hopes. At this time, Russian society itself began to shake off its
apathy, and this awakening, sweeping like a vivifying wave into the soul of the sad artist,
opened for him, at the same time, perspectives of new ideas.

This second aspect of Tchekoff's talent is perceptible in the story called "The Student." A
seminarist, Velikopolsky by name, tells the gardener Vassilissa and her daughter Lukeria about
St. Peter's denial of Christ. As a result of the impression which this story makes on her Vassilissa
suddenly breaks into tears; she weeps a long time and hides her face as if she were ashamed
of crying. Lukeria, who has been watching the student fixedly, blushes and her face takes on
the tender and sad expression which is characteristic of those whose life is made up of deep
suffering. After taking leave of them, the student thinks that Vassilissa's tears and the emotion
of her daughter come from sorrows connected with the things he has just told them.

"If the old woman wept, it was not because he knew how to tell the story in a touching manner,
but because Peter was near to her, and because she was interested, heart and soul, in what
was going on in the mind of the apostle...."

Joy suddenly fills his heart, and he stops a moment to take a long breath. "The past," he muses,
"is bound to the present by an uninterrupted chain of events." "And it seems to him that he
has just seen the two ends of this chain: he has touched one, and the other has vibrated...."

       *       *       *       *       *

In an ironical manner and by using very personal material, Tchekoff paints more than anything
else, life in its passive or negative manifestations. Nevertheless, it is not satire, at least
not in its general trend, for in his work we find too much human tenderness for satire. He
does not laugh at his characters, and does not nail them to the pillory in an outburst of indignation.
In his writing, the fundamental idea is fused with the form; his talent is calm, thoughtful,
observing; but it seems, at times, that this calmness, this seeming indifference, is only a
mask. A critic, speaking of Tchekoff, has said: "He is a tender crayon." It would be hard to
find a more suitable expression. The delicacy of tone, the softness of touch in the outlines,
the polish of some of the details, the capricious incompleteness of others are, in fact, the
mark of his talent.

Tchekoff was such a voluminous author that it would require a veritable effort to remember
the throng of characters which exists in his books; and it is more than difficult not to confuse
their individual doings and achievements. This abundance is connected with a peculiarity in
the author's talent. He does not exhaust his subject; the psychology of his characters is emphasized
by two or three expressive traits only, and this epitome is enough to make the theme of a story,
the simplicity and naturalness of which demand, nevertheless, a high degree of art. The author
is not interested in outlining the details, but the picture that he has sparingly conjured
up stands out lifelike; he is always in a hurry to observe and to tell. Therefore the brevity
and quantity of his stories. His stories seldom exceed ten pages in length, while some do not
exceed four. They constitute a series of sketches, of miniatures of rare value, among which
can be found some real gems. One cannot say as much for his longer works, where certain parts
are exaggerated, as in "The Valet de Chambre," "Ward No. 6," "The Steppe," and "The Duel."

The characters of the latter novel are especially weak and bad. There is but one exception,
the zoologist von Koren, a man of determination, who believes that the suppression of useless
people and degenerates would be a meritorious piece of work. This idea is suggested to him
by the sight of a functionary called Layevsky, an insignificant and lazy person, who has taken
the wife of one of his friends and fled with her to the Caucasus.

"The Valet de Chambre" is an equally unsatisfactory story. The principal character is a young
man who is supposed to be a revolutionist. He enters the service of a Petersburg dandy in hopes
of meeting there a minister whom he wants to kill. The employer of the pseudo-lackey, who is
not aware of any of his projects, is a masterful presentation of a type which we know as the
sybaritical citizen; the character of the valet is so fantastical that the account of his adventures
belongs absolutely to the "genre" of the newspaper novel.[3]

 [3] In many European papers there is always to be found a part
 called the "feuilleton," which usually consists of a serial story,
 continued from day to day.

"Ward No. 6" is one of the most powerful, if not the most powerful story that Tchekoff has
written. It is an analysis of moral degeneration, leading progressively to insanity, in a doctor
who is seized by the pervasive banality of the village in which he practises. Tchekoff, like
many other Russian writers, has shown himself a master in the study of certain psychological
anomalies. Certain conversations between the doctor, who himself is going mad, and a patient
who has long since lost his reason, interesting as they are from a philosophical standpoint,
leave the world of reality and run free according to the imagination of the author, who takes
advantage of this to formulate some of his favorite theories.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tchekoff has also tried himself out on the drama, and he has there established himself in a
peculiar manner. His plays, like his other literary productions, belong to two distinct periods.

There are some amusing little trifles that do not amount to much. Among these are: "The Bear,"
"The Asking in Marriage," and others. Then come the more serious plays, where one feels for
a moment the influence of Ibsen. We find here again the same heroes, each of whom talks about
his own particular case, and acts only in starts. These are specimens of "failures" belonging
to the most tiresome provincial society.

In "Ivanov," the author studies the mentality of a "failure." Dominated by a sickly self-love,
he has known nothing but losses. He continually complains of his real and his imaginary sufferings.
After squandering all his fortune, he marries a young girl, whom he wants to have act as his
nurse. This empty life ends in suicide.

In "Uncle Vanya," we have Vanya, a man full of goodness, modesty, and self-abnegation contrasted
with the celebrated professor Serebriakof, an egoist, unfeeling, scornful, and ungrateful.
The latter, who has recently remarried, comes back to the estate which Uncle Vanya, the brother
of his first wife, has managed for him. For several years Vanya has been working incessantly;
he has saved in every possible way so that he can send as much money as possible to his brother-in-law,
this professor, fondled and pampered by the whole family, who see in him their glorification.
But Serebriakof soon gets tired of the country; besides, he thinks that the doctor--a friend
of the family who is taking care of him--does not understand his sickness, and he begins to
mistrust him. He wants to go away, to travel, in order to recover his health, and, in order
to make money, he proposes to sell the estate, which legally belongs to Sonya, the daughter
of his first wife.

Up to this time Uncle Vanya and the other members of the family as well, had sacrificed themselves
entirely to this celebrated man. But at this proposition Vanya realizes that their idol is
nothing but an abominable egoist, and he begins to despise his brother-in-law. What is more,
he secretly loves the young and beautiful wife of the professor, while she suffers from the
everlasting complaints and caprices of her husband. However, a general reconciliation takes
place. The professor and his wife leave for the city, and all goes on as before; Uncle Vanya
and the family will sacrifice themselves for the glory of Serebriakof, to whom all the revenues
of the estate are sent.

The "Three Sisters," that is to say the sisters of Prozorov, live with their brother in a vulgar,
tiresome town,--a town lacking in men of superior minds, a town where one person is like the next.

The great desire of the three sisters is to go to Moscow, but their apathy keeps them in the
country, and they continue to vegetate while philosophizing about everything that they see.
However, at the arrival of a regiment, they become animated, and have sentimental intrigues
with the officers till the very day of their departure.

"They are going to leave; we shall be alone; the monotonous life is going to begin again,"
cries one of the sisters.

"We must work; work alone consoles," says the second.

And the youngest exclaims, embracing her two sisters, while the military band plays the farewell
march:

"Ah, my dear sisters, your life is not yet completed. We are going to live. The music is so
gay! Just a little bit more, and I feel that we shall know why we live, why we suffer...."

This certainly is the dominant note of Tchekoff's philosophy: the impotency of living mitigated
by a vague hope of progress.

The last, and perhaps the most important play of Tchekoff, is "The Cherry Garden."[4] Human
beings, locked up in themselves, morally bounded, impotent and isolated, wander about in the
old seignioral estate of the Cherry Garden. The house is several centuries old. In former times
a happy life was led there; feasts were given, and generals and princes were the hosts. The
Cherry Garden gave tone to the neighborhood, but many years have passed!... Now other houses
have taken its place: the estate is mortgaged, the interest is not paid, and the only guests
now are the postman or a railway official who lives close by. The occupants of the house do
not think of doing anything about this state of things. For them the past is gone. All that
is left is a dislike for work, carelessness, improvidence, and ignorance of the necessities
of the present. Like all that dies, they evoke a certain pity, a certain fatality hangs over
them. The inhabitants of the Cherry Garden set forth their ideas about one another; but in
reality none of them see anything but themselves, in their small and very limited moral world,
and they analyze with difficulty the embryos of thought that are left to them. Thus, they cannot
grasp in full the evil that is falling on the old home, and they remain impassive when some
one proposes to alleviate this evil by energetic means. People speak to them of the downfall
to which they are doomed; a means of safety is proposed, but they turn a deaf ear and continue
in their narrow and fruitless dream. Finally, when the estate is sold, they look upon this
event as a fatal and unexpected blow. They say good-bye to the cradle of their family, weeping
silently, and depart.

 [4] For some reason, unknown to the translator, the author has
 made no mention of Tchekoff's famous play, "The Sea-Gull." This
 drama, which, when first produced, was a flat failure, scored a
 tremendous success a short while afterwards. It is especially
 interesting in that the author has made one of the characters,
 Trigorin, largely autobiographical. To-day "The Sea-Gull" is one
 of the most popular productions on the Russian stage.

They are now thrown out into the world. The old existence has gone, as well as the seignioral
estate. The Cherry Garden is to be torn down; the blinds are all lowered, and in the half-darkened
rooms, the old servant, who is nearly a century old, wanders about among the disordered furniture.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tchekoff is a true product of Russian literature, an autochthon plant, nourished by his natal
sap. His humor is completely Russian; we hear Tolstoyan notes in his democracy; the "failures"
of his stories are distantly related to the "superficial characters" of Turgenev; finally,
the theory of the redemption of the past by suffering which he puts in the heart of the hero
of the "Cherry Garden" makes us think of Dostoyevsky. The qualities which call to mind all
these great names in Russian literature are found in the works of Tchekoff along with characteristics
which show a very original talent. If one wishes to look for foreign influence, one can relate
Tchekoff to de Maupassant and Ibsen, of whom he reminds one in snatches, although still in
a very vague way. And that is indeed fortunate, for, in general, Scandinavian symbolism hardly
goes hand in hand with the Russian spirit, which likes to make direct answers to "cursed questions,"
and whose ideal, elaborated since 1840 in the realm of strict realism, is so definite that
it does not necessitate going back to the circumlocutions of metaphors and allegories.

While Tchekoff lived his literary aspect was enigmatical. Some judged him to be indifferent,
because they did not find in his writings that revolutionary spirit which is felt in almost
all modern writers. Others thought of him as a pessimist who saw nothing good in Russian life,
because he described principally resigned suffering or useless striving for a better life.
Since the death of Tchekoff, which made it necessary for the critics to study his works as
a whole, and especially since the publication of his correspondence, his character has come
to the fore, as it really is: he is a writer, who, by the very nature of his talent, was irresistibly
forced to study the inner life of man impartially, and who, consequently, remains the enemy
of all religious or philosophical dogmas which may hinder the task of the observer.

The division of men into good and bad, according to the point of view of this or that doctrine,
angered him:

"I fear," he says in one of his letters, "those who look for hidden meanings between the lines,
and those who look upon me as a liberator or as a guardian. I am neither a liberal nor a conservative,
neither a monk nor an indifferent person. I despise lies and violence everywhere and under
any form.... I only want to be an artist, and that's all."

One realized that this unfettered artist, with his hatred of lies and violence, although he
belonged to no political party, could be nothing but a liberal in the noblest and greatest
sense of the word. One also realized that he was not the pessimist that he was once believed
to be, but a writer who suffered for his ideal and who awakened by his works a desire to emerge
from the twilight of life that he depicted.

To some he even appeared as an enchanted admirer of the future progress of humanity. Did he
not often say, while admiring his own little garden: "Do you know that in three or four hundred
years the entire earth will be a flourishing garden? How wonderful it will be to live then!"
And did he not pronounce these proud words: "Man must be conscious of being superior to the
lions, tigers, stars, in short, to all nature. We are already superior and great people, and,
when we come to know all the strength of human genius, we shall be comparable to the gods."

These great hopes did not prevent him from painting with a vigorous brush the nothingness of
mankind, not only at a certain given moment and under certain circumstances, but always and
everywhere. Is this a paradox? No. If he did not doubt progress, he would be most pessimistic,
if I may so express myself. He would suffer from that earthly pessimism, in face of which reason
is weak; the pessimism which manifests itself by a hopeless sadness in face of the stupidity
of life and the idea of death.

"I, my friend, am afraid of life, and do not understand it," says one of Tchekoff's heroes.
"When, lying on the grass, I examine a lady-bird, it seems to me that its life is nothing but
a texture of horrors, and I see myself in it.... Everything frightens me because I understand
neither the motive nor the end of things. I understand neither persons nor things. If you understand
I congratulate you.

"When one looks at the blue sky for a long time, one's thoughts and one's soul unite mysteriously
in a feeling of solitude.... For a moment one feels the loneliness of the dead, and the enigma
of hopeless and terrible life."

This universal hopelessness; this sadness, provoked by the platitudes of existence compared
with the unrelenting lessons of death, of which Tchekoff speaks with such a nervous terror,
can be found in almost all the works of the best known Russian writers. We find it in Byronian
Lermontov, who sees nothing in life but "une plaisanterie;" in Dostoyevsky, who has written
so many striking pages of realism on the bitterness of a life without religious faith; and
in the realist Turgenev, we find the same kind of thing. Turgenev even reaches a stage of hopeless
nihilism, and one of his heroes, Bazarov,--in "Fathers and Sons,"--reflecting one day on the
lot of the peasant, considering it better than his, says sadly, "He, at least, will have his
little hut, while all I can hope for is a bed of thorns." Finally, all the tortuous quests
of the ideal toward which Tolstoy strove, were suggested to him, as he himself says, by his
insatiable desire to find "the meaning of life, destroyed by death."

It is sometimes maintained that this state of intellectual sadness is innate in the Russians;
that their sanguinary and melancholy temperaments are a mixture of Don Quixote and Hamlet.
Foreign critics have often traced this despair to the so-called mysticism peculiar to the Slavonic
race.

What is there mystical in them? The consciousness of the nothingness, of the emptiness of human
life, can be found deep down in the souls of nearly all mankind. It shows itself, among most
people, only on rare tragic occasions, when general or particular catastrophes take place;
at other times it is smothered by the immediate cares of life, by passions that grip us, and,
finally, by religion. But none of these influences had any effect on Tchekoff. He was too noble
to be completely absorbed by the mean details of life; his organism was too delicate to become
the prey of an overwhelming passion; and his character too positive to give itself over to
religious dogmas. "I lost my childhood faith a long time ago," he once wrote, "and I regard
all intelligent belief with perplexity.... In reality, the 'intellectuals' only play at religion,
chiefly because they have nothing else to do." Tchekoff, in his sober manner, has seen and
recognized the two great aspects of life: first, the world of social and historical progress
with its promise of future comforts; secondly, an aspect that is closely related to the above,
the obscure world of the unknown man who feels the cold breath of death upon him. He was an
absolute positivist; his positivism did not make him self-assertive nor peremptory; on the
contrary, it oppressed him.

But why should this sad state of mind, which has been expressed by great men in all literatures,
be so exceptionally prominent among the Russians, and particularly among the modern ones? The
reason is, without a doubt, because the political and social organization of Russia has always
been a prison for literature. Oppression had reached its height during Tchekoff's life. This
period was the moment of suffocation before the storm. If Tchekoff were alive to-day, now that
the tempest has burst forth, his sadness would be lessened, or it would at least have before
it the screen which, according to Pascal, people wear before their eyes that they may not see
the abyss, on the edge of which they pass their lives. Up to the present time, the Russians
have lacked these screens.

III

VLADIMIR KOROLENKO

"A long time ago, on a dark autumn evening, I was being rowed down a rather uninteresting Siberian
stream. Suddenly, at a bend in the river, I saw a bright fire burning ahead of us at the foot
of some black mountains. It did not seem far away.

"'Thank Heaven,' I cried with joy, 'we have nearly reached our stopping-place!'

"The boatsman turned, looked at the fire over his shoulder, and again grasped the oars with
an apathetic gesture:

"'That is still a long way off,' he murmured.

"I did not believe him, for the fire seemed to stand out very clear against the infinite shadows.
However, he was right; we were still far away.

"Just so those fires, the conquerors of darkness, deceive us into thinking that they are near,
while they only cast their distant, illusive rays into the night...."

It is with this sober description in "Little Fires" that one of the last volumes of Korolenko's
"Sketches and Stories" opens. This simple picture makes a warm and clear impression on one's
very soul. It is itself a precious and welcome light.

At times when life is sombre, and when shadows fill the heart, when, under the blows of despair
and anguish, courage finally fails, the mere existence of some brave spirit suffices to give
a new birth to hope and to rekindle the flame so that the distance is again lighted up, and
we again put our shoulders to the wheel.

Thus for more than thirty years in Russian literature Korolenko has played the part of one
of these clear, alluring lights. He has not written a single book in which we do not find a
fire that warms us with its caresses even from afar, not one in which we do not feel the vibration
of a loving heart, which dreams of giving light and joy to all unfortunates, and is confident
that if they have not yet had their equal share, they will surely have it some day.

Korolenko was born in 1853 in Zhitomir, in Little Russia. On his father's side he is descended
from an old Cossack family, and by his mother he is related to Polish nobility. This double
origin, so to speak, is shown very clearly in his works, which are filled with the melancholy
and dreamy poetry of the Little Russians, and also with the perennial hope so common among
the Poles.

His father was a judge and enjoyed a reputation for strict integrity. It was, in fact, often
hard for him to ward off those who wanted to thank him for his services. One day he had to
accept a gift. A merchant, whose case he had won, sent him a cart filled with various objects,
among which was a beautiful large doll. The little daughter of the judge saw it, and at once
took possession of it. The judge, when he found out what had happened, ordered the gifts to
be returned immediately; but, because of the grief of the little girl, they had to give up
all thoughts of returning the doll.

The judge, who was a man of firm principles, maintained a severe discipline in his family.
He made a special study of medicine and hygiene, and put his knowledge into practice by treating
the sick of the neighborhood. His children, although always well dressed, had to go around
barefoot. Their father was convinced that this was the best way to toughen them. Besides, they
were compelled, every morning, summer and winter, to take a cold plunge bath. The children
did not like this way of doing things. Early in the morning they used to run to the stable
in their shirts, and there, cowering in a corner, trembling with cold, they would wait for
their father to leave the house.

Korolenko remembers well this Spartan-like education, which inured him to the severity of the
seasons. Without this training he certainly would have perished in savage and freezing Siberia,
where he lived in exile for several years.

At the death of the father, the family with its six children was left without resources. The
mother, a very good and kind woman, opened a boys' boarding-school, and Vladimir, then fifteen
years of age, helped her as well as he could, and also earned money by giving lessons outside.

In 1870, after having finished his studies in his native town, Korolenko entered the Technological
Institute at St. Petersburg, where he spent two years in extreme poverty. He had to earn his
living as well as he could, by giving lessons or doing copying. His mother could not help him
at all, as she herself had to struggle against adversity. The following will show how sparingly
he had to live in his youth: during his two years, he had a real substantial meal only about
once in two months, and then in a restaurant run on philanthropic principles, where he paid
only 30 copecks (about 30 cents). His regular meals consisted of bread, tea, sausage and potatoes.
But this was an epoch in which living was cheap: the wave of democracy was spreading, and the
"intellectuals" were trying to get into closer touch with the people. The movement was so powerful
that many of the younger generation who could have done other things took up this work; others,
on principle, married humble peasants. In 1872 Korolenko left for Moscow, and there entered
the Academy of Agriculture. He was expelled after two years and sent to Kronstadt for having
taken part in student manifestations. Several years later, we find him again in St. Petersburg
without a permanent position; he was employed as a reader in a publishing house, and was also
attempting to do some writing. His first efforts took the form of a series of sketches, published
under the title, "Episodes in the Life of a Seeker." He was at this time accused of being too
much inspired by the scenes of sadness and injustice of which he had been a witness. In 1879
he was imprisoned and then deported to Viatka. He remained there a year. Thence he was sent
to the miserable town of Kama, and a few months later to Tomsk, where he learned that they
wanted to exile him to Siberia. In a letter, published by a newspaper, he eloquently protested
against the persecutions of which he was the unhappy victim. His protestation was answered
by his transfer to the frozen region of the province of Yakutsk in Eastern Siberia! He passed
three years in the midst of the "taiga," the immense virgin forest which covers this country,
in a village of nomads whose miserable huts, very low and smoky, were scattered along the shores
of the Aldane. Here he wrote several stories, and the "Dream of Makar," which was published
two years later, and greatly praised by the critics for its originality and its setting. The
dreary country around Yakutsk and the life that is lived there made such a profound impression
on the young man that even to-day he speaks of that time with real emotion.

"My hut was at the extreme end of the town. During the short day one could see the small plain,
the mountains which surrounded it, and the fires in the other huts, in which lived people who
were either descended from Russian colonists or deported Tartars. But in the morning and evening
a cold grey mist covered everything so thickly that one could not see a foot ahead.

"My little hut was like a lost island in a boundless ocean. Not a sound about me.... The minutes,
the hours passed, and insensibly the fatal moment approached when the 'cursed land' pierced
me with the hostility of its freezing cold and its terrible shadows, when the high mountains
covered with black forests rose menacingly before me, the endless steppes, all lying between
me and my country and all that was dear to me.... Then came the terrible sadness ... which,
in the depths of your heart, suddenly lifts up its sinister head, and in the terrible silence
among the shadows murmurs these words: 'This is the end of you ... the very end ... you will
remain in this tomb till you die....'

"A low and caressing whine brought me out of my heavy stupor: it was my friend, Cerberus, my
intelligent and faithful dog, who had been placed as a sentinel near the door. Chilled through
and through, he was asking me what was the matter and why, in such terribly cold weather, I
did not have a fire.

"Whenever I felt that I was going to be beaten in my struggle with silence and the shadows,
I turned to this wholesome expedient,--a large fire."

In 1885, Korolenko, having returned from Siberia, went to Nizhny-Novgorod, and in a relatively
short space of time wrote a series of stories which, two years later, were collected in book
form. Afterward, he became the editor of the celebrated St. Petersburg review, the "Russkoe
Bogatsvo,"--a position which he still holds.

       *       *       *       *       *

In all of Korolenko's works we distinctly feel the living breath that inspires the artist,
and the ardor of a fervent ideal. His god is man; his ideal, humanity; his "leitmotiv," the
poetry of human suffering. This intimate connection with all that is human is to be found in
his psychological analysis as well as in his descriptions of natural phenomena. Both God and
nature are in turn spiritualized and humanized. Korolenko looks at life from a human standpoint;
the world which he describes is made up wholly of men and exists for them only. He has a very
clear philosophy, and a conscience aware of the duties it has to perform. If he has not opened
up hitherto unknown paths, nor made new roads, he has himself nevertheless passed through terrible
experiences; he has been a prey to profound sorrows and doubts, and in spite of all, he has
kept his love for the people intact, and deeply pities their ignorance and abasement. His work
constantly recalls to our minds the theory that the cultivated classes are in debt to the people
for the education which they have received at the people's expense. This is the great moral
principle which governs the conscience of the Russian "intellectuals." It is in this sense
then, that Korolenko may be said to continue the literature of 1870, and to be the successor
of Zlatovratsky and Uspensky. But he has reincarnated this past in new forms, which naturally
result from the activity of his far-sighted, powerful intelligence. We do not find in his work
either the nervousness, often sickly, which pervades the works of Uspensky, or the optimism
of Zlatovratsky, which often excessively idealizes the life of the Russian peasant, who is
the principal hero of all his works. Korolenko, because he puts a high value on human personality,
perfectly appreciates the terrible struggle that man has to make in order to secure his rights.
A desire for justice on the one hand, and a defence of man's dignity on the other, form the
very essence of the talent of this author, and it is with these feelings that he observes the
people on whom injustice weighs most heavily and who have merely remnants of human dignity
left in their make-up,--for in general, these people are not those whom fate has overcome.
Most of them lead a hard and gloomy life beset with misfortunes. Many of them are vagabonds,
escaped convicts, drunkards, murderers, who are bowed down with misery, and have no wish except
to escape the mortal dangers of the Siberian forests and marshes. On opening any of Korolenko's
books we find ourselves, to use his own words, in "bad company." He does not flatter his heroes,
he does not make gentlemen of them; they are not even men, but rather human rubbish.

"Because I knew a lot about the world," he writes, "I knew that there were people who had lost
every vestige of humanity. I knew that they were corroded with vice and sunk deep in debauchery,
in which they lived contented. But when the recollection of these beings surged through my
mind, enveloped in the mists of the past, I saw nothing but a terrible tragedy, and felt only
an inexpressible sorrow...."

This author does not give any judgment on life; he does not condemn it and does not nourish
a preconceived spite against it, but his sad heart overflows with pity, and, if he approaches
this life, it is with the balm of love, in order to try to dress its terrible wounds.

For Korolenko, the sufferings of existence atone for its injustice; he does not perceive the
iniquities that surround him except through the prism of sorrow.

       *       *       *       *       *

From the very beginning of his literary career, in his first book, "Episodes in the Life of
a Seeker," Korolenko shows himself to be a seeker after truth. With him, the understanding
of life, so ardently sought after, is never summed up in a single solution. He dreams of it
constantly; at times, he seems to have found it, but he loses track of it again and starts
all over.

This groping about resulted in a moral crisis in which he looked forward to death with joy.
Beset with the thought of suicide, he often prowled around railroad platforms and looked at
the car-wheels.

"I went there and came back again," he writes, "depressed by my realization of the stupidity
of life. The snow was falling all around me, and shaping itself into a frozen carpet, the telegraph
poles shivered as if they were cold through and through, and on the other side of the road,
on a slope, shone the sad little light of the watchman's tower. There, in the darkness, lived
a whole family. Through the shadows the little red fire seemed to be as desolate as the family.
The children were scrofulous and suffered; the mother was thin and sickly. To procreate and
to bury! Such was the life of the father, probably the most unfortunate of all, because the
household depended wholly upon him, and he saw no gleam of hope anywhere. He bore this condition
of things, because, in his simplicity, he believed in a superior will, and thought that his
misery was inevitable. The resignation of this man, the terrible bareness of his obscure existence,
oppressed me. If I could bear the sight of it, it was only because I hoped; I thought that
we should soon find the road which makes life happier, more agreeable to every one. How, where,
in what manner? What a mystery! But the future beauty of life was in the search for it."

       *       *       *       *       *

The observations that Korolenko was able to make were many and diverse. By going all over Russia
he gathered inexhaustible riches, in the form of anecdotes and actual experiences. This can
be easily realized when we consider the sumptuous variety of his descriptions. Where do we
not go, and whom do we not meet in his books? First, we are in a peaceful little town of the
southwest, then in the thick woods of Poliyessye, in the snow-covered and frozen Siberian forests,
or in the valleys of Sakhaline, inhabited by half-breed Russians and escaped convicts, not
to mention the innumerable sectarians who fill the Siberian prisons. And Korolenko never repeats.
Not even a detail occurs more than once. Each of his works is a little world in itself. The
author, moreover, unlike other writers, is never satisfied with pale sketches; each character
is shown in full relief, each picture is absolutely finished. This wholeness, this finish which
does not hurt the harmony of the proportions, is a precious quality, very rare in our time.

       *       *       *       *       *

The "Sketches of a Siberian Tourist," published in 1896, in which bandits of various odd types
tell thrilling tales of nocturnal attacks and other adventures, is a kind of artistic novel.
The postillion is the most original character in the book. Huge of stature, audacious and clever,
he exercises a mysterious influence over the brigands, whom he inspires with a superstitious
terror. Most of them, thinking him invulnerable, do not dare attack the travelers whom he is
driving.

That same year another work of Korolenko's appeared, called: "In Bad Company,"--a sort of autobiography
which added to his renown. Here Eph paused.

"What h-happened?" gasped Johnnie.

"In one year from that time," replied Eph gruesomely, "that there feller's cow wuz hit by lightnin';
in three year his hoss kicked him an' busted a rib; an' in seven year he wuz a corpse!"

The power of this horrible example was too much for Johnnie.

"Don't you reckon it's bedtime?" he suggested tremblingly.

Thenceforth for many months Johnnie led a haunted life. Ghosts glowered at him from cellar and
garret.

Specters slunk at his heels, phantoms flitted through the barn. Twilight teemed with horrors,
and midnight, when he awoke at that hour, made of his bedroom a veritable Brocken.

It was vain for his parents to expostulate with him. Was one not bound to believe one's own
eyes? And how about the testimony of the Hired Hand?

The story in his reader--told in verse and graphically illustrated--of the boy named Walter, who,
being alone on a lonesome highway one dark night, beheld a sight that made his blood run cold,
acquired an abnormal interest for Johnnie.

Walter, with courage resembling madness, marched straight up to the alleged ghost and laughed
gleefully to find, "It was a friendly guide-post, his wand'ring steps
to guide."

This was all very well, as it turned out, but what if it had been
a sure-enough ghost, reflected Johnnie.

What if it had reached down with its long, snaky arms and snatched
Walter up--and run off with him in the dark--and no telling what?

Or it might have swooped straight up in the air with him, for ghosts
could do that.

Johnnie resolved he would not take any chances with friendly guide-posts which might turn out to be
hostile spirits.

Then there was the similar tale of the lame goose, and the one concerning the pillow in the
swing--each intended, no doubt, to allay foolish fears on the part of children, but exercising an
opposite and harrowing influence upon Johnnie.

MAXIOMS

BY CAROLYN WELLS

Reward is its own virtue. The wages of sin is alimony. Money makes the mayor go. A penny saved
spoils the broth. Of two evils, choose the prettier. There's no fool like an old maid. Make love while
the moon shines. Where there's a won't there's a way. Nonsense makes the heart grow fonder. A word
to the wise is a dangerous thing. A living gale is better than a dead calm. A fool and his money
corrupt good manners. A word in the hand is worth two in the ear. A man is known by the love-letters
he keeps. A guilty conscience is the mother of invention. Whosoever thy hands find to do, do
with thy might. It's a wise child who knows less than his own father. Never put off till to-morrow
what you can wear to-night.

He who loves and runs away, may live to love another day.

       A TRAVELED DONKEY

BY BERT LESTON TAYLOR

But Buddie got no farther. The sound of music came to her ears, and
she stopped to listen.

The music was faint and sweet, with the sighful quality of an Æolian harp. Now it seemed near,
now far.

"What can it be?" said Buddie.

"Wait here and I'll find out," said Snowfeathers. He darted away and returned before you could
count fifty.

"A traveling musician," he reported. "Come along. It's only a little way."

Back he flew, with Buddie scrambling after. A few yards brought her to a little open place,
and here was the queerest sight she had yet seen in this queer wood.

On a bank of reindeer moss, at the foot of a great white birch, a mouse-colored donkey sat playing
a lute. Over his head, hanging from a bit of bark, was the sign:

WHILE YOU WAIT OLD SAWS RESET

After the many strange things that Buddie had come upon in Queerwood, nothing could surprise
her very much. Besides, as she never before had seen a donkey, or a lute, or the combination
of donkey and lute, it did not strike her as especially remarkable
that the musician should be holding his instrument upside down, and
sweeping the strings with one of his long ears, which he was able
to wave without moving his head a jot.

And this it was that gave to the music its soft and furry-purry quality.

The Donkey greeted Buddie with a careless nod, and remarked, as if anticipating a comment he had
heard many times:

"Oh, yes; I play everything by ear."

"Please keep on playing," said Buddie, taking a seat on another clump of reindeer moss.

"I intended to," said the Donkey; and the random chords changed to a crooning melody which wonderfully
pleased Buddie, whose opportunities to hear music were sadly few. As for the White Blackbird, he
tucked his little head under his wing and went fast asleep.

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked the Donkey, putting down the lute.

"Very nice, sir," answered Buddie, enthusiastically; though she added to herself: The idea of saying
sir to an animal! "Would you please tell me your name?" she requested.

The Donkey pawed open a saddle-bag, drew forth with his teeth a card, and presented it to Buddie,
who spelled out the following:

PROFESSOR BRAY TENORE BARITONALE TEACHER OF SINGING ALL METHODS CONCERTS AND RECITALS

While Buddie was reading this the Donkey again picked up his instrument and thrummed the strings.

"Did
you ever see a donkey play a lute?" said he. "That's an old saw," he added.

"I never saw a donkey before," said Buddie.

"You haven't traveled much," said the other. "The world is full of them."

       "This is the farthest I've ever been from home," confessed Buddie,
feeling very insignificant indeed.

"And how far may that be?"

Buddie couldn't tell exactly.

"But it can't be a great way," she said. "I live in the log house by the lake."

"Pooh!" said the Donkey.

"That's no distance at all." Buddie shrank another inch or two. "I'm a great traveler myself.
All donkeys travel that can. If a donkey travels, you know, he may come home a horse; and to become
a horse is, of course, the ambition of every donkey!"

"Is it?" was all Buddie could think of to remark.

What could she say that would interest a globe-trotter?

"Perhaps you have an old saw you'd like reset," suggested the Donkey, still thrumming the lute-strings.

Buddie
thought a moment.

"There's an old saw hanging up in our woodshed," she began, but got
no farther.

       

"Hee-haw! hee-haw!" laughed the Donkey. "Thistles and cactus, but that's rich!" And he hee-hawed
until the tears ran down his nose. Poor Buddie, who knew she was being laughed at but didn't know
why, began to feel very much like crying and wished she might run away.

"Excuse these tears," the Donkey said at last, recovering his family gravity. "Didn't you ever
hear the saying, A burnt child dreads the fire?"

Buddie nodded, and plucked up her spirits.

"Well, that's an old saw. And you must have heard that other very old saw, No use crying over spilt
milk."

Another nod from Buddie.

"Here's my setting of that," said the Donkey; and after a few introductory chords, he sang:

"'Oh, why do you cry, my pretty little maid, With a Boo-hoo-hoo and a Heigho?' 'I've spilled
my milk, kind sir,' she said, And the Cat said, 'Me-oh! my-oh!'

'No use to cry, my pretty little maid, With a Boo-hoo-hoo and a Heigho.'
'But what shall I do, kind sir?' she said, And the Cat said, 'Me-oh!
my-oh!'

'Why, dry your eyes, my pretty little maid, With a Boo-hoo-hoo
and a Heigho.' 'Oh, thank you, thank you, sir,' she said, And the
Cat said, 'Me-oh! my-oh!'"

"How do you like my voice?" asked the Donkey, in a tone that said very plainly: "If you don't
like it you're no judge of singing."

Buddie did not at once reply.

A professional critic would have said, and enjoyed saying, that the
voice was of the hit-or-miss variety; that it was pitched too high
(all donkeys make that mistake); that it was harsh, rasping and unsympathetic,
and that altogether the performance was "not convincing."

Now, Little One, although Buddie was not a professional critic, and neither knew how to wound
nor enjoyed wounding, even she found the Donkey's voice harsh; but
she did not wish to hurt his feelings--for donkeys have feelings,
in spite of a popular opinion to the contrary.

And, after all, it was pretty good singing for a donkey. Critics should not, as they sometimes
do, apply to donkeys the standards by which nightingales are judged. So Buddie was able to say, truthfully
and kindly:

"I think you do very well; very well, indeed."

It was a small tribute, but the Donkey was so blinded by conceit that
he accepted it as the greatest compliment.

"I ought to sing well," he said. "I've studied methods enough.

The more methods you try, you know, the more of a donkey you are."

       

"Oh, yes," murmured Buddie, not understanding in the least.

"Yes," went on the Donkey; "I've taken the Donkesi Method, the Sobraylia Method, the Thistlefixu
Method--"

"I'm afraid I don't quite know what you mean by 'methods,'" ventured Buddie.

The Donkey regarded her with a pitying smile.

"A method," he explained, "is a way of singing 'Ah!' For example, in the Thistlefixu Method,
which I am at present using, I fill my mouth full of thistles, stand on one leg, take in a
breath three yards long, and sing 'Ah!' The only trouble with this method is that the thistles
tickle your throat and make you cough, and you have to spray the vocal cords twice a day, which is
considerable trouble, especially when traveling, as I always am."

"I should think it would be," said Buddie. "Won't you sing something else?"

"I'm a little hoarse," apologized the singer.

"That's what you want to be, isn't it?" said Buddie, misunderstanding him.

"Hee-haw!" laughed the Donkey. "Is that a joke? I mean my throat is hoarse."

"And the rest of you is donkey!" cried Buddie, who could see a point as quickly as any one of
her age.

"There's something to that," said the other, thoughtfully. "Now, if the hoarseness should spread--"

"And
you became horse all over--"

"Why, then--"

"Why, then--"

"Think of another old saw," said the Donkey, picking up his lute.

"No; I don't believe I can remember any more old saws," said Buddie, after racking her small
brain for a minute or two.

"Pooh!" said the Donkey. "They're as common as, Pass the butter, or, Some more tea, please.
Ever hear, Fair words butter no parsnips?"

Buddie shook her head.

"The wolf does something every day that keeps him from church on Sunday--?"

Again Buddy shook her head.

"It is hard to shave an egg--?"

Still another shake.

"A miss is as good as a mile? You can not drive a windmill with a pair of bellows? Help the lame
dog over the stile? A hand-saw is a good thing, but not to shave with? Nothing venture, nothing
have? Well, you haven't heard much, for a fact," said the Donkey, contemptuously, as Buddie shook
her head after each proverb. "I'll try a few more; there's no end to them. Ever hear, When the
sky falls we shall all catch larks? Too many cooks spoil the broth?"

"I've heard that," said Buddie, eagerly.

"It's a wonder," returned the Donkey.

"Well, I have a very nice setting of that." And he sang:

"Some said, 'Stir it fast,' Some said, 'Slow'; Some said, 'Skim it off,' Some said, 'No'; Some
said, 'Pepper,' Some said, 'Salt';-- All gave good advice, All found fault.

Poor little Tommy Trottett! Couldn't eat it when he got it."

"I like that," said Buddie. "Oh, and I've just thought of another old ax--I mean saw, if it
is one--Don't count your chickens before they are hatched.

Do you sing that?"

"One of my best," replied the Donkey. And again he sang:

"'Thirteen eggs,' said Sammy Patch, 'Are thirteen chickens when they hatch.' The hen gave a
cluck, but said no more; For the hen had heard such things before.

The eggs fall out from tilted pail And leave behind a yellow trail; But Sammy,--counting, as
he goes, Upon his fingers,--never knows.

Oh, Sammy Patch, your 'rithmetic Won't hatch a solitary chick."

"I like that the best," said Buddie, who knew what it was to tip over a pail of eggs, and felt
as sorry for Sammy Patch as if he really existed.

"It's one of my best," said the Donkey.

       "I don't call it my very best.

Personally I prefer, Look before you leap. You've heard that old saw, I dare say."

"No; but that doesn't matter. I shall like it just as well," replied Buddie.

"That doesn't follow, but this does," said the Donkey, and once more he sang:

"A foolish Frog, one summer day, While splashing round in careless way, Observed a man With large
tin can, And manner most suspicious.

'I think I know,' remarked the Frog, 'A safer place than on this log; For when a man Comes
with a can His object is malicious.'

Thus far the foolish Frog was wise; But had he better used his eyes, He would have seen, Close
by, a lean Old Pike--his nose just showing. Kersplash! The Pike made just one bite.... The
moral I need scarce recite: Before you leap Just take a peep To see where you are going."

Buddie, however, clung to her former opinion.

"I like Sammy Patch the best," said she.

"That," rejoined the singer, "is a matter of taste, as the donkey
said to the horse who preferred hay to thistles.

Usually the public likes best the very piece the composer himself cares least about. So wherever
I go I hear, 'Oh, Professor, do sing us that beautiful song about Sammy Patch.' And I can't poke
my head inside the Thistle Club but some donkey bawls out, 'Here's
Bray!

Now we'll have a song. Sing us Sammy Patch, old fellow.' Really, I've sung that song so many
times I'm tired of the sound of it."

"It must be nice to be such a favorite," said Buddie.

"Suppose we go up to the Corner and see what's stirring," suggested
the Donkey, with a yawn.

"Oh, are you going up to the Corner, too?"
cried Buddie. "I am to meet the Rabbit there at two o'clock. I hope
it isn't late."

The Donkey glanced skyward.

"It isn't noon yet,"
said he.

"How do you tell time?" inquired Buddie.

"By the way it
flies. Time flies, you know. You can tell a great many birds that
way, too." As he spoke the Donkey put his lute into one of his bags
and took down his sign.

"You can ride if you wish," he offered graciously.

"Thank
you," said Buddie. And leaving the White Blackbird asleep on his perch,--for,
as Buddie said, he was having such a lovely nap it would be a pity
to wake him,--they set off through the wood.

It was bad traveling
for a short distance, but presently they came out on an old log-road;
and along this the Donkey ambled at an easy pace. On both sides grew
wild flowers in wonderful abundance, but, as Buddie noticed, they
were all of one kind--Enchanter's Nightshade.

Buddie had also noticed,
when she climbed to her comfortable seat, a peculiar marking on the
Donkey's broad back. It was bronze in color, and in shape like a cross.

"Perhaps
it's a strawberry mark," she thought, "and he may not want to talk
about it." But curiosity got the better of her.

"Oh, that?" said
the Donkey, carelessly, in reply to a question. "That's a Victoria
Cross. I served three months with the British army in South Africa,
and was decorated for gallantry in leading a charge of the ambulance
corps. I shall have to ask you not to hang things on my neck. It's
all I can do to hold up my head."

"Oh, excuse me," said Buddie, untying
the sign, OLD SAWS RESET WHILE YOU WAIT.

"Hang it round your own
neck," said the Donkey, and Buddie did so.

"I often wonder," she
said, "whether a horse doesn't sometimes get tired holding his head
out at the end of his neck. And as for a giraffe, I don't see how
he stands it."

"Well, a giraffe's neck runs out at a more convenient
angle," said the Donkey. "Still, it is tiresome without a check-rein.
You hear a great deal about a check-rein being a cruel invention,
but, on the contrary, it's a great blessing. Now, a nose-bag is a
positive outrage, and the more oats it contains the more of an imposition
it is. People have the queerest ideas!"

SELECTING THE FACULTY

BY
BAYNARD RUST HALL

Our Board of Trustees, it will be remembered, had
been directed by the Legislature to procure, as the ordinance called
it, "Teachers for the commencement of the State College at Woodville."
That business, by the Board, was committed to Dr. Sylvan and Robert
Carlton--the most learned gentleman of the body, and of--the New Purchase.
Our honorable Board will be more specially introduced hereafter; at
present we shall bring forward certain rejected candidates, that,
like rejected prize essays, they may be published, and thus have their
revenge.

None can tell us how plenty good things are till he looks
for them; and hence, to the great surprise of the Committee, there
seemed to be a sudden growth and a large crop of persons even in and
around Woodville, either already qualified for the "Professorships,"
as we named them in our publication, or who could "qualify" by the
time of election. As to the "chair" named also in our publications,
one very worthy and disinterested schoolmaster offered, as a great
collateral inducement for his being elected, "to find his own chair!"--a
vast saving to the State, if the same chair I saw in Mr. Whackum's
school-room. For his chair there was one with a hickory bottom; and
doubtless he would have filled it, and even lapped over its edges,
with equal dignity in the recitation room of Big College.

The Committee
had, at an early day, given an invitation to the Rev. Charles Clarence,
A.M., of New Jersey, and his answer had been affirmative; yet for
political reasons we had been obliged to invite competitors, or make
them, and we found and created "a right smart sprinkle."

Hopes of
success were built on many things--for instance, on poverty; a plea
being entered that something ought to be done for the poor fellow--on
one's having taught a common school all his born days, who now deserved
to rise a peg--on political, or religious, or fanatical partizan qualifications--and
on pure patriotic principles, such as a person's having been "born
in a canebrake and rocked in a sugar trough." On the other hand, a
fat, dull-headed, and modest Englishman asked for a place, because
he had been born in Liverpool! and had seen the world beyond the woods
and waters, too! And another fussy, talkative, pragmatical little
gentleman rested his pretensions on his ability to draw and paint
maps!--not projecting them in roundabout scientific processes, but
in that speedy and elegant style in which young ladies copy maps at
first chop boarding-schools! Nay, so transcendent seemed Mr. Merchator's
claims, when his show or sample maps were exhibited to us, that some
in our Board, and nearly everybody out of it, were confident he would
do for Professor of Mathematics and even Principal.

But of all our
unsuccessful candidates, we shall introduce by name only two--Mr.
James Jimmy, A.S.S., and Mr. Solomon Rapid, A. to Z.

Mr. Jimmy, who
aspired to the mathematical chair, was master of a small school of
all sexes, near Woodville. At the first, he was kindly, yet honestly
told, his knowledge was too limited and inaccurate; yet, notwithstanding
this, and some almost rude repulses afterward, he persisted in his
application and his hopes. To give evidence of competency, he once
told me he was arranging a new spelling-book, the publication of which
would make him known as a literary man, and be an unspeakable advantage
to "the rising generation." And this naturally brought on the following
colloquy about the work:

"Ah! indeed! Mr. Jimmy?"

"Yes, indeed,
Mr. Carlton."

"On what new principle do you go, sir?"

"Why, sir,
on the principles of nature and common sense. I allow school-books
for schools are all too powerful obstruse and hard-like to be understood
without exemplifying illustrations."

"Yes, but Mr. Jimmy, how is
a child's spelling-book to be made any plainer?"

"Why, sir, by clear
explifications of the words in one column, by exemplifying illustrations
in the other."

"I do not understand you, Mr. Jimmy, give me a specimen--"

"Sir?"

"An
example--"

"To be sure--here's a spes-a-example; you see, for instance,
I put in the spelling-column, C-r-e-a-m, cream, and here in the explification
column, I put the exemplifying illustration--Unctious part of milk!"

We
had asked, at our first interview, if our candidate was an algebraist,
and his reply was negative; but, "he allowed he could 'qualify' by
the time of election, as he was powerful good at figures, and had
cyphered clean through every arithmetic he had ever seen, the rule
of promiscuous questions and all!" Hence, some weeks after, as I was
passing his door, on my way to a squirrel hunt, with a party of friends,
Mr. Jimmy, hurrying out with a slate in his hand, begged me to stop
a moment, and thus addressed me:

"Well, Mr. Carlton, this algebra
is a most powerful thing--ain't it?"

"Indeed it is, Mr. Jimmy--have
you been looking into it?"

"Looking into it! I have been all through
this here fust part; and by election time, I allow I'll be ready for
examination."

"Indeed!"

"Yes, sir! but it is such a pretty thing!
Only to think of cyphering by letters! Why, sir, the sums come out,
and bring the answers exactly like figures. Jist stop a minute--look
here: a stands for 6, and b stands for 8, and c stands for 4, and
d stands for figure 10; now if I say a plus b minus c equals d, it
is all the same as if I said, 6 is 6 and 8 makes 14, and 4 subtracted,
leaves 10! Why, sir, I done a whole slate full of letters and signs;
and afterward, when I tried by figures, they every one of them came
out right and brung the answer! I mean to cypher by letters altogether."

"Mr.
Jimmy, my company is nearly out of sight--if you can get along this
way through simple and quadratic equations by our meeting, your chance
will not be so bad--good morning, sir."

But our man of "letters"
quit cyphering the new way, and returned to plain figures long before
reaching equations; and so he could not become our professor. Yet
anxious to do us all the good in his power, after our college opened,
he waited on me, a leading trustee, with a proposal to board our students,
and authorized me to publish--"as how Mr. James Jimmy will take strange
students--students not belonging to Woodville--to board, at one dollar
a week, and find everything, washing included, and will black their
shoes three times a week to boot, and--give them their dog-wood and
cherry-bitters every morning into the bargain!"

The most extraordinary
candidate, however, was Mr. Solomon Rapid. He was now somewhat advanced
into the shaving age, and was ready to assume offices the most opposite
in character; although justice compels us to say Mr. Rapid was as
fit for one thing as another. Deeming it waste of time to prepare
for any station till he was certain of obtaining it, he wisely demanded
the place first, and then set to work to become qualified for its
duties, being, I suspect, the very man, or some relation of his, who
is recorded as not knowing whether he could read Greek, as he had
never tried. And, besides, Mr. Solomon Rapid contended that all offices,
from president down to fence-viewer, were open to every white American
citizen; and that every republican had a blood-bought right to seek
any that struck his fancy; and if the profits were less, or the duties
more onerous than had been anticipated, that a man ought to resign
and try another.

Naturally, therefore, Mr. Rapid thought he would
like to sit in our chair of languages, or have some employment in
the State college; and hence he called for that purpose on Dr. Sylvan,
who, knowing the candidate's character, maliciously sent him to me.
Accordingly, the young gentleman presented himself, and without ceremony,
instantly made known his business thus:

"I heerd, sir, you wanted
somebody to teach the State school, and I'm come to let you know I'm
willing to take the place."

"Yes, sir, we are going to elect a professor
of languages who is to be the principal and a professor--"

"Well,
I don't care which I take, but I'm willing to be the principal. I
can teach sifring, reading, writing, joggerfee, surveying, grammur,
spelling, definition, parsin--"

"Are you a linguist?"

"Sir?"

"You,
of course, understand the dead languages?"

"Well, can't say I ever
seed much of them, though I have heerd tell of them; but I can soon
larn them--they ain't more than a few of them I allow?"

IV

VIKENTY VERESSAYEV

Veressayev is well known in France for his "Memoirs of a Physician," a work that has been translated
into almost every language. However, his reputation in Russia is not based on this book, which
is considered his masterpiece, but rather on his stories and tales. Let us, however, first
take a glance at the life of this author, a life so closely connected with the subjects of
his works that it forms an indispensable commentary on them.

Veressayev, whose real name is Vikenty Smidovich, was born in 1867, in Tula. His father was
a Pole and his mother a Russian. His father, a very pious and strictly moral man, was a well
known and well liked physician. In 1877, the boy entered the local school and received his
degree there seven years later. In 1884, he left for the University of St. Petersburg, where
he enrolled in the department of historical sciences. Four years later, when he was twenty-four
and a half, he received his degree of licentiate of letters.[5] Most of his class-mates became
school-teachers, but he preferred to pursue his studies. Medicine tempted him. He left for
Zhouriev (formerly Dorpat, already famous for its department of medicine) and entered the university,
where, at the end of six years, he received his doctor's degree.

 [5] On the continent of Europe, a university degree between that
 of bachelor and of doctor.

Two years before, in 1892, a cholera epidemic had broken out in Russia. Young Smidovich, then
a fourth-year student, asked to be sent immediately to a province in the East, where the epidemic
was spreading like wildfire. He remained there several months, in fact until the plague had
gone. As a doctor's assistant in an infirmary organized in one of the mining districts of the
government of Ekaterinoslav, he witnessed a peasant revolt in which several doctors were killed
and others cruelly burned by the exasperated and ignorant mob. Veressayev has traced these
sad events with tremendous power in his story, "Astray."

His doctor's degree in his pocket, he went to Tula, where he practised for several months,
but soon the position of house-surgeon was offered to him in the Botkin Hospital in St. Petersburg.
He remained there seven years, till 1901, when, by order of the Minister of the Interior, who
has charge of all hospital appointments, he was forced to retire from office and was expelled
from St. Petersburg and forbidden to reside in either of the two capitals, Moscow or St. Petersburg.
The reason for this was, that the name Veressayev appeared on the petition of the "intellectuals"
which had been given to the Minister of the Interior, protesting against the brutal attitude
of the police during a student manifestation in the Kazan cathedral on March 4, 1901. This
petition brought severe punishment to almost all the people whose names were signed to it.
Veressayev went abroad; he visited Italy, France, Germany and Switzerland.

Gifted with poetic inspiration, he had begun writing at an early age. He was not more than
fourteen when he translated some poems of Koerner and Goethe into Russian verse. Later, when
at college, he wrote some short prose tales, which were published in various papers. But it
was in 1896, when the "Russkoe Bogatsvo," the large St. Petersburg review, had published his
two important stories, "Astray" and "The Contagion," that renown came to him. It came so suddenly
that it troubled him and was almost a blow to his modesty, which is one of the sympathetic
traits of his personality.

In fact, there came a time when the attention of the literary world, especially among the younger
generation, became so wrapped up in his works that Gorky and Tchekoff sank to a second level.
This enthusiasm was caused by the fact that Veressayev's works answered a general need. They
brought into the world of literature a series of characters who summed up the rising fermentation
of new ideas and seemed to be spokesmen, around whom the Russian revolutionary forces gathered,--forces
which, up to this time, had been scattered. An era of struggle for liberty began.

It is rather important, I think, for the proper understanding of this period to say a few words
concerning its history.

The struggle of the younger generation against the autocracy began about 1860, at the time
of the freeing of the serfs, a period known in Russia as the "epoch of great reforms." These
ameliorations, which extended into almost every domain of Russian life, left intact the autocracy,
which, under pretence of protecting itself, fought successfully against all activity and thus
brought about, among the younger generation, a general movement towards freedom and socialism.
But the autocracy found its best help in the ignorance of the people. Urban commerce, little
developed at that time, practically interested only the peasants--which means nine-tenths of
the population of Russia. It was natural, then, that the peasants should become the principal
object of the revolutionary propaganda, and that tremendous efforts should be made on all sides
in order to awaken them from their dangerous sleep.

The peasant uprisings in the history of Russia, especially the two revolts directed by Stepan
Razin in the 17th century, and Pugachev in the 18th, proved the fact that the masses could
unite in a general insurrection. This time, the "intellectuals" joined. As they advocated a
sort of communism, periodic redivisions of land according to the growth of the population,
and as they harped on the tradition that land was a gift of God which no one had a right to
own, we can easily see that the agricultural proletariat would welcome with open arms the socialistic
ideas.

Although this popular movement did not affect many people, it was attacked with such pitiless
cruelty, that the revolutionists decided to have recourse to the red terror in order to fight
the white terror which was cutting down their ranks. The secret goal of this movement was to
replace the autocratic régime with political institutions emanating from the will of the people.
In order to accomplish its reforms more quickly, this party, which called itself the "Popular
Will," incited several attempts at murder; Russia then witnessed dynamite outrages against
imperial trains and palaces, and finally, the assassination of the Emperor Alexander II. For
a moment the autocratic régime seemed to totter under these sudden and fierce blows, but it
soon recovered. The white terror proved to be stronger than the red. Many executions and banishments
helped to crush the partisans of the "Popular Will;" then, when the movement had been checked,
the authorities began to repress even the slightest desire for independence on the part of
the press, the universities, or any other institutions which could do good to the people. Dejection
and disillusion dominated this period from 1880 to 1900, which has been so faithfully portrayed
in the works of Tchekoff.

Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that their ideals had come to nought, those of the red terror
had not disappeared, and hope remained in their breasts.

Tchekoff was still living when new symptoms of fermentation appeared in Russia, and he could
have alluded to this in his later works. But he did not have a fighting nature, and, in his
solitude, he looked at conditions with melancholy scepticism. There was need of a man, a writer--like
Gorky several years later--born right in the midst of this movement, who would be the very
product of it, and for whom its ideas would be a reason for existence.

Veressayev was this man and writer, and it is as much by his political opinions as by his literary
talents that he gained such a wide-spread reputation. If his works are not always irreproachable
from a literary standpoint, they are always accurate in describing exactly what the author
himself has seen and lived through.

       *       *       *       *       *

Veressayev, in three great stories, gives us the three phases of the movement between 1880
and 1900. These three stories, "Astray," "The Contagion" and "At the Turn," are of such extreme
importance, that in the following pages there will be a detailed analysis of each of them.

The two protagonists of the story, "Astray," are Dr. Chekanhov and his cousin Natasha. The
former is at the end of his moral life, the latter is on the threshold, and both of them are
"astray," because the one has not found the road on which to travel through life, and the other
is just beginning to look for it. The entire existence of Chekanhov is dominated by the idea
that it is his duty to serve the people, which was the basis of the activity of the "narodnikis."
According to him, the "intellectuals," who represent a small and privileged fraction of the
population, are the debtors of the people and ought to pay their debt by giving the people
knowledge and comfort. This theory is burned into his very soul; it is the leading thought
that directs all of his actions. At this epoch, few men showed such absolute devotion. From
1880 to 1890, after the cruel suppression of the movement of the "narodnikis," there was a
stop in this revolutionary activity. Unaware of this pacification, Chekanhov makes great exertions;
as a doctor, he combats disease and saves several people. But how exhaust the source of this
evil, this misery, which is increased by a despotic social order? Chekanhov spends his energy
in vain; where else shall he apply his strength?

The famine of 1891! Dr. Chekanhov speaks only of his despair: "A terrible malady beats down
on one after another of the inhabitants; it is an epidemic of typhoid caused by the privations
which left us numb and weak." In 1892 an epidemic of cholera broke out. In spite of the prayers
of his parents, the young man rushes off to the most infected district. One day, he penetrates
into an infected hovel. The children are sprawling everywhere, the mother is foolish and stupid,
and the father, weakened by prison labor, has come down with cholera. The wife forbids the
doctor, whom she accuses of poisoning the sick, to approach her husband. Scorning the danger,
in order to encourage the sick man, the doctor drinks out of the very cup which the invalid
has used. Nothing counts with him as long as he can inspire confidence and save people from death.

"What good is there in love between good and strong people," adds Chekanhov, after having noted
down this cure in his "Journal," "since it results only in miserable abortions? And why are
the people held down to work which is so rough and unpleasant? What motive supports them in
their painful labor? Is it the desire to preserve their infected hovels?"

At the end of these reflections could not Chekanhov, absolutely in despair, have abandoned
his task? No, he knew how to keep up his devotion. Sacrificing his life for others, Chekanhov
begins to love life again. He says to himself: "Life is good ... but will it be for a long
time?" We do not catch the answer.

Furious voices are heard, and a savage and cruel mob calls him a poisoner and hurls itself
upon him, beating and striking him.

Exhausted by the blows and jeered at by those whom he had considered his brothers in need and
for whom he had put himself in constant peril, he lies stretched out on his bed, suffering
severely; but he nourishes no grudge against his tormentors; on the contrary, his apostle-like
character is moved with pity at the thought of these uncultured and ignorant beings so unconscious
of the evil that they are doing. And several days before his death he writes the following
tragic words in his "Journal," almost terrifying in their simplicity:

"They have beaten me! They have beaten me like a mad dog because I came to help them and because
I used all my knowledge and strength, in one word, gave all that I had. I am not thinking now
about how much I loved these people and how badly I feel at the way they have treated me. I
simply did not succeed in gaining their confidence; I did succeed in making them believe in
me for a while, but soon a mere trifle was enough to plunge them back among their dark shadows
and to awaken in them an elemental, brutal instinct. And now I have to die. I am not afraid
of death, but of a tarnished life full of empty remorse. Why have I struggled? In the name
of what am I going to die? I am only a poor victim stripped of the strength of an ideal and
cared for by no one.... It had to be so, for we were always strangers to them, beings belonging
to another world; we scornfully avoid them, without trying to know them, and a terrible abyss
separates us from them."

It is interesting to note how Chekanhov is regarded by the new generation and especially by
the woman he loves, his cousin Natasha. She believes in him, she expects a gospel of life from
him; but Chekanhov cannot respond to her; he adheres to such vague expressions as: "work,"
"idea," "duty towards the people." He says to her: "You want an idea which will dominate you
entirely and which will lead you to a definite goal; you want me to give you a standard and
say: 'Fight and die for it.' I have read more than you, I have had more experience than you,
but like you, I Do Not Know, and that is our torture." According to Chekanhov, all of his generation
are in the same position: it is Astray, without a guiding star, it is perishing without realizing
it.... Finally, in order to avoid the pressing questions of Natasha, who would like to work
and sacrifice herself for the poor, he points out to her the salutary work of the village school-mistress.
A few days later he dies, welcoming death with joy.

       *       *       *       *       *

While the people who were ending their existence and those who were beginning it were so carefully
looking for a field of action, the uncultivated ground of Russian life was gradually being
cleared by the slow evolution of an economic movement. Between 1895 and 1900, as a result of
the natural development of national commerce, the number of city workingmen grew to vast proportions
and they formed an important class, which, on account of its situation, was much more qualified
than the peasants to interest itself in the ideas of socialism and liberty. So from the very
midst of the people certain individuals appeared capable of adopting progressive ideas; Marxism
awaited them, the theory which is the basis of European democratic socialism. This doctrine
was nothing new in Russia. But formerly, the proletariat of the cities had been very little
developed and the Marxian doctrines had been of theoretical interest only.

"The Contagion" has for its heroine Natasha,--the Natasha that we have already met, but how
transformed! She has at last found her bearings. If, in 1892, she was waiting for the right
road to be shown to her, in 1896 she was enthusiastically following the new road opened by
the doctrines of Marx.

In Zharoshenko's famous picture, "The Student," Uspensky notes something new in this type of
femininity. He calls it "the masculine trait"; it is the mark of thought. He sees there the
harmonious fusion of a young girl and an adolescent boy, with an expression neither feminine
nor masculine, but exceptionally human. And this transforms Zharoshenko's "Student" into a
luminous personification, unknown up to this time, a type which synthesizes "le type humain."

In the work of Veressayev this student is Natasha. Reflection has ripened her mind since her
last talk with poor Chekanhov. She has become a regular "mannish woman," having seen and thought
a great deal. She has traveled; she has lived in St. Petersburg and in the south of Russia.
Full of courage and energy, she claims to be fully satisfied with her lot; she begs her companions
to follow the road she has found, and when they refuse she becomes angry with them. In company
with her comrade Dayev she vigorously attacks the convictions of the men of Kisselev, who see
sufficient safety in the workingmen's associations; she rises up, in the name of Marxism, against
the "narodnikis," whom she considers ingenuous idealists; she refuses to endorse the theories
of the "intellectuals," who oppose the thought of any great work, since they believe that smaller
deeds are more immediately realizable. When one of them, a doctor, Troïtsky, ends his conversation
with her with these words: "It is not necessary to wear one's brains out trying to solve difficult
problems while there is so much immediate need and so few workers," she puts an end to the
discussion. Shrugging her shoulders, in a trembling voice she answers: "How can you live and
think as you do? New problems confront us, and you stand before them and do nothing, because
you have lost confidence. I can't work any longer with you, because it would mean dedicating
myself blindly to 'spiritual death.'"

Veressayev does not show us how she solves the problems of which she speaks. The adepts of
this sort of social apostleship usually propagate their ideas among the workingmen, help them,
and play a part in conspiracies. Natasha offers herself up. But the censorship has not allowed
Veressayev to carry his subject on, and he has limited himself to showing us Natasha in company
with her friends and disciples, giving herself up to oratorical tilts, discussing principles,
and uttering long discourses full of passion, faith, and juvenile impatience,--discourses which
unfortunately are mistaken in their reasoning.

       *       *       *       *       *

In realizing from the socialist ideal the logical and inevitable consequence of capitalism,
which continues according to a law independent of human will, the Marxian doctrine dissipates
the doubts and consolidates the faith of those who adopt it. According to this faith, the socialists
do not have to create socialism, they only have to coöperate in the historical process which
will inevitably make socialism grow. In thus recognizing the supremity of the law of history,
socialism, utopian up to this time, becomes scientific and, under its new form, it is no longer
subject to the influence of personal opinions, no matter how full of genius they may be. But
this "scientific socialism," which, on account of the backwardness of political economy, could
be only a step ahead, was taken by the younger generation of Russia as the "dernier mot" of
the science. The result was, that several narrow and exclusive dogmas were grafted on this
doctrine. Thus, the theory of "class struggle" transformed itself into the absolute negation
of all community interests between the diverse social strata. The "materialistic"--or rather
"economic"--point of view, according to which the products of spiritual activity in the history
of humanity lose all independence, being only the consequences of economic organization, generated
scorn for all idealism; and the proletariat character of the socialistic movement impelled
society to divide into two hostile and irreconcilable parts, one of which is made up of the
proletariats, the other of the elements opposed to socialism. To this last party the enormous
mass of half-starved peasants joined itself. The peasants, according to the Marxian doctrine,
cannot understand socialism until they have become proletariats themselves, instead of becoming
miserable landed proprietors. And this "proletariazation" of about 100,000,000 peasants, the
fervent Marxists consider a fatal and desirable event in the near future.

These theories, carried to excess, were sure to excite a reaction. It manifested itself by
a neo-idealistic movement, which found the principal cause of social progress in the tendency
of humanity to attain supreme development and perfection. Then there were the "narodnikis"
who considered the "proletariazation" of the Russian peasant impossible and inopportune. There
were also the various groups of Socialists who applauded the criticism that Bernstein made
on the Marxian orthodoxy. So several deviations were made from the original theory; there were
grave dissensions and interminable and bitter controversies. All this occupies a large part
of "At the Turn," one of Veressayev's novels, in which these events are traced with almost
stenographic exactitude.

The characters are, Tanya, a fanatic Marxist; her brother, Tokarev, whose soul is a field for
spiritual battles; and Varenka, a village school-mistress. There are several eccentric characters
around them, such as Serge, a young apostle of a somewhat Nietzschean egoism, Antsov and others.
Tanya is none other than Natasha of "Astray," with this great difference, however, that Tanya
has found truth already formulated for her, and does not have to grope about for it. Nevertheless,
the essential characteristics of the two girls are the same. They both have the same joyous
self-denial, the same love of life, the same courage in face of difficulties, and also the
same faith in a better future. Tanya has lived during the whole winter with her comrades in
a region devastated by the famine, and she has spent there all that she possesses. At Toliminsk,
where she arrives after a long walk, she speaks of her meagre living and tells amusing stories
without suspecting her wonderful heroism.

But this young girl, full of the joy of life and ready for any sacrifices, is pitiless towards
her theoretical adversaries and has absolutely no compassion for them. The passage in "Crime
and Punishment," in which Dostoyevsky depicts one of his heroes in the following manner: "He
was young, he had abstract ideas, and was, consequently, cruel," perfectly fits Tanya. Veressayev
tells the following incident: "One day, when she was at the station, some peasants rushed down
from the platform. A railroad guard struck one of the peasants. The peasant put his head down
and ran off.... Tanya, knitting her brows, said: 'That's good for him! Oh, these peasants!'
And her eyes lighted up with scorn and hate...."

Just as Tanya brings Natasha to our mind, so does Varenka make us think of Dr. Chekanhov; the
same feeling of duty governs them both. But, while Chekanhov wanted to devote himself to the
social problem, without ever succeeding in doing so, because he did not exactly see the principles,
Varenka was able to devote herself to her work without mental reservation. However, she refuses
to, because she has not enough enthusiasm for this sort of research. Her understanding, which
is deeper and broader than Tanya's, sees the error, the narrowness of her doctrine; she cannot
admit it, and, fired by a desire to devote herself body and soul to some useful work, she chooses
the laborious profession of a school-mistress in the village. But this humble and unpleasant
career does not satisfy her. Little by little ennui and anguish drive her to suicide.

Between Tokarev, Tanya's brother, and Varenka, the contrast is complete. While still a student,
he had accepted, with all the ardor of youth, the idea of duty, and he desired to give himself
up to the cause of justice and truth; but, having encountered many obstacles, he felt, when
he had reached his thirtieth year, that the sacred fire was going out.

He now dreamed only of his personal happiness, and of poor theories that justified this egoism.
An assured material existence, comfort, a happy domestic life, work without risks, without
sacrifices, but useful enough in appearance to satisfy the conscience, attracted him irresistibly.
He then went to work to tear out his former ideas, which had taken a pretty firm root. Urged
on by his conscience, which protested, he forced himself at times to resurrect his youthful
enthusiasm; he thought a great deal about morals, about duty, and he read many books treating
this subject; he says: "I feel that something extremely necessary has left me. My feelings
about humanity have disappeared and nothing can replace them. I read a great deal now, and
I am directing my thoughts towards ethics. I try to give morality a solid basis and I try to
make clearer to myself the various categories of duty.... And I blush to pronounce the word,
'Duty.'"

Nevertheless, Tokarev tries, at times, to justify his inclinations towards peaceable bourgeois
prosperity to the struggling youth who surround his sister Tanya. These cruel young people,
however, answer him only with sarcastic remarks, and caustic arguments, and do not hesitate
to express their doubts as to the sincerity of his opinions. To his conscience, they are like
a living reproach from the past. Once he also was intolerant towards others as these people
are towards him to-day. And that is why he suffers under their condemnation of him. He defends
himself weakly, and after one of his oratorical tilts, he falls into such spiritual depression,
that he almost thinks of suicide.

These, then, are the three main characters of Veressayev's novel. In the background we have
the secondary characters. We have the proud proprietor and his wife, both of them liberals;
we have the pedagogue Osmerkov, who does not like talented people because they bother everybody;
and then there are the respectable inhabitants of Gniezdelovka, Serge's father and mother,
who are entirely absorbed with their household and with cards.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Comrades" is a variation on this theme: old school friends, who formerly had been wrapped
up in a great ideal, are now living a life of shabby prosperity, and they feel that they have
deteriorated, although they do not dare to confess it to each other.

And Veressayev profits by this to generalize on the causes of this fatal fall after the unselfish
enthusiasms of youth. He sees them especially in a mysterious force: "The Invisible," already
studied by Maeterlinck, Ibsen, Tchekoff, and especially by de Maupassant; and he sees them
in the unhappy conditions of Russian history, which created a social and political organization
favorable only to those who crawl along and not to those who plan.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us now analyze the stories in which Veressayev describes the life of the people.

The story of "The Steppe" is as follows: One beautiful autumn evening two men meet on the steppe.
One of them, the forger Nikita, is returning to his native land; he is wounded in the leg and
it is hard for him to walk. He is looking for work. The other is a professional beggar.

The beggar, who is never hungry because he has no scruples, offers Nikita something to eat.
After resting a short while, the travelers continue on their way. In the first village that
they come to, the pilgrim beggar makes a speech to the inhabitants and sells them certain "sacred
properties" which he keeps in his bag. After pocketing gifts of money and various other things,
the false pilgrim pursues his way, still accompanied by Nikita. On the road once more, he offers
to share with his comrade the fruits of his "work," but the latter refuses.

"What a fool!" cries the beggar, and bursts out laughing. But Nikita, indignant, gives him
a heavy blow and leaves him for good.

"For a Home" and "In Haste" gave Veressayev an opportunity to note one of the characteristic
traits of the ambitious villagers: their strong desire to preserve their homes and to propagate
the race.

In the first of these stories, two old people, Athanasius and his wife, want to marry their
daughter Dunka, but the "mir,"--the assembly of peasants,--egotistical and inflexible towards
people who are growing weak, oppose them. "We have not enough land for our own children," is
the answer of the "mir." Dunka remains unmarried, and dies at an early age. Her mother soon
follows her. Old Athanasius lives alone in his freezing "isba," which is in a state of ruin,
while the neighboring isbas, solid and austere, "spitefully watch him die."

In the last story, we have a widower who is the father of five children, and is therefore looking
everywhere for a woman with some bodily defect, because he knows that other women will not
want to have anything to do with him.

It is the same wish to preserve his home that makes a peasant go to the city to earn his living
while he leaves his family in the country to take care of the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

The peasant is, besides, entirely engrossed with the difficulties of existence. Necessity often
urges him to desperate acts.... Some, who are almost starving, ingratiate themselves with the
raftsmen. They force wages down by asking only 5 copecks (5 cents) a day.... If they are contented
with this absurd pay, it is because they avoid seeing how their little children are suffering
at home. "It's hard living at present; there is not enough space; ground is scarce and there
are too many people." "Men haven't room enough," says a sad-looking man with prominent cheek-bones.
"But," he goes on, "they tell me that sickness has struck our village, and that the men are
losing blood! Is that true?" "Yes, it's true!" "So much the better! That will clean out the
people; it will be easier to live then," he concludes, thoughtfully. (From "In the Cold Spell.")

In almost all the work of Veressayev a voice proclaims that the Russian peasant is near his
end; that he is not useful to any one. The poverty of the villages is painted in the most sombre
colors. The people are unanimous in believing that the struggle for life has become terrible.
"On what will you live?" one asks the other. "The earth does not nourish us. The holdings are
small; in summer, one must cultivate, and in winter the cottages have to be closed while we
look for work or charity. What is there to eat? Hay! Let us thank God that the cattle have
enough of that. Oats? We have to give four hectoliters and two measures of our oats to the
common granary.... And taxes and clothes? coal-oil, matches, tea, sugar? Tell me, how can one
live?"

The unfortunates even go so far as to bless war and epidemics. "Everything went better then.
Men lived peacefully in the fear of God, the Lord took care of every one. War, smallpox, famine
came and cleaned out the populace; those that remained, after having got the coffins ready,
lived easier. God pitied us. Now there is no more war; He leaves us to our own poor devices."

Speeches like this abound in the works of Veressayev. A dull sadness, bordering on despair,
breathes forth from the pages. It seems, at times, as if the Russian peasant could never awake
from his torpor, because the author represents him as full of infinite egoism, without any
spirit of solidarity, sacrificing everything for love of his sorry little house and his morsel
of ground, which is insufficient to nourish him. But we must remember that the Marxian point
of view, which the author takes, explains in part the horror of such pictures.

According to Veressayev the poor peasants can better their position only by getting rid of
their land, in order to become free proletarians. But if the peasant class is unfortunate,
it is so, for the most part, because it is the most exploited and the most oppressed. It is
not, then, the getting rid of their land that will bring the peasants salvation; on the contrary,
they must fight for it against their oppressors. The peasants are beginning to understand the
necessity of this struggle, and their late uprisings in several provinces have shown that they
lack neither solidarity nor organization.

In the story called, "The End of Andrey Ivanovich," which is about the working class of Russia,
we see the transformation of a peasant into a "city man." In his new surroundings, it is true,
the wine-shop plays an important rôle, but schools are organized there which inspire a taste
for reading, and "thought" gradually awakens.

Andrey has not yet rid himself of his rustic unsociability; however, he is beginning to become
civilized, and is receiving city culture. He tries to free himself from his misery, from his
degradation. He beats his wife when he is drunk, but, at the same time, he gets angry at a
friend when he beats his mistress.... According to his own confession he reads many useless
things, nevertheless he can become interested in a serious work. If he drinks to excess, it
is to "drive away the thoughts" that torment him. He wants to analyze every question and find
out what is at the bottom of it. He is the spiritual brother of Natasha, Chekanhov, and Tanya.

The sequel to this story is "The Straight Road." This time we are transported into the world
of factory workers, a world lamentable for its misery, despair, and crime. Andrey Ivanovich's
wife, Alexandra Mikhailovna, being without resources after the death of her husband, with a
little daughter in arms, enters a book-binding establishment, belonging to a man named Semidalov.
But the foreman, a vicious and evil-minded man, reigns as despot. It is he who gives out the
work. The young girls who listen to his advances are sure of being shown partiality; the others
are badly treated. As Alexandra wants to live honestly, her work in the shop is made very hard.
Her best friend, Tanya, who inadvertently spilled oil on some paper and could not pay for the
damage, had to give herself to the foreman. Finally Tanya despairs and ends by drowning herself.
Alexandra is saved, thanks to a "loveless" marriage with the locksmith, Lestmann. She accepts
this union so that she will not have to starve and can remain "straight." Thus, the "straight
road" which Alexandra wanted to follow has forced her finally to sell herself, to marry a man
whom she does not love.

       *       *       *       *       *

Each page of Veressayev's work exists merely to throw light on this or that social question,
considered from a well defined point of view. The secret of his success rests mostly in the
frank, sincere manner in which he has approached certain problems. At the same time, all of
his work breathes forth a deep and tender love for those who suffer. In reality, there is not
a single book by Veressayev which might not be a confession; all that he writes he has already
experienced himself, and his work vibrates with a delicate and personal emotion. It is only
necessary to read "The Memoirs of a Physician," which is almost an autobiography, in order
to perceive the moral relationship that exists between Veressayev and the heroes of his stories.

This book is the confession of a physician from the time of his early studies. The young man
is astonished at the number of maladies that exist and by the unbelievable variety of keen
suffering that nature inflicts upon the human species, man. Soon he is obliged to make a discovery
that stuns him: that medicine is incapable of curing many evils. It only gropes about, trying
thousands of remedies before it arrives at a sure result. The scruples and anxiety of the student
increase, especially after an autopsy on a woman in the amphitheatre, when the professor announces
that the woman has succumbed because the surgeon, who was operating, swooned, and ends by saying:
"In such difficult operations the very best surgeons are not safe from accidents of this kind."
After this, the professor shook hands with his colleague and every one left. At that time,
doubt entered the mind of the young man. And so, within a period of ten years, he passes from
extreme optimism to the same degree of pessimism.

We follow him in the hospitals, where he is scandalized by the brutality of the teaching, which
makes use of the unwilling bodies of sick people. "Not being able to pay for their treatment
in money, they have to pay with their bodies." Finally, the student becomes a doctor himself.
Full of faith and knowledge, he starts practice in a small market-town of central Russia. But
his work soon cools him down; in the clinic he had studied mostly exceptional cases; now he
is disconcerted by simple and every-day sicknesses. His ignorance leads to the following tragic
case:

One day, a poor and widowed washerwoman brings him her sick child, whom she does not want to
take to the hospital because her two oldest children died there. The child is a weak boy of
eight years who has caught scarlet-fever. At first, the inside of the throat begins to swell,
and, to prevent an abscess, the doctor orders rubbings with a mercurial ointment. The next
day, he finds the boy all aquiver and covered with pimples. "There is no mistake," he says,
"the rubbing has spread the infection into the neighboring organs and a general poisoning of
the blood has taken place. The little boy is lost.... All that day and night I wandered about
the streets. I could think of nothing, and I felt crushed by the horror of the thing. Only
at times this thought came into my mind: 'I have killed a human being!'" The child lived ten
days more. The night before his death Veressayev comes to see him. The poor mother is sobbing
in a corner of the miserable room. She pulls herself together, however, and taking three rubles
out of her pocket, offers them to the trembling doctor, who refuses them. Then this woman falls
down on her knees and thanks him for having pitied her son. "I'll leave everything, I'll give
up everything," sobs the doctor.... "I have decided to leave for St. Petersburg to-morrow in
order to study some more even if I die of hunger!"

Once the resolution was made to pursue his studies in a more practical manner, he becomes the
house-surgeon of a hospital. But even there a mass of problems disturb him. He sees how dangerous
the simplest operations are; he is frightened by the unrestraint of the doctors, who try new
methods on the sick, methods the effects of which are not known, methods that result in the
patient's being inoculated with more sickness. Medicine cannot progress without direct experimentation,
and experience is gained at the expense of the more unfortunate. Nevertheless, Veressayev does
not argue against this way of working; he shows the facts, and leaves it to the reader to decide.
On the other hand, he does not hide his fear of the common ignorance of all doctors. Every
individual differs from his neighbor. How distinguish their idiosyncrasies? Once the scope
of a sickness is known, what remedy shall be used? Some say this, others, that. How shall one
choose? Veressayev has felt all of this; he has tried to harden himself against the unreasonable
ingratitude of some, the scepticism of others; he realizes that patience, resignation, and
heroism are needed in order to struggle against and support the mortifications in the career
of a doctor. How much easier it would be not to consider medicine as infallible; to study it
as an art rather than as a science. But people prefer to believe that doctors know everything.
They do not want to see the reality, and this is the reason why sad, and at times tragic conflicts
arise between patient and physician.

Finally, what could the most perfect medical science and the cleverest doctor do against the
enormous mass of sickness and suffering that are the inevitable result of the social evils,
of which poverty is the most conspicuous? How can one tell a man that his trade is running
him down and that he does not get enough nourishment? How can one order a man to eat better
food, to get more sleep and more pure air? First, and most important, is the necessity of curing
the social organism.

It is easy to see why this book made many enemies for its author. There is too much frankness
and conscientiousness in these studies not to anger those who have their greatest interest
in concealing the truth! The upright man who sees primarily in medicine a means to relieve
human suffering, cannot realize without sadness the many abuses hidden under the name of this
science.

       *       *       *       *       *

"In the War," recently published, is the story of Veressayev's campaign in Manchuria. In this
work, the author has painted vividly the peregrinations of his moving hospital, and also the
terrible sufferings of the Russian army. By the thousands, the starved children of the campaign,
the Russian foot-soldiers, stoics and fatalists, sacrificing their lives for a strange and
incomprehensible cause, pass before the eyes of the reader. And in the background, detaching
themselves from the crowd, in their gold and silver embroidered uniforms, are "the heroes of
the war, these vultures of the advance and rear-guard, who enrich themselves at the expense
of the unfortunate soldiers." A number of these great chiefs, whose infamy was evident at the
end of the war, since they had shown themselves incapable of dealing with the foreign enemy,
had distinguished themselves by the ferocity they exhibited in quelling internal troubles.
As to the military doctors, the greater number of them went into the campaign only for commercial
gain. Among the nurses who accompanied them, aside from those who were real heroines of goodness
and devotion, there were many who prostituted themselves shamefully.

Corruption, carelessness, disorder, and cowardice are shown on every page of this story, as
well as the terrible suffering endured by the wounded in the hospitals. The wounded were the
real martyrs of this frightful campaign.

       *       *       *       *       *

Veressayev, like all of his heroes and heroines, wants to help the people, and for this reason
he gets in touch with the revolutionists who consecrate their work to political and social
regeneration, under the various titles, "narodnikis," Marxists, Socialists, idealists and so
on.... Which of these does he prefer? We do not know. We find the influence of Marx in his
ideas, but we cannot affirm that he is an absolute Marxian. It seems as if Veressayev, troubled
by the innumerable divergencies of opinion, asks himself secretly: "Will this war lead to the
unity of opinion and program, so necessary for victory, or by its quarrels will it only retard
the harmony so much sought after?"

It is not discussion that will finally lead to unity, but rather life itself, with all its
realities.

It would be most interesting to read a sequel to the three famous novels of Veressayev--"Astray,"
"The Contagion," and "At the Turning"--in which he would give us the psychology of his former
heroes under present conditions. To-day, the people are not "astray"; the field is big enough
for every one to find the place that best suits his ideas, tastes, and temperament. Dr. Chekanhov,
if he were living now, instead of being maltreated by the people, would certainly be their
well beloved champion, and perhaps represent them in the Duma; the timid Tokarev, in spite
of his aversion to the ideas of the revolutionists, could find a place in the liberal party
of the Reforming Democrats, or at least among the Octobrists; the unfortunate Varenka would
not be worn out by her work as school-mistress, for she would be supported by the peasants.
The peasants themselves are not the miserable and resigned creatures of Veressayev's earlier
stories. Certainly, liberty is not yet a legal thing in Russia, and the Duma is still an unstable
institution, but the end of absolutism is near, for a great event has taken place in the empire
of the Tsar, namely, this awakening of the feeling of human dignity, and the spirit of revolt
among the lower strata of the Russian people, which in the past, by its unconsciousness, formed
the granite pedestal of autocracy. The struggle is terrible, but confidence in final victory
redoubles the energy of the strugglers. A certain Russian was right when he said: "Formerly,
life was formidable, but now it is both formidable and gay."

In reading the works of Veressayev, Tchekoff, and other painters of modern Russian society,
it is easy to note that not one of them anticipated this sudden change of scenery on the Russian
political stage, a change which, however, was being prepared in the souls of the peasants.
But let us not reproach them! Russia will always remain an enigma.

There is a very old story about the son of the peasant Ilya Murometz. After remaining lazily
resting in his "isba" for thirty years, he suddenly arose, and began to walk with such fury
that the earth trembled. How could these writers conceive the time when this lazy giant would
make up his mind to walk? It is enough to have the assurance that now, no matter what happens,
since he has arisen, he will not lie down again.

V

MAXIM GORKY

Maxim Gorky is the most original and, after Tolstoy, the most talented of modern Russian writers.
He was born in 1868 or 1869--he does not know exactly when himself--in a dyer's back shop at
Nizhny Novgorod. His mother, Barbara Kashirina, was the daughter of the aforementioned dyer;
and his father, Maxim Pyeshkov, was an upholsterer. The child was christened Alexis. His real
name, then, is Alexis Pyeshkov, and Maxim Gorky[6] is only his pseudonym. When he was four,
he lost his father, and three years later, his mother. He was then taken by his grandfather,
who had been a soldier under Nicholas I, a hard, authoritative, pitiless old man, before whom
all trembled. And it was under his rude tutelage that the child first began to read. When he
was nine, he was sent to work for a shoemaker, an evil sort of man who maltreated him.

 [6] In Russian, Gorky means bitterness.

"One day," Gorky tells us, "I was warming some water for him; the bowl fell, and I burned my
hands badly. That evening I ran away, my grandfather having scolded me severely. I then became
a painter's apprentice."

He did not remain long in this position. From this time on, his unsatisfied soul was seized
with the "wanderlust." First apprenticed to an engraver, and then as a gardener, he finally
became a scullion on one of the boats that plies up and down the Volga. Here he felt more at ease.

On board, in the person of the master-cook, named Smoury, he unexpectedly met a teacher. This
cook, who had been a soldier, loved to read, and he gave the child all the books that he had
in an old trunk. They consisted of the works of Gogol, Dumas' novels, the "Lives of the Saints,"
a manual of geography, and some popular novels. Surely, a queer collection!

Smoury inspired his scullion, then sixteen years of age, "with an ardent curiosity for the
printed word." A "furious" desire to learn seized the young fellow; he went to Kazan, a university
city, in the hope of "learning gratuitously all sorts of beautiful things." Cruel deception!
They explained to him that "this was not according to the established order." Discouraged,
a few months later, he took a position with a baker. He who dreamed of the sun and the open
air had to be imprisoned in a filthy and damp cellar. He remained there for two years, earning
two dollars a month, board and lodging included; the food, however, was putrid, and his lodging
consisted of an attic which he shared with five other men.

"My life in that bakery," he has said, "left a bitter impression. Those two years were the
hardest of my whole life." He has thus described his recollections in one of his stories:

"We lived in a wooden box, under a low and heavy ceiling, all covered with cobwebs and permeated
with fine soot. Night pressed us between the two walls, spattered with spots of mud and all
mouldy. We got up at five in the morning and, stupid and indifferent, began work at six o'clock.
We made bread out of the dough which our comrades had prepared while we slept. The whole day,
from dawn till ten at night, some of us sat at the table rolling out the dough, and, to avoid
becoming torpid, we would constantly rock ourselves to and fro while the others kneaded in
the flour. The enormous oven, which resembled a fantastic beast, opened its large jaws, full
of dazzling flames, and breathed forth upon us its hot breath, while its two black and enormous
cavities watched our unending work....

"Thus, from one day to the next, in the floury dust, in the mud that our feet brought in from
the yard, in the suffocating and terrible heat, we rolled out the dough and made cracknels,
moistening them with our sweat; we hated our work with an implacable hatred; we never ate what
we made, preferring black bread to these odorous dainties."

       *       *       *       *       *

At this period of his life, he had occasion to study at first hand certain places where he
received original information which he later used in writing "Konovalov" and "The Ex-Men,"
which have thus acquired an autobiographical value. In fact, he worked a long while with these
"ex-men;" like them, he sawed wood, and carried heavy burdens. At the same time, he devoted
all his spare time to reading and thinking about problems, which became more and more "cursed"
and alarming. He had found an attentive listener and interlocutor in the person of his comrade,
the baker Konovalov. These two men, while baking their bread, found time to read. And the walls
of the cellar heard the reading of the works of Gogol, Dostoyevsky, Karamzine, and others.
Then they used to discuss the meaning of life. On holidays, Gorky and Konovalov had for the
moment an opportunity to come out of the hole--this word does not exaggerate--in which they
worked, to breathe the fresh air, to live a bit in nature's bosom, and to see their fellow men.

"On holidays," Gorky tells us, "we went with Konovalov down to the river, into the fields;
we took a little brandy and bread with us, and, from morning till evening, we were in the open
air."

They often went to an old, abandoned house which served as a refuge for a whole tribe of miserable
and wandering people, who loved to tell of their wandering lives. Gorky and his companion were
always well received on account of the provisions which they distributed so generously.

"Each story spread out before our eyes like a piece of lace in which the black threads predominated--they
represented the truth--and where there were threads of light color--they were the lies. These
people loved us in their way, and were attentive listeners, because I often read a great deal
to them."

Often, these expeditions were not without their risks. One day, two of the baker's workmen
happened to drown in a bog; another time, they were taken in a police raid and passed the night
in the station house.

It was also at this time that Gorky frequented the company of several students, not care-free
and happy ones, but miserable young fellows like those whom Turgenev described as "nourished
by physical privations and moral sufferings."

On leaving the bakery, where his health, very much weakened by the lack of air and by bad food,
did not permit him to remain any longer, he joined those vagabonds, those wanderers, whose
melancholy companion he had been, and whose painter and poet he was to be. In their company,
he traveled through Russia in every sense of the word, now as a longshoreman, now as a wood-chopper.
Whenever he had a copeck in his pocket he bought books and newspapers and spent the night reading
them. He suffered hunger and cold; he slept in the open air in summer, and, in winter, in some
refuge or cellar. The feverish activity of so keen an intellect in an organism so crushed had,
as its consequence, one of the attempts at suicide which are so frequent among the younger
generation of the Russians.

In 1889, at the age of twenty-one, Gorky shot himself in the chest, but he did not succeed
in killing himself. Soon afterwards, he became gate-keeper for the winter at Tzaratzine; but
the summer had hardly come before he began his vagabondage again, in the course of which he
undertook a thousand little jobs in order to keep himself alive. On the road, he noticed those
pariahs whom society does not want or who do not want society. And of these, in his short stories,
he has created immortal types.

Life was still very hard for him at this time. He has given us a moving sketch of it in his
story entitled: "Once in Autumn." The hero, who is none other than the author himself, passes
the night under an old, upturned boat, in the company of a prostitute who is just as poor and
just as abandoned as himself. They have broken into a booth in order to steal enough bread
to keep them from starving. Gorky is sad; he wants to weep; but the poor girl, miserable as
she is, consoles him and covers him with kisses.

"Those were the first kisses any woman ever gave me, and they were the best, for those that
I received later always cost me a lot and never gave me any joy.... At this time, I was already
preparing myself to be an active and powerful force in society; it seemed to me at times that
I had in part accomplished my purpose.... I dreamed of political resolutions, of social reorganization;
I used to read such deep and impenetrable authors that their thoughts did not seem to be a
part of them--and now a prostitute warmed me with her body, and I was in debt to a miserable,
shameful creature, banished by a society that did not want to accord her a place. The wind
blew and groaned, the rain beat down upon the boat, the waves broke around us, and both of
us, closely entwined, trembled from cold and hunger. And Natasha consoled me; she spoke to
me in a sweet, caressing voice, as only a woman can. In listening to her tender and naïve words,
I wept, and those tears washed away from my heart many impurities, much bitterness, sadness
and hatred, all of which had accumulated there before this night."

At daybreak, they say good-bye to each other, and never see one another again.

"For more than six months, I looked in all the dives and dens in the hope of seeing that dear
little Natasha once more, but it was in vain...."

       *       *       *       *       *

We find him again at Nizhny Novgorod at the time of the call for military recruits. Gorky was
reformed, for, he says, "They do not accept those who are fallen." Meanwhile, he became a kvass
merchant and exercised this trade for several months. Finally, he became the secretary of a
lawyer, named Lanine. The latter, who had a very good reputation, took a deep interest in the
poor boy whom life had treated so ill. He became interested in his intellectual development
and, according to Gorky himself, had a great influence on him. At Nizhny Novgorod, as at Kazan,
Gorky felt himself attracted by the circle of young people who discussed the "cursed" questions,
and he soon was noticed by his comrades. They spoke of him as "a live and energetic soul."

Easy as life was for Gorky in this city, where he remained for a while, the "wanderlust" again
seized him. "Not feeling at home among these intelligent people," he traveled. From Nizhny
Novgorod, he went, in 1893, to Tzaratzine; then he traveled on foot through the entire province
of the Don, the Ukraine, entered into Bessarabia, and from there descended by the coast of
the Crimea as far as Kuban.

In October, 1892, Gorky found himself at Tiflis, where he worked in the railroad shops. That
same year, he published in a local paper his first story, "Makar Choudra," in which already
a remarkable talent was evident.

Leaving Tiflis after a short sojourn there, he came to the banks of the Volga, in his native
country, and began to write stories for the local papers. A happy chance made him meet Korolenko,
who took a great interest in the "debutante" writer. "In the year 1893-1894," writes Gorky,
"I made the acquaintance of Vladimir Korolenko, to whom I owe my introduction into 'great'
literature. He has done a great deal for me in teaching me many things."

The important influence of Korolenko on the literary development of Gorky can best be seen
in one of the latter's letters to his biographer, Mr. Gorodetsky. "Write this," he says to
his biographer, "write this without changing a single word: It is Korolenko who taught Gorky
to write, and if Gorky has profited but little by the teaching of Korolenko, it is the fault
of Gorky alone. Write: Gorky's first teacher was the soldier-cook Smoury; his second teacher
was the lawyer Lanine; the third, Alexander Kalouzhny, an 'ex-man;' the fourth, Korolenko...."

From the day when he met Korolenko, Gorky's stories appeared mostly in the more important publications.
In 1895, he published "Chelkashe" in the important Petersburg review, "Russkoe Bogatsvo;" a
year later, other publications equally well known published, "Konovalov," "Malva," and "Anxiety."
These works brought Gorky into the literary world, where he soon became one of the favorite
writers. The critics, at first sceptical, soon joined their voices with the enthusiastic clamor
of the people.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gorky's wandering life has given his works a peculiar and universally established form. He
is, above all others, the poet of the "barefoot brigade," of the vagabonds who eternally wander
from one end of Russia to the other, carelessly spending the few pennies that they have succeeded
in earning, and who, like the birds of the sky, have no cares for the morrow.

But this does not suffice to explain this author's popularity, especially among the younger
generation. The "barefoot brigade" is not a novelty in Russian literature. We find it in the
works of Reshetnikov, Uspensky, Mamine, Zhassinsky, and others. It is true that, up to this
time, the vagabonds had been represented as the dregs of the people, as hopeless drunkards,
thieves, and murderers. The writers who represented them were satisfied in rousing in their
readers pity for the victims of this social disorder, victims so wounded by fate, that they
have not even a realization of the injustice with which they are treated. And it is only in
the works of the great dramatist Ostrovsky that we find any happy vagabonds, with a deep love
of nature and beauty.

Gorky's vagabonds have, like Ostrovsky's, exalted feelings for natural beauties, but they possess,
besides, a full consciousness of themselves, and they declare open war against society. Gorky
lives the lives of his heroes; he seems to sink himself into them, and, at the same time, he
idealizes them, and often uses them as his spokesmen. Far from being crushed by fate, his vagabonds
clothe themselves with a certain pride in their misery; for them, the ideal existence is the
one they lead, because it is free; with numerous variations, they all exalt the irresistible
seduction of vagabondage:

"As for me, just listen! How many things I've seen in my fifty-eight years," says Makar Choudra.
"In what country have I not been? That is the only way to live. Walk, walk, and you see everything.
Don't stay long in one place: what is there out of the ordinary in that? Just as day and night
eternally run after one another, thus you must run, avoiding daily life, so that you will not
cease to love it...."

"I, brother,"--says, in turn, Konovalov,--"I have decided to go all over the earth, in every
sense of the word. You always see something new.... You think of nothing.... The wind blows,
and you might say that it blows the dust out of your soul. You feel free and easy.... You are
not troubled by any one. If you are hungry, you stop, and work to earn a few pennies; if there
is no work to be had, you ask for some bread and it is given to you. So you see many countries,
and the most diverse beauties...."

Likewise, in "Tedium," Kouzma Kossiyak thus clearly expresses himself:

"I would not give up my liberty for any woman, nor for any fireplace. I was born in a shed,
do you hear, and it is in a shed that I am going to die; that is my fate. I am going to wander
everywhere until my hair turns grey.... I get bored when I stay in the same place."

In their feeling of hostility to all authority, and all fixed things, including bourgeois happiness
and economical principles, some of Gorky's characters resemble some of those superior heroes
of Russian literature, like Pushkin's Evgeny Onyegin, Lermontov's Pechorine, and, finally,
Turgenev's Rudin, who, in their way, are vagabonds, filled with the same independent spirit
in their respective social, intellectual, or political circles.

On the other hand, Gorky's wandering beggars are closely related to those "free men" to whom
M. S. Maximov attributes a historic rôle which was favorable to the extension of the Russian
empire. "Russia," he says, in his book, "Siberia and the Prison," "lived by vagabondage after
she became a State; thanks to the vagabonds, she has extended her boundaries: for, it is they
who, in order to maintain their independence, fought against the nomad tribes who attacked
them from the south and the east...."

There is a marked difference between these two classes: men of the former look for a place
on this earth where they can establish themselves; while men of the other class, those who
are out of work, drunkards, and lazy men, have no taste for a sedentary life.

But if Gorky has not created the type of vagabond which is so familiar to those who know Russian
literature, on the other hand, he has remodeled it with his original, energetic, and vibrantly
realistic talent. His nomad "barefoot brigade," picturesquely encamped, is surrounded with
a sort of terribly majestic halo in these vast stretches of country, a background against which
their sombre silhouettes are set off. From the perfumed steppes to the roaring sea, they conjure
up to the eye of their old co-mate the enchanting Slavic land of which they are the audacious
offsprings. And Gorky also lovingly gives them a familiar setting, painted with bold strokes,
of plains and mountains which border in the distance the glaucous stretch of the sea. The sea!
With what fervor does Gorky depict the anger and the peace of the sea. It always inspires,
like an adored mistress:

"... The sea sleeps.

"Immense, sighing lazily along the strand, it has gone to sleep, peaceful in its huge stretch,
bathed in the moonlight. As soft as velvet, and black, it mingles with the dark southern sky
and sleeps profoundly, while on its surface is reflected the transparent tissue of the flaky,
immobile clouds, in which is incrusted the gilded design of the stars."

Thus, like a "leitmotiv," the murmuring of the water interrupts the course of the story. And
the steppe, this steppe "which has devoured so much human flesh and has drunk so much blood
that it has become fat and fecund," surrounds with its immensity these miserable wandering
beings and menaces them with its storm:

"Suddenly, the entire steppe undulated, enveloped with a dazzling blue light which seemed to
enlarge the horizon ... the shadows trembled and disappeared for a moment ... a crash of thunder
burst forth, disturbing the sky, where many black clouds were flying past....

"... At times the steppe stretched forth like an oscillating giant ... the vast stretch of
blue and cloudless sky poured light down upon us, and seemed like an immense cupola of sombre
color."

The wind passed "in large and regular waves, or blew with a sharp rattle, the leaves sighed
and whispered among themselves, the waves of the river washed up on the banks, monotonous,
despairing, as if they were telling something terribly sad and mournful," the entire country
vibrated with a powerful life that harmonized with the souls of the people.

In "Old Iserguile," Gorky writes: "I should have liked to transform myself into dust and be
blown about by the wind; I should have liked to stretch myself out on the steppe like the warm
waters of the river, or throw myself into the sea and rise into the sky in an opal mist; I
should have liked to drink in this evening so wonderful and melancholy.... And, I know not
why, I was suffering...."

Gorky's stories, always short enough, have little or no plot, and the characters are barely
sketched. But, in these simple frames, he has confined the power of an art which is prolific,
supple and profoundly living. Let us take, for example, "The Friends." Dancing Foot and The
One Who Hopes are ordinary thieves, the terror of the villagers whose gardens they rob. One
day, when they are especially desperate, they steal a thin horse which is browsing at the edge
of the woods. The One Who Hopes gets an incurable sickness, and it is perhaps on account of
his approaching death that he feels scruples at this crime. Dancing Foot expresses the scorn
that the weakness of his companion inspires him with, but he ends by giving in and returns
the animal. One hour later, The One Who Hopes falls dead in front of Dancing Foot, who is tremendously
upset in spite of his affected indifference.

A dry outline cannot possibly convey the emotion contained in this little drama, where the
low mentality of the characters is rendered with the mastery which Gorky usually shows in creating
his elemental heroes. Among other works that should be noted are "Cain and Arteme," so poignantly
ironical in its simplicity, "To Drive Away Tedium," "The Silver Clasps," "The Prisoner," and
that little masterpiece, "Twenty-Six Men and a Girl," in which we see twenty-six bakers pouring
out an ideal and mystical love on Tanya, the little embroiderer, who they believe, is as pure
as an angel. One day, a brutal soldier comes to defy them, and boasts that he will conquer
this young girl. He succeeds. Then the twenty-six insult their fallen idol; the tragedy is
not so much in the insults that they hurl at her, as in the suffering they undergo through
having lost the illusion that was so dear to them.

Let us note, incidentally, the existence of a sort of comic spirit in these works which relieves
the tragedy of the situations. In spite of their dark pessimism, the actors in these little
dramas have an appearance of gaiety which deceives. It is by this popular humor that Gorky
is the continuator of the work of Gogol; this is especially noticeable in "The Fair at Goltva."

       *       *       *       *       *

In studying Gorky, one is often struck by the homogeneity of the types which he has described.
Open any of his books, and you will always meet that "restless" type, dissatisfied with the
banality of his existence, trying to get away from it, and leaning irresistibly towards absolute
liberty, far removed from social and political obligations.

Who are these "restless" people? Toward what end are they striving? What do they represent?
First, they have an immense reserve force which they do not know what to do with; they have
got out of the rut, the rut which they despise, but it is hard for them to create another sort
of existence for themselves. Bourgeois happiness repulses them, while all sorts of duties are
hateful to them. They consider the people who are contented with this sort of a life as slaves,
unworthy of the name of man, and they show the same disdain for the peasants, for the leading
classes, and for the workingmen. The simple farmer excites the scorn of the "barefoot brigade:"

"As for me," says one of them, "I don't like any peasants.... They are all dogs! They have
provincial States, and they do for them.... They tremble, they are hypocrites, but they want
to live; they have one protection: the soil.... However, we must tolerate the peasant, for
he has a certain usefulness."

"What is a peasant?" asks another. And he answers the question himself: "The peasant is for
all men a matter of food, that is to say, an animal that can be eaten. The sun, the water,
the air, and the peasant are indispensable to man's existence...."

One might think that this hostility was the fruit of a feeling of envy provoked by the fact
that the peasant seems to enjoy so many advantages. But, on the contrary, the "barefoot brigade"
admits that the peasant subjugates his individuality for any sort of profit, and that he cannot
feel the yoke which he has voluntarily taken in the hope of getting his daily bread.

These workingmen "who pitifully dig in the soil" are unfortunate slaves. "They do nothing but
construct, they work perpetually, their blood and sweat are the cement of all the edifices
of the earth. And yet the remuneration which they receive, although they are crushed by their
work, does not give them shelter or enough food really to live on."

The enlightened classes are always characterized in Gorky's works by violent traits. The architect
Shebouyev accords a sufficiently great, but scarcely honorable, place to the category of intelligent
men to whom he belongs.

"All of us," he says, "are nonentities, deprived of happiness. We are in such great numbers!
And our numbers have been a power for so long a time! We are animated by so many desires, pure
and honest.... Why is there so much talk among us and so little action? And, all the while,
the germs are there!... All these papers, novels, articles are germs ... just germs, and nothing
else.... Some of us write, others read; after reading, we discuss; after discussing, we forget
what we have read. For us, life is tedious, heavy, grey, and burdensome. We live our lives,
but sigh from fatigue and complain of the heavy burdens we are carrying."

The journalist Yezhov, in "Thomas Gordeyev," expresses himself in the same manner, but even
more decisively:

"I should like to say to the intelligent classes: 'You people are the best in my country! Your
life is paid for by the blood and tears of ten Russian generations! How much you have cost
your country! And what do you for her? What have you given to life? What have you done?...'"

The absence of all independence, of any passion even a little sincere, the complete submission
of heart and mind to the old prescribed morality, the constant effort to realize mere personal
ambitions--all of these are the reproaches that Gorky addresses to cultivated man, whose moral
disintegration he proves has been produced by routine and prejudice.

In contrast to them, the vagabonds are the instinctive enemies of all slavery, in any form
whatsoever. The complete independence of their personality means everything to them. And no
material conditions, no matter how prosperous, will induce them to make the least compromise
on this point. One of these "restless" types, Konovalov, tells how, after he had bound himself
to the wife of a rich merchant, he could have lived in the greatest comfort, but he abandoned
everything, the easy life, and even the woman, whom he loved well enough, in order to go out
and look for the unknown. This is a common adventure on the part of Gorky's heroes.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is the cause of this restlessness?

"Well, you see," explains Konovalov, "I became weary. It was such weariness, I must tell you,
little brother, that at moments I simply could not live. It seemed to me as if I were the only
man on the whole earth, and, with the exception of myself, there was no living thing anywhere.
And in those moments, everything was repugnant to me, everything in the world; I became a burden
to myself, and if everybody were dead, I wouldn't even sigh! It must have been a disease with
me, and the reason why I took to drink, for, before this time, I never drank."

For the same reasons, in "Anguish," a workingman leaves his mistress and his employer, the
miller. Where does this anguish come from? Perhaps it is the simple result of a psychological
process which, Konovalov admits, is nothing other than a disease. It is very possible that,
in impulsive acts, a psychiatrist would see something analogous to alcoholism, or the symptoms
of some other anomaly.

Turgenev had already analyzed a similar case in "The Madman." When Michael Poltev is asked
what evil spirit led him to drink and to risk his life, he always refers to his anguish.

"'Why this anguish?' asks his uncle.

"'Why?... When the brain is free, one begins to think of poverty, injustice, Russia.... And
that's the end! anguish hastens on.... One is ready to send a bullet through one's head! There's
nothing left to do but get drunk!...'

"'And why do you associate Russia with all of that? Why, you are nothing but a sluggard!'

"'But I can do nothing, dear uncle!... Teach me what I ought to do, to what task I ought to
consecrate my life. I will do it gladly!...'"

Gorky's characters give the same explanation of their "ennui," and almost in identical terms.
This disgust comes in great part from not knowing how to adapt oneself to life, nor how to
become a "useful" man.

"Take me, for instance," says Konovalov, "what am I? A vagabond ... a drunkard, a crack-brained
sort of man. There is no reason for my life. Why do I live on earth, and to whom am I useful?
I have no home, no wife, no children, and I don't feel as if I wanted any. I live and am bored....
What about? No one knows. I have no life within myself, do you understand? How shall I express
it? There's a spark, or force lacking in my soul...."

Another character, the shoemaker Orlov, in "Orlov and His Wife," especially reflects this pessimistic
disposition. In the same way as Konovalov, he is born with "restlessness in his heart."

He is a shoemaker; and why?

"As if there weren't enough of them already! What pleasure is there in this trade for me? I
sit in a cellar and sew. Then I shall die. They say that the cholera is coming.... And after
that? Gregory Orlov lived, made shoes--and died of the cholera. What does that signify? And
why was it necessary that I should live, make shoes and die, tell me?"

These creatures are under the impression that they are superfluous; therefore their pessimistic
conclusions. All of them passionately want to be able to express the meaning of life in general,
their life in particular, but the task is too much for them.

Gorky's heroes consider themselves "useless beings," but they never humiliate themselves. Their
restlessness of spirit does not permit them to resign themselves to the reigning banality or
to take part in it without protesting. At the same time, some of them are gifted with sufficient
personality to possess an unshaken faith in themselves, in their strength, which keeps them
from letting the responsibility of their torments fall back upon society.

Promtov, the hero of "The Strange Companion," makes these restless seekers the descendants
of the Wandering Jew: "Their peculiarity," he ironically says, "is, that whether rich or poor,
they cannot find a suitable place for themselves on earth, and establish themselves in it.
The greatest of them are satisfied with nothing: money, women, nor men."

What, then, do these "greatest" want?

Their desires evidently take a multitude of forms, and have the most diverse shades; but the
greatest number of them are impatient for extraordinary happenings, eager for exploits. Some
of them declare that they would be willing to throw themselves on a hundred knives if humanity
could be relieved by their doing so. But simple daily activity, even if it is useful, does
not satisfy them.

The shoemaker Orlov leaves his cellar, as he calls it, and accepts a position in the hospital
where they are taking care of cholera patients. His devotion makes him an "indispensable man;"
he is reborn, and, according to his own words, he is "ripe for life." It seems as if his end
were going to be attained. But not so. Restlessness seizes him again. Orlov questions the value
of his work. He saves sick people from the cholera. Is he doing good? The greatest care is
taken of these people, but how many people are there outside of the hospitals, one hundred
times as many as there are inside, who are just as unfortunate, but, in spite of that fact,
are not helped by any one?

"While you live," he declares, "no one will refuse to give you a drink of water. And if you
are near death, not only will they not allow you to die, but they will go to some expense to
stop you. They organize hospitals.... They give you wine at 'six and a half rubles a bottle.'
The sick man gets well, the doctors are happy, and Orlov would like to share their joy; but
he cannot, for he knows that, on leaving the threshold of the hospital, a life 'worse than
the convulsions of the cholera' awaits the convalescent...." And again he is seized by the
desire to drink, and to be a vagabond, and by a wish to experience new sensations.

       *       *       *       *       *

These, then, are the vagabonds whom we can class in the category of the "restless." After these,
come those whom the author terms the "ex-men," and whom he studies, under this title, in one
of his longest stories. The ex-men are closely related to the "restless;" however, they differ
from them in that they push their opinions to an extreme, for they are, more than the others,
miserable and at bay against society.

"What difference would it make if it all went to the devil," one of them philosophizes--"I
should like to see the earth go to pieces suddenly, provided that I should perish the last,
after having seen the others die.... I'm an ex-man, am I not? I am a pariah, then, estranged
from all bonds and duties.... I can spit on everything!"

Thomas Gordeyev's father develops another thesis; a rich and rational bourgeois, he tries to
inculcate in his son from his infancy--a son who later augments the ranks of the "restless"--the
most perfect spirit of egotism.

"You must pity people," he says, "but do it with discernment. First, look at a man, see what
good you can get out of him, and see what he is good for. If you think he is a strong man,
capable of work, help him. But if you think him weak and little suited for work, abandon him
without pity. Remember this: two boards have fallen into the mud, one of them is worm-eaten,
the other is sound. What are you going to do? Pay no attention to the worm-eaten plank, but
take out the sound one and dry it in the sun. It may be of service to you or to some one else...."

The reader will note the absolute egotism in all of Gorky's types. The "restless" are interested
only in their own misery, and they think that all men are like them; nor do they try to stop
or bridle their passions.

Strong passions are one of the most precious privileges of mankind. This truth is well shown
in the story: "Once More About the Devil."[7] Here, the men have become shabby and insignificant
since there has been propagated among them, with a new strength, the gospel of individual perfection.
The demon stifles, in the heart of Ivan Ivanovich Ivanov, all the passions that can agitate
a human soul,--ambition, pity, evil, and anger; this operation makes Ivan an absolutely perfect
being. On his face there appears that beatitude which words cannot express. The devil has crushed
all "substance" out of him, and he is completely "empty."

 [7] This was preceded by a story called "The Devil."

One understands that Gorky's heroes cannot find what would be good for them, nor feel the least
satisfaction in doing their fellow men a good service. They only dream of action; their sole
desire is to affirm their individuality by "manifesting" themselves, little matter how. Old
Iserguille is persuaded that "in life, there is room for mighty deeds" and, if a man likes
them, he will find occasion to do them. Konovalov is most enthusiastic over Zhermak,[8] to
whom he feels himself akin.

 [8] A celebrated brigand in the time of Ivan the Terrible who, in
 order to be pardoned, conquered Siberia in the name of the Tsar.

"I'd like to reduce the whole earth to dust," dreams Orlov, "or get up a crowd of comrades
and kill off all the Jews ... all, to the very last one! Or, in general, do something that
would place me high above all men, so that I could spit on them from up there, and cry to them:
'Dogs! Why do you live? You're all hypocritical rascals and nothing more....'"

These people demand a boundless liberty, but how obtain it? All of them dream of a certain
organization which will let them feel relieved of all their duties, of all the thousands of
petty things that make life hard, of all the small details, conventions, and obligations which
hold such an important place in our society. But the time for heroic deeds has passed away,
and the "restless" fight in vain against the millions of men who are determined to keep their
habits and advantages.

Thus they are obliged to shake the dust off their feet and to leave the ranks in which they
are suffocating. No matter what they do or what they try to do, their motto is, "each one for
himself."

"Come," says a vagabond poetically to Thomas Gordeyev, "come with me on the open road, into
the fields and steppes, across the plains, over the mountains, come out and look at the world
in all its freedom. The thick forests begin to murmur; their sweet voice praises divine wisdom;
God's birds sing its glory and the grass of the steppe burns with the incense of the Holy Virgin.

"The soul is filled with an ardent yet calm joy, you desire nothing, you envy no one.... And
it is then that it seems as if on the whole earth there is no one but God and you...."

The material inconveniences of such an existence hardly affect Gorky's characters. Promtov,
one of the prophets of individualism, says, in speaking of himself:

"I have been 'on the road' for ten years, and I have not complained of my fate to God. I don't
want to tell you anything of this period, because it is too tedious.... In general, it is the
joyous life of a bird. Sometimes, grain is lacking, but one must not be too exacting and one
must remember that kings themselves do not have pleasures only. In a life like ours, there
are no duties--that is the first pleasure--and there are no laws, except those of nature--that
is the second. Without a doubt, the gentlemen of the police force bother one at times ... but
you find fleas even in the best hotels. As a set-off, one can go to the right, or to the left,
or straight ahead, wherever your heart bids you go, and if you don't want to go anywhere, after
having provided yourself with bread from the hut of some peasant, who will never refuse it,
you can lie down until you care to resume your travels...."

This is the final point at which all of the "restless" arrive, believing that there they will
find what they have always lacked. Even the author himself shares their views up to a certain
point:

"You have to be born in civilized society," he says, speaking of himself, "in order to have
the patience to live there all your life without having the desire to flee from this circle,
where so many restrictions hinder you, restrictions sanctioned by the habit of little poisoned
lies, this sickly center of self-love, in one word, all this vanity of vanities which chills
the feelings and perverts the mind, and which is called in general, without any good reason
and very falsely, civilization.

"I was born and brought up outside of it, and I am glad of that fact. Because of it, I have
never been able to absorb culture in large doses, without feeling, at the end of a certain
time, the terrible need of stepping out of this frame.... It does one good to go into the dens
of the cities, where everything is dirty, but simple and sincere; or even to rove in the fields
or on the highroads; one sees curious things there. It refreshes the mind; and all you need
in order to do it is a pair of sturdy legs...."

What then is the teaching that we get out of Gorky's works? For, faithful to Russian tradition,
he does not practise art for art's sake. His "barefoot brigade" and his "restless" men are
generally considered as representative of his own ideals. The principle of "Do what seems to
you to be good"--a principle which is expressed by a wandering and free life--ought to be justified,
one thinks. Critics have risen up against this ideal, trying to prove how incompatible the
kind of existence that he conceives is with a solid political organization, and how far from
reality the men are whom he represents.

Doubtless, in real life, people are not as original and not as heroic as Gorky represents them
to be. And he himself agrees that their inventive faculties are very highly developed. He shows
this in putting the following words into the mouth of Promtov:

"I have very probably exaggerated, but that's not of much importance. For, if I have exaggerated
what happened, my method of exposition has shown the true state of my soul. Perhaps, I have
served you with an imaginary roast, but the sauce is made of the purest truth."

The end that he is after, Gorky has shown us in his story, "The Lecturer," which contains his
theories on literature. In the person of the lecturer, he addresses himself to the men who
represent the majority of the Russian cultivated classes. He begins by analyzing himself carefully
and discovers in himself many good feelings and honest desires, but he feels that he lacks
clear and harmonious thought, a thing which keeps all the manifestations of life in equilibrium.
Numerous doubts torment him, and his mind has been so moved with them, his heart so wounded,
that, for a long time, he has lived "empty inside."

"What have I to say to others?" he asks himself. "That which was told them long ago, that which
has always been told them, none of which makes any one any better. But have I the right to
teach these ideas and convictions, if I, who was brought up according to them, act so often
in opposition to them?"

With his usual sincerity, it is not to be wondered at that he answered this question in the
negative, and, to cite the words of one of his characters, that he "refused to live in the
chains which had already been forged for free thought, and to class himself under the label
of an ism."

He has not thought it profitable to hide his doubts and has not feared to declare openly that
none of the existing philosophies suit him, and that he is trying to follow his own path. All
of his work is but the absolute image of his own uncertainties, of his passionate researches,
and of his constant "restlessness."

At times people have believed that he was a disciple of Nietzsche. And, in truth, he has come
under his influence, like so many other Russian authors. But he has gone on mostly by himself,
aided by his acute sensibility, which has not, as yet, allowed him to adopt any one system
to the exclusion of all others, or to formulate a system for his personal use.

"I know one thing," he says, "it is not happiness that we should hope for. What should we do
with it? The meaning of life does not lie in the search for happiness, and the satisfaction
of the material appetites will never suffice to make a man fully contented with himself. It
is in beauty that we must look for the meaning of life, and in the energy of the will! Every
moment of our lives ought to be devoted to some better end...."

However, he has very neatly set forth what he considers the task of the author. According to
him, the man of to-day has lost courage; he interests himself too little in life, his desire
to live with dignity has grown weaker, "an odor of putrefaction surrounds him, cowardice and
slavery corrupt his heart, laziness binds his hands and his mind." But, at the same time, life
grows in breadth and depth, and, from day to day, men are learning to question. And it is the
writer who ought to answer their questions; but he should not content himself with straightening
out the balance sheet of social deterioration, and in giving photographs of daily life. The
writer must also awaken in the hearts of men a desire for liberty, and speak energetically,
in order to infuse in man an ardent desire to create other forms of life.... "It seems to me,"
says Gorky, "that we desire new dreams, gracious inventions, unforeseen things, because the
life which we have created is poor, dreary, and tedious. The reality which formerly we wanted
so ardently, has frozen us and broken us down.... What is there to do? Let us try: perhaps
invention and imagination will aid man in raising himself so that he may again glance for a
moment at the place which he has lost on earth."

All of Gorky's characters curse life, but without ceasing to love it, because they "have the
taste for life." Their complaints are only a means by which the author hopes to raise up around
him "that revengeful shame and the taste for life" of which he so often speaks. Here is the
artful Mayakine, who, indignant at the debasement of the younger generation, is ready to take
the most cruel means in order "to infuse fire into the veins" of his contemporaries. Varenka
Olessova, the heroine of a story, incessantly repeats that people would be more interesting
if they were more animated, if they laughed, played, sang more, if they were more audacious,
stronger, and even more coarse and vulgar. Gorky admires also the beautiful type, vigorous,
with a rudimentary mentality, which meets with his approval simply because he sees in it a
nature which is complete, untouched, and filled with a love of life.

Gorky suffers miseries inherent in the mere fact of existence, but he has found no remedy;
he looks for consolations in the cult of beauty, in the strength of free individuality, in
the flight towards a superior ideal. But he does not know where to find this superior ideal,
which vivifies everything. This is perhaps the reason why people have thought they saw in his
work the Nietzschean influence, which praises an insistence on individuality in defiance of
current conventions, and gives us just as vague a solution as Gorky does.

But this enthusiasm for an ideal, vague as it is, this passionate appeal for energy in the
struggle, has awakened powerful echoes in the hearts of the Russians, especially the younger
of them. Gorky suddenly became their favorite author, and it is to this warm reception that
he owes a great part of his renown. He has carried the young along with him, and they have
put their ideals in the place which he had left empty.

If we now pass on to the first novels and dramas of Gorky, we shall be struck by the fact that,
in spite of the talent shown in them, they are very inferior to his short stories. His former
mastery is not found, except in his later novels, which we shall take occasion to mention presently.

"Thomas Gordeyev" contains some very fine passages, but is not very successful as a whole.
Thomas's father is a merchant on the banks of the Volga; he is an energetic man who carries
out all his ideas. Whatever he is engaged on, whether business affairs, or a debauch, or repentance
thereof, he gives himself entirely to the impression of the moment. Like other men of his class,
moreover, he lives a life which is a singular mixture of refinement and savagery. He spends
his time in drinking and working, as much for himself as for his only son, Thomas, whose mother
died in giving birth to him. The child grows up under the care of his aunt and shows a serious
disposition toward study. Gradually, he feels the motives that make men act, and he questions
his father about them.

Before dying, the latter says to his son: "Don't count on men, don't count on great events."
In spite of the wealth which he inherits Thomas is not happy; he has no friends; his colleagues,
the merchants, and especially his father's old friend, Mayakine, are repulsive to him on account
of their cupidity and their unscrupulousness. Thomas does not love money and does not understand
its power, two things that people cannot forgive him for. Besides, he does not know how to
make use of the forces that are burning within him. After having vainly sought for moral relief
in debauchery, he ends by proposing to strike a bargain with Mayakine so that he can be freed
from responsibility and go out and look for happiness. He will give Mayakine his personal fortune
if the latter will look after his business affairs. But the old roué, who hopes to get possession
of the fortune in a surer way, refuses, and their conversation turns into a quarrel.

As he does not work, Thomas indulges in many extravagances in company with a journalist of
very advanced ideas. Finally, one day when he is at a fête at which are present all the wealthy
members of the merchant class, the young man, disgusted with their vices, rises to apostrophize
them in the most bitter terms. They throw themselves on him, and he is arrested as a madman
and put into an asylum. He comes out, only to abandon himself to drink.

In "The Three," Gorky tells us the life story of Ilya Lounyev, a poor creature, born in poverty,
whose life is full of deceptions, misfortunes, even crimes. Several times, Ilya has tried to
lead a decent life; but it is his sincerity that makes him lose his position with the merchant
for whom he works. He has believed in beauty and in the purity of love, and he is deceived
by the woman he loves. Gradually all the baseness of the world becomes clear to him. In a moment
of jealousy he kills his mistress's lover, an old miser. Several months later he publicly confesses
his crime, and, in order to escape from human justice, he commits suicide.

       *       *       *       *       *

In his first two dramas, "The Smug Citizen," and "A Night's Refuge," as in his short stories,
Gorky shows us his usual characters.

The Bessemenovs, comfortable, petty bourgeois, have given their children an education. Their
daughter, Tatyana, becomes a school-teacher, but her profession does not please her. Peter,
their son, has been expelled from the university, in spite of his indifference toward "new"
ideas. The children are continually harassed by their father, who bemoans the fact that he
has given them an education. Besides, another sadness troubles him: Nil, his adopted son, whom
he has had taught the trade of a mechanician,--an alert and industrious fellow,--wants to marry
Polya, a girl without a fortune. The father is beside himself, for, if Nil marries, he will
never be in a condition to pay back the money that has been spent on him. But Nil protests:
he is young, and, some day, he will repay his debt. He has not noticed that Tatyana is in love
with him; and the young girl has not strength enough to live through the sorrow of seeing herself
abandoned forever. She tries to commit suicide, but does not succeed. While Tatyana is bemoaning
her fate, Peter has fallen in love with a young woman quite different from any of the members
of his family. Helen understands how sad Peter's position is among these ignorant people, and
she decides to marry him, for pity as much as for love. The father is no more satisfied with
this match than he was with Nil's, and with death in his soul he is present at the dismemberment
of his family. While Helen takes Peter, Nil goes off with Polya. The mother, a humble and kind
woman, does not understand the cause of all this dissension and, while consoling the weeping
Tatyana, she asks her husband: "Why are our children punishing us so? Why do they make us suffer?"
This play is not dramatically effective and has never had a great success on the stage.

On the other hand, Gorky's second attempt, "A Night's Refuge," has been enormously successful.
Here, the author takes us into the world of the barefoot brigade. Vasska Pepel, Vassilissa's
lover, the proprietor of the night refuge in which he sleeps, loves the sister of his mistress,
Natasha by name, a timid and dreamy young girl, who blooms like a lily in this mire. The old
vagabond, Luke, advises the young girl to run off with Vasska, who wants to begin a new life.
But Vassilissa, jealous and evil as she is, has noticed the coldness which her lover shows
towards her. She avenges herself by striking her younger sister whenever she can. Her plan
was, with the aid of Vasska, to kill her husband, Kostylev, and then to live openly with her
lover. But when she sees Vasska ready to leave with Natasha, she starts a terrible scene, which
ends in Vasska's killing Kostylev without meaning to. Vassilissa and her lover are arrested
and Natasha disappears.

Although the characters of this play are vagabonds, they differ from most of Gorky's creations,
whose fiery and enthusiastic souls usually discover a real beauty in the life they have chosen.
Alcoholism, prostitution, and misery have shut off these people who live in the cellar. They
have fallen so low, that conscience is a useless luxury for them. It belongs to the rich only.
One of them, who is asked if he has a conscience, replies with sincere astonishment: "What?
Conscience?" And when the question is asked again, he answers, "What good is conscience? I'm
not a rich man." The life of these people is worse than a nightmare: to-morrow they will be
cold, hungry, and drunk, just as they were yesterday. Sometimes, perhaps, they feel like struggling
against their evil lot, but no one stretches forth a helping hand to them. They do not dare
think of the future, and they would like to forget the past. One of them expresses his fear
of life thus:

"At times, I'm afraid, brother; can you understand that?... I tremble.... For, what is there
after this?" And this fear smothers all the energy in them. They are poor and scantily clothed,
not only in the material sense of the word, but also in the moral sense. Money would not be
necessary to save them, but a word of sympathy, of love, a word that would give them the courage
really to live.

And it is here that old Luke appears. He treats the men as if they were children, and gains
their confidence. In his words there is manifested a real experience of things and people.
As he says, "They moulded me a lot," and that is why he became "tender." He knows just the
right word for every one. He assures the dying woman that: "Eternal rest means happiness. Die,
and you will have rest, you will have no cares, and no one to fear. Silence will calm you!
All you have to do is remain lying down! Death pacifies and is tender. You will appear before
God, and He will say to you: 'Take her to Paradise so that she may rest. I know that her life
has been hard; she is tired, give her peace.'" And the sick woman, who has dragged out her
existence so long, is consoled.

To the drunkard, a former actor who has fallen, Luke says: "Stop drinking, pull yourself together
and be patient. You will be cured, and you will begin a new existence...." And he succeeds
in awakening a hope of a better life in the soul of the poor comedian, while he himself, perhaps,
hardly believes in the possible regeneration of his protégé.

After Luke's departure, the temporary dreams of these miserable people vanish. One evening,
when they are all gathered around a bottle of brandy, they strike up a song. A friend, a baron
by birth, rushes into the cellar and announces that the actor has hung himself, and that his
corpse is hanging in the court. A deathlike silence follows these words. All look at each other
in fright. "Ah, the fool!" finally murmurs a vagabond, "he spoiled our song...." The hope in
a better life that Luke had awakened in the actor made him kill himself, when he saw that he
had not enough strength to realize this hope.

This drama is the quintessence of all that Gorky has, up to this time, written on the "ex-man,"
whom he has thoroughly "explored." And the figure of old Luke is one of his most original and
lifelike creations.

His third important play, which, however, has never enjoyed the popularity of "A Night's Refuge,"
is called: "The Children of the Sun." The "children of the sun" are the elect of heaven, richly
endowed with talent and knowledge. They live in a world of noble dreams, of elevated thoughts,
enveloped though they are in the greyness of life. There pass before them long processions
of tired and oppressed people. The latter, also, have been generated by the strong sun; but
the light has gone out for them, and they travel on life's highway without joy or faith, among
those who are proud of their beauty or learning. The "children of the sun" are the aristocrats
of the soul. They have but one end: to make life beautiful, good, and agreeable for all. They
continually think of making it easier, of soothing suffering, and of preparing a better future.
Their mission is a large one. They are not idle, but are men who have the most elevated ends
in view.

Between "the children of the sun" and "the children of the earth" there is a deep abyss. They
do not understand each other. The "children of the sun" cannot admit the miseries and ugliness
of daily life. They have compassion for the people who work below them. The "children of the
earth" feel the superiority of the "children of the sun," but their narrow-mindedness, continually
absorbed by the necessity of finding shelter and food, cannot rise to the preoccupations of
so elevated an order. However, life brings these two worlds together in a common work; but
their mere meeting on the ground of practical interests produces a collision.

A third category constitutes the intermediary link. This is made up of the university people,
the representatives of the liberal professions. As "intellectuals," they cannot equal the "children
of the sun," but they can understand them. They conceive the grandeur of their moral activity.
At the same time, these men are close to the people. They are often obliged to mingle in the
life of the people, and more than the "children of the sun," they are capable of enlarging
their minds and ennobling their duties. But, while they know and understand the duties of the
people completely, they are not yet strong enough to help them. This, then, is the general
meaning of the play.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although this play is cleverly constructed, with a last act which is pathetic and moving in
its intensity, and produces a profound impression, on the whole, unfortunately, it has the
general harshness of problem plays. Under its lyric vestments, its solid and massive character
appears too often. Gorky, a born observer, inheritor of the realistic traditions of his country,
could not help turning aside, one day, from this ideological art, visibly influenced by Tolstoy's
dramas. The direct part that the romanticist has played in the political events of his country
sufficiently proves that he has taken a different road from that taken by the apostle of Yasnaya
Polyana. With maturity, he felt the need of hastening the dénouement of the crisis in Russia,
in actively participating in its emancipation. From that time on, he chose his heroes from
a less singular environment. Instead of the philosophic vagabonds, the neurasthenic "restless"
ones, and the ex-men, he chose the plebeian of the city and country, who is gradually awakening
from a sleep of ignorance and slavery. A remarkable story, called "In Prison," all atremble
with new sensations, inaugurates this new style. A victim himself of the intolerance of "over-men,"
Gorky has incarnated his own revolts and hopes in the soul of his hero, Misha, a brother of
the revolutionary students who do not hesitate to sacrifice their life or liberty for a principle
or ideal.

Written at the same time, the story called "The Soldiers" gives proof of an equally careful
incorporation of the claims of the oppressed in a literary work.

The school-mistress, Vera, has conceived the daring project of teaching the soldiers who are
quartered in the village. She gets some of them together at the edge of the neighboring woods
and there she tries to show them the ignominy of the rôles they play in times of uprisings.
Angered by this unexpected talk, the soldiers threaten the young girl. But her coolness and
sincerity finally make them listen to her with a respect mingled with admiration.

A third story, called "Slaves," in a masterful way retraces the catastrophes of the now historical
journey of January 9, 1905, at the end of which, a crowd of 200,000 men, led by the famous
pope Gapon, went to the Tsar's palace to present their demands to him, and were received with
cannon shots.

These stories were followed by three works of great merit: "Mother," "A Confession," and "The Spy."

The novel "Mother" takes us into the midst of revolutionary life. The heroes of this book belong,
for the most part, to that workingman and agricultural proletariat whose rôle has lately been
of such great importance in the Russian political tempests. With marvelous psychological analysis,
Gorky shows how some of these simple creatures understand the new truth, and how it gradually
penetrates their ardent souls.

Pavel Vlassov, a young, intelligent workingman, is thirsty for knowledge, and is the apostle
of the new ideal. He throws himself heart and soul into the dangerous struggle he has undertaken
against ignorance and oppression. The Little Russian, Andrey, is all feeling and thought, and
the peasant Rybine is inflamed by action. Sashenka is a young girl who sacrifices herself entirely
to the Idea, and the coal-man Ignatius is driven by an obscure force to help in a cause which
he does not understand. Finest of them all is Pelaguaya Vlassov, the principal character of
the book, and Pavel's mother.

Old and grey, Pelaguaya has passed her whole life in misery. She has never known anything but
how to suffer in silence and endure without complaint; she has never dreamed that life could
be different. One day her father had said to her:

"It's useless to make faces! There is a fool who wants to marry you,--take him. All girls marry,
all women have children; children are, for all parents, a sorrow. And are you, yes or no, a
human being?"

She then marries the workingman Michael Vlassov, who gets drunk every day, beats her cruelly
and kicks her, and even on his death-bed, says: "Go to the devil.... Bitch! I'll die better alone."

He dies, and his son Pavel begins to bring forbidden books into the house. Friends come and
talk; a small group is formed. Pelaguaya listens to what is said, but understands nothing.
Gradually, however, there begins to filter into her old breast, like a stream of joy, an understanding
of something big, of something in which she can take part. She discovers that she too is a
free creature, and, obscurely, there is formed in her mind the notion that every human being
has a right to live. Then she speaks: "The earth is tired of carrying so much injustice and
sadness, it trembles softly at the hope of seeing the new sun which is rising in the bosom
of mankind." So the obscure and miserable woman gradually rises to the dignity of "The Mother
of the Prophet." And when Pavel accepts, like the martyrdom of the cross, his banishment to
Siberia, with a joyous heart she sacrifices her son to the Idea.

Her soul opens wide to the new truth that is lighting it. With the most touching abnegation,
she tries to carry on the work of the absent one. But the police are watching. One day, when
she is about to take the train to a neighboring town to spread the "good word" there, she is
recognized and apprehended. Seeing that she is lost, the Mother, whose personality at this
moment grows absolutely symbolic, cries out to the crowd:

"'Listen to me! They condemned my son and his friends because they were bringing the truth
to everybody! We are dying from work, we are tormented by hunger and by cold, we are always
in the mire, always in the wrong! Our life is a night, a black night!'

"'Hurrah for the old woman!' cries some one in the crowd.

"A policeman struck her in the chest; she tottered, and fell on the bench. But she still cried:

"'All of you! get all your forces together under a single leader.'

"The big red hand of the policeman struck her in the throat, and the nape of her neck hit against
the wall.

"'Shut up, you hag!' cried the officer in a sharp voice.

"The Mother's eyes grew larger and shone brightly. Her jaw trembled.

"'They won't kill a resurrected soul!'

"'Bitch!'

"With a short swing the policeman struck her full in the face.

"Something red and black momentarily blinded the Mother; blood filled her mouth.

"A voice from the crowd brought her to herself:

"'You haven't the right to strike her!'

"But the officers pushed her, and hit her on the head.

"'... It's not blood that will drown what's right.'...

"Dulled and weakened, the Mother tottered. But she saw many eyes about her, glowing with a
bold fire, eyes that she knew well and that were dear to her.

"'... They will never get at the truth, even under oceans of blood!'

"The policeman seized her heavily by the throat.

"There was a rattling in her throat:

"... 'The unfortunates!'

"Some one in the crowd answered her, with a deep sigh."

       *       *       *       *       *

"A Confession" is the story of a restless soul who untiringly searches for the God of truth
and goodness. Found as a child in a village of central Russia, Matvey was first taken by a
sacristan, and, after his death, by Titov, the inspector of the domain. In order to debase
Matvey, whose superiority irritates him, Titov asks him to participate in his extortions. Having
become the son-in-law of his adopted father, Matvey, on account of his love for his wife, accepts
the shameful life. But the God in whom Matvey has placed his distracted confidence, seems to
want to chastise him cruelly. After having lost, one after the other, his wife and child, he
goes away at a venture. He enters a monastery where, among the dissolute monks, whose vices
are most repugnant, his soul gradually shakes off the Christian dogma. On one of his pilgrimages,
he gets to Damascus. Among the workingmen, where chance has taken him, he feels his heart opening
to the truth, which he follows up with the determination of a real Gorkyan hero. The life of
the people appears to him in its sublime simplicity. And it is in the midst of a dazzling apotheosis--which
reminds one of the most grandiose pages of Zola's "Lourdes"--that he finally confesses the
God of his ideal: it is the people.

"People! you are my God, creator of all the gods that you have formed from the beauty of your
soul, in your troubled and laborious search!

"Let there be no other gods on the earth but yourself, for you are the only God, the creator
of miracles!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Spy" is a study of the Russian police. The novel treats of the terrible Okhrana, whose
mysterious affairs have become the laughing-stock of all the foreign papers.

The principal character, about whom circle the police spies and secret agents, is a poor orphan,
weak and timid, called Evsey Klimkov, whom his uncle, the forger Piotr, has taken into his
house and brought up with his son, the strong and brutal James. Beaten by his schoolmates and
by his cousin, the child lives in a perpetual trance. Life seems formidable to him, like a
jungle in which men are the pitiless beasts. Everywhere, brute force or hypocrisy triumph;
everywhere, the weak are oppressed, downtrodden, conquered. And in his feverish imagination,
daily excited by facts which his terror distorts, Evsey delights in conceiving another existence,
all made of love and goodness, an existence that he unceasingly opposes against the hard realities
of daily life, with the stubborn fervor of a mystic.

Having entered the service of the old bookseller Raspopov, the young man does his duty with
the faithfulness of a beast of burden. His home no longer pleases him at all; there, things
and people are still hostile to him; but his uncle Piotr seems enchanted with his new position.
Evsey spends his days in arranging and classifying the books which his master has bought. A
young woman, Raïssa Petrovna, keeps house for the book-dealer, and as every one knows, they
live like man and wife. In this queer environment, the faculties of the young man become sharpened,
and serve him well. It does not take long for him to find out what they are hiding from him.
A few words addressed by Raspopov to a certain Dorimedonte Loukhine reveal to Evsey the part
that is being played by his patron. Raspopov, who is an agent of the secret police, gives Dorimedonte--who,
by the way, is deceiving him with Raïssa--the names of the buyers of the forbidden books in
which he trades. And here it is that the tragedy suddenly breaks forth.

Raïssa, tired of being tormented by Raspopov, who accuses her of poisoning him, strangles the
old man in a moment of cold anger, under the very eyes of Evsey. Thanks to Dorimedonte, this
crime goes unpunished. Evsey, having become the lodger of the two lovers, now enters the Okhrana,
at the advice of his new master. After a while, Raïssa, haunted by remorse, commits suicide,
and Dorimedonte is killed by some revolutionists.

All the interest of the book, however, is centered in the picture of the police institutions.
From the chief Philip Philipovich to the agent Solovyev, Gorky presents, with consummate art,
the mass of corrupt and greedy agents who wearily accomplish their tasks.

Among them, young Evsey leads a miserable and ridiculous existence. Bruised by an invincible
power, he sees himself compelled to arrest an old man who has confided his revolutionary ideas
to him; then a young girl with whom he is in love; finally, his own cousin, a revolutionary
suspect.

Gradually his eyes are opened. He realizes that he cannot extricate himself from the position
in which he has placed himself. Tired of leading a life which his conscience disapproves of,
he thinks of killing his superior, who has driven him to do so many infamous deeds. He will
thus get justice. His project miscarries; maddened, he throws himself under a passing train.

       *       *       *       *       *

These three remarkable works, riddled by the Russian censor, so that the complete version has
appeared only abroad, have recently been followed by two important stories: "Among the People"
and "Matvey Kozhemyakine."

With his accustomed power, Gorky shows us, in the first of these stories, the spread of socialism
among the agricultural proletariat. He depicts village life with its pettiness and ignominy.
The village is for the most part a backward place, hostile to everything that makes a breach
in tradition. The hatching of socialism goes on slowly. From day to day, new obstacles, helped
on by the ignorance of the peasants, hinder those who are trying to carry out their belief.
Even the village guard, Semyon, pursues them with his hatred.

But Igor Petrovich, the propagator of these new ideas, finds, in a few old friends and in a
village woman who becomes his mistress, some precious helpers. Thanks to them, he gradually
gets up a little circle of firm believers who gather in a cave in the woods. Every evening,
they read, discuss, and dream of a better organization, out there in the cave. All would have
gone well, if some of them had not betrayed the leader to the police. While being led to the
city prison, the leader spoke to the soldiers who were escorting him:

"The soldiers trembled as they clicked their bayonets; they silently listened to the legend
of the generous earth which loves those who work it. Again, their red faces were covered with
drops of melted snow; the drops ran down their cheeks like bitter tears of humiliation; they
breathed heavily, they snuffled, and I felt that they kept walking a little faster, as if they
wanted this very day to arrive in that fairy land.

"We are no longer prisoners and soldiers; we are simply seven Russians. I do not forget the
prison, but when I remember all that I lived through that summer and before that, my heart
fills with joy, and I feel like crying out:

"Rejoice, beloved Russian people! Your resurrection is close at hand!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Matvey Kozhemyakine" very brilliantly returns to Gorky's early manner. In this book no symbolic
character interprets the bold thoughts of the author. It is simply a novel of Russian provincial
life. Its simplicity does not exclude vigor, and it reminds us at times of Balzac.

Young Matvey is the son of an old workingman who has become rich, thanks to his energy and
dishonesty. He has grown up in a large house, adjoining a rope-yard, with his father and several
servants. His mother, whom he never knew, left home shortly after his birth, and entered a
convent in order to escape the torments of life. Later, Matvey's father marries a young girl,
in order to provide a mother for his son, whom he loves dearly. But his new mother is not long
in finding out the dreary life which she has to lead with the old man. In order to escape from
the tedium of it, she listens to the interesting experiences of the wandering life of the porter
Sazanov, and gives her unfaithful love in exchange.

Unexpected circumstances disclose this shameful adultery to Matvey. Instead of revealing it
to his father, he generously guards the secret. He even goes so far as to protect her from
the fury of a workingman, named Savka, whom Sazanov's success has rendered bold. Through gratitude,
and later through love, in the absence of Kozhemyakine, she becomes the mistress of her step-son.
On his return, the father, finding out about this "liaison," spares his son, but beats his
wife to death, and himself, mad with fury, falls, struck with apoplexy.

All the newspapers in the world have attacked Gorky's way of living. As he is forced to remain
away from his beloved country, the great writer has made his home in the little island of Capri,
the air of which is propitious to his failing health. Moreover, its impressive scenery inspires
his restless genius.

Drunk with liberty, taken up with beauty, always ready to help a man who is in political and
social difficulties, Gorky, from the depths of his peaceful retreat, wanders out over the world
of ideas in search of truth, as formerly he used to wander over the earth in search of bread.

VI

LEONID ANDREYEV

Leonid Andreyev was born of a humble bourgeoise family in Orel, in 1871. "It was there that
I began my studies," he says. "I was not a good pupil; in the seventh form I was last in my
class for a whole year, and I had especially poor reports as to my deportment. The most agreeable
part of my schooling, which I still remember with pleasure, was the intervals between the lessons,
the 'recesses,' and the times, rare as they were, when the instructor sent me from the class-room
for inattention or lack of respect. In the long deserted halls a sonorous silence reigned which
vibrated at the solitary noise of my steps; on all sides the closed doors, shutting in rooms
full of pupils; a sunbeam--a free beam--played with the dust which had been raised during recess
and which had not yet had time to settle; all of it was mysterious, interesting, full of a
particular and secret meaning."

Andreyev's father, who was a geometrician, died while he was still at school, and the family
was without resources. The young man did not hesitate, however, in setting out for St. Petersburg,
where he entered the university, hoping to gain a livelihood by giving lessons. But it was
hard to secure what he wanted. "I knew what terrible misery was," Andreyev tells us; "during
my first years in St. Petersburg I was hungry more than once, and sometimes I did not eat for
two days."

His first literary productions date from this sombre epoch. Andreyev gives us remarkably graphic
details of this misery. One day, he gave a daily paper a story about the tribulations of an
ever-hungry student: his own life!

"I wept like a child in writing these pages," he confesses. "I had put down all of my sufferings.
I was still affected by my great sadness when I took the manuscript to the editor. I was told
to come back in a few weeks to find out whether it had been accepted. I returned with a light
heart, keeping down my anguish in expectation of the decision. It came to me in the form of
a loud burst of laughter from the editor, who declared that my work was absolutely worthless...."

Nevertheless, he energetically pursued his studies, which he completed at the University of
Moscow. "There," he tells us, "life was, from a material standpoint, less unbearable; my friends
and the aid society came to my assistance; but I recall my life at the University of St. Petersburg
with genuine pleasure; the various classes of students are there more differentiated and an
individual can more easily find a sympathetic surrounding among such distinct groups."

Some time after that, Andreyev, disgusted with life, attempted suicide. "In January, 1894,"
he writes, "I tried to shoot myself, but without any appreciable result. I was punished by
religious penance, imposed upon me by authority, and a sickness of the heart which, although
not dangerous, was persistent. During this time I made one or two equally unsuccessful literary
attempts, and I gave myself up with success to painting, which I have loved since childhood;
I then painted portraits to order for from 5 to 10 rubles....

"In 1897, I received my counsellor's degree and I took up that profession in Moscow. For want
of time I did not succeed in getting any sort of a 'clientele'; in all, I pleaded but one civil
case, which, however, I lost completely, and several gratuitous criminal cases. However, I
was actively working in reporting these cases for an important paper."

Finally, two strangely impressionistic stories: "Silence," and "He Was...," published in an
important Petersburg review, brought the author into prominence. From that time, he devoted
himself entirely to literature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Andreyev is considered, to-day, as one of the most brilliant representatives of the new constellation
of Russian writers, in which he takes a place immediately next to Tchekoff, whom he resembles
in the melancholy tone of his work. In him, as in Tchekoff, the number of people who suffer
from life, either crushed or mutilated by it, by far exceed the number of happy ones; moreover,
the best of his stories are short and sketchy like those of Tchekoff. Andreyev is then, so
to speak, his spiritual son. But he is a sickly son, who carries the melancholy element to
its farthest limit. The grey tones of Tchekoff have, in Andreyev, become black; his rather
sad humor has been transformed into tragic irony; his subtle impressionability into morbid
sensibility. The two writers have had the same visions of the anomalies and the horrors of
existence; but, where Tchekoff has only a disenchanted smile, Andreyev has stopped, dismayed;
the sensation of horror and suffering which springs from his stories has become an obsession
with him; it does not penetrate merely the souls of his heroes, but, as in Poe, it penetrates
even the descriptions of nature.

Thus, the "near and terrible" disk of the moon hovers over the earth like the "gigantic menace
of an approaching but unknown evil"; the river congeals in "mute terror," and silence is particularly
menacing. Night always comes "black and bad," and fills human hearts with shadows. When it
falls, the very branches of the trees "contract, filled with terror." Under the influence of
the disturbing sounds of the tocsin, the high linden-trees "suddenly begin to talk, only to
become quiet again immediately and lapse into a sullen silence." The tocsin itself is animated.
"Its distinct tones spread with rapid intensity. Like a herald of evil who has not the time
to look behind him, and whose eyes are large with fright, the tocsin desperately calls men
to the fatal mire."[9]

 [9] This passage is a sort of a variation on the theme that Poe
 has developed in a masterful way in his poem, "The Bells."

Most of Andreyev's characters, like those of Dostoyevsky, are abnormal, madmen and neurasthenics
in whom are distinguishable marked traces of degeneration and psychic perversion. They are
beings who have been fatally wounded in their life-struggle, whose minds now are completely
or partially powerless. Too weak to fight against the cruel exigencies of reality, they turn
their thoughts upon themselves and naturally arrive at the most desolate conclusions, and commit
the most senseless acts. Some, a prey to the mania of pride, despairing because of their weakness
and their "nothingness," look--as does Serge Petrovich--for relief in suicide. Others, who
have resigned themselves to their sad lives, become passive observers, become transformed into
living corpses whose sole desire is peace; such a one is the hero of "At the Window." Others
still instinctively choke in themselves the best tendencies of their characters and are passionately
fond of futile and senseless amusements, by means of which they enjoy themselves like children,
until a catastrophe makes them "come back to themselves." This is the idea of the original
story called "The Grand Slam." In "The Lie" Andreyev depicts the pathological process in the
soul of a man who, crushed by the falsehood of his own solitary existence, becomes insane at
the idea that truth is inaccessible to human reason and that the reign of the Lie is invincible.
The hero of "The Thought"[10] reveres but one thing in the world--his own thought. Wrapped
up in this one idea, he admires the force and finesse of it, while his reason, detached from
reality and having only him for an end, begins to weaken, becomes gradually perverted to the
point where this man, harassed by a terrible doubt, begins to ask himself whether he is insane.
In the long and pathetic story, "The Life of a Priest," we are shown the disturbance of the
religious feelings of a country priest who, although he has an ardent and strong soul, is crushed
by his moral isolation among the ignorant people of a miserable village. It is again this moral
isolation that is analyzed in "Silence," in which story it is the cause of a domestic tragedy.
The same cause provokes a rupture between a father and a son in "The Obscure Distance," and
brings with it in some way the death of the neurasthenic student.

 [10] In the English translation this book is called "A Dilemma."

In general, the stories of Andreyev, after passing through various catastrophes, lead the reader
back to this theme,--the moral isolation of a human being, who feels that the world has become
deserted, and life a game of shadows. The abyss which separates Andreyev's heroes from other
men makes them weak, numb, and miserable. It seems, in fact, that there is no greater misfortune
than for a man to feel himself alone in the midst of his fellow-creatures.

Finally, in "The Gulf," a somewhat imaginary thesis is developed, based on the terrible vitality
which certain vile instincts keep even in the purest and most innocent minds, while the story
"He Was..." shows us the inside of a clinic, in which there are two dying men whose illusions
of life persist till the supreme moment.

       *       *       *       *       *

If we carefully study a few of Andreyev's characters we can more easily understand his feelings
and his style. Here is, for instance, Serge Petrovich, a student. Although he is not very intelligent,
he is above the average. His mind is preoccupied with all sorts of questions; he reads Nietzsche,
he ponders over many things, but he does not know how to think for himself. The fact that there
are people who can find a way to express themselves appears to him as an inaccessible ideal;
while mediocre minds have no attraction for him at all. It is from this feeling that all his
sufferings come. So "a horse, carrying a heavy burden, breathes hard, falls to the ground,
but is forced to rise and proceed by stinging lashes from a whip."

These lashes are the vision of the superman, of the one who rightfully possesses strength,
happiness, and liberty. At times a thick mist envelops the thoughts of Serge Petrovich, but
the light of the superman dispels this, and he sees his road before him as if it had been drawn
or told him by another.

Before his eyes there is a being called Serge Petrovich for whom all that makes existence happy
or bitter, deep and human, remains a closed book. Neither religion nor morality, neither science
nor art, exists for him. Instead of a real and ardent faith, he feels in himself a motley array
of feelings. His habitual veneration of religious rites mingles with mean superstitions. He
is not courageous enough to deny God, not strong enough to believe in Him. He does not love
his fellow-men, and cannot feel the intense happiness of devoting himself to his fellow-creatures
and even dying for them. But neither does he experience that hate for others which gives a
man a terrible joy in his struggle with his fellow-men. Not being capable of elevating himself
high enough or falling low enough to reign over the lives of men, he lives or rather vegetates
with a keen feeling of his mediocrity, which makes him despair. And the pitiless words of Zarathustra
ring in his ears: "If your life is not successful, if a venomous worm is gnawing at your heart,
know that death will succeed." And Serge Petrovich, desperate, commits suicide.

The hero of "At the Window" is quite different. This man has succeeded in building for himself
a sort of fortress, "in which he retires, sheltered from life." Like Serge Petrovich, although
not as often, he is tormented by restless thoughts, and, from time to time, he is obliged to
defend his "fortress." But usually he is contented with watching life, that is to say, that
part which he can see from his window. Nothing troubles the tranquillity of his mind, not even
the desire to live like other men. One day, he speaks of his theories to a simple, uneducated
young girl whom he thinks of marrying. She is astonished and stupefied by them. She perceives
that he leads an insipid and morose life. Andrey Nikolayevich does not take into account or
understand the stupefaction of the young girl.

"This then is your life?" she asks, incredulously.

"This is it. What more could you want?"

"But it must be terribly monotonous to live in that way, apart from the world."

"What good does one find in mankind? Nothing but tedium. When I am alone, I am my own master,
but among men you never know what attitude to take to please them. They drag you into drunkenness,
into gambling; then they denounce you to your superiors. I, however, love calmness and frankness.
Some of them accept bribes and allow themselves to become corrupt; I do not like that.... I
adore tranquillity."

Moreover, he does not marry the young girl. He gives her up because he is afraid of the incumbrances
that housekeeping will bring.

In "The Grand Slam" four provincial "intellectuals" are locked up in the same fortress, and,
by playing cards, they escape the terrible problems of a life which is inimical to them. Their
existence has been passed among these cards, which, by a mysterious phenomenon, have become
real living creatures to them. One of the players has dreamed all through his life of getting
a grand slam, when, one evening, he sees he has the necessary cards in his hand. He has but
to take one more card, the ace of spades, and his dream will be realized. But at the very moment
when he is stretching forth his hand to take it, he falls down dead. His partners are terrified.
One of them, a timorous and exact old man, named Jacob Ivanovich, is particularly struck. A
thought comes to him; he quickly rises, after making sure that it was the ace of spades that
the dead man was going to take, and cries:

"But he will never know that he was going to get the ace of spades and a grand slam! Never....
Never...."

"Then it appeared to Jacob Ivanovich that, up to this moment, he had never understood what
death was. Now he understood, and what he saw was senseless, horrible, and irreparable!...
The dead man would never know!"

The poignant irony of this story is not unusual with Andreyev.

It is again found in the short and symbolic story "The Laugh." A student, profiting by the
fact that it is carnival time, disguises himself as a Chinaman and goes to the house of the
girl he loves. The mute, immobile, and stupidly calm mask, and the whole "get-up" are so funny,
that the unfortunate man rouses irresistible laughter wherever he goes. The young girl cannot
help herself, and, while listening to his very touching and sincere declaration, which, at
any other time, would have brought tears to her eyes, she bursts out laughing and cannot again
become serious, although she realizes that a living and unhappy being is hidden under this
impassive and foolish Chinaman's mask.

       *       *       *       *       *

In "The Lie" we see a man who, by isolating himself from life, has lost the feeling of reality,
and all capacity of discerning the true from the false. He suffers terribly from the feeling
that something unknown is happening around him. This man, who would be ready to sacrifice everything,
even his life, in order to know truth, guesses the lie that comes between him and the person
who is dearest to him. He falls into a despair that soon turns to fury. In order to recover
his calm, he begs the girl he loves, whom he suspects of having deceived him, to reveal the
whole truth to him. But he cannot believe her protestations of innocence. One word bursts from
his being, breaks forth from the depths of his soul: "Lies! Lies! Lies everywhere!"

"In looking at her beautiful pure forehead," he writes, "I dreamed that truth was there, on
the other side of that thin barrier, and I felt a senseless desire to break that barrier and
at least to see the truth. Lower down, beneath her white breast, I heard the beating of her
heart, and I had a mad desire to open her breast so that I could read, at least once, what
there was at the bottom of her heart."

He ends by killing that which he loved, and thinks that he is satisfied: he believes he has
killed the lie.

In "The Thought" we see the gradual development of insanity during the period when it is doubtful,
when the will is almost entirely annihilated and replaced by a fixed idea, and when conscience
is not entirely abolished. Dr. Kerzhenzev kills his friend, obeying a mental suggestion, which
now forbids him to do it, now urges him on. Then, like the "half-insane" or those sick people
who feign madness in order more easily to attain their end, this man suggests to himself that
he is in reality insane. This idea gets a hold on him after the murder and fills his soul with
mortal terror, the exposure of which forms the most supremely pathetic part of the whole story.
All this drama of a foundering intelligence, complicated by bizarre contradictions, is developed
with a penetrating power of analysis.

Andreyev tells us that on the day of judgment the alienists are divided as to the insanity
of Kerzhenzev. The story ends at this place. But the principal interest of the story does not
lie in this or that solution of the problem, which is not mysterious, for the doctor is doubtlessly
abnormal, and it is only as to the degree of insanity that there can be any question. The main
interest lies in another direction, in the subtle analysis of this special mental condition,
which is done with consummate art.

This story had the honor of occupying an entire meeting of the psychiatrists attached to the
Academy of Medicine of St. Petersburg. According to the report of Dr. Ivanov, the assembly
was almost unanimous in declaring the murderer insane. Another psychiatrist, who thought he
saw proofs of an abnormal mentality in all the stories of Andreyev, pronounced the same verdict
against Dr. Kerzhenzev, in a meeting of doctors.

       *       *       *       *       *

"All of priest Vassily Fiveyisky's life was weighed down by a cruel and enigmatic fatality,"--it
is thus that the story, "The Life of a Pope," opens. "As if struck by an unknown malediction,
he had from his youth been made to carry a heavy burden of sorrows, sickness and misfortunes;
he was solitary among men as a planet is among planets; a peculiar and malevolent atmosphere
surrounded him. Son of an obscure, patient, and submissive village priest, he also was patient
and submissive, and he was a long time in recognizing the particular rancour of destiny. He
fell rapidly and arose slowly. Twig by twig he restored his nest. Having become a priest, the
husband of a good woman, the father of a son and a daughter, he thought that all was going
well with him, that all was solidly established, and that he would remain thus forever. And
he blessed God."

But fate was always on the watch for him. It had showed him happiness only to take it away
again. After seven years of prosperity, his little son is drowned one summer's day in the river.
Death and nameless misfortunes again invade the home of Vassily. One does not live there any
more, one prowls around gropingly in a mournful stupor. From morning till evening, his wife
comes and goes, silent and indifferent to everything, as if she were looking for some one or
something.

In losing his son, poor Vassily has also lost his wife, his helpmate and friend, for the unfortunate
woman takes to drink. The faith of the priest holds in this terrible trial. But his misery
increases immeasurably. The vice of his wife, his own sick weakness, excite the meanness of
the people. Insults have to be borne in silence, tears hidden. At home, the priest's wife has
no rest. She has the idea that she can have another son who will take the place of the dead
one and be a balm to her broken heart. In her alcoholic desire, a prey to savage fury, she
demands that her husband gratify her desire.

"Give him to me, Vassily! Give him back to me, I tell you...."

At last her desire is realized: a son is born to her; but the child, conceived in madness,
is born half-witted. The mother takes to drink again, and the despair of Vassily increases.
One day the unfortunate woman hangs herself. The pope comes in, however, in time to save her;
but now another noose has tightened itself about the priest's heart. One question oppresses him:

"Why these sufferings? If God exists, and if God is love, how is such misery possible?"

Vassily's faith trembles. He decides to leave his cassock, to fly, to put his idiot son out
to board and to start life over again. This resolution relieves him. His wife breathes easier.
It seems to him that she also can begin a new life. But fate does not loosen its reins.

One day, on coming back from the harvest, he finds his house burned. His wife, in a drunken
stupor, had probably set fire to it. She is dying of her burns. Vassily can only sigh. This
new misfortune does not put an end to the priest, but rather inspires him. His old faith comes
back, he sees in this supreme test a predestination. He kneels down and cries:

"I believe! I believe! I believe!"

From that time on he devotes himself entirely to prayer and macerations. He lives in perpetual
ecstasy. The people around him understand nothing of this change and are astounded. Every one
of them is waiting for something unusual. And their waiting is not in vain. One day, when he
is delivering the funeral oration of a workingman, who has been suddenly killed, Vassily abruptly
interrupts the ceremony, approaches the corpse, which has begun to decay, and addresses it
thus three times:

"I tell you: arise!"

But the dead man does not move. Then the priest looks at this inert and deformed corpse. He
notices the fetid odor that arises from it, the odor of the slow but sure decomposition, and
he has a sort of sudden revelation. The scepticism which, for a long time, has been brooding
in his heart suddenly is transformed into absolute negation, and addressing himself to Him
in whom he had believed, Vassily cries out:

"Thou wishest to deceive me? Then why did I believe? Why hast Thou kept me in servitude, in
captivity, all of my life? No free thought! No feeling! No hope! All with Thee! All for Thee!
Thee alone! Well, appear! I am waiting! I am waiting!... Ah! Thou dost not want to? Very well...."

He does not finish. In a burst of savage madness he rushes forth from the now empty church.
He rushes straight ahead and finally falls in the middle of the road. Death has put an end
to his miseries.

"Silence" also shows us a priest, stubborn in his prejudices. This man, Father Ignatius by
name, is a sort of rude and authoritative Hercules. All tremble before his stern air, except
his daughter, who has decided to continue her studies in St. Petersburg, against the will of
her father. Coming back to her home after a long absence, she wanders about, sad and silent.
For days at a time she wanders about, pale and melancholy, speaking little, seeking solitude.
She hides what oppresses her; she keeps her secret from all. One night, she throws herself
under a train, taking her secret with her.

Her grief-stricken mother gets a paralytic stroke which transforms her into a sort of living
corpse. The father, crushed by these two catastrophes, which have destroyed all the joy of
his life, becomes the prey of a singular mental state: his conscience revolts against the severe
maxims and the pitiless prejudices that he has always defended. Tender love, which he has hitherto
concealed under his pride, now softens him; he needs affection, and a vague feeling suggests
to him that he himself is to blame for all of these misfortunes. His past life, his daughter,
and his wife appear to him as so many enigmas which raise anguishing questions in his heart.
He calls out, but no one answers. A death-like silence has invaded the presbytery, and this
silence is especially dreadful near the paralyzed wife, who is dying without speaking. Even
her eyes do not betray a single thought. Gradually, a terrible desire to know why his daughter
committed suicide seizes him. At twilight, softly, in his bare feet, he goes up to the room
of his dead daughter and speaks to her. He entreats her to tell him the truth, to confess to
him why she was always so sad, why she has killed herself. Only the silence answers him. Then
he rushes to the cemetery, where his daughter's tomb irresistibly attracts him; again he implores,
begs, threatens. For a moment he thinks that a vague answer arises from the earth; he places
his ear on the rough turf.

"Vera, tell me!" he repeats in a loud and steady voice.

"And now Father Ignatius feels with terror that something sepulchrally cold is penetrating
his ear and congealing his brain; it is Vera, who is continually answering him with the same
prolonged silence. This silence becomes more and more sinister and restless, and when Father
Ignatius arises with an effort, his face is as livid as death."

Crushed by the same blind destiny which annihilated the powerful personality of Father Ignatius,
the piteous and tearful hero of "The Marseillaise" moves us even more than does the old priest.
The poor fellow cannot grasp the reason for the ferocity of stupid fate, which unrelentingly
preys upon him. Arrested by mistake as a revolutionist and condemned to deportation, he becomes
an object of derision to his comrades. However, gradually, he finds the strength to share the
severe privations of his companions who have sacrificed themselves to their ideal of justice
and liberty. And, on his death-bed, he is elated by all that he has endured; he dreams of liberty,
which, up to this time, had been indifferent to him, and asks them to sing the Marseillaise
over his grave.

"He died, and we sang the Marseillaise. Our young and powerful voices thundered forth this
majestic song of liberty, accompanied by the noise of the ocean which carried on the crests
of its waves towards 'dear France,' pale terror and blood-red hope.

"It became our standard forever, the picture of this nonentity with the hare's body and the
man's heart.

"On your knees to the hero, friends and comrades!

"We sang. The guns, with their creaking locks, were pointed menacingly at us; the steel points
of the bayonets were pointed at our hearts. The song resounded louder and louder, with increasing
joy. Held in the friendly hands of the 'strugglers,' the black coffin slowly sank into the earth.

"We sang the Marseillaise!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The two main characters of "The Gulf," a student and a school-girl, are walking and discussing
rather deep things, such as immortality and the beauty of pure and noble love. They feel some
sadness in speaking about these things, but love appears more and more luminous to them. It
rises before their eyes, as large as the world, bursting forth like the sun and marvelously
beautiful, and they know that there is nothing so powerful as love.

"You could die for the woman you loved?" asked Zinochka.

"Of course," replies Nemovetsky unhesitatingly, in a frank and sincere voice, "and you?"

"I too!" She remains pensive a moment. "To die for the one you love, that is a great happiness!
Would that that were to be my destiny!"

Gradually night falls. Nemovetsky and his companion lose their way in the woods; they finally
arrive in a clearing, where three filthy-looking men are seated about an empty bottle. These
intoxicated men, whose wicked eyes light up with a brutal envy of enjoyment and love of destruction,
try to quarrel with Nemovetsky, and one of them ends by striking him full in the face with
his fist. Zinochka runs away. His heart full of terror, Nemovetsky can hear the shrieks of
his friend, whom the vagabonds have caught. Then a feeling of emptiness comes over him, and
he loses consciousness. Two of the men throw him into a ravine.

An hour later, Nemovetsky regains consciousness; he gets up with great pain, for he is badly
wounded. He remembers what has happened. Fright and despair seize him. He begins to run and
call for help with all his strength, at the same time looking among all the bushes, when at
his feet, he sees a dim, white form. It is his companion, who lies there motionless. He falls
down on his knees and touches her. His hand encounters a nude body, damp and cold, but still
living. It seems to grow warm at his touch. He pictures to himself with abominable clearness
what the men have done. A feeling of strange strength circulates in his members. On his knees
in front of the young girl, in the obscurity of the forest, he tries to bring her back to life,
calling her sweet names, caressing her hair, rubbing her cold hands.

"With infinite precautions, but also with deep tenderness, he tries to cover her with the shreds
of her torn dress, and the double sensation of the cloth and the nude body are as keen as a
sword and as inconceivable as madness. And now he cries for help, now he presses the sweet
and supple body to his breast. His unconscious abandonment unchains the savageness of his passion.
He whispers in a low voice, 'I love you, I love you.' And throwing himself violently upon her
lips, he feels his teeth entering her flesh.

"Then, in the sadness and impetuousness of the kiss, the last bit of his mind gives way. It
seems to him that the lips of the young girl tremble. For an instant, a terrible terror fills
his soul and he sees a horrible gulf yawning at his feet.... And he hurls himself into the
mad throes of his insane passion."

The account of the collegian, which forms the plot of the story "In the Fog," is even more
daring in its realism. It actually oppresses the reader, not so much by certain details that
provoke disgust, as by the analysis of the sufferings of an unfortunate young man, whose mind
is pure, but who has let himself be dragged into excesses which are followed by a sickness
of ill name. Severely reprimanded by his father, the poor young fellow, overcome with sorrow,
the victim of an instinct which he could not conquer, ends his days in a most horrible way:
one evening, he leaves home and goes out into the streets in an adventuresome spirit. A half-intoxicated
prostitute touches him in passing; he follows her. As they go along, a conversation starts
up, and the young man, although she is repugnant to him, goes home with her. Once in her room,
a violent quarrel starts up and he kills her, and then commits suicide.

These two stories, especially "The Gulf," caused many lively discussions on the part of the
public, and then in the newspapers. Mr. Bourenine, the well-known critic of the "Novoye Vremya,"
says that he received from several correspondents a series of letters which blamed Andreyev
vehemently and requested that this "skunk" of literature be called to order according to his
deserts. These protestations were reënforced by an ardent letter from Countess Tolstoy, the
wife of the great author, who reproached Andreyev for having so complacently painted such sombre
pictures, with such low and violent scenes, all of which tended to pervert youth. The writers
were not the only ones to take offence. Two important Russian newspapers organized a sort of
inquiry, and they published many of the answers received from the young people of both sexes,
but these were all favorable to Andreyev.

In truth, all these judgments are too passionate. It is true that "most of the critics have
understood Andreyev only in a superficial manner," as Tolstoy rightfully asserted. The double
impression, for instance, produced by "The Gulf," is the result of a simple misunderstanding.
Those who think that the adventure of young Nemovetsky is a slice of life and characterizes
certain psychological states, have, without a doubt, the right to judge this story as an indiscretion,
and to reproach the author with a deviation from morality; but Andreyev has not taken his hero
from reality; he has not tried to give us a picture of manners, but has expressed an idea,
born in his brain under the influence of the philosophy of Nietzsche. It illustrates the terrible
power and the brutality of a dormant instinct lurking in the purest minds.

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides, "The Gulf" and "In the Fog" are compositions which are exceptional in the work of
Andreyev. The idea that he mostly presents is not the power of bestial instincts, but rather
the indestructible vitality of human feelings and aspirations towards a better existence, which
sometimes comes to light among the most miserable and depraved people, and even among those
who are in the most abject material condition.

In the destiny of these beings, there are, however, rays of hope. The slightest incident serves
to transform them; suddenly their hearts begin to beat happily, tears of tenderness moisten
their eyes, they vaguely feel the existence of something luminous and good. A profound sensibility,
an ardent love of life bursts forth in their souls. This sensibility, this attachment to existence,
form the theme of four touching stories: "He Was," "Petka in the Country," "The Cellar," and
"The Angel."

The action of "He Was" takes place in a hospital, where a deacon, a foolishly debonair man,
who is attached to his stunted existence, and a pessimistic merchant, thoroughly satiated,
are at the point of death. The deacon has an incurable sickness, and his days are numbered.
But he does not know it, and speaks with enthusiasm of the pilgrimage he is going to make after
he is cured, and of the apple-tree in his garden, which he expects will bear a great deal of
fruit. The fourth Friday of Lent he is taken into the amphitheatre. He comes back, very much
moved and making the sign of the cross.

"Ah! my brothers," he says, "I am all upset. The doctor made me sit down in a chair and said
to the students: 'Here you see a sick man.' Ah! how painful it was to hear him add: 'He was
a deacon!'"

"The unfortunate man stopped, and continued in a choking voice: '"He was a deacon," the doctor
told them. He told them the story of my whole life, he even spoke about my wife. It was terrible!
One would have said that I was dead already, and that he was talking over my coffin.'

"And as the deacon is thus speaking, all of the others see clearly that he is going to die.
They see it as clearly as if death itself was standing there, at the foot of the bed...."

The merchant is a very different sort of man: he does not believe in God; he has had enough
of life and is not afraid of death. All of his strength he has spent unnecessarily, without
any appreciable result, without joy. When he was young he had stolen meat and fruit from his
master. Caught in the act, he had been beaten, and he detested those who had struck him. Later
on, having become rich, he crushed the poor with his fortune and scorned those who, on falling
into his hands, answered his hate with scorn. Finally, old age and sickness had come; people
now began to steal from him, and he, in turn, beat those whom he caught terribly. And thus
his life had been spent; it had been nothing but a series of transgressions and hatreds, where
the flames of desire, in dying out, had left nothing but cold ashes in his soul. He refuses
to believe that any one can love this existence, and he disdainfully looks at the sallow face
of the deacon, and mutters: "Fool!" Then, he looks at the third man in the room, a young student
who is asleep. This student never fails to embrace his fiancée, a pretty young girl, whenever
she comes to see him. As he looks the merchant, more bitterly than before, repeats: "Fool!"

But death approaches; and this man who thinks himself superior and who scorns the deacon because
he dreams of light and the sun, now feels disturbed in his turn. In making up the balance-sheet
of this existence which, up to this time, he believed he hated, he remembers a stream of warm
light which, during the day, used to come in through the window and gild the ceiling; and he
remembers how the sun used to shine on the banks of the Volga, near his home. With a terrible
sob, beating his hands on his breast, he falls back on his bed, right against the deacon, whom
he hears silently weeping.

"And thus they wept together. They wept for the sun which they were never to see again, for
the apple-tree with fruit which they were not going to eat, for the shadow that was to envelop
them, for dear life and cruel death!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Petka--the hero of "Petka in the Country"--is, at ten years of age, a barber's apprentice.
He does not yet smoke as does his thirteen year old friend Nicolka, whom he wants to equal
in everything. Petka's principal occupation, in the rare moments when the shop is empty, is
to look out of the window at the poorly dressed men and women who are sitting on the benches
of the boulevard. In the meantime, Nicolka goes through the streets of ill fame, and comes
back and tells Petka all his experiences. The precocious knowledge of Nicolka astonishes the
child, whose one ambition is to be like his friend one of these days. While waiting, he dreams
of a vague country, but he cannot guess its location nor its character. And no one comes to
take him there. From morning till evening he always hears the same jerky cry: "Some water, boy!"

But one morning his mother, the cook Nadezhda, tells the barber that her master and mistress
have told her to take Petka to the country for a few days. Then begins for him an enchanted
existence. He goes in bathing four times a day, fishes, goes on long walks, climbs trees, rolls
in the grass. When, at the end of a week, the barber claims his apprentice, the child does
not understand: he has completely forgotten the city and the dirty barber-shop; and the return
is very sad. Again is heard the jerky cry: "Some water, boy!" followed by a menacing murmur
of "Come! Come!" if the child spills any of the water, or has not understood the orders.

"And, during the night, in the place where Petka and Nicolka sleep side by side, a weak little
voice speaks of the country, of things that do not exist, of things that no one has ever heard
of or seen!..."

"The Cellar" is inhabited by absolutely fallen people. A baby has just been born there. With
down-bent necks, their faces unconsciously lighted up by strangely happy smiles, a prostitute
and a miserable drunkard look at the child. This little life, "weak as a fire in the steppe,"
calls to them vaguely, and it seems to promise them something beautiful, clear, and immortal.
Among the inhabitants of this cellar, the most unfortunate of all, is a man named Kizhnakov;
he is pale, sickly, worn by work, almost devoured by suffering and alcohol; death already lies
in wait for him. The most terrible thing for this man is the necessity of having to begin to
live again each day. He would like to lie down all day and think of suicide under the heap
of rags that serve him as a covering. He would like best to have some one come up back of him,
and shoot him. He fears his own voice and his own thoughts. And it is on him that the baby
produces the deepest impression. Since the birth of the child Kizhnakov does not sleep any
more; he tries to protect himself from the cold, and weeps softly, without sadness and without
convulsions, like those who have pure and innocent hearts, like children.

"'Why do I weep?' he asks himself.

"Not finding a suitable answer, he replies: 'It is thus....'

"And the meaning of his words is so deep that a new flood of tears come to the eyes of the
man whose life is so sad and solitary."

We find the same theme again in "The Angel." A child who also lives in a cellar comes back
from a Christmas-tree; he brings with him a toy, and a pretty little wax angel, which he shows
to his father. The latter has seen better days, but in the last few years he has been sick
with consumption, and now he is awaiting death, silent and continually exasperated by the sight
of social injustice. However, the delight of the child infects the father, and both of them
have a feeling "of something that joins all hearts into one, and does away with the abyss which
separates man from man, and makes him so solitary, unfortunate, and weak." The poor dying man
seems to hear a voice from this better world, where he once lived and from which he had been
sent forever.

But these are only the dreams of a dying man, the last rays of light of the life which is being
extinguished. The ray, penetrating this sick soul, is like the weak sunlight which passes through
the dirty windows of a dark hovel.

       *       *       *       *       *

In his two stories, "The Stranger" and "The Obscure Future," Andreyev shows us two men of entirely
different character, animated by generous feelings and a firm will. One of them, a young student,
being disgusted with the miseries of Russian life and having decided to expatriate himself,
suddenly changes his mind, as a result of the patriotism of one of his friends, a Servian,
named Raiko. He makes it his duty never to leave his country, although life there is so terrible
and hopeless. There is, in this new feeling, an immense joy and a terrible sadness. The other,
the hero of the second story, having one day expressed to his father the hatred he has for
the bourgeois life that he is leading, leaves his family, who love him, in order to penetrate
the "obscure future."

Evidently, these are people who are fitted to struggle. However, these strugglers, so infrequent
in the work of Andreyev, have, in spite of all, something sickly and savage in them; instead
of real fighting courage, they possess only extreme audaciousness, mystical rapture, or nervous
exaltation. The "obscure future" toward which their eyes are turned is not lighted up by the
rays of faith and hope.

The question is whether Andreyev himself believes in the triumph of the elements of life over
the elements of death, the horror of which he excels in portraying for us. It is in the following
manner that he expresses himself in one of his essays entitled, "Impressions of the Theatre":
"In denying everything, one arrives immediately at symbols. In refuting life, one is but an
involuntary apologist. I never believe so much in life as when I am reading the father of pessimism,
Schopenhauer! As a result, life is powerful and victorious!... It is truth that always triumphs,
and not falsehood; it is truth which is at the basis of life, and justifies it. All that persists
is useful; the noxious element must disappear sooner or later, will inevitably disappear."

       *       *       *       *       *

What, then, constitutes the essence of Andreyev's talent is an extreme impressionability, a
daring in descriptions of the negative sides of reality, melancholy moods and the torments
of existence. As he usually portrays general suffering and sickness rather than definite types,
his heroes are mostly incarnations and symbols. The very titles of some of his stories indicate
the abstract character of his work. Such are: "Silence," "The Thought," and "The Lie." In this
respect he has carried on the work of Poe, whose influence on him is incontestable. These two
writers have in common a refined and morbid sensibility, a predilection for the horrible and
a passion for the study of the same kind of subjects,--solitude, silence, death. But the powerful
fantasy of the American author, which does not come in touch with reality, wanders freely through
the whole world and through all the centuries of history. His heroes take refuge in half-crumbled
castles, they look at the reader from the top of craggy rocks, whither their love of solitude
has led them; even death itself is not a repulsive skeleton, but rather a majestic form, full
of grandiose mystery. Andreyev, on the other hand, but rarely breaks the bounds which unite
him to reality. His heroes are living people, who act, and whose banal life ends with a banal
death. This realism and this passionate love of truth make the strength and the beauty of all
his work.

       *       *       *       *       *

A certain harmony between the imaginative and the real element is characteristic of the best
of Andreyev's productions, especially his last stories: "The Red Laugh," "The Governor," "The
Shadows," and "The Seven Who Were Hanged."

"The Red Laugh" is the symbol, the incarnation, of the bloody and implacable cynicism of war.
The psychologist of the mysterious has, in these pages, recorded the terrifying aspects of
the Manchurian campaign, which one could not have foreseen in all of its horror. He has shown
in a lasting manner the poor human creature torn from his home, debased to the rôle of a piece
of mechanism. Not knowing where he is being led to, he goes, making murderous gestures, the
meaning of which he does not know, without even having the illusory consolation of possible
personal bravery, being killed by the shots of an invisible enemy, or, what is worse, being
killed by the shots of his own comrades--and all of this, automatically, stupidly. The feeling
of terror, the somewhat mystical intuition of events which, at times, seem to be paradoxes
in the other works of Andreyev, are perfectly adapted to this terribly real representation
of the effects of war.

The inner drama which Andreyev analyzes in "The Governor" makes a bold contrast with the violent
pages of "The Red Laugh," the savage powers of which attain the final limits of horror.

The governor has during his whole life been a loyal and strict servant of the Tsar. On the
day of an uprising he mercilessly beat the enemies of his master; he blindly accomplished what
he thought was his duty. But, since that bloody day, a new and unceasing voice speaks in his
conscience. The irreparable act has forever isolated him from his fellow-creatures, and even
from his friends who congratulate him upon his fine conduct. A stranger to all that is happening
around him, he is left alone to fight with his conscience, which soon crushes him with all
the weight of remorse. He knows that he has been condemned by a revolutionary tribunal. A young
girl who is a stranger to him writes him a compassionate letter: "You are going to be killed,"
she says, "and that will be justice; but I have great pity for you." This discerning and youthful
sympathy penetrates his heart, which finally opens--alas, too late,--to justice and pity.

This marks the beginning of a terrible agony. The governor makes no effort to escape from the
fatal judgment. Always alone, he contemplates his terrible distress and awaits the coming of
the judiciary. He feels that he has incurred universal blame, and at times he comes to wish
for death, which surprises him suddenly as he is turning the corner of a street:

"The whole thing was short and simple, like a scene from a moving-picture play. At a cross-ways,
close by a muddy spot, a hesitating voice called to the governor:

"'Your honor!'

"'What?'

"He stopped and turned his head: two men who had come from behind a wall were crossing the
street, and were shuffling along in the mud towards him. One of them had in his left hand a
piece of folded paper; his other hand was in his pocket.

"And immediately, the governor knew that death had come; and they knew that the governor knew.

"While keeping the paper in his left hand the unknown man took a revolver out of his pocket
with difficulty.

"The governor glanced about him; he saw a dirty and deserted square, with bits of grass growing
in the mud, and a wall. But what did it matter, it was too late! He gave a short but deep sigh,
and stood erect again, fearless, but without defiance.... He fell, with three shots in his body."

This drama of conscience is set forth with admirable sureness of analysis, and the author has
been able to represent with impressive intensity the mysterious fatality which demands the
death of the guilty one.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is this same fatality, under whose hand all men are equal, which makes the hero of "The
Shadows," a young terrorist who has taken refuge in a house of ill-fame, obey the strange desire
of his bed-companion.

"Stay with me!" cries the young girl, in whom is incarnated his destiny, at the moment that
he is going to leave the establishment in order to escape from the spies who are following
him. "You are an honest man! And I've been waiting five years to meet an honest man.... Stay
with me, because you belong to me."

After a terrible internal combat the man yields to this unknown will which is oppressing him.
A traitor to his party, he decides to become the companion of this painted girl, with whom
he then gets drunk.

"As long as I am in the shadows," he murmurs with the sombre resignation of an Andreyev hero,
"I might as well remain there."

At dawn, the police come to arrest him. And while his friend tries desperately to resist the
agents of the force, he contemplates the brutal scene with an ironic smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Seven Who Were Hanged," written in 1908, right after the executions at Kherson and Warsaw,
shows us pictures of terror and fright aptly described by the genius of Andreyev. This work
has prodigious color and strength, and one experiences deep emotions on reading it. Five terrorists,
captured at the very moment when they are going to assassinate a minister, and two criminals,
are condemned to be hanged on the same day. The writer shows them to us tortured by the most
horrible anguish, that which immediately precedes death. The word "madness" appears on every
page: mystical madness of hallucination that hears music and voices, such is that of the young
revolutionary Moussya; then there is the brutal madness of her comrades Kashirine and Golovine,
who are ready to scream with terror; the madness of the victims, the frenzy of the executioners.

The night before the execution the prisoners are visited by their relatives. The farewell which
Serge Golovine takes of his family is rightly considered one of the most poignant and most
cleverly constructed scenes that Andreyev has ever written.

Followed by his mother, who totters along, Serge's father, a retired colonel, enters the room
where visitors are received. Serge does not know that the colonel spent the whole night in
preparing for this meeting. He has told his wife what to do: embrace her son, keep from crying,
and say nothing. But the unhappy mother in the presence of her son cannot control her emotions;
her eyes are strained and she breathes faster and faster.

"Don't torture him!" commands the colonel.

Several stupid and insignificant words are exchanged in order to hide the terrible suffering
that they all are going through. The visit ends: the parents must bid their son good-bye forever.
The mother gives her son a short kiss, then she shakes her head and murmurs, trembling:

"'No, it is not that! It is not that!'

"'Good-bye, Serge,' says his father.

"They shake hands, and give each other a brief but hearty kiss.

"'You...' begins Serge.

"'What's that?' asks his father in a jerky voice.

"'No, not like that. No, no! What was I going to say?' repeats his mother, shaking her head.

"She was again seated, trembling.

"'You...' continues Serge.

"Suddenly, his face took on a pitiful expression, and he made a grimace like a child. The tears
then came to his eyes.

"'Father, you are a strong man!'

"'What are you saying? What are you saying?' the colonel cries, frightened.

"Then, as if he had been struck, the colonel's head sank down upon his son's shoulder. And
they kissed each other, again and again, the one with white hair and the other with the prisoner's
'capote.'

"'And I?' a hoarse voice brusquely asked.

"They looked: the mother was standing, her head thrown back, and she was watching them with
anger, almost hate.

"'What is the matter, dear?' cried the colonel.

"'And I?' she repeated. 'You two kiss each other, and I? You are men, aren't you? And I?'

"'Mother!'

"And Serge threw himself into his mother's arms....

"The last words of the colonel were:

"'I consecrate you to death, my boy! Die with courage, like a soldier!'"

These few lines retrace one of the thousands of daily dramas which compose modern Russian history.
The work of Andreyev brings to us a sad vibrant echo of the sobs which ring out in Russian
dungeons. And this faithful portrayal of events, events so frequent that they no longer move
us from our indifference, when we find the echo of them in the press, will raise in the conscience
of Andreyev's readers a cry of horror and pity.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is principally in the dramas which he has written in the last few years[11] that Andreyev
has developed with most force and clearness his favorite themes: the fear of living and dying,
the madness of believing in free-will, and the nonsense of life, the weakness and vanity of
which he depicts for us.

 [11] Mention should be made of some of Andreyev's other dramas:
 "To the Stars," "Anfissa," "Gaudeamus," and "Sava," plays of
 uneven value, but with a strength of observation and analysis
 which is not inferior to that shown in some of his best stories.

The first of these works to appear was "The Life of Man," which is a tragic illustration of
this pessimism.

When the curtain rises, "some one in grey," holding a torch, informs the audience that Man
is about to be born. From this time on, his life, lighted like a lamp, will burn until death
extinguishes it. And Man will live, docile and obedient to the orders that come to him from
On-High, through the intermediary of this "some one," whom he does not know. Each act of the
play represents a period in the life of Man. In the first act, Man has acquired riches and
glory, and is found feasting with his friends in his sumptuous home. The guests are enchanted
with their host, whom they envy. But happiness is a fugitive shadow; it soon betrays the man,
who becomes poor, loses his son, falls into the most abject misery, and dies in a filthy and
infected cellar, surrounded by vile beggars, while the torch, held by "some one in grey," begins
to grow weaker, and then dies out. And the man, conscious of his powerlessness to conquer fate,
and conscious of his weakness in face of the mysterious "some one in grey," confounds in the
same malediction God, Satan, Fatality, and Life, who have united to annihilate him.

The themes of the "King of Famine" and "Black Masks" offer a certain analogy to the theme of
"The Life of Man."

From the top of a belfry the "King of Famine," in company with "Time" and "Death," incites
a workingmen's revolt. He inspires them with an absolute certainty of victory, although he
can see that the revolt will be quelled and the rebels crushed. Events do not delay, in fact,
to verify the prophecy of the monarch. Locked up, the leaders of the revolt are condemned to
death. The scene of judgment in the last act is one of the finest in the play. On one side
are seated the sad and dull judges; on the other, the elegant public, which, with a feeling
of fear and disgust, gazes at the unfortunates whom the King of Famine has robbed of almost
all human semblance. And in this play, also, Death reaps a bountiful harvest.

"Black Masks" is the study of a pathological case which Andreyev has dramatized after the fashion
of de Maupassant's "The Horla."

The Duke Lorenzo, young, noble, and the owner of a magnificent palace, is getting ready to
receive his guests, to whom he is giving, on this evening, a masked ball. The masks arrive:
they are all black, and all look alike. They all crowd around Lorenzo, whom this funereal sort
of masquerade bothers extremely. He cannot find his wife among the guests. In fact, he does
not recognize any of them until, to cap the climax, he meets his double, fights with him and
dies, without being able to discern who is the real Lorenzo.

       *       *       *       *       *

At times, Andreyev tries to find the justification of life, and looks for it in mysticism.
He then expounds a doctrine, according to which, truth is individual and perhaps conceived
by each man, thanks to direct intuition. Such is the mystical truth which the author tries
to affirm in "Anathema."

The play opens with a scene between Anathema, the incarnation of Satan, and "He who guards
the gates," behind which is the mystery of eternity. Anathema entreats the Guardian to give
him access. But it is in vain that Anathema flatters and insults him; finally, Anathema declares
that he will choose from among mankind a poor Jew, named David Leiser, will enrich him and,
in order to prove the absolute nonsense of life, will make this man a living protestation against
the work of Him who knows all. Disguised as the lawyer Nullius, Anathema comes down to earth
and gives millions to David. The latter, the best of men, distributes his riches among the
poor. But the beggars become more and more numerous, and soon David finds that he is as poor
as he was before the visit of Anathema.

In the meantime, the crowd of paupers, always increasing, ask more money from David; they demand
miracles from this man, whose goodness has made him a saint, a superman, in their eyes. They
bring him corpses and ask him to resuscitate them. David flees; the crowd follows and stones
him to death. But, through his love for his fellow-men, David has acquired immortality, as
"He who guards the gates" tells Anathema, when, in the last act, the evil archangel, beaten,
returns to lie on the threshold of the inconceivable mysterious.

This admirable play, born of a philosophical conception which relates it to Goethe's "Faust,"
has been received with particular interest. Andreyev, in writing it, has come very near to
solving the question of the meaning of life, and its justification. And, to the person who
ponders a while over this work, it will appear that it is not Anathema who entreats "Him who
guards the gates" to reveal the mystery, but it is Andreyev himself, who, carried away by the
force of his genius, has thrown himself, as if at an invincible wall, against this pitiless
guardian, the guardian of the solution of the enigma of life.

While "Anathema" is an abstract character, whose form resembles more an algebraic formula than
a living process of human relations, another of Andreyev's plays, "The Love of the Student,"
written a short time before "Anathema," gives us a little picture of customs, alert and painted
with the touch of a master.

Gloukortzev, a young student, falls in love with a young girl whom her mother forces to become
a prostitute. Gloukortzev, young and inexperienced, has not the slightest suspicion, till the
young girl herself reveals to him the horrible truth. And, perhaps for the first time in his
life, the gulf of necessity, toward which fate drives men, opens before him. He sees with horror
that he cannot come to the rescue of the girl he loves, because he is poor himself. He cannot
even buy her some food, when she tells him that she has eaten nothing since the night before.
Placed before the absolute bare reality of life, Gloukortzev does not know what to do, and
his comrades, good and upright fellows like himself, have not the means to help him.

Several very successful scenes, in which the author blends the tragic with the comic, deserve,
in this brief analysis, special attention. In the first act, there is a students' picnic at
which Olga and Gloukortzev, still full of happiness, are present. The spectator is drawn by
personal sympathy to the student Onoufry, a good fellow, always drunk, who makes fun of others
and himself. We see him again in the second act, when Gloukortzev finds out about Olga's life.
The poignant scene between the poor girl and her lover is heightened and softened by the arrival
of the students, to whom Gloukortzev tells his sorrow. The last two acts take place in Olga's
home. The mother brings her daughter a rich "client." And, in the next room, Gloukortzev suffers
terribly, because he knows that his beloved is still leading an infamous life. In the same
room, in the fourth act, we are present at an orgy, during which the student quarrels with
an officer who has come to spend the night with Olga. But Onoufry, interfering in time, prevents
an affray the issue of which would probably have been fatal. When the curtain falls, Gloukortzev,
intoxicated, is weeping; at his side is Olga, also weeping, while Onoufry and the officer are
singing: "The days of our lives are as short as the life of a wave."

This drama, as well as most of Andreyev's plays, has been produced with great success in Russia
and also in Europe.

VII

DMITRY MEREZHKOVSKY

Unlike Gorky, Andreyev, and Tchekoff, Merezhkovsky was brought up in the midst of comfort and
elegance; he received a correct and careful education; fate was solicitous for him, in that
it allowed him to develop that spirit of objective observation and calm meditation which permits
a man to look down on the spectacle of life, and indulge in philosophical speculations very
often divorced from reality.

The son of an official of the imperial court, Merezhkovsky was born in St. Petersburg in 1865.
In this city he received his entire education, and here he gained the degree of bachelor of
letters in 1886.

He began his literary career with some poems which won for him a certain renown. In 1888, he
published his first collection, and then a second in 1892, "The Symbols." At the same time,
he published several translations from Greek and Latin authors.

As he was a friend of the unfortunate Nadson, and a pupil of the humanitarian Pleshcheyev,
Merezhkovsky wrote at first under the influence of the liberal ideas of his early masters.
His verses, always harmonious, and a little affected, soon belied this tendency and very frankly
revealed his preferences. In the first collection of his poems, vibrant with generous ideas,
he proclaimed that he wanted, above all, "the joy of life," and that a poet should not have
any other cult than that of beauty.

The poem called "Vera" was his first real success. The extreme simplicity of the plot--the
unfortunate love of a young professor and of a young weakly girl who dies of consumption in
the very flower of youth--and the very faithful reproduction of the intellectual life of Russia
in 1880, give to this work the importance of a document in some ways almost historic.

This poem is like a last tribute paid by the author to the humanitarian and realistic tendencies
of Russian literature. Afterward, yielding to the inclinations of his nature and his taste
for classical antiquity, Merezhkovsky insensibly changed. While acquiring, both in prose and
in verse, an incontestable mastery, he could now look only for a cold and haughty beauty which
was sufficient unto itself. The beginning was hard, but then all came easier. After critical
articles on the trend of modern literature, he published "The Reprobate," a bold dithyrambic
on ancient Greek philosophy. The poetry that followed was clearly Epicurean and in complete
contradiction to the altruistic tendencies of the neo-Christian period, which found an arch
enemy in Nietzsche, whose philosophy evidently influenced Merezhkovsky. However, this evolution
did not have a very favorable effect on his poetry; it bordered on an art the clarity of which
approached dryness, while at the same time its lack of tenderness reduced its symbolism to
an artificial lyricism or to lifeless allegories.

       *       *       *       *       *

Merezhkovsky works with untiring constancy to glorify antiquity. He has made excellent translations
of Sophocles, Euripides, and of "Daphne and Chloe," that idyl of Longus that charmed both Goethe
and Catherine II. He chooses the characters of his new poems from Greek and Latin mythology,
and from themes inspired by an ardent love of paganism. He has written three prose works of
considerable value: "The Death of the Gods," "The Resurrection of the Gods,"[12] and "Peter
and Alexis." The general idea of all of these is the struggle between Greek polytheism and
Christianity, between Christ and Antichrist, to use the author's expression, or, as Dostoyevsky
used to say, between the "man-God" and the "God-man."

 [12] Also called "The Romance of Leonardo da Vinci, the
 Forerunner."

This struggle touches upon the gravest problem that can occupy the human mind, and continually
puts before us this perplexing question: "Should the purpose of life be only the search for
happiness and beauty, or must we admit, as a law of nature, the dogma of suffering and death?"
The former of these conceptions found its supreme formula in Greek paganism. The ultimate expansion
of the latter leads us, on the one hand, to faith,--to the religion of sacrifice, and, on the
other hand, into the domain of philosophy,--to the destruction of the desire to live, as conceived
by Schopenhauer. It is this struggle between the two principles of Hellenic philosophy and
Christian faith that Merezhkovsky has tried to show us by fixing, in his novels, the historic
moments when this struggle reached its greatest intensity; and by making appear in these periods
the characters who, according to him, are most typical and representative. For this reason
he has chosen to give his readers pictures of the three epochs which he considers as culminating:
first, the last attempt made to restore the worship of the gods a short time after the Emperor
Constantine had brought about their ruin; secondly, the Renaissance, which, in spite of triumphant
Christianity, shows us a glorious renewal of the arts and sciences of antiquity; finally, the
beginning of the 18th century, the reign of Peter the Great, who tried to make a place for
the gods of antiquity in Russia, where they were regarded with horror by the orthodox clergy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In his novel, "The Death of the Gods," Merezhkovsky has painted the first of these epochs,
the different phases of which revolve about the principal hero, the emperor Julian the Apostate.
In "The Resurrection of the Gods" he develops, in sumptuous frescoes, the age of the Renaissance,
personified by Leonardo da Vinci, who best typifies the character and tendencies of that time.
In "Peter and Alexis," he retraces Russian life in the beginning of the 18th century, when
it was dominated by the extraordinary character of Peter the Great.

Julian the Apostate was one of the last idolaters of expiring paganism. But he could do nothing
against the infatuation of the masses who were embracing the new religion, and it was in vain
that he employed both so much kindness and so much violence in order to suppress Christianity.
The reign of the gods was irrevocably ended. His soul filled with rage when he saw that he
was powerless to change the course of events. He ended by undertaking a foolhardy expedition
into Persia, thinking that that was the only way in which to defeat Christ, triumph over the
"cursed" religion, and bring back victoriously the altars of the dead gods. But the Olympians
on whom he had counted were of no service to him. According to the Christian legend, it was
then, at the moment of death, that he cried out: "Galilean, thou hast conquered!" They say
that he added: "Let the Galileans conquer, for the victory will be ours, ... later. The gods
will come back ... we shall all be gods."

This scene is one of the finest in the book. Surrounded by some faithful friends, Julian speaks,
with his last breath, the words which one of these friends, the historian Ammianus Marcellinus,
has recorded.

"His voice was low but clear. His whole presence breathed forth intellectual triumph, and from
his eyes there still gleamed invincible will. Ammianus's hand trembled as he wrote. But he
knew that he was writing on the tables of history, and transmitting to future generations the
words of a great emperor:

"'Listen, friends; my hour is come, perhaps too soon. But you see that I, like an honest debtor,
rejoice in giving back my life to Nature, and feel in my soul neither pain nor fear; nothing
but cheerfulness, and a presentiment of eternal repose.... I have done my duty, and have nothing
to repent. From the days when, like a hunted animal, I awaited death in the palace of Marcellum,
in Cappadocia, up to the time when I assumed the purple of the Roman Cæsars, I have tried to
keep my soul spotless. If I have failed to do all that I desired, do not forget that our earthly
deeds are in the hands of Fate. And now I thank the Eternal Ruler for having allowed me to
die, not after a long sickness nor at the hands of an executioner, but on the battlefield,
in full youth, with work ahead of me still to be done.... And, my dear friends, tell both my
friends and my enemies, how the Hellenes, endowed with divine wisdom, can die....'"

       *       *       *       *       *

Revenge for the dying emperor was long in coming. But now, after eleven centuries, the prophecy
of Julian is accomplished: heroic antiquity, everlastingly young, arises from the grave. On
all sides the gods are resurrected. Their marble effigies, so long buried, reappear. Both the
powerful and the humble receive them with enthusiasm and rejoice at seeing them. It is an irresistible
outburst which carries with it all classes of the Italian people. Like a wind-blown flame,
Greek genius inspires a new life in the world. But, while a sweeter and more humane moral feeling
tries to liberalize the church, the sombre voice of Savonarola, hardened by the terrible corruption
of manners, mounts ever more menacingly:

"Oh, Italy! oh, Rome! I am going to deliver you up into the hands of a people who will efface
you from among the nations. I see them, the enemies who descend like hungry tigers.... Florence,
what have you done? Do you want me to tell you? Your iniquity has heaped up the measure; prepare
for a terrible plague! Oh, Lord, thou art witness that I tried to keep off this crumbling ruin
from my brothers; but I can do no more, my strength is failing me. Do not sleep, oh, Lord!
Dost Thou not see that we are becoming a shame to the world? How many times we have called
to Thee! How many tears we have shed! Where is Thy providence? Where is Thy goodness? Where
is Thy fidelity? Stretch forth Thy helping hand to us!"

And thus the antagonism between the "God-man" and the "man-God" of Hellenic paganism expresses
itself more strongly than ever before.

The picture of the Renaissance that Merezhkovsky paints for us is very full, very rich, at
times even a little overburdened with episodes and people. One constantly rubs shoulders with
Leonardo da Vinci, the duchess Beatrice of Este, regent of Milan, the favorite Lucrecia Crivelli,
the mysterious Gioconda, Charles VIII, Louis XII and Francis I, kings of France, and also with
Cæsar Borgia; we find here the preaching of Savonarola, the death of the pope Alexander VI
(Borgia), Marshal Trivulce, the triumphal entry of the French into Milan, the diplomacy of
Niccolo Machiavelli. In fact, as has been said above, there are too many events and characters.

       *       *       *       *       *

Two centuries go by and now we come to the third novel, "Peter and Alexis." The scene is in
Russia, and the hero is Peter the Great, whom Merezhkovsky represents as a worshipper of things
Olympian. He gives a magnificent description of the orgies held by the emperor in honor of
Bacchus and Venus, especially the latter, whose statue he expressly ordered from Rome and installed
in the Summer Garden at St. Petersburg.

In a veritable fairyland of avenues, of yoke-elms and flower-beds in geometric designs, of
enormous baskets filled with the choicest flowers, of straight canals, of ponds, of islets,
of magnificent fountains, such a fairyland as Watteau would have dreamed of, there is a Venetian
fête with all sorts of fire-works and illuminations; small crafts, adorned with flags, are
filled with men in golden garments, girded with swords, and wearing three-cornered hats and
buckled shoes; and the women are dressed in velvet and covered with jewels.

The Tsar himself opens the case, and helps in placing the goddess on her pedestal. Again, as
two hundred years before in Florence, the resurrected goddess, Aphrodite, emerges from the
grave. The cords stretch, the pulleys creak; she rises higher and higher. Peter is almost of
the same superhuman height as the statue. And his face, close to that of Aphrodite, remains
noble: the man is worthy of the goddess....

"The Immortal One--Aphrodite--was still the same that she was on the hillside in Florence;
she had progressed further and further, from age to age, from people to people, halting nowhere,
till in her victorious march she had reached the very ends of the earth, the Hyperborean Scythia,
beyond which there is naught but darkness and death...."

But what miseries this magnificent façade conceals! Not far off, on an island in the river,
one can see people who are watching the fête and who think that they are present at one of
the spectacles forerunning doomsday. Among the crowd are seen the "raskolnik" Cornelius, old
Vitalya of the "runners," deserters, the merchant Ivanov, the clerk Dokounine ... and several
others. In the few remarks that they exchange, we can see that, for them, Peter the Great is
the Antichrist, "the beast announced by the Gospel."

Such is the tie that binds Peter the Great, Julian, and Leonardo together. But this tie is
weakened by the fact that Peter, an essentially practical and utilitarian genius, was not the
man to become inspired with Hellenic poetry, and if the author introduces the Tsar into the
society of Julian the Apostate and of Leonardo da Vinci, it is because Peter the Great was
one of those indefatigable strugglers, who, to attain their ends, put themselves above the
obligations of ordinary morality, one of those supermen, who hesitate at nothing in satisfying
the instincts of their egoisms, of their dominating wills. In fact, the heroes of Merezhkovsky's
novels all belong in the category of the Nietzschean type of superman, which explains their
philosophical relationship and the sort of trilogy which these three novels form. Thus, Julian
the Apostate, who tried in vain during his life to make history repeat itself, by transplanting
pagan traditions into a plot which had become unfit to receive them, and who died in the effort
to preserve a faith--does not this man, then, incarnate that implacable pursuit of the "integral
personality" so extolled by Nietzsche? Leonardo da Vinci, that great universal and keen mind,
who gave himself over to all the impulses of his creative genius, not caring whether the impulses
are worthy or harmful, appears as a luminous manifestation of that state of the soul "beyond
good and bad" which characterizes the superman. And is not Peter the Great also a veritable
superman; a man who, through his iron will, upset all the ancient institutions of aged Russia,
and who did not even prevent the assassination of his son Alexis, inasmuch as he thought that
it was for the good of his country?

At all events, the interest and value of "Peter and Alexis" does not rest in its philosophic
ideas and in the Nietzschean obsession, but rather in the art with which Merezhkovsky faithfully
depicts the psychology of his heroes. The successive phases of this terrible tragedy lead up
to a striking climax, and set off, one against the other, temperaments so entirely opposed
that the reciprocal tenderness of the father and son is transformed finally into suspicion
and hate, and the father resolves to sacrifice the life of his son to what appears to him to
be the right of the State. The novel, although a little overburdened with details, is an excellent
analysis of the customs of the Russia of former times.

The source of the struggle between Peter and Alexis was known. Peter represented the West and
the new ideas, while Alexis represented the Russia of old, rebellious to innovations which
she considered dangerous. The author thus symbolizes the eternal conflict between the past
and the future. He has analyzed with consummate art the characters of his two heroes. Peter
is a man full of contrasts; he is, like many Russians, "a brute and a child," by turns violent
and gentle, knavish and simple, cruel and kind, practical and mystical, proud and modest. Possessed
of a prodigious activity, he conceives tremendous projects which he immediately wants to put
into execution, inspecting everything, verifying everything, finding no care beneath his dignity,
talking to the workingmen as if he were one of them, not making long speeches, and fiercely,
with cries of rage, fighting dishonest contractors and tradesmen.

Set over against this irascible father, endowed with herculean strength, the Tsarevich Alexis,
thin, pale, and delicate, makes a sad figure. Most historians, following the example of Voltaire,
have represented this prince as a narrow-minded person, a victim of the bigoted and intolerant
education of the clergy. Merezhkovsky, a more discreet psychologist, does not rely on these
superficial data, but shades the portrait admirably. He makes Alexis an intelligent man, not
like his father, but a man with a comprehensive, subtle spirit. He probably was crushed by
the powerful individuality of his father. As he is closely in touch with the people, and knows
their aspirations, Alexis judges the work of his father with delicate insight: "My father hopes,"
he says, "to do everything in a great hurry. One, two, three, and the affair is settled. He
does not realize that things done hastily do not last...."

While Peter is aware of his unpopularity, his son is loved by the townspeople, the peasants,
and the clergy. They say that, "Alexis is a man who seeks God and who does not want to upset
everything: he is the hope of the nation."

What the author has best shown in this novel is the degree to which the high society of this
time was, under its exterior gorgeousness, barbarous and vulgar. A German girl, maid-of-honor
to the wife of Alexis, defines it in the following way: "Brandy, blood, coarseness. It is hard
to say which is most prominent,--perhaps it is coarseness." The boyards[13] she describes as:
"Impudent savages, baptized bears, who only make themselves more ridiculous when they try to
ape the Europeans."

 [13] Russian noblemen.

       *       *       *       *       *

As is evident, these three works of Merezhkovsky belong to the "genre" of the historical and
philosophical novel which demands, besides the power to call up past ages, a careful education
and the gift of clear-sightedness. And the novelist completely fulfills these requirements.
He knows his subject, he studies all the necessary documents with the greatest care and follows
every story to its source; finally, before taking up his pen, he visits the countries and the
cities in which the stories take place. Thus, in order better to understand Leonardo da Vinci,
in order to live his life, the author of "The Resurrection of the Gods" traversed Italy and
France from one end to the other, in the same way that he had traveled all over Greece so that
he could give us a more life-like Julian. With the same care, he spent a long time reading
Russian historical documents in order to present the reader with a better picture of the customs
of the time of Peter the Great. The result is a series of historical pictures, almost perfect
in their accuracy. If Merezhkovsky had no other merit than this faithful portrayal of the past,
his novels even then would be read with interest and pleasure.

Some critics have remarked that the most glaring defect in his books lies in their construction.
His novels often disregard the laws relating to this sort of literature, which demand the clever
grouping of the characters and events around a principal hero. It is true that this unity and
the sense of proportion absolutely necessary for any sort of harmony are not to be found in
his works. The details predominate to the detriment of important facts; the people of secondary
importance are sometimes drawn better than the heroes themselves, whose adventures are entirely
unconnected. There is a series of jumps from one situation to another, with gaps and interruptions
of considerable length, which break the chain of events. It is for this reason that, instead
of seeing a historical fresco, we see a whole gallery of sketches, executed with subtle artistry,
but insufficiently connected with the main action of the drama.

These observations apply especially to the first attempt of the young author: "The Death of
the Gods"; "The Resurrection of the Gods" and "Peter and Alexis" are more skilfully composed.
They indicate a stronger tendency towards unity; one feels that an infinitely firmer and more
experienced brush has been used; the colors are richer and they do not suffer from that monotony
of effect and of color so noticeable in "The Death of the Gods," where the author too often
uses the same devices. As to the characters of Leonardo da Vinci and Peter the Great, they
are very carefully worked out, and the events in the lives of the Italian master and the Russian
Tsar are narrated with magnificent psychological analysis, which forces the reader to sympathize
with the heroes even more than he would naturally.

Merezhkovsky has also been accused of being over-educated. The innumerable documents presented
do not bear closely enough upon the action, the result being that many of his pages read like
mere annals. They interest the reader but do not move him. This is one reason why some critics,
essentially different in spirit from Merezhkovsky, have believed themselves right in denying
that he has any talent. But this accusation falls of itself in the face of the power of the
inspiration which pervades his work, and the dramatic sense which he displays in setting forth
the events and personages. It is impossible, for instance, to read without the deepest emotion
the story of the last days of Leonardo da Vinci, where the author establishes the tragic contrast
between the outward signs of glory, the superficial honors with which this genius is overwhelmed,
and the moral solitude which afflicts him to the very end, which comes when he is among people
who are strangers to his soul. All the childhood recollections of this same Da Vinci are full
of charm. There is a veritable master spirit shown in the chapters in which the author portrays
for us the enigmatic and seductive Mona Lisa. Finally, he has given us a relief of rare energy
in the terrible struggle between Peter and Alexis, between the man of iron whom nothing can
affect and his son, kind and timid, who, while having a mortal fear of his father, still loves
him. As to certain pages, like those which describe the strange inner life of the Tsarina Marfa
Matveyevna, "living by the light of candles, in an old house savouring of the oil of night-lamps,
the dust and the putrification of centuries," these pages are a veritable tour de force if
only because of the plasticity and richness of the author's vocabulary.

Finally, what tragic horror there is in the supreme struggle where the emperor, the assassin
of his son, sees his isolation and feels his weakness, "like a large deer gnawed at by flies
and lice until the blood runs!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Besides his novels Merezhkovsky has published several essays, on Pushkin, Maykov, Korolenko,
Calderon, the French neo-romanticists, Ibsen and others.... The most important of all are:
"The Causes of the Decadence of Modern Russian Literature" and "Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky." He
reveals here a fine and penetrating power of observation, which, however, is often obscured
because of his obsession by Nietzschean ideas. Moreover, he does not hide his antipathy to
the people whose literary tastes and ideas differ from his. From this characteristic comes
strange exaggerations and a somewhat limited appreciation of men and events. An example of
this, for instance, is the impression that he gives in his study of the causes of the decadence
of modern Russian literature, the subject of which imposes upon the author the double task
of looking up the causes of this decadence and also proving that it exists. He has not succeeded.
In fact, it appears that this idea of decadence exists only in the minds of the author and
of a small circle of writers who have the same ideas about the mission of literature. Merezhkovsky
is absolutely right in all that he says about the fact that Russian writers live solitary,
deprived of that precious excitation which is felt when one is in contact with original and
different temperaments; but if you add to this, as he has done, the statement that Russia does
not possess a literature worthy of the name, you go too far. Without being a great scholar,
it is easy to perceive that our contemporary Russian authors are legitimate sons of Turgenev,
Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy, and grandsons of Gogol, who himself is closely related to Pushkin.
A democratic and humanitarian realism--widely separated from the Nietzscheism of Merezhkovsky--strongly
characterizes the Russian lineage.

In his book on Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky he spends a long time in differentiating between the
artistic intuition of these two great masters, who are, according to him, the most profound
expression of the popular and higher element of Russian culture.

What strikes him first in Tolstoy is the insistence with which he describes "animal man." In
a kind of "leitmotiv" Merezhkovsky has shown us the Tolstoyan characters individualized by
very particular corporal signs. "Tolstoy," he says, "has, to the very highest degree, the gift
of clairvoyance of the flesh; even when dead, the flesh has a tongue." He is the subtle painter
of all sensations and he is a master in this domain. But his art diminishes singularly, and
even disappears when he tries to analyze the soul within the flesh. Dostoyevsky, on the other
hand, triumphs in his dialogue; one sees his characters because one shares all their sadness,
their passions, their intelligence, and their sensibility. Dostoyevsky is the painter of the
depths of the human soul, which he portrays with almost supernatural acuteness. And, as Tolstoy
is "the seer of the flesh," so is Dostoyevsky "the seer of the soul."

Having established this difference in principle, Merezhkovsky, by constant deduction, concludes,
in consonance with his favorite idea, that Tolstoy personifies "the pagan spirit" at its height,
while Dostoyevsky represents "the Christian spirit." There is a great deal of fine drawn reasoning
in all of this, some very original ideas, but a great many paradoxes. Even the very personality
of Tolstoy, the analysis of which occupies a large part of the book, is belittled in the hands
of Merezhkovsky. Instead of a noble character, one sees a very vain person, preoccupied only
with himself. It is in this simple way that Merezhkovsky explains the moral evolution which
led Tolstoy to make those long and sad studies of a kind of life compatible with the true good
of humanity, and forced him to them by "the anguish of the black mystery of death" which, having
got possession of the author of "Anna Karenina" in his sixtieth year, in the midst of a life
of prosperity, made him hate his fortune and his comfort, which formerly had been so dear to
him. In the refusal of Tolstoy to "bow to the great authorities of the literary world, such
as Æschylus, Dante, and Shakespeare," a refusal which is only the logical consequence of his
ideas on the principle and purpose of art, Merezhkovsky can only see a lack of general culture.
Finally, the sort of life he led toward the end of his days came only "from the desire to know
and taste the pleasure of simplicity in all its subtleties." "The admirable Epicurus," says
Merezhkovsky, "that joyous sage, who, in the very center of Athens, cultivated with his own
hands a tiny garden, and taught men not to believe in any human or divine chimeras, but to
be contented with the simple happiness that can be given by a single sunbeam, a flower, a sup
of water from an earthen cup, or the summer time, would recognize in Tolstoy his faithful disciple,
the only one, perhaps, who survives in this barbaric silence, where American comfort, a mixture
of effeminacy and indigence, has made one forget the real purpose of life...."

In writing these lines, Merezhkovsky must have forgotten that Tolstoy, in proclaiming his ideas
on religion and humanity, prepared himself, not for Epicurean pleasures, but for seclusion
in one of the terrible dungeons of a Russian monastery (now in disuse) under the persecutions
of a temporal and secular authority, and it was not his fault that, by a sort of miracle, he
escaped this fate.

Dostoyevsky's life is the exact opposite of Tolstoy's. The story of Dostoyevsky's terrible
existence is probably known. Born in an alms-house, he never ceased to suffer, and to love....
It is hard to think of two people more absolutely different than Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky. But
Merezhkovsky loves violent contrasts; in the sharp difference between these two writers, he
sees the permanent union of two controlling ideas of the Russian Renaissance and the imminence
of a final sympathy, symbolic of a concluding harmony.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have, by turns, studied Merezhkovsky as a poet, a novelist, and a critic. The greatest merit
of his literary personality rests in the perfect art with which he calls up the past.

But Merezhkovsky is not only an artist. As we have noted, his novels have, as their end, one
of the greatest contradictions of human life,--the synthesis of the voluptuous representations
of the religion of classical antiquity and the moral principles of Christianity. It is, therefore,
natural to ask whether he has in any way approached his goal and just where he sees the salvation
of humanity, the present situation of which seems to him desperate. The answer to this question
can be found in his book, "Ham Triumphant."[14] Our study of Merezhkovsky's literary character
would be incomplete if the ideas of this book were not set forth.

 [14] In Russia, the name of the biblical Ham has become synonymous
 with servility and moral baseness. Merezhkovsky employs this
 scornful term to designate those people who are strangers to the
 higher tendencies of the mind and are entirely taken up with
 material interests. His "Ham Triumphant" is the Antichrist, whose
 reign, as predicted by the Apocalypse, will begin with the final
 victory of the bourgeoisie. In one chapter of this book,
 Merezhkovsky proves that the writers of western Europe and Russia
 (Byron and Lermontov) err in crowning this Antichrist with an
 aureole of proud revolutionary majesty, for, since he is the enemy
 of all that is divine in man, he can only be a character of shabby
 mediocrity and human banality, that is to say, a veritable "Ham."

According to Merezhkovsky, the present evil in the world consists entirely in the moral void
which results from the disappearance of the Christian ideal from the soul. The loss of this
ideal was inevitable, and even productive of good, because it had been so mutilated and deformed
by the Church, that Christian religion became a symbol of the reaction, and its God synonymous
with executioner. Humanity will rid itself of Christianity. But nothing will replace it, unless
it be the philosophy of positivism, a sort of material religion of the appetites and the senses,
which gives no answer to our anguish and our mystical instincts. This philosophy presided at
the formation of a miserable society, an egotistical and mediocre bourgeoisie, who have no
spiritual tendencies, and are incapable of sacrificing themselves to any ideal other than that
of money.

John Stuart Mill said that the bourgeoisie would transform Europe into a China; the Russian
publicist Hertzen, frightened by the victories of socialism, in 1848, foresaw the end of European
civilization, drowned in a wave of blood. Merezhkovsky affirms that the Chinese and the Japanese,
being the most complete and the most persevering representatives of this "terrestrial" religion,
will without fail conquer Europe, where positivism still bears some traces of Christian romanticism.
"The Chinese," he says, "are perfect positivists, while the Europeans are not yet perfect Chinese,
and, in this respect, the Americans are perfect Europeans." Where is one to look for safety
against this heavy load on the understanding and this future humiliation? In socialism, one
says. But socialism, if it is not yet bourgeois, is almost so. "The starved proletariat and
the rejected bourgeois have different economic opinions," says Merezhkovsky, "but their ideal
is the same, the pursuit of happiness." As it is but a step from the prudence of the bourgeois
to the exasperated state of the starved proletariat, this pursuit can lead to nothing else
but international atrocities of militarism and chauvinism. Progress having become the sole
ambition of the cultivated barbarians, satiety became their religion, and the only hope of
escaping from this barbarism was to adopt the religion of love, founded by Jesus. Jesus said
to those who were treated with violence, and who, in turn, had used violence in trying to free
themselves: "Truth (love) will set you free." These words, which identify truth with love,
contain in themselves the profoundest social and personal morality. They inspired the first
martyrs of Christianity; but in time they were forgotten by the Church. Succumbing to the "diabolical
seduction of power," religion itself became a power, an autocracy; people submitted to this
power, and thus the Byzantine and Russian orthodoxy came into existence. In this manner, the
morals of the government, antichristian in essence, became the doctrine of Christianity; and
the particular morals of the latter became transformed into a mysterious gospel of life, relegating
its aspirations to an existence beyond the tomb. Now there is nothing for Christianity to do
but return to its first sources and develop the principles of universal religion found there.
One should no longer be concerned with heavenly and personal advantage, but with earthly affairs
and social conditions; instead of being conquered by the government one should conquer it,
permeate it with one's spirit, and thus realize the prophecy in the Apocalypse of the millennium
of the saints on earth, and destroy the forms of the power of the government, the laws, and
the empire. Such a renewal of Christianity demands an energetic struggle, self-forgetfulness,
and martyrs. But where is one to find the necessary forces? Merezhkovsky does not see them
in the States of western Europe, because the "intellectuals" there are antichristians and are
congealed in their bourgeois positivism. "Above these Christian states, above these old Gothic
stores," says Merezhkovsky, "rises, here and there, a Protestant wooden cross, half rotted;
or a Catholic one of iron, all rusted, and no one pays any attention to them." What purity
and nobility remains can manifest itself only in certain scattered individuals, in such great
hermits as Nietzsche, Ibsen, Flaubert, Goethe in his old age; they are like deep artesian wells
which prove that, beneath the arid earth there is still some flowing water. There is nothing
of this sort in Russia. Although backward from the point of view of progress and politics,
this country produced the "intellectuals" who form something unique in our present civilization:
in essence, they are anti-bourgeois. "The positivism which the Russian 'intellectuals' have
adopted by way of imitation is rejected by their feelings, their conscience, and their will;
it is an artificial monument that is set up in their minds only."

Merezhkovsky, then, has reason for thinking that the social renovation of Christianity will
be accomplished in Russia. And as this work is the especial concern of the clergy, Merezhkovsky,
who several years ago was present at a meeting where the Russian priests affirmed their desire
to free themselves from the yoke of their religious and secular chiefs, proposed to accomplish
this great mission. "It is indispensable," he says, "for the Russian Church to untie the knots
that bind it to the decayed forms of the autocracy, to unite itself to the 'intellectuals'
and to take an active part in the struggle for the great political and social deliverance of
Russia. The Church should not think of its own liberty at present, but of martyrdom."

We will not criticize these, perhaps illusory, ideas and previsions of Merezhkovsky. Russian
life has become an enigma; who knows to what moral crisis the social conscience may be led
by the present political crisis? Merezhkovsky's Olympian æsthetics have made him a foreigner
in Russian literature. Yet as soon as the tempest burst forth, certain familiar traits showed
themselves, traits common to the best Russian writers and to the general spirit of Russian
literature. In his absolute, and even exaggerated, distaste for "bourgeoisisme," and his desire
for an ideal, he is a legitimate son of this literature. The nature of his ideas is in harmony
with those we have already found in Tolstoy, with his gospel of Christian anarchism, in Dostoyevsky,
with his ideas about the "omni-humanity" of the Russian spirit, in Vladimir Solovyev, with
his idea of universal theocracy, and, finally, in Chadayev, one of the most remarkable thinkers
of the first half of the last century, who, although now almost forgotten, was the real source
of all these ideas.

Thus in the conception of socialized Christianity Merezhkovsky seeks the end of the great antithesis
between the "God-man" and the "man-God," between Christ and Bacchus, an antithesis which makes
the generality of men often conduct themselves after the manner of that German petty kingdom,
of which Heine speaks, where the people, while venerating Christ, do not forget to honor Bacchus
by abundant libations. Merezhkovsky's idea ought to appear in the form of a synthetic fusion
of the joyous religion of Greece and the religion of love, as taught by Jesus.[15]

 [15] Merezhkovsky has also written a long historical drama, called
 "The Death of Paul I." He traces there, with his accustomed
 animation, the figure of the weak and criminal Tsar, now heaping
 favors upon those who surround him, now persecuting them with the
 most terrible cruelty. The savage scene of the assassination of
 this tyrant is of remarkable beauty.

VIII

ALEXANDER KUPRIN

The work of Kuprin contrasts strongly with the writings of his predecessors and of his contemporaries.
It would be useless to try to connect him with Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, or Gorky. This does not
mean that he came under foreign influence. As a matter of fact his work clearly shows the imprint
of Slavic genius and receives its richness from qualities which have always appeared in Slavic
literature,--sincerity and accuracy of observation, a passionate love for all manifestations
of modern life, lyrical fullness, and power of suggestion. But Alexander Kuprin does not depict
adepts of the "religion of pity," nor the psychology of the abnormal, the "pathological case,"
so curious and rare, and so dear to the author of "Crime and Punishment."[16] He does not reincarnate
the sad genius of Korolenko. He is equally separated from Tolstoy and Gorky. He is himself.
That is to say, he is an exquisite story-teller, profound and touching, who imposes neither
thesis nor moral upon his reader, but paints life as it appears to him,--not seen through the
medium of a temperament,--but in all sincerity, without too much ardor or too much indifference.

 [16] Dostoyevsky.

This author was born in 1870. After having attended the Cadet School and the Military School
at Moscow, he entered military service as an active lieutenant in 1890, but resigned seven
years later in order to devote his time to literature. Before this, he had published several
stories.

In spite of the undeniable talent which is found in his earlier writings, the public hesitated
to praise him. Certain lucky circumstances, however, favored the beginning of his work. One
of his relatives, at the start, offered him a position on a magazine which she was then editing.
This was a wonderful opportunity for him, for usually at his age the more gifted writers are
still groping around for light. But merit alone seldom suffices to form the basis of literary
fame. Scandal is often necessary to consecrate, as one might say, a growing reputation. Kuprin,
without seeking to start a scandal, did so, in spite of himself, when he published "The Duel,"
a study of military life, in which he showed the most absolute impartiality.

To his great surprise, the public accepted this book as a new indictment of the army. It was
because the Manchurian campaign was so recent. Every portrayal of military life passed as a
violent satire on the corrupt and disgraced army. Kuprin in vain tried to change this unexpected
judgment. As he was an ardent partisan of the theory of "art for art's sake," he could not
allow a purpose to be attributed to his work. He had only faithfully portrayed what he had
witnessed in the course of his brief career. But in order to strengthen his defence, he alleged
reasons which could not be understood in an altruistic country. Besides, several of his stories,
such as, "The Wedding," full of the dissolute life led by the officers in their garrisons,
"The Inquest," where the author shows the violences to which the Russian soldiers are subjected,
"The Night's Lodging," and "The Ensign of the Army," which stigmatize certain lace-bedecked
"Lovelaces," only help to nullify his best arguments. In short, his fame spread rapidly and
the young writer had to accept the renown that became his.

       *       *       *       *       *

From that time on Kuprin's road was mapped out. According to the dictates of his fancy he depicts
thousands of the ever-changing, different aspects of life. He is equally impelled to write
about petty tradesmen, actors, acrobats, and sinners in the Crimea. To the accomplishment of
his task, he brings an over-minute and cruel observation. With the genius that is his he dwells
on certain important, carefully selected traits of people who live intensely.

In "The Disciple," we see a young sharper on a boat on the Volga. He has the tired eyes of
a precocious old man, stubby fingers, and the hands of a murderer alert to strike the fatal
blow. He has just fleeced a party of travelers, and he discovers, in a savory conversation
with an old cheat, who has found him out, that his soul is being consumed with insatiable desires.
And as the old sharper admires the "savoir-faire" of his young friend, the latter observes,
not without scorn, that they belong to two very different categories of sharpers. "Among you
old fellows," he sneers, "there was romanticism. You loved beautiful women, champagne, music
and the song of the tziganes.... We, however, we others are tired of everything. Fear and debauch
are equally unknown to us...."

After the sharper we have the spy in "Captain Rybnikov." He passes for a Siberian, and says
that he has been wounded in the Russo-Japanese war. He goes out into society a great deal,
and is most commonly seen in the military offices and in the best "salons" of St. Petersburg.
One night, when he is asleep at a courtesan's house, he mutters the war-cry of Japan: "Banzai!
Banzai!" The courtesan denounces him to a policeman who happens to be there, and the pseudo-captain,
who is no other than a colonel in the Japanese army, is arrested.

Before leaving the military world, let us analyze "The Delirium." Captain Markov has been ordered
by the government to suppress the revolution in certain provinces. Disgusted with the duty
of daily executioner, the officer frets himself into a high fever. A non-commissioned officer
enters to ask him to decide the fate of three men who have been arrested the previous night,
one of whom is an old man with a peaceful and strangely beautiful face. The sergeant knows
that they ought to be shot, but these executions are so repulsive to him, that he is anxious
to have the sentence of death confirmed by his chief, who seems to him to have the sole responsibility.

"I don't want you ever again to ask me such a question," cries Markov, who has guessed the
intention of his subordinate. "You know what you ought to do." And he dismisses him. But the
soldier remains motionless.

"What else do you want?" asks the captain.

"The men," answers the stubborn soldier, "are anxious to know what to do with the ... old ...
man...."

"Get out of here!" the officer roars, exasperated. "Do you understand?"

"Very well, captain. But as to-day is December 31, allow me to offer you my best wishes for
a happy New Year."

"Thank you, my friend," replies Markov in a voice which has suddenly become soft.

During the night the captain begins to rave. The old man whom he has just condemned to death
appears and speaks to him. He says that his name is Cain, and confesses the murder of his brother.
Cursed by God, he wanders disconsolately through the centuries, followed by the groaning of
his victim.

Just before dawn the sergeant awakens Markov.

"What about those three men?" asks the captain eagerly.

"Shot, captain!"

"And the old man? The old man?... what have you done with him?"

"We shot him along with the others, captain."

The next day Captain Markov asks for his discharge, having decided to leave the army for good.

This story, which is one of the most powerful in Russian literature, would have been enough
to bring the young writer renown, even if he had never written anything else. But his work,
which is already imposing in amount, abounds in pages of great merit, and especially in well-constructed,
brief, tragic stories.

Under this class should be mentioned "Humble People," a short story, the scene of which is
laid in the extreme north. It is the story of a close friendship between a nurse in a dispensary
and a school-teacher.

Snowed in by a terrible winter--a winter of seven months--these two friends find in their daily
meetings the only pleasure that can make their enforced solitude easier for them. However,
in spite of their mutual friendship, they often find their lot hard to endure. And they continually
quarrel, only to become reconciled almost immediately. But now an unexpected event comes to
break the monotony of their existence. They are invited to a dance, given by the priest of
the neighboring village, and there they fall in love with two charming young girls, who, they
are happy to find, are not indifferent to them. Once at home, they bestow lavish praises on
their new friends. With the touching devotion of simple and starved hearts they speak about
them as if the young girls already were theirs.

"Mine has eyes of velvet," says the one.

"And mine has hair of pure gold," replies the other.

Gradually, however, their recollections grow weaker, and fade, just as flowers do. Their sad
life would have begun again if the spring had not come, and with it brought deliverance. The
two friends, full of new sprightliness, get up a fishing party one day. A foolish accident
makes them both fall into the river, and they are drowned.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The End of a Story," which we are about to analyze, deserves, as does "Humble People," a special
place in the work of Kuprin. It is a little masterpiece of graceful emotion.

Kotik, a child of seven, and the son of a celebrated painter, teases his father to tell him
a story. The father racks his memory. He has told so many that his fount is almost dry.

Suddenly an idea comes to him. Is not his own life a tender, melancholy, and charming story?
It is not a long time, twelve years at the most, since he was a poor, obscure painter, neglected
by his masters and tormented by the miseries of his life. Discouraged, he used continually
to curse the hour in which he chose to devote himself to art. One day, a young girl, believing
in his talent, gave him her hand and comforted him with her tenderness and angelic goodness.
And love had triumphed.

To-day his name is celebrated among the most famous, and his paintings adorn the galleries
of kings and emperors. The plot of the story is ready.

"Listen," says the father to his son. "There was once upon a time a king who, feeling that
he was going to die, gathered his many children about him and said to them: 'I will leave my
kingdom to that one of you who can enter a marble palace situated in a very dense forest, and
there light his torch from the sacred fire which always burns there. The forest is full of
wild beasts and venomous serpents. The palace is guarded by three lions: Envy, Poverty, and Doubt.'

"The young people set out on the road. But, while the older ones search outside of the forest
for a road that is not beset with dangers, the youngest courageously starts on the regular
path. He there is exposed to many dangers and temptations. Already, his strength failing, he
feels that he is almost on the point of succumbing, when a fairy appears and stretches forth
her hand to him. The young man blesses this providential aid. The fairy brings back his courage
and leads him to the palace."

Near them on the terrace, concealed by some plants, there sat a young and beautiful woman who
was eagerly listening to the story. She was Kotik's mother, the fairy of the story, and the
favorite pupil of the painter. Some of her paintings had already made a sensation.

The story ended, the father led the child to his room and with the help of his nurse undressed
him and put him to bed.

"He had started back towards the terrace, when suddenly two arms embraced his neck, while two
sweet lips pressed against his.

"The story was finished."

With these words the story really ends.

Kuprin shows the same grace and the same delicate emotion in his recent story, "The Garnet
Necklace," a tale which is analogous to the legend of the troubadour Geoffrey Rudel, which
has been made into a play by Rostand in his "Princesse Lointaine." 

"I love her very dearly, Dick."

"Norris and I are going out to see her to-morrow. We'll take the motor, I guess."

Mrs. Percival beamed down at him and gave his head an affectionate
pat, and the son glanced up with a blandness that might easily have
become a smirk.

Yet his mother's complacent satisfaction with the inevitable irritated him. Madeline Elton might
be the most admirable combination of the virtues and the graces, but he wanted to find it out for
himself.

Mrs. Percival rose with the air of one who has heard and said what she desired.

"Good night, dear boy," she purred as Dick struggled to his long legs.

"How good it is to have you to lean on and trust! These have been lonely years while you were away.
Now I shall leave you two to your quiet smoke."

Dick kissed her hand and then her lips, as though to show both reverence
and love.

       Norris, too, stooped and kissed her hand, and the two watched her
as she moved in her slow way up the stairs.

As she disappeared, Norris turned and laid an arm over Dick's shoulder.

"That's the kind of thing, Percival, that you do not wholly appreciate unless you've gone without
it. I grew up without any atmosphere to speak of, and I've been gasping
for breath all my life.

I wonder if I shall ever get a full allowance of air to live in."

As they looked, friendly eye into friendly eye, Ellery seemed to review his own life in contrast
with Dick's. Dick had background; he had to begin everything for himself. He had earned most
of his way through college; he had earned his standing among the
men as he had earned his standing in scholarship, by dogged persistence
instead of by the right of eminent domain to which Dick was born.

He had never envied Percival's readier brain, wider popularity, more profuse fortune; but something
close to envy crept upon him now for this refinement of home, this delicate mother-love. This
was a loss not to be made good by pluck or perseverance. Love was the gift of the gods.

CHAPTER III

AN OCCIDENTAL LUMINARY

Over next door, beyond the thick laurel hedge, on this same evening, Mr. Sebastian Early, now
that the last of his guests had withdrawn the silken wonder of her reception skirts, was settling
down to a quiet evening with his turbaned guest.

Now Mr. Sebastian Early is far too intricate a person to be dismissed, as Mrs. Lenox disposed
of him, with a phrase and a laugh. In early life, it is true, he
had seemed a commonplace and insignificant young man.

His first appearance before the public was as the inventor of a hook-and-eye, but his hook-and-eye
had such unusual merits that it seemed, according to the engaging pictures and verses in the
street-cars, to simplify most of the sterner problems of every-day life. As its lineaments
began to stare at passers-by from thousands of huge bill-boards over
the length and breadth of the land, dimes turned to dollars in Mr.
Early's ever-widening pockets, and for the time he felt himself a
man of distinction.

Yet in these later and regenerate days, Mr. Early sometimes had a moment's anguish as he remembered
those miles of unesthetic bill-boards, which once marred the meadows and streams of his native
land; for with a widening horizon, there had crept upon him a rising
spirit of discontent.

Perhaps it was that divine discontent, which William Morris celebrates, that makes men yearn for
higher things. Department stores still rolled out their multitudinous cards of hooks-and-eyes,
but the person of Sebastian Early passed unnoticed in the crowd. He yearned for fame, not for his
product, but for himself, and the same ability that led him to serve the wants of the public
in hooks now drove him to study its social demands. Like many another unfortunate, he began to
perceive that dollars alone were not enough of a key to unlock the
magic door.

       In this over-fed land, people with money are growing too common.

Therefore to gold one must add power and distinction, if one would keep one's head above the herd.
This must one do and not leave the other undone.

Sebastian determined to make himself interesting. The public has a fawning respect for fame.
One or two abortive attempts convinced Mr. Early that his literary efforts would bring him not
even the distinction of infamy. At last he hit upon an idea. He would be a patron of the Arts--not
one of your little ordinary buyers, but a man whose purse was, so to speak, regilded by mind.
He spent six months of hard work as a student of the situation and
then he made his début.

He selected a few gems of half-forgotten eighteenth century literature--gems that deserved
to be given life-preservers on that stream of oblivion into which they were too surely being
sucked. These he brought forth in tiny volumes, wide-edged and thick-papered, illuminated as
to capitals and bound in ooze or in old brocade on which were scattered
a few decorations, calculated, so unthinkable were they, to upset
the reasoning power of the average reader, and thus prepare him for
the literary matter which he should find within.

These books naturally "took."

 They invited no man to read, but they were interesting to look at
and therefore particularly adapted to those occasions when one must
make a small gift to a friend.

Scarce a center-table in the country but held at least one.

The beauty of it was that the literary matter cost him nothing, and
the books were their own advertising bill-boards; for wherever they
went they lay in conspicuous places.

From books Mr. Early passed on to furniture; and he begot strange
shapes, wherein forgotten Gothic forms were commingled with forms
that never man saw before; and these also took.

So the circle widened, until glass pottery and rugs were gathered into the potpourri of Mr. Early's
genius.

Finally he established his magazine, The Aspirant, for he began to feel the need of explaining
things--chiefly himself--to his expanding circle. The Aspirant had covers of butcher's paper;
and the necessity for self-defense at last developed in Mr. Early that literary style which he
had found it impossible to cultivate while he still had nothing to say. He grew a peculiar ability
for self-glorification and for slugging the other man. Particularly caustic did his pen become
in respect to those, whether painters, musicians, poets, novelists or reformers, who had endeared
themselves to the great mass of the public.

 The Aspirant always called the public "the rabble," and you can't
 damn humanity more easily and cheaply than by calling it "the rabble."
 Naturally every one hastened to buy Mr. Early's furniture, his
 rugs and his pottery, and diligently to read The Aspirant, in order
 that he or she might escape the universal condemnation. Be outré
 and you'll be right; be right and you'll be outré; be outré anyway:
 was the simple creed.

To those penniless celebrities to whom purchase of Mr. Early's commodities was over-expensive,
there was another way out from under. They might visit Mr. Early's hospitable home, and so contribute
their mite to the halo of distinction that surrounded him. The great ones came to St. Etienne.
They ate and drank and were exhibited to an admiring throng.

They gave lectures, introduced from the platform by Mr. Sebastian Early; they went away and
The Aspirant chronicled their satellite excellences. No such ex-guest need fear a blow in the
face upon its pages. All these things came before the public--more and more before the public
every year. They kept Mr. Early's growing corps of assistants busy, inventing new furniture
and new forms of invective.

It is needless to say that the hook-and-eye was never included in
the illustrious list of Mr. Early's productions.

That gentleman frequently blessed himself in private that his first commodity had been put upon
the market as the "Imperial," and not as the "Bright and Early" as he had once half-resolved.
Only a few knew who was responsible for the bill-boards.

Still even his new enterprises paid. He was a good business man, and he shared with "the rabble"
an appetite for cold cash. Nor did the crafty Arts exhaust either his abilities or his desires;
for though he had no wish to pose before the world in the over-done rôle of a millionaire,
still he needed money and ever more and more money. To get it he kept his hand in many a business
enterprise and his eye on many a speculation of which the gaping world did not dream. Even
his right-hand editorial writer knew not of his left-handed dip into an electric light company
here or a paving contract there, for his left hand had assistants too,--quiet, unobtrusive, even
shy,--men who could lobby a bill "on the quiet," or wreck an opposing company, even though they
did not know the difference between Hafiz and chutney.

And Mr. Early's mind was of such a broad catholicity that it would be hard to tell which side of
his career he most enjoyed, the variety-show or the still-hunt.

Thus it will be seen that this great man, who was a credit to the
new art movement of our time, and of whom St. Etienne, a young western
city, felt justly proud, was in his usual element when he introduced
to the society, in which he was now a fixed star, a light from the
Far East.

And Swami Ram Juna seemed so sure that he himself was right and all the rest of the world was wrong,
that Mr. Early felt him to be a kindred spirit.

The impression deepened as he found himself alone with the Hindu. He had rather dreaded the strange
demands and customs that might meet him; but the man of bronze and
the snowy turban proved himself to be the best of table companions,
suave, courteous and sympathetic.

He seemed even to take a kindly interest in such matters of a day as Mr. Early's incursions into the
realms of art and literature. Through dinner they chatted almost gaily, and afterward, while
Mr. Early smoked, the Swami joined him in the slow sipping of a liqueur.

There is a frankness of those who have nothing to hide; there is a frankness which makes a mask
for him who is, below the surface, all mystery. As Sebastian studied his companion, he told himself
that this simple creature was after all a man, perhaps adapting himself to public demands as
any clever fellow would; and, as this thought occurred to him, Mr. Early's benevolence increased.

"You
ought to write a book," he said with the air of one projecting a
novel thought.

"With your gift for expression, and your--ah--insight into realities, you couldn't fail to make a
success of it."

"It is my intention," said the Hindu.

Mr. Early looked a little taken aback, but brightened again with a
new suggestion.

       "Why not do it here?" he asked.

"Come, where could you find a more fitting place? You have your rooms in a wing of the house
all to yourself. That gives you perfect solitude. I should be delighted to have you for my
guest while you do your work; and when you finish, I know enough of the tricks of the trade
to help you push it a bit."

"Of a certainty truth is self-vigorous, and needs no tricks to keep it living."

"Ah, yes," the man of business answered cheerfully. "But one may boost it,--one may boost it, my
dear fellow."

The Swami bent his great head and appeared to meditate.

       When he looked up, his spiritual eyes were narrowed to a speculative
slit, and he studied the face on the other side of the comfortable
log fire.

"My friend, you are generous. You offer me a home, and I am fain to accept it, if I may put the
offer in another form. For the present I must return to India. Too long already have I been away
from the atmosphere which is to me life. I must see some of the brothers of my soul. I must saturate
myself with repose and with the underlying--with Karma. Also, in this too-vigorous country,
that is unattainable.

       But here, in this place, one who is filled with the message might
give it forth to his brothers--or perhaps to the sisters, who appear
the more anxious for it.

Here the very energy of the air says 'give' rather than 'grow'. If I might a year--six months hence--accept
your hospitality?" He looked tentatively at Mr. Early.

"My home is yours.

Do what you like with it," said Mr. Early benignly. He was thinking how well a picturesque cut
of the Hindu's head would look on the covers of The Aspirant, combined with a judicious puff within.

The
Swami smiled serenely.

"I observe," he went on in his delicate voice, "that the wing on the ground floor, in which
you have given me room, has two apartments, divided by a little passage, and that the little passage
gives not upon the public highway, but upon a garden, quiet and lovely, that faces the sun
and is shut in by brick walls and hedges. The farther one of these rooms is bare and but slightly
furnished, though my bedroom is sumptuous like that of a maha-rajah. Still the bare small room
pleases me best. If I might have this room when I come again! If I might keep the bare room
sacred to my meditations, all unentered save by myself!

It means to me much that no alien mind, no soul of a common servant, should mar the serenity of
the atmosphere in that spot where I sit alone with myself. I would have it dedicated to the greater
Me. It would be the cap-sheaf--do you not so say in this land of great harvests?--thus to give
shelter not only to my body, but to my soul, in this bare and quiet little room."

"Why, certainly, certainly!" Mr. Early could not help thinking that
a guest who spent most of his time alone in an empty room would prove
no great tax upon his entertainer.

"I thank you," said Ram Juna,
rising and making a salaam of curious dignity and courtesy. "You bid
me lecture. You bid me write and instruct in the sacred truths. That
will I do when I come again; and my consolation shall be the unblemished
hours when I sit alone in the little room which faces the sun. You
comprehend me? You understand?"

And Mr. Early, who never, if he could
help it, spent a half-hour in either solitude or idleness, answered
again:

"Why, certainly, certainly."

"In some months, then, I may
return, noble friend. And now I will bid you farewell until the dawn."

The
Swami, with marvelous lightness of foot in spite of his huge body,
made off for his own domain. If Mr. Early, who now sat and yawned
alone by the dying fire, could have peeped in on the excellent Ram
Juna, he would have been much gratified by the evident satisfaction
with which the Oriental surveyed the quarters which were one day to
be his. The Swami strode at once across the bedroom, across the little
passage that opened into the garden, into the unused room beyond.
Here with a swift thrust he turned on the electric light, then moved
from window to window, opened them, examined the heavy wooden shutters
which he closed and unclosed, craning his bull-neck through the opened
sashes. Around and under each piece of furniture he peered, nodding
and smiling his approbation of everything. As he came out, he paused
for some moments to examine the lock on the door.

"Quite inadequate,
quite inadequate," he muttered with a frown. "We must do better than
that."

He stood and thought a moment, then put out the light, stepped
to the garden door and disappeared into the night.

With so light
a tread did he come back that Mr. Early, should he have been listening,
could have heard no warning footstep to tell him that his guest was
returning.

Back in his own bedroom, Ram Juna peeped into the luxurious
bath-room with placid delight.

"So much water, so easily hot," he
said. "It is admirable. All is admirable." However, he will marry her if the princess can get him the position
he desires. But will the princess keep her word? It is some time since she has let herself
be heard from. What is to be done?

"Marry," says his friend Routilov to him, when he is told the condition of things. "I have
three sisters," he continues. "Choose the one you like best and marry her immediately. Thus
Varvara will know nothing and cannot throw any obstacles in the way."

"Done!" cries Peredonov, who has known the three sisters for a long time. He chooses the youngest,
Valerie.

"Go and tell her about it. I will wait for you in the hall and then we'll go to the priest's
together."

Alone, Peredonov again muses: "Doubtless, Valerie is pretty and I shall be happy to have her
as my wife. But she is young, pretentious; she will demand lots of new clothes, she will want
to go out a lot, in fact, so much that I'll not be able to lay anything aside. Moreover, she'll
not look after the kitchen, I'll have poor food, and the cook will rob us." Anguish seizes
him. He knocks at the window, calls his friend, and says:

"I've changed my mind."

"Ah!" exclaimed the other, horrified.

"Yes, I have reflected, and I have decided that I prefer the second, Lyoudmila."

Lyoudmila consents, for, besides his personal fortune, Peredonov occupies an enviable position,
and the sisters are poor. She hurriedly gets dressed; in a quarter of an hour she will be ready
to accompany him to the priest's.

However, Peredonov reflects: "Lyoudmila is pretty and plump; she doubtless has a perfect body,
but she is always jolly, she loves to laugh. She will laugh incessantly and will make her husband
seem ridiculous." Full of fear, he knocks at the window: "I have reflected," he cries. "I prefer
the oldest, Darya."

"What an awful man!" cries his friend. "Hurry up, Darya, or he'll leave all of us in the lurch."

Again Peredonov reflects: "Darya is nice, not young any more, and economical; she knows life.
But ... she is decisive in her resolutions, and she has an energetic character. She is not
the kind who would listen to my observations. She could make life hard for me, and use me ill.
Frankly, do I have to marry any of the three sisters? What will the princess say when she hears
of my marriage? And my position as inspector? How stupid it is to stand waiting in this court!
Without a doubt, Routilov ensnared me. I've got to get out of this at any cost!"

He spits on all sides to conjure up the spirits, then knocks at the window, and tells the amazed
family:

"I am going away.... I have thought it over. I don't want to get married."

Meanwhile, his position in school becomes intolerable; complaints are registered against him;
he is reproached with having ill-treated and even with having beaten the poor children, and
with treating the noble and rich children with too much respect. His ridiculous and evil passions
cause him to be detested by all. Luckily, he will soon be nominated inspector, and then he
will say good-bye to all this riff-raff. In the meantime, Varvara writes a letter, filled with
the most alluring promises, to which she signs the princess's name, and has it mailed from
St. Petersburg. Peredonov is at the height of joy; but, being a prudent man, he does not want
to marry before he has received the nomination. He waits and waits for it, and, meanwhile,
he is not even sure of his position in the school. He discovers enemies everywhere, and believes
there are always spies at his heels. In order to cajole the administration, he begins to frequent
the church, and to pay visits to the city authorities. He assures the chief of police of his
respect, and, in order to give a glaring proof of his devotion to the established institutions,
he lodges information against a school-mistress of the locality. But still the nomination does
not come, and he lives in a continual trance. The evil in him increases. He torments beasts
and human beings. He whips his pupils, throws nettles at his cat, and maltreats his cook. He
believes himself more and more in the power of the demon, and terrible visions follow him:

"He saw running before him, a little, grey, noisy beast. It sneered, its head trembled, and
it ran quickly around Peredonov. When he wanted to seize it, it escaped under the cupboard,
only to reappear a moment later...."

This strange book, written with rare perfection, had a great success. To several readers who
thought that they recognized the author himself in the person of Peredonov (Sologoub had had
the same position as his hero for several years) the author replied in the preface of a recent
edition, by these malicious lines:

"Men like to be loved. They adore noble and elevated descriptions and portrayals. They even
search among the scum for a 'divine spark.' They also are surprised and offended when any one
offers them a veracious and sombre picture. And most of them then do not fail to declare: 'The
author has described himself in his work.' But no, my dear friends and readers, it is you,
and only you, whom I have painted in my book, 'The Little Demon.'"

In "The Charms of Navii" Sologoub happily blends fantasy and reality. Revolutionary meetings
alternate with improbable hypnotic seances, and terrible cortèges of corpses contrast violently
with scenes of platonic and ethereal love.

The plot of the story, "The Old Home," is not less distressing than the preceding one. A young
revolutionary, condemned to death by court-martial, has been executed, but for his dear ones
this death has never been a reality. His mother and sister, and even the old servant, have
not the strength to admit his disappearance. They wait and wait for his return until their
own death carries them off.

Another story, "The Crowd," shows us a "fair" at which pewter goblets are being given away.
These so excite the greediness of the crowd that a fray results, in which three children are
seriously wounded. While dying, the unfortunates have terrible visions of life and humanity.
"It seemed to them that ferocious demons were chuckling and sneering silently behind human
faces. And this masquerade lasted so long that the poor little tots thought that it would never
end...."

Sologoub is, above all, a chanter of death. Almost all of his works unveil a murder, suicide,
or madness. Moreover, the author, who shows only the injustices, evils, and infamy of life,
and who affirms that the only happiness that he foresees for man is the possibility of "creating
for himself a chimera" by turning away from reality, finds the clearest colors and the sweetest
expressions in speaking of death.

"There is not a surer and more tender friend on earth than death," says one of his heroes.
"And if men fear the name of death, it is because they do not know that it is the real life,
eternal and invariable. Life deceives very often, death never. It is sweet to think of death,
as it is to think of a dear friend, distant and yet always close at hand.... One forgets all
in the arms of the consoling angel, the angel of death."

The ever supremely correct and beautiful language of Sologoub shows the power of a master,
and it is most regrettable that an artist of his merit should confine himself to so morbid an art.

       *       *       *       *       *

These then are the principal authors--some of whom have enjoyed an immense popularity--who
treat the "cursed questions:" the rights of the flesh, the problem of death, and other equally
"cursed" problems.

The other writers are principally occupied with social questions, and, without rigorously following
in the steps of their predecessors, remain, however, most of the time, realists.

Among these, Sergyev-Tzensky occupies a prominent place. The stories of this writer show us
beings who seem strangers to what is going on around them. This peculiarity comes from the
fact that Tzensky does not understand the physical facts in the same way that the naturalists
do. For him, they are the manifestations of the will of a supernatural entity, incomprehensible,
inconceivable, and, at the same time, clearly hostile to man.

His story, "The Sadness of the Fields," testifies to this singular conception. A farmer and
his wife, good and peaceful people, have for many years wished for a child. Up to this time,
the six children which the mother has given birth to have died in their infancy. They are anxiously
awaiting the seventh. Will this one live? Will not the sadness of the fields, which puts its
imprint on everything, kill it as it has killed the others? Alas! the child is not viable,
and the mother dies in child-birth. They are buried, and "the fields and the surrounding country
forever keep their powerful and mysterious melancholy."

"The Fluctuation" is one of the most curious and beautiful of all of Tzensky's stories. Anton
Antonovich, a rich and enterprising merchant, of a very violent and unruly character, lives
like a wolf in his domains, alone with his family, without seeing any of his neighbors. The
peasants detest him. As his partners and helpers, he always engages nonentities, without power
of initiative, who blindly follow his orders. Intellectual and energetic men cannot get along
with him. Men, beasts, and nature in its entirety, are considered by this man as having been
especially created for his service. The one end of his life is wealth and power. The only beings
he loves are his wife and his three sons; but even they have to bow down to his will.

One day, he buys some straw and insures it against fire. Sometime later, it burns. They accuse
him of having been the incendiary. Ridiculous accusation! He is a millionaire and the straw
barely cost a few hundred rubles. The old man makes fun of the whole affair; he insults the
judge, his own lawyer, and even the jury. He feels the impending misfortune, but his inborn
violence carries him away from prudence. He is condemned to hard labor and he succumbs to a
sickness that he has been feeling coming on for a long time. He had made a pillager's nest
for himself, and he died like a pillager, abandoned even by those who were dear to him.

In Tzensky's short stories, "I Shall Soon Die," "Diphtheria," "Tedium," and "The Masks," there
is something mysterious, fatal, and terrible that constantly surrounds his people. As to his
longer works, "The Swamp in the Forest," and "Lieutenant Babayev," they plunge the reader into
the mad chaos of the often abnormal emotions felt by the characters. These characters imagine
the divine side of human nature; they consider it as having existed before in the essence of
things, but the reality does not harmonize with their dream. The authentication of this discord
torments Tzensky's heroes and their souls protest passionately, but in vain, against these
outrages.

Sergyev-Tzensky's style, graphic and pure, often strange, has found imitators among the younger
writers. Thus, Mouyzhel, who describes village life, is visibly influenced by his writings.
According to him, the soul goes through life without understanding it, without being able to
ascribe any meaning to it. And he is so sincere, that his works obtain the frankest sort of
success.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Mouyzhel studies peasant life, Simon Youshkevich, to the exclusion of all else, makes
a study of the poor Russian Jews. Some of his stories have produced an overwhelming impression.
They show us beings, heaped up, pell-mell in the ghettos of the cities of western and southern
Russia, dirty and unwholesome ghettos, where consumption and all kinds of terrible sickness
reign. These stories, often tragic, always sad, have given Youshkevich the name of "chanter
of human suffering."

In his earlier works--the best of which are "The Jews," "Tavern-Keeper Heimann," "The Innocents,"
"The Prologue" and "The Assassin"--he devoted himself to portraying, not isolated persons,
but the immense Russian Jewish proletariat, with its sad past, its bloody present, and its
exalted faith in the future. Youshkevich has created this sphere; he considers the poor people
of the cities not as a social class, but as a symbolic representation of an entire organization. Martello
Towers.--Is it the fact that the towers erected along the low coasts of Kent and Sussex during
the prevalent dread of the French invasion received their designation from a town in Spain, where
they were first built? By whom was the plan introduced into England? What makes this writer unique, is that he cannot be confounded
with any one else. He has never influenced any of his readers and, in turn, has never imitated
any one. He made himself what he is.

His last literary productions--with the exception of his very touching drama, "Misere"--have
been inferior to his former work. But the abundance of the materials furnished by Jewish life
would still give this author opportunity to give us more of the magnificently colored pictures
that he gave us in his initial productions.

Close to Youshkevich should be placed the two young writers, Sholom Ash and Izemann. Sholom
Ash has principally depicted the Jewish world and its psychology. "The God of Vengeance" is
a touching picture of the life of young Jewish girls who have been obliged to prostitute themselves
for a living. "Sabbatai-Zevi,"[19] a philosophical poem, treats of the powerful personality
of that Jewish prophet and of the surroundings in which he passed his life.

 [19] A famous impostor of the 17th century: 1626-1676.

Izemann, who has written quite a few tales and stories, is a very uneven author. His best work
is "The Thorn Bush," a drama of the life of the Russian-Jewish revolutionists. Manousse, the
son of a poor tinsmith, has been arrested, and then hanged for having taken part in a terrorist
uprising. For Mr. Thompson, that preached the forenoone and afternoone, for a quart of sack,
14d."

"1650. For six quartes of sacke to the ministre that preached, when
we had not a ministere, 9s."

It is to be observed that this was in
the puritanical era. Thus, the entire family perishes. The last act of this sombre drama makes a tremendous
impression on the stage.

       *       *       *       *       *

After having been a country doctor for several years, Eugene Chirikov abandoned his practice
in order to devote himself to literature. His drama, "The Jews," has aroused great interest
and has been played with great success both in Russia and abroad. It is one of the most significant
works of this writer. The story concerns itself with the children of a poor Jewish watchmaker,
who are infatuated with ideas of progress. Their infatuation is such, that the daughter becomes
engaged to a Gentile. A delirious mob invades the houses of the Jews. The store of the poor
watchmaker is not spared, and the fiancée of the Gentile is ravished and then murdered. The
rapid action of the play makes it a dramatic "slice of life."

The other plays and stories of this author give us pictures both of the petty "bourgeois" and
of the "intellectuals." Thus, "The Strangers" tells the story of a group of "intellectuals"
who have strayed into a small market town in the provinces where all are hostile to them. Then
there is "The Invalids," which gives the story of the life of an old man who, after having
been exiled to Siberia for several years on account of "advanced" ideas, returns to Russia
as confident as ever, ready to consecrate the rest of his life to the people. Finally, "At
the Bottom of the Court," "The Mysteries of the Forest" and "Marya Ivanovna" are dramas from
bourgeois life, while "The Sorceress" is a play, taken from a national epic.

Not less well known than Chirikov, is Ossip Dymov. He forsook the "Imperial Institute of Foresters"
in order to devote himself to literature. He has written numerous stories, among which "Vlass"
is the most captivating. It is the childhood of Vlass told by himself. An observing little
person, the child notices everything and everybody around him. His father had killed himself
before the child was old enough to talk, and his mother, a very intelligent and stern woman,
alone had to care for four children. Vlass has an older brother, Yuri, a sister, Olya, and
a younger brother, Vladimir, a kind and inoffensive creature. Life runs along smoothly in the
little country town. The days pass, one like the other, and the most insignificant event takes
on grave importance in this monotonous life. One night, Vlass's young teacher is arrested and
sent to Siberia. A year later, a friend of the family, who has been in exile a long time, comes
back secretly and passes several days at the house. Later on, it is "the beautiful, good aunt"
who comes unexpectedly; but she soon departs, leaving a mass of confused and restless thoughts
in the child's mind. Vlass ends his story with a most pathetic account. Far away from the little
town, in one of the prisons of St. Petersburg, they are going to hang Yuri. The entire family
has broken down since they have heard the news, and they sit up the night before the execution,
trying, in thought, to alleviate the torment of their cherished one.

In his other stories, the author paints nature in an original and entirely personal manner.
According to a Russian critic, the works of Dymov breathe forth "the fresh breeze and the quickening
aroma of the forests."

Dymov has also written some very well-liked plays, of which "Niyu" is the most original. Niyu,
a young woman, abandons her husband and child in order to follow a poet, whose beautiful language
and touching poetry have won her admiration and brought her under his spell. She hopes that
her lover will create a new world, a higher and nobler world than the every-day one, because
he is a poet, that is to say, one of the elect. The abandoned husband and the uncared-for child
desperately call out for their wife and mother. In vain! However, the days that she passes
with the poet are filled with disenchantment, disillusion, and bitterness. Despairing, she
writes a letter to her old parents who live in a distant town, and then commits suicide. He was
happy with the simplest things--and when we put him to bed in his little hammock under the
trees, he would smile up at the stars and say: 'Mother's up there! Good-night, mother!' Oh, the
lonely trees, and the empty hammock!

Oh, my lad!--my little pretty lad! Murdered! Murdered! Gone from me for ever! For ever! God! God!"

Reeling
heavily forward, he sank in a crouching heap beside the child's dead body and snatched it into his
embrace, kissing the little cold lips and cheeks and eyelids again and again, and pressing it with
frantic fervour against his breast.

       "The dark hour!" he muttered--"the dark hour!

To-day when I came away over the moors I felt it creeping upon me! Last night it whispered to me,
and I felt its cold breath hissing against my ears! One of his best works is "Agrafena," a touching picture of the life
of a peasant woman. During her lifetime, she was a domestic in the cities, and when finally,
bent under years of labor, she comes back to her native village and her daughter, whom she
has secretly brought up at great pains, it is only to find that she has committed suicide,
having been abandoned by her lover.

Among others, should be mentioned Gussev-Orenburgsky, who has written some very interesting
stories about the Russian clergy; Skitaletz, whose "Rural Tribunal" has had a great success,
and has been translated into several languages; Seraphimovich and Teleshov, who, like Chirikov,
depict the life of the "intellectuals," and Olizhey, the psychologist of revolutionary spheres,
known particularly by his "The Day of Judgment," which tells of an officer, a member of a council
of war, who is forced to condemn his future brother-in-law to death. This story leaves an indescribable
impression of terror and horror.

Let us finally mention Count Alexis Tolstoy, the homonym of the great Russian thinker, to whom
the critics predict a brilliant future. His first work appeared in 1909. He generally depicts
landed proprietors. His recent stories, "The Asking in Marriage," and "Beyond the Volga," show
signs of great strength and power of observation.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the women, there are three who show real talent. In fact, Mme. Hippius-Merezhkovskaya
is regarded as one of the founders of Russian modernism. We are indebted to her for some rather
daring verses and some very good stories. The most recent of these, "The Creature," is the
curious history of a love-sick prostitute; "The Devil's Doll" is an episode in the life of
the Russian "intellectuals." Endowed with a caustic spirit, she excels all others in literary
criticism. 

Are Tables, giving the value of money at various periods in our history, to be found in any
readily accessible source?
E.V.

Members for Calais.--Henry VIII. granted a representative in
the English parliament to the town of Calais. In "The Spirit of the Time" she has tried, not
without some success, to paint the immense picture of the revolution of 1905. Her recent novel,
"The Keys of Happiness," has had an enormous success.

Finally, mention should be made of Mme. Shepkina-Koupernik, who has written some verses and
charming stories, full of caressing tenderness and delicate psychology. Her stories, in which
she shows us two old Italian masters, are very interesting. Thus, "Eternity in a Moment" is
delicious. In a painter's studio, a young model by chance meets her old lover, who has also
been reduced to posing in studios. Happy at heart, the woman rushes toward him, but he pushes
her away: he is too miserable, he has fallen too low to dare to love her again. Repulsed by
him, she stands as if petrified, with death in her soul, and her face changed by terrible despair.
At this moment the master enters; he looks at the young woman and utters a cry of joy; finally
he has found what he wants for his picture: human traits ravaged by suffering and despair!

Russia is also indebted to this author for impeccable translations of Rostand's "Princesse
Lointaine" and "Chantecler."

THE END

