CHAPTER XLI.

When I last made a memorandum, we were at Ephesus.  We are in Syria, now, encamped in the mountains
of Lebanon.  The interregnum has been long, both as to time and distance.  We brought not a
relic from Ephesus! After gathering up fragments of sculptured marbles and breaking ornaments
from the interior work of the Mosques; and after bringing them at a cost of infinite trouble
and fatigue, five miles on muleback to the railway depot, a government officer compelled all
who had such things to disgorge!  He had an order from Constantinople to look out for our party,
and see that we carried nothing off.  It was a wise, a just, and a well-deserved rebuke, but
it created a sensation.  I never resist a temptation to plunder a stranger's premises without
feeling insufferably vain about it.  This time I felt proud beyond expression.  I was serene
in the midst of the scoldings that were heaped upon the Ottoman government for its affront
offered to a pleasuring party of entirely respectable gentlemen and ladies I said, "We that
have free souls, it touches us not."  The shoe not only pinched our party, but it pinched hard;
a principal sufferer discovered that the imperial order was inclosed in an envelop bearing
the seal of the British Embassy at Constantinople, and therefore must have been inspired by
the representative of the Queen.  This was bad--very bad.  Coming solely from the Ottomans,
it might have signified only Ottoman hatred of Christians, and a vulgar ignorance as to genteel
methods of expressing it; but coming from the Christianized, educated, politic British legation,
it simply intimated that we were a sort of gentlemen and ladies who would bear watching!  So
the party regarded it, and were incensed accordingly.  The truth doubtless was, that the same
precautions would have been taken against any travelers, because the English Company who have
acquired the right to excavate Ephesus, and have paid a great sum for that right, need to be
protected, and deserve to be. They can not afford to run the risk of having their hospitality
abused by travelers, especially since travelers are such notorious scorners of honest behavior.

We sailed from Smyrna, in the wildest spirit of expectancy, for the chief feature, the grand
goal of the expedition, was near at hand--we were approaching the Holy Land!  Such a burrowing
into the hold for trunks that had lain buried for weeks, yes for months; such a hurrying to
and fro above decks and below; such a riotous system of packing and unpacking; such a littering
up of the cabins with shirts and skirts, and indescribable and unclassable odds and ends; such
a making up of bundles, and setting apart of umbrellas, green spectacles and thick veils; such
a critical inspection of saddles and bridles that had never yet touched horses; such a cleaning
and loading of revolvers and examining of bowie-knives; such a half-soling of the seats of
pantaloons with serviceable buckskin; then such a poring over ancient maps; such a reading
up of Bibles and Palestine travels; such a marking out of routes; such exasperating efforts
to divide up the company into little bands of congenial spirits who might make the long and
arduous Journey without quarreling; and morning, noon and night, such mass-meetings in the
cabins, such speech-making, such sage suggesting, such worrying and quarreling, and such a
general raising of the very mischief, was never seen in the ship before!

But it is all over now.  We are cut up into parties of six or eight, and by this time are scattered
far and wide.  Ours is the only one, however, that is venturing on what is called "the long
trip"--that is, out into Syria, by Baalbec to Damascus, and thence down through the full length
of Palestine.  It would be a tedious, and also a too risky journey, at this hot season of the
year, for any but strong, healthy men, accustomed somewhat to fatigue and rough life in the
open air.  The other parties will take shorter journeys.

For the last two months we have been in a worry about one portion of this Holy Land pilgrimage.
I refer to transportation service.  We knew very well that Palestine was a country which did
not do a large passenger business, and every man we came across who knew any thing about it
gave us to understand that not half of our party would be able to get dragomen and animals.
At Constantinople every body fell to telegraphing the American Consuls at Alexandria and Beirout
to give notice that we wanted dragomen and transportation.  We were desperate--would take horses,
jackasses, cameleopards, kangaroos--any thing.  At Smyrna, more telegraphing was done, to the
same end.  Also fearing for the worst, we telegraphed for a large number of seats in the diligence
for Damascus, and horses for the ruins of Baalbec.

As might have been expected, a notion got abroad in Syria and Egypt that the whole population
of the Province of America (the Turks consider us a trifling little province in some unvisited
corner of the world,) were coming to the Holy Land--and so, when we got to Beirout yesterday,
we found the place full of dragomen and their outfits.  We had all intended to go by diligence
to Damascus, and switch off to Baalbec as we went along--because we expected to rejoin the
ship, go to Mount Carmel, and take to the woods from there.  However, when our own private
party of eight found that it was possible, and proper enough, to make the "long trip," we adopted
that programme.  We have never been much trouble to a Consul before, but we have been a fearful
nuisance to our Consul at Beirout.  I mention this because I can not help admiring his patience,
his industry, and his accommodating spirit.  I mention it also, because I think some of our
ship's company did not give him as full credit for his excellent services as he deserved.

Well, out of our eight, three were selected to attend to all business connected with the expedition.
The rest of us had nothing to do but look at the beautiful city of Beirout, with its bright,
new houses nestled among a wilderness of green shrubbery spread abroad over an upland that
sloped gently down to the sea; and also at the mountains of Lebanon that environ it; and likewise
to bathe in the transparent blue water that rolled its billows about the ship (we did not know
there were sharks there.) We had also to range up and down through the town and look at the
costumes.  These are picturesque and fanciful, but not so varied as at Constantinople and Smyrna;
the women of Beirout add an agony--in the two former cities the sex wear a thin veil which
one can see through (and they often expose their ancles,) but at Beirout they cover their entire
faces with dark-colored or black veils, so that they look like mummies, and then expose their
breasts to the public.  A young gentleman (I believe he was a Greek,) volunteered to show us
around the city, and said it would afford him great pleasure, because he was studying English
and wanted practice in that language.  When we had finished the rounds, however, he called
for remuneration--said he hoped the gentlemen would give him a trifle in the way of a few piastres
(equivalent to a few five cent pieces.)  We did so.  The Consul was surprised when he heard
it, and said he knew the young fellow's family very well, and that they were an old and highly
respectable family and worth a hundred and fifty thousand dollars!  Some people, so situated,
would have been ashamed of the berth he had with us and his manner of crawling into it.

At the appointed time our business committee reported, and said all things were in readdress--that
we were to start to-day, with horses, pack animals, and tents, and go to Baalbec, Damascus,
the Sea of Tiberias, and thence southward by the way of the scene of Jacob's Dream and other
notable Bible localities to Jerusalem--from thence probably to the Dead Sea, but possibly not--and
then strike for the ocean and rejoin the ship three or four weeks hence at Joppa; terms, five
dollars a day apiece, in gold, and every thing to be furnished by the dragoman.  They said
we would lie as well as at a hotel.  I had read something like that before, and did not shame
my judgment by believing a word of it.  I said nothing, however, but packed up a blanket and
a shawl to sleep in, pipes and tobacco, two or three woollen shirts, a portfolio, a guide-book,
and a Bible.  I also took along a towel and a cake of soap, to inspire respect in the Arabs,
who would take me for a king in disguise.

We were to select our horses at 3 P.M.  At that hour Abraham, the dragoman, marshaled them
before us.  With all solemnity I set it down here, that those horses were the hardest lot I
ever did come across, and their accoutrements were in exquisite keeping with their style. 
One brute had an eye out; another had his tail sawed off close, like a rabbit, and was proud
of it; another had a bony ridge running from his neck to his tail, like one of those ruined
aqueducts one sees about Rome, and had a neck on him like a bowsprit; they all limped, and
had sore backs, and likewise raw places and old scales scattered about their persons like brass
nails in a hair trunk; their gaits were marvelous to contemplate, and replete with variety
under way the procession looked like a fleet in a storm.  It was fearful.  Blucher shook his
head and said:

"That dragon is going to get himself into trouble fetching these old crates out of the hospital
the way they are, unless he has got a permit."

I said nothing.  The display was exactly according to the guide-book, and were we not traveling
by the guide-book?  I selected a certain horse because I thought I saw him shy, and I thought
that a horse that had spirit enough to shy was not to be despised.

At 6 o'clock P.M., we came to a halt here on the breezy summit of a shapely mountain overlooking
the sea, and the handsome valley where dwelt some of those enterprising Phoenicians of ancient
times we read so much about; all around us are what were once the dominions of Hiram, King
of Tyre, who furnished timber from the cedars of these Lebanon hills to build portions of King
Solomon's Temple with.

Shortly after six, our pack train arrived.  I had not seen it before, and a good right I had
to be astonished.  We had nineteen serving men and twenty-six pack mules!  It was a perfect
caravan.  It looked like one, too, as it wound among the rocks.  I wondered what in the very
mischief we wanted with such a vast turn-out as that, for eight men.  I wondered awhile, but
soon I began to long for a tin plate, and some bacon and beans.  I had camped out many and
many a time before, and knew just what was coming.  I went off, without waiting for serving
men, and unsaddled my horse, and washed such portions of his ribs and his spine as projected
through his hide, and when I came back, behold five stately circus tents were up--tents that
were brilliant, within, with blue, and gold, and crimson, and all manner of splendid adornment!
I was speechless.  Then they brought eight little iron bedsteads, and set them up in the tents;
they put a soft mattress and pillows and good blankets and two snow-white sheets on each bed.
Next, they rigged a table about the centre-pole, and on it placed pewter pitchers, basins,
soap, and the whitest of towels --one set for each man; they pointed to pockets in the tent,
and said we could put our small trifles in them for convenience, and if we needed pins or such
things, they were sticking every where.  Then came the finishing touch--they spread carpets
on the floor!  I simply said, "If you call this camping out, all right--but it isn't the style
I am used to; my little baggage that I brought along is at a discount."

It grew dark, and they put candles on the tables--candles set in bright, new, brazen candlesticks.
And soon the bell--a genuine, simon-pure bell --rang, and we were invited to "the saloon."
I had thought before that we had a tent or so too many, but now here was one, at least, provided
for; it was to be used for nothing but an eating-saloon.  Like the others, it was high enough
for a family of giraffes to live in, and was very handsome and clean and bright-colored within.
It was a gem of a place.  A table for eight, and eight canvas chairs; a table-cloth and napkins
whose whiteness and whose fineness laughed to scorn the things we were used to in the great
excursion steamer; knives and forks, soup-plates, dinner-plates--every thing, in the handsomest
kind of style.  It was wonderful!  And they call this camping out.  Those stately fellows in
baggy trowsers and turbaned fezzes brought in a dinner which consisted of roast mutton, roast
chicken, roast goose, potatoes, bread, tea, pudding, apples, and delicious grapes; the viands
were better cooked than any we had eaten for weeks, and the table made a finer appearance,
with its large German silver candlesticks and other finery, than any table we had sat down
to for a good while, and yet that polite dragoman, Abraham, came bowing in and apologizing
for the whole affair, on account of the unavoidable confusion of getting under way for a very
long trip, and promising to do a great deal better in future!

It is midnight, now, and we break camp at six in the morning.

They call this camping out.  At this rate it is a glorious privilege to be a pilgrim to the
Holy Land.

CHAPTER XLII.

We are camped near Temnin-el-Foka--a name which the boys have simplified a good deal, for the
sake of convenience in spelling.  They call it Jacksonville.  It sounds a little strangely,
here in the Valley of Lebanon, but it has the merit of being easier to remember than the Arabic
name.

                     "COME LIKE SPIRITS, SO DEPART."

I slept very soundly last night, yet when the dragoman's bell rang at half-past five this morning
and the cry went abroad of "Ten minutes to dress for breakfast!"  I heard both.  It surprised
me, because I have not heard the breakfast gong in the ship for a month, and whenever we have
had occasion to fire a salute at daylight, I have only found it out in the course of conversation
afterward.  However, camping out, even though it be in a gorgeous tent, makes one fresh and
lively in the morning --especially if the air you are breathing is the cool, fresh air of the
mountains.

I was dressed within the ten minutes, and came out.  The saloon tent had been stripped of its
sides, and had nothing left but its roof; so when we sat down to table we could look out over
a noble panorama of mountain, sea and hazy valley.  And sitting thus, the sun rose slowly up
and suffused the picture with a world of rich coloring.

Hot mutton chops, fried chicken, omelettes, fried potatoes and coffee --all excellent.  This
was the bill of fare.  It was sauced with a savage appetite purchased by hard riding the day
before, and refreshing sleep in a pure atmosphere.  As I called for a second cup of coffee,
I glanced over my shoulder, and behold our white village was gone--the splendid tents had vanished
like magic!  It was wonderful how quickly those Arabs had "folded their tents;" and it was
wonderful, also, how quickly they had gathered the thousand odds and ends of the camp together
and disappeared with them.

By half-past six we were under way, and all the Syrian world seemed to be under way also. 
The road was filled with mule trains and long processions of camels.  This reminds me that
we have been trying for some time to think what a camel looks like, and now we have made it
out.  When he is down on all his knees, flat on his breast to receive his load, he looks something
like a goose swimming; and when he is upright he looks like an ostrich with an extra set of
legs.  Camels are not beautiful, and their long under lip gives them an exceedingly "gallus"--[Excuse
the slang, no other word will describe it]--expression.  They have immense, flat, forked cushions
of feet, that make a track in the dust like a pie with a slice cut out of it.  They are not
particular about their diet. They would eat a tombstone if they could bite it.  A thistle grows
about here which has needles on it that would pierce through leather, I think; if one touches
you, you can find relief in nothing but profanity.  The camels eat these.  They show by their
actions that they enjoy them.  I suppose it would be a real treat to a camel to have a keg
of nails for supper.

While I am speaking of animals, I will mention that I have a horse now by the name of "Jericho."
He is a mare.  I have seen remarkable horses before, but none so remarkable as this.  I wanted
a horse that could shy, and this one fills the bill.  I had an idea that shying indicated spirit.
If I was correct, I have got the most spirited horse on earth.  He shies at every thing he
comes across, with the utmost impartiality.  He appears to have a mortal dread of telegraph
poles, especially; and it is fortunate that these are on both sides of the road, because as
it is now, I never fall off twice in succession on the same side.  If I fell on the same side
always, it would get to be monotonous after a while.  This creature has scared at every thing
he has seen to-day, except a haystack. He walked up to that with an intrepidity and a recklessness
that were astonishing.  And it would fill any one with admiration to see how he preserves his
self-possession in the presence of a barley sack.  This dare-devil bravery will be the death
of this horse some day.

He is not particularly fast, but I think he will get me through the Holy Land.  He has only
one fault.  His tail has been chopped off or else he has sat down on it too hard, some time
or other, and he has to fight the flies with his heels.  This is all very well, but when he
tries to kick a fly off the top of his head with his hind foot, it is too much variety. He
is going to get himself into trouble that way some day.  He reaches around and bites my legs
too.  I do not care particularly about that, only I do not like to see a horse too sociable.

I think the owner of this prize had a wrong opinion about him.  He had an idea that he was
one of those fiery, untamed steeds, but he is not of that character.  I know the Arab had this
idea, because when he brought the horse out for inspection in Beirout, he kept jerking at the
bridle and shouting in Arabic, "Ho! will you?  Do you want to run away, you ferocious beast,
and break your neck?" when all the time the horse was not doing anything in the world, and
only looked like he wanted to lean up against something and think.  Whenever he is not shying
at things, or reaching after a fly, he wants to do that yet.  How it would surprise his owner
to know this.

We have been in a historical section of country all day.  At noon we camped three hours and
took luncheon at Mekseh, near the junction of the Lebanon Mountains and the Jebel el Kuneiyiseh,
and looked down into the immense, level, garden-like Valley of Lebanon.  To-night we are camping
near the same valley, and have a very wide sweep of it in view.  We can see the long, whale-backed
ridge of Mount Hermon projecting above the eastern hills.  The "dews of Hermon" are falling
upon us now, and the tents are almost soaked with them.

Over the way from us, and higher up the valley, we can discern, through the glasses, the faint
outlines of the wonderful ruins of Baalbec, the supposed Baal-Gad of Scripture.  Joshua, and
another person, were the two spies who were sent into this land of Canaan by the children of
Israel to report upon its character--I mean they were the spies who reported favorably.  They
took back with them some specimens of the grapes of this country, and in the children's picture-books
they are always represented as bearing one monstrous bunch swung to a pole between them, a
respectable load for a pack-train.  The Sunday-school books exaggerated it a little.  The grapes
are most excellent to this day, but the bunches are not as large as those in the pictures.
I was surprised and hurt when I saw them, because those colossal bunches of grapes were one
of my most cherished juvenile traditions.

Joshua reported favorably, and the children of Israel journeyed on, with Moses at the head
of the general government, and Joshua in command of the army of six hundred thousand fighting
men.  Of women and children and civilians there was a countless swarm.  Of all that mighty
host, none but the two faithful spies ever lived to set their feet in the Promised Land. They
and their descendants wandered forty years in the desert, and then Moses, the gifted warrior,
poet, statesman and philosopher, went up into Pisgah and met his mysterious fate.  Where he
was buried no man knows --for

          "* * * no man dug that sepulchre,
          And no man saw it e'er
--          For the Sons of God upturned the sod
          And laid the dead man there!"

Then Joshua began his terrible raid, and from Jericho clear to this Baal-Gad, he swept the
land like the Genius of Destruction.  He slaughtered the people, laid waste their soil, and
razed their cities to the ground. He wasted thirty-one kings also.  One may call it that, though
really it can hardly be called wasting them, because there were always plenty of kings in those
days, and to spare.  At any rate, he destroyed thirty-one kings, and divided up their realms
among his Israelites.  He divided up this valley stretched out here before us, and so it was
once Jewish territory.  The Jews have long since disappeared from it, however.

Back yonder, an hour's journey from here, we passed through an Arab village of stone dry-goods
boxes (they look like that,) where Noah's tomb lies under lock and key.  [Noah built the ark.]
Over these old hills and valleys the ark that contained all that was left of a vanished world
once floated.

I make no apology for detailing the above information.  It will be news to some of my readers,
at any rate.

Noah's tomb is built of stone, and is covered with a long stone building. Bucksheesh let us
in.  The building had to be long, because the grave of the honored old navigator is two hundred
and ten feet long itself!  It is only about four feet high, though.  He must have cast a shadow
like a lightning-rod.  The proof that this is the genuine spot where Noah was buried can only
be doubted by uncommonly incredulous people.  The evidence is pretty straight.  Shem, the son
of Noah, was present at the burial, and showed the place to his descendants, who transmitted
the knowledge to their descendants, and the lineal descendants of these introduced themselves
to us to-day.  It was pleasant to make the acquaintance of members of so respectable a family.
It was a thing to be proud of.  It was the next thing to being acquainted with Noah himself.

Noah's memorable voyage will always possess a living interest for me, henceforward.

If ever an oppressed race existed, it is this one we see fettered around us under the inhuman
tyranny of the Ottoman Empire.  I wish Europe would let Russia annihilate Turkey a little--not
much, but enough to make it difficult to find the place again without a divining-rod or a diving-bell.
The Syrians are very poor, and yet they are ground down by a system of taxation that would
drive any other nation frantic.  Last year their taxes were heavy enough, in all conscience--but
this year they have been increased by the addition of taxes that were forgiven them in times
of famine in former years.  On top of this the Government has levied a tax of one-tenth of
the whole proceeds of the land.  This is only half the story.  The Pacha of a Pachalic does
not trouble himself with appointing tax-collectors.  He figures up what all these taxes ought
to amount to in a certain district.  Then he farms the collection out.  He calls the rich men
together, the highest bidder gets the speculation, pays the Pacha on the spot, and then sells
out to smaller fry, who sell in turn to a piratical horde of still smaller fry. These latter
compel the peasant to bring his little trifle of grain to the village, at his own cost.  It
must be weighed, the various taxes set apart, and the remainder returned to the producer. 
But the collector delays this duty day after day, while the producer's family are perishing
for bread; at last the poor wretch, who can not but understand the game, says, "Take a quarter--take
half--take two-thirds if you will, and let me go!"  It is a most outrageous state of things.

These people are naturally good-hearted and intelligent, and with education and liberty, would
be a happy and contented race.  They often appeal to the stranger to know if the great world
will not some day come to their relief and save them.  The Sultan has been lavishing money
like water in England and Paris, but his subjects are suffering for it now.

This fashion of camping out bewilders me.  We have boot-jacks and a bath-tub, now, and yet
all the mysteries the pack-mules carry are not revealed.  What next?

CHAPTER XLIII.

We had a tedious ride of about five hours, in the sun, across the Valley of Lebanon.  It proved
to be not quite so much of a garden as it had seemed from the hill-sides.  It was a desert,
weed-grown waste, littered thickly with stones the size of a man's fist.  Here and there the
natives had scratched the ground and reared a sickly crop of grain, but for the most part the
valley was given up to a handful of shepherds, whose flocks were doing what they honestly could
to get a living, but the chances were against them.  We saw rude piles of stones standing near
the roadside, at intervals, and recognized the custom of marking boundaries which obtained
in Jacob's time.  There were no walls, no fences, no hedges--nothing to secure a man's possessions
but these random heaps of stones.  The Israelites held them sacred in the old patriarchal times,
and these other Arabs, their lineal descendants, do so likewise.  An American, of ordinary
intelligence, would soon widely extend his property, at an outlay of mere manual labor, performed
at night, under so loose a system of fencing as this.

The plows these people use are simply a sharpened stick, such as Abraham plowed with, and they
still winnow their wheat as he did--they pile it on the house-top, and then toss it by shovel-fulls
into the air until the wind has blown all the chaff away.  They never invent any thing, never
learn any thing.

We had a fine race, of a mile, with an Arab perched on a camel.  Some of the horses were fast,
and made very good time, but the camel scampered by them without any very great effort.  The
yelling and shouting, and whipping and galloping, of all parties interested, made it an exhilarating,
exciting, and particularly boisterous race.

At eleven o'clock, our eyes fell upon the walls and columns of Baalbec, a noble ruin whose
history is a sealed book.  It has stood there for thousands of years, the wonder and admiration
of travelers; but who built it, or when it was built, are questions that may never be answered.
One thing is very sure, though.  Such grandeur of design, and such grace of execution, as one
sees in the temples of Baalbec, have not been equaled or even approached in any work of men's
hands that has been built within twenty centuries past.

The great Temple of the Sun, the Temple of Jupiter, and several smaller temples, are clustered
together in the midst of one of these miserable Syrian villages, and look strangely enough
in such plebeian company. These temples are built upon massive substructions that might support
a world, almost; the materials used are blocks of stone as large as an omnibus--very few, if
any of them, are smaller than a carpenter's tool chest--and these substructions are traversed
by tunnels of masonry through which a train of cars might pass.  With such foundations as these,
it is little wonder that Baalbec has lasted so long.  The Temple of the Sun is nearly three
hundred feet long and one hundred and sixty feet wide.  It had fifty-four columns around it,
but only six are standing now--the others lie broken at its base, a confused and picturesque
heap.  The six columns are their bases, Corinthian capitals and entablature--and six more shapely
columns do not exist.  The columns and the entablature together are ninety feet high--a prodigious
altitude for shafts of stone to reach, truly--and yet one only thinks of their beauty and symmetry
when looking at them; the pillars look slender and delicate, the entablature, with its elaborate
sculpture, looks like rich stucco-work.  But when you have gazed aloft till your eyes are weary,
you glance at the great fragments of pillars among which you are standing, and find that they
are eight feet through; and with them lie beautiful capitals apparently as large as a small
cottage; and also single slabs of stone, superbly sculptured, that are four or five feet thick,
and would completely cover the floor of any ordinary parlor.  You wonder where these monstrous
things came from, and it takes some little time to satisfy yourself that the airy and graceful
fabric that towers above your head is made up of their mates.  It seems too preposterous.

The Temple of Jupiter is a smaller ruin than the one I have been speaking of, and yet is immense.
It is in a tolerable state of preservation.  One row of nine columns stands almost uninjured.
They are sixty-five feet high and support a sort of porch or roof, which connects them with
the roof of the building.  This porch-roof is composed of tremendous slabs of stone, which
are so finely sculptured on the under side that the work looks like a fresco from below.  One
or two of these slabs had fallen, and again I wondered if the gigantic masses of carved stone
that lay about me were no larger than those above my head.  Within the temple, the ornamentation
was elaborate and colossal.  What a wonder of architectural beauty and grandeur this edifice
must have been when it was new!  And what a noble picture it and its statelier companion, with
the chaos of mighty fragments scattered about them, yet makes in the moonlight!

