Thus Lincoln began a role that he never afterward abandoned. It was the role of scapegoat Whatever
went wrong anywhere could always be loaded upon the President. He appeared to consider it a
part of his duty to be the scapegoat for the whole Administration. It was his way of maintaining
trust, courage, efficiency, among his subordinates.

Of those papers which he had signed without reading on April first, Lincoln was to hear again
in still more surprising fashion six days thereafter.

He was now at the very edge of his second crucial decision. Though the naval expedition was
in preparation, he still hesitated over issuing orders to sail. The reply to the Thoughts had
not committed him to any specific line of conduct. What was it that kept him wavering at this
eleventh hour? Again, that impenetrable taciturnity which always shrouded his progress toward
a conclusion, forbids dogmatic assertion. But two things are obvious: his position as a minority
president, of which he was perhaps unduly conscious, caused him to delay, and to delay again
and again, seeking definite evidence how much support he could command in the North; the change
in his comprehension of the problem before him-his perception that it was not an "artificial
crisis" involving slavery alone, but an irreconcilable clash of social-political idealism--this
disturbed his spirit, distressed, even appalled him. Having a truer insight into human nature
than Seward had, he saw that here was an issue immeasurably less susceptible of compromise
than was slavery. Whether, the moment he perceived this, he at once lost hope of any peaceable
solution, we do not know. Just what he thought about the Virginia Compromise is still to seek.
However, the nature of his mind, the way it went straight to the human element in a problem
once his eyes were opened to the problem's reality, forbid us to conclude that he took hope
from Virginia. He now saw what, had it not been for his near horizon, he would have seen so
long before, that, in vulgar parlance, he had been "barking up the wrong tree." Now that he
had located the right tree, had the knowledge come too late?

It is known that Seward, possibly at Lincoln's request, made an attempt to bring together the
Virginia Unionists and the Administration. He sent a special representative to Richmond urging
the despatch of a committee to confer with the President.

The strength of the party in the Convention was shown on April fourth when a proposed Ordinance
of Secession was voted down, eighty-nine to forty-five. On the same day, the Convention by
a still larger majority formally denied the right of the Federal government to coerce a State.
Two days later, John B. Baldwin, representing the Virginia Unionists, had a confidential talk
with Lincoln. Only fragments of their talk, drawn forth out of memory long afterward--some
of the reporting being at second hand, the recollections of the recollections of the participants--are
known to exist. The one fact clearly discernible is that Baldwin stated fully the Virginia
position: that her Unionists were not nationalists; that the coercion of any State, by impugning
the sovereignty of all, would automatically drive Virginia out of the Union.(23)

Lincoln had now reached his decision. The fear that had dogged him all along--the fear that
in evacuating Sumter he would be giving something for nothing, that "it would discourage the
friends of the Union, embolden its adversaries"--was in possession of his will. One may hazard
the guess that this fear would have determined Lincoln sooner than it did, except for the fact
that the Secretary of State, despite his faults, was so incomparably the strongest personality
in the Cabinet. We have Lincoln's own word for the moment and the detail that formed the very
end of his period of vacillation. All along he had intended to relieve and hold Fort Pickens,
off the coast of Florida. To this, Seward saw no objection. In fact, he urged the relief of
Pickens, hoping, as compensation, to get his way about Sumter. Assuming as he did that the
Southern leaders were opportunists, he believed that they would not make an issue over Pickens,
merely because it had not in the public eye become a political symbol. Orders had been sent
to a squadron in Southern waters to relieve Pickens. Early in April news was received at Washington
that the attempt had failed due to misunderstandings among the Federal commanders. They stayed. The cousin saw that there was nothing that could be done. He warned again the
old cousin of the child to be thankful. It was advantageous for the child to take something and
they could pay for it later. Then he left.

The entire day during work he thought of his grandmother and the words of his cousin, but he
couldn't decide. Now in the twilight so thought carefully and sighed deeply.
 This was the business that Seward
was contriving, that Lincoln would not explain, on April first. The order interfering with
the Navy Department was designed to checkmate the titular head of the department. Furthermore,
Seward had had the amazing coolness to assume that Lincoln would certainly accept his Thoughts
and that the simple President need not hereinafter be consulted about details. He aimed to
circumvent Welles and to make sure that the Sumter expedition, whether sailing orders were
issued or not, should be rendered innocuous. The warship Powhatan, which was being got ready
for sea at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, was intended by Welles for the Sumter expedition. One of
those unread despatches signed by Lincoln, assigned it to the Pickens expedition. When the
sailing orders from Welles were received, the commander of the Sumter fleet claimed the Powhatan.
The Pickens commander refused to give it up. The latter telegraphed Seward that his expedition
was "being retarded and embarrassed" by "conflicting" orders from Welles. The result was a
stormy conference between Seward and Welles which was adjourned to the White House and became
a conference with Lincoln. And then the whole story came out. Lincoln played the scapegoat,
"took the whole blame upon himself, said it was carelessness, heedlessness on his part; he
ought to have been more careful and attentive." But he insisted on immediate correction of
his error, on the restoration of the Powhatan to the Sumter fleet. Seward struggled hard for
his plan. Lincoln was inflexible. As Seward had directed the preparation of the Pickens expedition,
Lincoln required him to telegraph to Brooklyn the change in orders. Seward, beaten by his enemy
Welles, was deeply chagrined. In his agitation he forgot to be formal, forgot that the previous
order had gone out in the President's name, and wired curtly, "Give up the Powhatan. Seward."

This despatch was received just as the Pickens expedition was sailing. The commander of the
Powhatan had now before him, three orders. Naturally, he held that the one signed by the President
took precedence over the others. He went on his way, with his great warship, to Florida. The
Sumter expedition sailed without any powerful ship of war. In this strange fashion, chance
executed Seward's design.

Lincoln had previously informed the Governor of South Carolina that due notice would be given,
should he decide to relieve Sumter. But the power to do so was wholly conditioned on the presence
in its midst of the Powhatan. And the Powhatan was far out to sea on its way to Florida.

And now it was the turn of the Confederate government to confront a crisis. It, no less than
Washington, had passed through a period of disillusion. The assumption upon which its chief
politicians had built so confidently had collapsed. The South was not really a unit. It was
not true that the secession of any one State, on any sort of issue, would compel automatically
the secession of all the Southern States. North Carolina had exploded this illusion. Virginia
had exploded it. The South could not be united on the issue of slavery; it could not be united
on the issue of sectional dread. It could be united on but one issue-State sovereignty, the
denial of the right of the Federal Government to coerce a State. The time had come to decide
whether the cannon at Charleston should fire. As Seward had foreseen, Montgomery held the trumps;
but had Montgomery the courage to play them? There was a momentous debate in the Confederate
Cabinet. Robert Toombs, the Secretary of State, whose rapid growth in comprehension since December
formed a parallel to Lincoln's growth, threw his influence on the side of further delay. He
would not invoke that "final argument of kings," the shotted cannon. "Mr. President," he exclaimed,
"at this time, it is suicide, murder, and will lose us every friend at the North. You will
instantly strike a hornet's nest which extends from mountain to ocean, and legions now quiet
will swarm out and sting us to death. It is unnecessary; it puts us in the wrong; it is fatal."
But Toombs stood alone in the Cabinet. Orders were sent to Charleston to reduce Fort Sumter.
Before dawn, April twelfth, the first shot was fired. The flag of the United States was hauled
down on the afternoon of the thirteenth. Meanwhile the relieving fleet had arrived--without
the Powhatan. Bereft of its great ship, it could not pass the harbor batteries and assist the
fort. Its only service was to take off the garrison which by the terms of surrender was allowed
to withdraw. On the fourteenth, Sumter was evacuated and the inglorious fleet sailed back to
the northward.

Lincoln at once accepted the gage of battle. On the fifteenth appeared his proclamation calling
for an army of seventy-five thousand volunteers. Automatically, the upper South fulfilled its
unhappy destiny. Challenged at last, on the irreconcilable issue, Virginia, North Carolina,
Tennessee, Arkansas, seceded. The final argument of kings was the only one remaining.

XVI "ON TO RICHMOND!"

It has been truly said that the Americans are an unmilitary but an intensely warlike nation.
Seward's belief that a war fury would sweep the country at the first cannon shot was amply
justified. Both North and South appeared to rise as one man, crying fiercely to be led to battle.

