It seems absolutely evident, that no simple loss can account for this difference. Something
of the character of the parent-varieties must have remained in the plant. And whatever conception
we may formulate of these vestigial characters it is clear that the simplest and most obvious
idea is their preservation in a dormant or latent state. Assuming that the distinguishing marks
have only become inactive by virescence, it is manifest that on returning each will show its
own peculiarities, as recorded above. Our second point was the incomplete loss of [232] the
distinguishing quality in some varieties. It is of general occurrence, though often overlooked.
Many white varieties of colored flowers give striking instances, among them many of the most
stable and most prized garden-flowers. If you look at them separately or in little bouquets
they seem to be of irreproachable purity. But if you examine large beds a pale hue will become
visible. In many cases this tinge is so slight as to be only noticeable in a certain illumination,
or by looking in an oblique direction across the bed; in others it is at once evident as soon
as it has been pointed out. It always reminds the observer of the color of the species to which
the variety belongs, being bluish in violets and harebells, reddish in godetias and phloxes,
in Silene Armeria and many others. It proves that the original color quality of the species
has not wholly, but only partly disappeared. It is dormant, but not entirely obliterated; latent,
but not totally concealed; inactive, but only partially so. Our terminology is an awkward one;
it practically assumes, as it so often does in other cases, a conventional understanding, not
exactly corresponding to the simple meaning of the words. But it would be cumbrous to speak
always of partial inactivity, incomplete latency or half awakening qualities. Even such words
as sub-latent, [233] which would about express the real state of things, would have little
chance of coming into general use.

Such sub-latent colors are often seen on special parts in white varieties of flowers. In many
cases it is the outer side of the petals which recalls the specific color, as in some white
roses. In violets it is often on the spur that the remains of the original pigment are to be
seen. In many instances it is on the tips of the petals or of the segments of the corolla,
and a large number of white or yellow flowers betray their affinity to colored species by becoming
red or bluish at the edges or on the outer side.

The reality of such very slight hues, and their relation to the original pigment of the species
may in some cases be proved by direct experiment. If it is granted that latency is not an absolute
quality, then it will be readily accepted, that even latency must be subjected to the laws
of gradual variation or fluctuating variability. We will deal with these laws in a later lecture
but every one knows that greater deviations than the ordinary may be attained by sowing very
large numbers and by selecting from among them the extreme individuals and sowing anew from
their seed. In this way the slightest tinge of any latent color may be [234] strengthened,
not indeed to the restoration of the tinge of the species, but at least so far as to leave
no doubt as to the identity of the visible color of the species and the latent or sublatent
one of the variety.

I made such an experiment with the peach leaved harebell or Campanula persicifolia. The white
variety of this species, which is often met with in our gardens, shows a very pale bluish hue
when cultivated in large quantities, which however is subject to individual variations. I selected
some plants with a decided tinge, flowered them separately, sowed their seeds, and repeated
this during two generations. The result was an increase of the color on the tips of the segments
of the corolla in a few individuals, most of them remaining as purely white as the original
strain. But in those few plants the color was very manifest, individually variable in degree,
but always of the same blue as in the species itself.

Many other instances could be given. Smooth varieties are seldom absolutely so, and if scattering
hairs are found on the leaves or only on some more or less concealed parts, they correspond
in their character to those of the species. So it is with prickles, and even the thornless
thorn-apple has fruits with surfaces far from smooth. The thornless horse-chestnut [235] has
in some instances such evident protuberances on the valves of its fruits, that it may seem
doubtful whether it is a pure and stable variety.

Systematic latency may betray itself in different ways, either by normal systematic marks,
or by atavism. With the latter I shall deal at length on another occasion, and therefore I
will give here only one very clear and beautiful example. It is afforded by the common red
clover. Obviously the clovers, with their three leaflets in each leaf, stand in the midst of
the great family of papilionaceous plants, the leaves of which are generally pinnate. Systematic
affinity suggests that the "three leaved" forms must have been derived from pinnate ancestors,
evidently by the reduction of the number of the leaflets. In some species of clover the middle
of the three is more or less stalked, as is ordinarily the case in pinnate leaves; in others
it is as sessile as are its neighbors. In a subsequent chapter I will describe a very fine
variety, which sometimes occurs in the wild state and may easily be isolated and cultivated.
It is an ordinary red clover with five leaflets instead of three, and with this number varying
between three and seven, instead of being nearly wholly stable as in the common form. It produces
from time to time pinnate leaves, [236] very few indeed, and only rarely, but then often two
or three or even more on the same individual. Intermediate stages are not wanting, but are
of no consequence here. The pinnate leaves obviously constitute a reversion to some prototype,
to some ancestor with ordinary papilionaceous leaves. They give proof of the presence of the
common character of the family, concealed here in a latent state. Any other explanation of
this curious anomaly would evidently be artificial. On the other hand nothing is really known
about the ancestors of clover, and the whole conception rests only on the prevailing views
of the systematic relationships in this family. But, as I have already said, further proof
must be left for a subsequent occasion.

Many instances, noted in our former lectures, could be quoted here. The systematic distribution
of rayed and rayless species and varieties among the daisy-group of the composites affords
a long series of examples. Accidental variations in both directions occur. The Canada fleabane
or Erigeron canadensis, the tansy or Tanacetum vulgare and some others may at times be seen
with ray-florets, and according to Murr, they may sometimes be wanting in Aster Tripolium,
Bellis perennis, some species of Anthemis, Arnica montana and in a number [237] of other well-known
rayed species. Another instance may be quoted; it has been pointed out by Grant Allen, and
refers to the dead-nettle or Lamium album. Systematically placed in a genus with red-flowering
species, we may regard its white color as due to the latency of the general red pigment.

But if the flower of this plant is carefully examined, it will be found in most cases not to
be purely white, but to have some dusky lines and markings on its lower lip. Similar devices
are observed on the lip of the allied Lamium maculatum, and in a less degree on the somewhat
distant Lamium purpureum. With Lamium maculatum or spotted dead-nettle, the affinity is so
close that even Bentham united the two in a single species, considering the ordinary dead-nettle
only as a variety of the dappled purple type. For the support of this conception of a specific
or varietal retrograde change many other facts are afforded by the distribution of the characteristic
color and of the several patterns of the lips of other labiates, and our general understanding
of the relationships of the species and genera in this family may in a broad sense be based
on the comparison of these seemingly subordinate characteristics.

The same holds good in many other cases, and systematists have often become uncertain [238]
as to the true value of some form, by its relationship to the allied types in the way of retrogressive
modification. Color-differences are so showy, that they easily overshadow other characters.
The white and the blue thorn-apple, the white and the red campion (Lychnis vespertina and diurna)
and many other illustrative cases could be given, in which two forms are specifically separated
by some authors, but combined by others on the ground of the retrograde nature of some differentiating
mark.

Hitherto we have dealt with negative characters and tried to prove that the conception of latency
of the opposite positive characteristics is a more natural explanation of the phenomenon than
the idea of a complete loss. We have now to consider the positive varieties, and to show that
it is quite improbable that here the species have struck out for themselves a wholly new character.
In some instances such may have been the case, but then I should prefer to treat these rather
as elementary species. But in the main we will have to assume the latency of the character
in the species and its reassumption by the variety when originating, as the most probable explanation.

Great stress is laid upon this conception by the fact, that positive varieties are so excessively
rare when compared with the common occurrence [239] of negative ones. Indeed, if we put aside
the radiate and the color-varieties of flowers and foliage, hardly any cases can be cited.
We have dealt with this question in a former lecture, and may now limit ourselves to the positive
color-varieties.

The latency of the faculty of producing the red pigment in leaves must obviously be accepted
for nearly the whole vegetable kingdom. Oaks and elms, the beautiful climbing species of Ampelopsis,
many conifers, as for instance Cryptomeria japonica, some brambles, the Guelder-rose (Viburnum
Opulus) and many other trees and shrubs assume a more or less bright red color in the fall.
During summer this tendency must have been dormant, and that this is so, is shown by the young
leaves of oaks and others, which, when unfolding in the spring show a similar but paler hue.
Moreover, there is a way of awakening the concealed powers at any time. We have only to inflict
small wounds on the leaves, or to cut through the nerves or to injure them by a slight bruising,
and the leaves frequently respond with an intense reddening of the living tissues around and
especially above the wounds. Azolla caroliniana, a minute mosslike floating plant allied to
the ferns, responds to light and cold with a reddish tinge, and to shade or warmth with a pure
green. The foliage [240] of many other plants behaves likewise, as also do apples and peaches
on the insolated sides of the fruits. It is quite impossible to state these groups of facts
in a more simple way than by the statement that the tendency to become red is almost generally
present, though latent in leaves and stems, and that it comes into activity whenever a stimulus
provokes it.

Now it must be granted that the energizing of such a propensity under ordinary circumstances
is quite another thing from the origination of a positive variety by the evolution of the same
character. In the variety the activity has become independent of outer influences or dependent
upon them in a far lesser degree. The power of producing the red pigments is shown to be latent
by the facts given above, and we see that in the variety it is no longer latent but is in perfect
and lasting activity throughout the whole life of the plant.

Red varieties of white flowers are much more rare. Here the latency of the red pigment may
be deduced partly from general arguments like those just given, partly from the special systematic
relations in the given cases. Hildebrand has clearly worked out this mode of proof. He showed
by the critical examination of a large number of instances that the occurrence of the red-flowered
varieties is contingent upon the [241] existence of red species in the same genus, or in some
rare cases, in nearly allied genera. Colors that are not systematically present in the group
to which a white species belongs are only produced in its varieties in extremely rare cases.

We may quote some special rules, indicated by Hildebrand. Blue species are n the main very
rare, and so are blue varieties of white species also. Carnations, Asiatic or cultivated buttercups
(Ranunculus asiaticus), Mirabilis, poppies, Gladiolus, Dahlia, and some other highly cultivated
or very old garden-plants have not been able to produce true blue flowers. But the garden-anemone
(Anemone coronaria) has allies with very fine blue flowers. The common stock has bluish varieties
and is allied to Aubretia and Hesperis, and gooseberries have a red form, recalling the ordinary
currant. In nearly all other instances of blue or red varieties every botanist will be able
to point out some allied red or blue species, as an indication of the probable source of the
varietal character.

Dark spots on the lower parts of the petals of some plants afford another instance, as in poppies
and in the allied Glaucium, where they sometimes occur as varietal and in other cases as specific
marks.

The yellow fails in many highly developed [242] flowers, which are not liable to produce yellow
variations, as in Salvia, Aster, Centaurea, Vinca, Polygala and many others. Even the rare
pale yellowish species of some of these genera have no tendency in this direction. The hyacinths
are the most remarkable, if not the sole known instance of a species having red and blue and
white and yellow varieties, but here the yellow is not the bright golden color of the buttercups.

The existence of varietal colors in allied species obviously points to a common cause, and
this cause can be no other than the latency of the pigment in the species that do not show it.

The conception of latency of characters as the common source of the origination of varieties,
either in the positive or in the negative way, leads to some rules on variability, which are
known under the names given to them by Darwin. They are the rules of repeated, homologous,
parallel and analogous variability. Each of them is quite general, and may be recognized in
instances from the most widely distant families. Each of them is quite evident and easily understood
on the principle of latency.

By the term of repeated variability is meant the well-known phenomenon, that the same variety
has sprung at different times and in different [243] countries from the same species. The repetition
obviously indicates a common internal cause. The white varieties of blue- and red-flowered
plants occur in the wild state so often, and in most of the instances in so few individuals
that a common pedigree is absolutely improbable. In horticulture this tendency is widely and
vexatiously known, since the repetition of an old variety does not bring any advantage to the
breeder. The old name of "conquests," given by the breeders of hyacinths, tulips and other
flower-bulbs to any novelty, in disregard of the common occurrence of repetitions, is an indication
of the same experience in the repeated appearance of certain varieties.

The rule of parallel variations demands that the same character occasionally makes its appearance
in the several varieties or races, descended from the same species, and even in widely distinct
species. This is a rule, which is very important for the general conception of the meaning
of the term variety as contrasted with elementary species. For the recurrence of the same deviation
always impresses us as a varietal mark. Laciniated leaves are perhaps the most beautiful instance,
since they occur in so many trees and shrubs, as the walnut tree, the beech, the birch, the
hazelnut, and even in [244] brambles and some garden-varieties of the turnip (Brassica).

In such cases of parallel variations the single instances obviously follow the same rules and
are therefore to be designated as analogous. Pitchers or ascidia, formed by the union of the
margins of a leaf, are perhaps the best proof. They were classified by Morren under two heads,
according to their formation from one or more leaves. Monophyllous pitchers obey the same law,
viz.: that the upper side of the leaf has become the inner side of the pitcher. Only one exception
to this rule is known to me. It is afforded by the pitchers of the banyan or holy fig-tree,
Ficus religiosus, but it does not seem to belong to the same class as other pitchers, since
as far as it has been possible to ascertain the facts, these pitchers are not formed by a few
leaves as in all other cases, but by all the leaves of the tree.

In some cases pitchers are only built up of part of the leaf-blade. Such partial malformations
obey a rule, that is common to them and to other foliar enations, viz.: that the side of the
leaf from which they emerge, is always their outer side. The inner surface of these enations
corresponds to the opposite side of the leaf, both in color and in anatomical structure. The
last of the four rules above mentioned is [245] that of the homologous variability. It asserts
that the same deviation may occur in different, but homologous parts of the same plant. We
have already dealt with some instances, as the occurrence of the same pigment in the flowers
and foliage, in the fruits and seeds of the same plant, as also illustrated by the loss of
the red or blue tinge by flowers and berries. Other instances are afforded by the curious fact
that the division of the leaves into numerous and small segments is repeated by the petals,
as in the common celandine and some sorts of brambles.

It would take too long to make a closer examination of the numerous cases which afford proof
of these statements. Suffice it to say that everywhere the results of close inspection point
to the general rule, that the failure of definite qualities both in species and in varieties
must, in a great number of cases, be considered as only apparent. Hidden from view, occasionally
reappearing, or only imperfectly concealed, the same character must be assumed to be present
though latent.

In the case of negative or retrogressive varieties it is the transition from the active into
a dormant state to which is due the origin of the variety. Positive varieties on the contrary
owe their origin to the presence of some character [246] in the species in the latent state,
and to the occasional re-energizing thereof.

Specific or varietal latency is not the same thing as the ordinary latency of characters that
only await their period of activity, or the external influence which will awake them. They
are permanently latent, and could well be designated by the word perlatent. They spring into
activity only by some sudden leap, and then at once become independent of ordinary external
stimulation.

[247]

LECTURE IX

CROSSES OF SPECIES AND VARIETIES

