Having settled these preliminaries to his own satisfaction, he and his baggage were embarked
about six o'clock in the month of September, and it was not without emotion that he found himself
benighted upon the great deep, of which, before the preceding day, he had never enjoyed even
the most distant prospect.  However, he was not a man to be afraid, where there was really
no appearance of danger; and the agreeable presages of future fortune supported his spirits,
amidst the disagreeable nausea which commonly attends landsmen at sea, until he was set ashore
upon the beach at Deal, which he entered in good health about seven o'clock in the morning.

Like Caesar, however, he found some difficulty in landing, on account of the swelling surf,
that tumbled about with such violence as had almost overset the cutter that carried him on
shore; and, in his eagerness to jump upon the strand, his foot slipped from the side of the
boat, so that he was thrown forwards in an horizontal direction, and his hands were the first
parts of him that touched English ground.  Upon this occasion, he, in imitation of Scipio's
behaviour on the coast of Africa, hailed the omen, and, grasping a handful of the sand, was
heard to exclaim, in the Italian language: "Ah, ah, Old England, I have thee fast."

As he walked up to the inn, followed by Maurice loaded with his portmanteau, he congratulated
himself upon his happy voyage, and the peaceable possession of his spoil, and could not help
snuffing up the British air with marks of infinite relish and satisfaction.  His first care
was to recompense himself for the want of sleep he had undergone, and, after he had sufficiently
recruited himself with several hours of uninterrupted repose, he set out in a post-chaise for
Canterbury, where he took a place in the London stage, which he was told would depart next
morning, the coach being already full.  On this very first day of his arrival, he perceived
between the English and the people among whom he had hitherto lived, such essential difference
in customs, appearance, and way of living, as inspired him with high notions of that British
freedom, opulence, and convenience, on which he had often heard his mother expatiate.  On the
road, he feasted his eyesight with the verdant hills covered with flocks of sheep, the fruitful
vales parcelled out into cultivated enclosures; the very cattle seemed to profit by the wealth
of their masters, being large, sturdy, and sleek, and every peasant breathed the insolence
of liberty and independence.  In a word, he viewed the wide-extended plains of Kent with a
lover's eye, and, his ambition becoming romantic, could not help fancying himself another conqueror
of the isle.

He was not, however, long amused by these vain chimeras, which soon vanished before other reflections
of more importance and solidity.  His imagination, it must be owned, was at all times too chaste
to admit those overweening hopes, which often mislead the mind of the projector.  He had studied
mankind with incredible diligence, and knew perfectly well how far he could depend on the passions
and foibles of human nature.  That he might now act consistent with his former sagacity, he
resolved to pass himself upon his fellow-travellers for a French gentleman, equally a stranger
to the language and country of England, in order to glean from their discourse such intelligence
as might avail him in his future operations; and his lacquey was tutored accordingly.

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

SOME ACCOUNT OF HIS FELLOW-TRAVELLERS.

Those who had taken places for the coach, understanding the sixth seat was engaged by a foreigner,
determined to profit by his ignorance; and, with that politeness which is peculiar to this
happy island, fixed themselves in the vehicle, in such a manner, before he had the least intimation
of their design, that he found it barely practicable to insinuate himself sidelong between
a corpulent quaker and a fat Wapping landlady, in which attitude he stuck fast, like a thin
quarto between two voluminous dictionaries on a bookseller's shelf.  And, as if the pain and
inconvenience of such compression was not sufficient matter of chagrin, the greatest part of
the company entertained themselves with laughing at his ludicrous station.

The jolly dame at his left hand observed, with a loud exclamation of mirth, that monsieur would
be soon better acquainted with a buttock of English beef; and said, by that time they should
arrive at their dining-place, he might be spitted without larding.  "Yes, verily," replied
Obadiah, who was a wag in his way, "but the swine's fat will be all on one side."--"So much
the better for you," cried mine hostess, "for that side is all your own."  The quaker was not
so much disconcerted by the quickness of this repartee, but that he answered with great deliberation,
"I thank thee for thy love, but will not profit by thy loss, especially as I like not the savour
of these outlandish fowls; they are profane birds of passage, relished only by the children
of vanity, like thee."

The plump gentlewoman took umbrage at this last expression, which she considered as a double
reproach, and repeated the words, "Children of vanity!" with an emphasis of resentment.  "I
believe, if the truth were known," said she, "there's more vanity than midriff in that great
belly of yours, for all your pretending to humility and religion.  Sirrah! my corporation is
made up of good, wholesome, English fat; but you are puffed up with the wind of vanity and
delusion; and when it begins to gripe your entrails, you pretend to have a motion, and then
get up and preach nonsense.  Yet you'll take it upon you to call your betters children.  Marry
come up, Mr. Goosecap, I have got children that are as good men as you, or any hypocritical
trembler in England."

A person who sat opposite to the quaker, hearing this remonstrance, which seemed pregnant with
contention, interposed in the conversation with a conscious leer, and begged there might be
no rupture between the spirit and the flesh.  By this remonstrance he relieved Obadiah from
the satire of this female orator, and brought the whole vengeance of her elocution upon his
own head.  "Flesh!" cried she, with all the ferocity of an enraged Thalestris; "none of your
names, Mr. Yellowchaps.  What! I warrant you have an antipathy to flesh, because you yourself
are nothing but skin and bone.  I suppose you are some poor starved journeyman tailor come
from France, where you have been learning to cabbage, and have not seen a good meal of victuals
these seven years.  You have been living upon rye-bread and soup-maigre, and now you come over
like a walking atomy with a rat's tail at your wig, and a tinsey jacket.  And so, forsooth,
you set up for a gentleman, and pretend to find fault with a sirloin of roast beef."

The gentleman heard this address with admirable patience, and when she had rung out her alarm,
very coolly replied, "Anything but your stinking fish madam.  Since when, I pray, have you
travelled in stage-coaches, and left off your old profession of crying oysters in winter, and
rotten mackerel in June?  You was then known by the name of Kate Brawn, and in good repute
among the ale-houses in Thames Street, till that unlucky amour with the master of a corn-vessel,
in which he was unfortunately detected by his own spouse; but you seem to have risen by that
fall; and I wish you joy of your present plight.  Though, considering your education on Bear
Quay, you can give but a sorry account of yourself."

The Amazon, though neither exhausted nor dismayed, was really confounded at the temper and
assurance of this antagonist, who had gathered all these anecdotes from the fertility of his
own invention; after a short pause, however, she poured forth a torrent of obloquy sufficient
to overwhelm any person who had not been used to take up arms against such seas of trouble;
and a dispute ensued, which would have not only disgraced the best orators on the Thames, but
even have made a figure in the celebration of the Eleusinian mysteries, during which the Athenian
matrons rallied one another from different waggons, with that freedom of altercation so happily
preserved in this our age and country.

Such a redundancy of epithets, and variety of metaphors, tropes, and figures were uttered between
these well-matched opponents, that an epic bard would have found his account in listening to
the contest; which, in all probability, would not have been confined to words, had it not been
interrupted for the sake of a young woman of an agreeable countenance and modest carriage;
who, being shocked at some of their flowers of speech, and terrified by the menacing looks
and gestures of the fiery-featured dame, began to scream aloud, and beg leave to quit the coach.
Her perturbation put an end to the high debate.  The sixth passenger, who had not opened his
mouth, endeavoured to comfort her with assurances of protection; the quaker proposed a cessation
of arms; the male disputant acquiesced in the proposal, assuring the company he had entered
the lists for their entertainment only, without acquiring the least grudge or ill-will to the
fat gentlewoman, whom he protested he had never seen before that day, and who, for aught he
knew, was a person of credit and reputation.  He then held forth his hand in token of amity,
and asked pardon of the offended party, who was appeased by his submission; and, in testimony
of her benevolence, presented to the other female, whom she had discomposed, an Hungary-water
bottle filled with cherry-brandy, recommending it as a much more powerful remedy than the sal-volatile
which the other held to her nose.

Peace being thus re-established, in a treaty comprehending Obadiah and all present, it will
not be improper to give the reader some further information, touching the several characters
assembled in this vehicle. The quaker was a London merchant, who had been at Deal superintending
the repairs of a ship which had suffered by a storm in the Downs.  The Wapping landlady was
on her return from the same place, where she had attended the payment of a man-of-war, with
sundry powers of attorney, granted by the sailors, who had lived upon credit at her house.
Her competitor in fame was a dealer in wine, a smuggler of French lace, and a petty gamester
just arrived from Paris, in the company of an English barber, who sat on his right hand, and
the young woman was daughter of a country curate, in her way to London, where she was bound
apprentice to a milliner.

Hitherto Fathom had sat in silent astonishment at the manners of his fellow-travellers, which
far exceeded the notions he had preconceived of English plainness and rusticity.  He found
himself a monument of that disregard and contempt which a stranger never fails to meet with
from the inhabitants of this island; and saw, with surprise, an agreeable young creature sit
as solitary and unheeded as himself.

He was, indeed, allured by the roses of her complexion, and the innocence of her aspect, and
began to repent of having pretended ignorance of the language, by which he was restrained from
exercising his eloquence upon her heart; he resolved, however, to ingratiate himself, if possible,
by the courtesy and politeness of dumb show, and for that purpose put his eyes in motion without
farther delay.

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

ANOTHER PROVIDENTIAL DELIVERANCE FROM THE EFFECTS OF THE SMUGGLER'S INGENIOUS CONJECTURE.

During these deliberations, the wine merchant, with a view to make a parade of his superior
parts and breeding, as well as to pave the way for a match at backgammon, made a tender of
his snuff-box to our adventurer, and asked, in bad French, how he travelled from Paris.  This
question produced a series of interrogations concerning the place of Ferdinand's abode in that
city, and his business in England, so that he was fain to practise the science of defence,
and answered with such ambiguity, as aroused the suspicion of the smuggler, who began to believe
our hero had some very cogent reason for evading his curiosity; he immediately set his reflection
at work, and, after various conjectures, fixed upon Fathom's being the Young Pretender.  Big
with this supposition, he eyed him with the most earnest attention, comparing his features
with those of the Chevalier's portrait which he had seen in France, and though the faces were
as unlike as any two human faces could be, found the resemblance so striking as to dispel all
his doubts, and persuade him to introduce the stranger to some justice on the road; a step
by which he would not only manifest his zeal for the Protestant succession, but also acquire
the splendid reward proposed by parliament to any person who should apprehend that famous adventurer.

These ideas intoxicated the brain of this man to such a pitch of enthusiasm, that he actually
believed himself in possession of the thirty thousand pounds, and amused his fancy with a variety
of magnificent projects to be executed by means of that acquisition, until his reverie was
interrupted by the halting of the coach at the inn where the passengers used to eat their breakfasts.
Waked as he was from the dream of happiness, it had made such impression upon his mind, that,
seeing Fathom rise up with an intention to alight, he took it for granted his design was to
escape, and seizing him by the collar, called aloud for assistance in the King's name.

Our hero, whose sagacity and presence of mind very often supplied the place of courage, instead
of being terrified at this assault, which might have disturbed the tranquillity of an ordinary
villain, was so perfectly master of every circumstance of his own situation, as to know at
once that the aggressor could not possibly have the least cause of complaint against him; and
therefore, imputing this violence either to madness or mistake, very deliberately suffered
himself to be made prisoner by the people of the house, who ran to the coach door in obedience
to the summons of the wine merchant.  The rest of the company were struck dumb with surprise
and consternation at this sudden adventure; and the quaker, dreading some fell resistance on
the side of the outlandish man, unpinned the other coach door in the twinkling of an eye, and
trundled himself into the mud for safety.  The others, seeing the temper and resignation of
the prisoner, soon recovered their recollection, and began to inquire into the cause of his
arrest, upon which, the captor, whose teeth chattered with terror and impatience, gave them
to understand that he was a state criminal, and demanded their help in conveying him to justice.

Luckily for both parties, there happened to be at the inn a company of squires just returned
from the death of a leash of hares, which they had ordered to be dressed for dinner, and among
these gentlemen was one of the quorum, to whom the accuser had immediate recourse, marching
before the captive, who walked very peaceably between the landlord and one of his waiters,
and followed by a crowd of spectators, some of whom had secured the faithful Maurice, who in
his behaviour closely imitated the deliberation of his master.  In this order did the procession
advance to the apartment in which the magistrate, with his fellows of the chase, sat smoking
his morning pipe over a tankard of strong ale, and the smuggler being directed to the right
person, "May it please your worship," said he, "I have brought this foreigner before you, on
a violent suspicion of his being a proclaimed outlaw; and I desire, before these witnesses,
that my title may be made good to the reward that shall become due upon his conviction."

"Friend," replied the justice, "I know nothing of you or your titles; but this I know, if you
have any information to give in, you must come to my house when I am at home, and proceed in
a lawful way, that is, d'ye mind me, if you swear as how this here person is an outlaw; then
if so be as he has nothing to say to the contrary, my clerk shall make out a mittimus, and
so to jail with him till next 'size."  "But, sir," answered the impeacher, "this is a case
that admits of no delay; the person I have apprehended is a prisoner of consequence to the
state."  "How, fellor!" cried the magistrate, interrupting him, "is there any person of more
consequence than one of his Majesty's justices of the peace, who is besides a considerable
member of the landed interest!  D'ye know, sirrah, who you are talking to?  If you don't go
about your business, I believe I shall lay you by the heels."

The smuggler, fearing his prize would escape through the ignorance, pride, and obstinacy of
this country justice, approached his worship, and in a whisper which was overheard by all the
company, assured him he had indubitable reason to believe the foreigner was no other than the
Pretender's eldest son.  At mention of this formidable name, every individual of the audience
started, with signs of terror and amazement. The justice dropped his pipe, recoiled upon his
chair, and, looking most ridiculously aghast, exclaimed, "Seize him, in the name of God and
his Majesty King George!  Has he got no secret arms about him!"

Fathom being thus informed of the suspicion under which he stood, could not help smiling at
the eagerness with which the spectators flew upon him, and suffered himself to be searched
with great composure, well knowing they would find no moveables about his person, but such
as upon examination would turn to his account; he therefore very calmly presented to the magistrate
his purse, and a small box that contained his jewels, and in the French language desired they
might be preserved from the hands of the mob.  This request was interpreted by the accuser,
who, at the same time, laid claim to the booty.  The justice took charge of the deposit, and
one of his neighbours having undertaken the office of clerk, he proceeded to the examination
of the culprit, whose papers were by this time laid on the table before him.  "Stranger," said
he, "you stand charged with being son of the Pretender to these realms; what have you to say
in your own defence?"  Our hero assured him, in the French language, that he was falsely impeached,
and demanded justice on the accuser, who, without the least reason, had made such a malicious
attack upon the life and honour of an innocent gentleman.

The smuggler, instead of acting the part of a faithful interpreter, told his worship, that
the prisoner's answer was no more than a simple denial, which every felon would make who had
nothing else to plead in his own behalf, and that this alone was a strong presumption of his
guilt, because, if he was not really the person they suspected him to be, the thing would speak
for itself, for, if he was not the Young Pretender, who then was he?  This argument had great
weight with the justice, who, assuming a very important aspect, observed, "Very true, friend,
if you are not the Pretender, in the name of God, who are you?  One may see with half an eye
that he is no better than a promiscuous fellow."

Ferdinand now began to repent of having pretended ignorance of the English language, as he
found himself at the mercy of a rascal, who put a false gloss upon all his words, and addressed
himself to the audience successively in French, High Dutch, Italian, and Hungarian Latin, desiring
to know if any person present understood any of these tongues, that his answers might be honestly
explained to the bench.  But he might have accosted them in Chinese with the same success:
there was not one person present tolerably versed in his mother-tongue, much less acquainted
with any foreign language, except the wine merchant, who, incensed at this appeal, which he
considered as an affront to his integrity, gave the judge to understand, that the delinquent,
instead of speaking to the purpose, contumaciously insulted his authority in sundry foreign
lingos, which he apprehended was an additional proof of his being the Chevalier's son, inasmuch
as no person would take the pains to learn such a variety of gibberish, except with some sinister
intent.

This annotation was not lost upon the squire, who was too jealous of the honour of his office
to overlook such a flagrant instance of contempt. His eyes glistened, his cheeks were inflated
with rage.  "The case is plain," said he; "having nothing of signification to offer in his
own favour, he grows refractory, and abuses the court in his base Roman Catholic jargon; but
I'll let you know, for all you pretend to be a prince, you are no better than an outlawed vagrant,
and I'll show you what a thing you are when you come in composition with an English justice,
like me, who have more than once extinguished myself in the service of my country.  As nothing
else accrues, your purse, black box, and papers shall be sealed up before witnesses, and sent
by express to one of his Majesty's secretaries of state; and, as for yourself, I will apply
to the military at Canterbury, for a guard to conduct you to London."

This was a very unwelcome declaration to our adventurer, who was on the point of haranguing
the justice and spectators in their own language, when he was relieved from the necessity of
taking that step by the interposition of a young nobleman just arrived at the inn, who, being
informed of this strange examination, entered the court, and, at first sight of the prisoner,
assured the justice he was imposed upon; for that he himself had often seen the Young Pretender
in Paris, and that there was no kind of resemblance between that adventurer and the person
now before him.  The accuser was not a little mortified at his lordship's affirmation, which
met with all due regard from the bench, though the magistrate took notice, that, granting the
prisoner was not the Young Chevalier himself, it was highly probable he was an emissary of
that house, as he could give no satisfactory account of himself, and was possessed of things
of such value as no honest man could expose to the accidents of the road.

Fathom, having thus found an interpreter, who signified to him, in the French tongue, the doubts
of the justice, told his lordship, that he was a gentleman of a noble house in Germany, who,
for certain reasons, had come abroad incognito, with a view to see the world; and that, although
the letters they had seized would prove the truth of that assertion, he should be loth to expose
his private concerns to the knowledge of strangers, if he could possibly be released without
that mortification.  The young nobleman explained his desire to the court; but, his own curiosity
being interested, observed, at the same time, that the justice could not be said to have discharged
the duties of his station, until he should have examined every circumstance relating to the
prisoner.  Upon which remonstrance, he was requested by the bench to peruse the papers, and
accordingly communicated the substance of one letter to this effect:--

"MY DEAR SON,--Though I am far from approving the rash step you have
taken in withdrawing yourself from your father's house, in order to avoid
an engagement which would have been equally honourable and advantageous
to your family, I cannot so far suppress my affection, as to bear the
thought of your undergoing those hardships which, for your disobedience,
you deserve to suffer.  I have therefore, without the knowledge of your
father, sent the bearer to attend you in your peregrinations; his
fidelity you know hath been tried in a long course of service, and I have
entrusted to his care, for your use, a purse of two hundred ducats, and a
box of jewels to the value of twice that sum, which, though not
sufficient to support an equipage suitable to your birth, will, at least
for some time, preserve you from the importunities of want.  When you are
dutiful enough to explain your designs and situation, you may expect
further indulgence from your tender and disconsolate mother,--
                                                COUNTESS OF FATHOM."

This letter, which, as well as the others, our hero had forged for the purpose, effectually
answered his intent, in throwing dust in the eyes and understanding of the spectators, who
now regarded the prisoner with looks of respectful remorse, as a man of quality who had been
falsely accused.  His lordship, to make a parade of his own politeness and importance, assured
the bench, he was no stranger to the family of the Fathoms, and, with a compliment, gave Ferdinand
to understand he had formerly seen him at Versailles.  There being no longer room for suspicion,
the justice ordered our adventurer to be set at liberty, and even invited him to be seated,
with an apology for the rude manner in which he had been treated, owing to the misinformation
of the accuser, who was threatened with the stocks, for his malice and presumption.

But this was not the only triumph our hero obtained over the wine merchant.  Maurice was no
sooner unfettered, than, advancing into the middle of the room, "My lord," said he, addressing
himself in French to his master's deliverer, "since you have been so generous as to protect
a noble stranger from the danger of such a false accusation, I hope you will still lay an additional
obligation upon the Count, by retorting the vengeance of the law upon his perfidious accuser,
whom I know to be a trader in those articles of merchandise which are prohibited by the ordinances
of this nation.  I have seen him lately at Boulogne, and am perfectly well acquainted with
some persons who have supplied him with French lace and embroidery; and, as a proof of what
I allege, I desire you will order him and this barber, who is his understrapper, to be examined
on the spot."

This charge, which was immediately explained to the bench, yielded extraordinary satisfaction
to the spectators, one of whom, being an officer of the customs, forthwith began to exercise
his function upon the unlucky perruquier, who, being stripped of his upper garments, and even
of his shirt, appeared like the mummy of an Egyptian king, most curiously rolled up in bandages
of rich figured gold shalloon, that covered the skirts of four embroidered waistcoats.  The
merchant, seeing his expectation so unhappily reversed, made an effort to retire with a most
rueful aspect, but was prevented by the officer, who demanded the interposition of the civil
power, that he might undergo the same examination to which the other had been subjected.  He
was accordingly rifled without loss of time, and the inquiry proved well worth the care of
him who made it; for a considerable booty of the same sort of merchandise was found in his
boots, breeches, hat, and between the buckram and lining of his surtout.  Yet, not contented
with this prize, the experienced spoiler proceeded to search his baggage, and, perceiving a
false bottom in his portmanteau, detected beneath it a valuable accession to the plunder he
had already obtained.

Proper cognisance being thus taken of these contraband effects, and the informer furnished
with a certificate, by which he was entitled to a share of the seizure, the coachman summoned
his passengers to the carriage; the purse and jewels were restored to Count Fathom, who thanked
the justice, and his lordship in particular, for the candour and hospitality with which he
had been treated, and resumed his place in the vehicle, amidst the congratulations of all his
fellow-travellers, except the two forlorn smugglers, who, instead of re-embarking in the coach,
thought proper to remain at the inn, with view to mitigate, if possible, the severity of their
misfortune.

Among those who felicitated Fathom upon the issue of this adventure, the young maiden seemed
to express the most sensible pleasure at that event. The artful language of his eyes had raised
in her breast certain fluttering emotions, before she knew the value of her conquest; but now
that his rank and condition were discovered, these transports were increased by the ideas of
vanity and ambition, which are mingled with the first seeds of every female constitution. 
The belief of having captivated the heart of a man who could raise her to the rank and dignity
of a countess, produced such agreeable sensations in her fancy, that her eyes shone with unusual
lustre, and a continual smile played in dimples on her rosy cheeks; so that her attractions,
though not powerful enough to engage the affection, were yet sufficient to inflame the desire
of our adventurer, who very honestly marked her chastity for prey to his voluptuous passion.
Had she been well seasoned with knowledge and experience, and completely armed with caution
against the artifice and villany of man, her virtue might not have been able to withstand the
engines of such an assailant, considering the dangerous opportunities to which she was necessarily
exposed.  How easy then must his victory have been over an innocent, unsuspecting country damsel,
flushed with the warmth of youth, and an utter stranger to the ways of life!

While Obadiah, therefore, and his plump companion, were engaged in conversation, on the strange
incidents which had passed, Fathom acted a very expressive pantomime with this fair buxom nymph,
who comprehended his meaning with surprising facility, and was at so little pains to conceal
the pleasure she took in this kind of intercourse, that several warm squeezes were interchanged
between her and her lover, before they arrived at Rochester, where they proposed to dine. 
It was during this period, he learned from the answers she made to the inquisitive quaker,
that her sole dependence was upon a relation, to whom she had a letter, and that she was a
perfect stranger in the great city; circumstances on which he soon formed the project of her ruin.

Upon their arrival at the Black Bull, he for the first time found himself alone with his Amanda,
whose name was Elenor, their fellow-travellers being elsewhere employed about their own concerns;
and, unwilling to lose the precious opportunity, he began to act the part of a very importunate
lover, which he conceived to be a proper sequel to the prelude which had been performed in
the coach.  The freedoms which she, out of pure simplicity and good-humour, permitted him to
take with her hand, and even her rosy lips, encouraged him to practise other familiarities
upon her fair bosom, which scandalised her virtue so much, that, in spite of the passion she
had begun to indulge in his behalf, she rejected his advances with all the marks of anger and
disdain; and he found it necessary to appease the storm he had raised, by the most respectful
and submissive demeanour; resolving to change his operations, and carry on his attacks, so
as to make her yield at discretion, without alarming her religion or pride.  Accordingly, when
the bill was called after dinner, he took particular notice of her behaviour, and, perceiving
her pull out a large leathern purse that contained her money, reconnoitred the pocket in which
it was deposited, and, while they sat close to each other in the carriage, conveyed it with
admirable dexterity into an hole in the cushion.  Whether the corpulent couple, who sat opposite
to these lovers, had entered into an amorous engagement at the inn, or were severally induced
by other motives, is uncertain; but sure it is, both left the coach on that part of the road
which lies nearest to Gravesend, and bade adieu to the other pair, on pretence of having urgent
business at that place.

Ferdinand, not a little pleased at their departure, renewed his most pathetic expressions of
love, and sung several French songs on that tender subject, which seemed to thrill to the soul
of his beauteous Helen.  While the driver halted at Dartford to water his horses, she was smit
with the appearance of some cheesecakes, which were presented by the landlady of the house,
and having bargained for two or three, put her hand in her pocket, in order to pay for her
purchase; but what was her astonishment, when, after having rummaged her equipage, she understood
her whole fortune was lost!  This mishap was, by a loud shriek, announced to our hero, who
affected infinite amazement and concern; and no sooner learned the cause of her affliction,
than he presented her with his own purse, from which he, in emphatic dumb show, begged she
would indemnify herself for the damage she had sustained.  Although this kind proffer was some
alleviation of her misfortunes, she did not fail to pour forth a most piteous lamentation,
importing that she had not only lost all her money, amounting to five pounds, but also her
letter of recommendation, upon which she had altogether relied for present employment.

The vehicle was minutely searched from top to bottom, by herself and our adventurer, assisted
by Maurice and the coachman, who, finding their inquiry ineffectual, did not scruple to declare
his suspicion of the two fat turtles who had deserted the coach in such an abrupt manner. 
In a word, he rendered this conjecture so plausible, by wresting the circumstances of their
behaviour and retreat, that poor Elenor implicitly believed they were the thieves by whom she
had suffered; and was prevailed upon to accept the proffered assistance of the generous Count,
who, seeing her very much disordered by this mischance, insisted upon her drinking a large
glass of canary, to quiet the perturbation of her spirits.  This is a season, which of all
others is most propitious to the attempts of an artful lover; and justifies the metaphorical
maxim of fishing in troubled waters.  There is an affinity and short transition betwixt all
the violent passions that agitate the human mind.  They are all false perspectives, which,
though they magnify, yet perplex and render indistinct every object which they represent. 
And flattery is never so successfully administered, as to those who know they stand in need
of friendship, assent, and approbation.

