Our California color scheme is the very latest thing in decorative art. There is nothing shrinking
about us, for we come boldly forth in orange and yellows in true cigar-ribbon style--even our
motor licenses of last year had poppies on them. Speaking of poppies, I heard the other day
of a lady who voiced her opinion in all seriousness in the paper, that Mr. Hoover should have
California poppy seeds sent to him for distribution among the Belgians to sow over the ruins
of their country. Of course there is something in the power of suggestion, and I suppose it
would brighten up the landscape. Joedy is strong on the color idea. We had a neighbor who had
a terrible attack of jaundice, which turned her the color of a daffodil. I was saying what
a pity it was, then Joedy observed: "Well, Muvs, I think she makes a nice bright spot of color!"

There is a road leading toward the San Fernando Valley, with fruit stalls on both sides, very
gay with oranges, grape-fruit, and lemons. One particularly alluring stand is presided over
by a colored mammy in bandana shades, turban and all.

All this profusion makes one feel that it is no trick to get a living out of this very impulsive
soil, but before buying a plot of one's own, it is wise to see the seasons through. California
is a very unexpected country. You see a snug little ranch, good soil, near a railroad, just
what you were looking for, but three months of the year it may be under water. Tell me all about
it."
When I had told him what had happened, omitting only Vedia's disguise
and her presence in the water-garden, he said:

"I certainly should
not have prescribed any such excitements and efforts as medicaments
for a case like yours. For
the same reason it was so packed with other visitors, maybe as unwilling as we, that we had
a choice of sleeping in the park or taking a small apartment belonging to a Papa and Mama Dane.
It was full of green plush and calla lilies, but we chose it in preference to the green grass
and calla lilies of the park. We passed an uneasy and foggy week there. Your schemes are half idiocy,
half moonshine. I have pledged you my word to be secret as to what you have told me. My pledge
holds if you now keep silent, rise from this seat and walk straight out to your litter, by
the same way by which you came from it. J---- and I took no chances, and ate in silence. Anyway, the eggs were fresh.
We explored the country as well as we could in the fog, and found quite a large part of it
well under water. On one ranch we met a morose gentleman in hip boots, wading about his property,
which looked like a pretty lake with an R. F. D. box sticking up here and there like a float
on a fishing line, while a gay party of boys and girls were rowing through an avenue of pepper
trees in an old boat. The gentleman in the hip boots had bought his place in summer! J----
and I decided then and there that if we ever bought any property in California, it would be
in the midst of the spring rains, but we know now that even that wouldn't be safe--another
element has to be reckoned with besides water--fire.

Of course Rain in California is spelled with a capital R. Noah spelled it that way, but we
didn't before we came West. It swells the streams, which in summer are nothing but trickles,
to rushing torrents in no time. Bridges snap like twigs, dams burst, telegraph lines collapse;
rivers even change their courses entirely, if they feel like it, so that it would really be
a good idea to build extra bridges wherever it seemed that a temperamental river might decide
to go. I have heard of a farmer who wrote to one of the railroads, saying, "Will you please
come and take your bridge away from my bean-field? I want to begin ploughing."

This adds natural hazards to the real-estate game. There are others--Fire, as I said a moment
ago. I have a very profound respect for the elements since we have come West to live. A forest
fire is even more terrifying than a flood, and in spite of the eagle eyes of the foresters
many are the lovely green slopes burned over each year. Your perturbation of mind and activity of
body has cured you. You are, as far as I can judge, well. I am of the opinion that you may safely
eat and drink what you like in moderation, rest only as you please and may resume your normal life."


The very impulsiveness of the climate seems to give the most wonderful results in the way of
vegetables and fruit. Around Pasadena there are acres and acres of truck gardens, developed
with Japanese efficiency. I love al fresco marketing. If I can find time once a week to motor
up the valley and fill the machine with beautiful, crisp, fresh green things of all kinds,
it makes housekeeping a pleasure. The little Japanese women are so smiling and pleasant, with
their "Good-by, come gen," the melons are so luscious, the eternal strawberry so ripe and red,
the orange blossom honey so delectable, and everything is so cheap compared to what we had
been used to in the East! I think that in San Diego one can live better on a small income than
anywhere in the country. Once some intimate friends of ours gave us a dinner there in January
that could not have been surpassed in New York. The menu included all the delicacies in season
and out of season, fresh mushrooms, alligator pears and pheasants. J---- and I looked at one
another in mingled enjoyment and dismay that so much was being done for us. Finally our host
could not help telling us how much for each person this wonderful meal was costing, including
some very fetching drinks called "pink skirts." You wouldn't believe me if I told how little!

One more delicacy of which we make rather a specialty: I should call it a climate sandwich.
If you live in the invigorating air of the foothills, to motor to the sea, a run of some thirty
miles from where we live in winter, spend several hours on the sand, and before dark turn "Home
to Our Mountains" gives a mountain air sandwich with sea-breeze filling--a singularly refreshing
and satisfying dainty. 

I was, naturally, much pleased, but had no impulse to resume my habits that day. I kept indoors,
denied myself to all visitors, slept long after Galen had left, ate a moderate dinner and went
early to bed.
Next day I went through the normal routine of a Roman of my rank. I have even noticed J---- looking at one with interest. When my father comes out to
visit us every spring, the truck gardens, the packing houses, and the cost of living here,
I think, affect him in much the same way that those magazines do me, and I wonder if every
one, except a dyspeptic, doesn't secretly like to hear and see these very things! Could it
be the reason people used to paint so much still life?--baskets of fruit, a hunter's game-bag,
a divided melon, etc. I frankly own that they would thrill me more if I knew their market price,
so that I might be imagining what delightful meals I could offer my family without straining
the household purse, which is my excuse for the intimate details concerning food and prices
which I have given.

Surely human beings ought to respond as the fruits do to this climate, in spirit as well as
in body, and become a very mellow, amiable, sweet-tempered lot of people, and I think they
do. Even the "culls" are almost as good as the rest, though they won't bear transportation.
It is the land of the second chance, of dreams come true, of freshness and opportunity, of
the wideness of out-of-doors--"Sunkist!"

THE END