BEING A BOY

By Charles Dudley Warner

BEING A BOY

I. BEING A BOY

One of the best things in the world to be is a boy; it requires no experience, though it needs
some practice to be a good one. The disadvantage of the position is that it does not last long
enough; it is soon over; just as you get used to being a boy, you have to be something else,
with a good deal more work to do and not half so much fun. And yet every boy is anxious to
be a man, and is very uneasy with the restrictions that are put upon him as a boy. Good fun
as it is to yoke up the calves and play work, there is not a boy on a farm but would rather
drive a yoke of oxen at real work. What a glorious feeling it is, indeed, when a boy is for
the first time given the long whip and permitted to drive the oxen, walking by their side,
swinging the long lash, and shouting "Gee, Buck!" "Haw, Golden!" "Whoa, Bright!" and all the
rest of that remarkable language, until he is red in the face, and all the neighbors for half
a mile are aware that something unusual is going on. If I were a boy, I am not sure but I would
rather drive the oxen than have a birthday. The proudest day of my life was one day when I
rode on the neap of the cart, and drove the oxen, all alone, with a load of apples to the cider-mill.
I was so little that it was a wonder that I did n't fall off, and get under the broad wheels.
Nothing could make a boy, who cared anything for his appearance, feel flatter than to be run
over by the broad tire of a cart-wheel. But I never heard of one who was, and I don't believe
one ever will be. As I said, it was a great day for me, but I don't remember that the oxen
cared much about it. They sagged along in their great clumsy way, switching their tails in
my face occasionally, and now and then giving a lurch to this or that side of the road, attracted
by a choice tuft of grass. And then I "came the Julius Caesar" over them, if you will allow
me to use such a slang expression, a liberty I never should permit you. I don't know that Julius
Caesar ever drove cattle, though he must often have seen the peasants from the Campagna "haw"
and "gee" them round the Forum (of course in Latin, a language that those cattle understood
as well as ours do English); but what I mean is, that I stood up and "hollered" with all my
might, as everybody does with oxen, as if they were born deaf, and whacked them with the long
lash over the head, just as the big folks did when they drove. I think now that it was a cowardly
thing to crack the patient old fellows over the face and eyes, and make them wink in their
meek manner. If I am ever a boy again on a farm, I shall speak gently to the oxen, and not
go screaming round the farm like a crazy man; and I shall not hit them a cruel cut with the
lash every few minutes, because it looks big to do so and I cannot think of anything else to
do. I never liked lickings myself, and I don't know why an ox should like them, especially
as he cannot reason about the moral improvement he is to get out of them.

Speaking of Latin reminds me that I once taught my cows Latin. I don't mean that I taught them
to read it, for it is very difficult to teach a cow to read Latin or any of the dead languages,--a
cow cares more for her cud than she does for all the classics put together. But if you begin
early, you can teach a cow, or a calf (if you can teach a calf anything, which I doubt), Latin
as well as English. There were ten cows, which I had to escort to and from pasture night and
morning. To these cows I gave the names of the Roman numerals, beginning with Unus and Duo,
and going up to Decem. Decem was, of course, the biggest cow of the party, or at least she
was the ruler of the others, and had the place of honor in the stable and everywhere else.
I admire cows, and especially the exactness with which they define their social position. In
this case, Decem could "lick" Novem, and Novem could "lick" Octo, and so on down to Unus, who
could n't lick anybody, except her own calf. I suppose I ought to have called the weakest cow
Una instead of Unus, considering her sex; but I did n't care much to teach the cows the declensions
of adjectives, in which I was not very well up myself; and, besides, it would be of little
use to a cow. People who devote themselves too severely to study of the classics are apt to
become dried up; and you should never do anything to dry up a cow. Well, these ten cows knew
their names after a while, at least they appeared to, and would take their places as I called
them. At least, if Octo attempted to get before Novem in going through the bars (I have heard
people speak of a "pair of bars" when there were six or eight of them), or into the stable,
the matter of precedence was settled then and there, and, once settled, there was no dispute
about it afterwards. Novem either put her horns into Octo's ribs, and Octo shambled to one
side, or else the two locked horns and tried the game of push and gore until one gave up. Nothing
is stricter than the etiquette of a party of cows. There is nothing in royal courts equal to
it; rank is exactly settled, and the same individuals always have the precedence. You know
that at Windsor Castle, if the Royal Three-Ply Silver Stick should happen to get in front of
the Most Royal Double-and-Twisted Golden Rod, when the court is going in to dinner, something
so dreadful would happen that we don't dare to think of it. It is certain that the soup would
get cold while the Golden Rod was pitching the Silver Stick out of the Castle window into the
moat, and perhaps the island of Great Britain itself would split in two. But the people are
very careful that it never shall happen, so we shall probably never know what the effect would
be. Among cows, as I say, the question is settled in short order, and in a different manner
from what it sometimes is in other society. It is said that in other society there is sometimes
a great scramble for the first place, for the leadership, as it is called, and that women,
and men too, fight for what is called position; and in order to be first they will injure their
neighbors by telling stories about them and by backbiting, which is the meanest kind of biting
there is, not excepting the bite of fleas. But in cow society there is nothing of this detraction
in order to get the first place at the crib, or the farther stall in the stable. If the question
arises, the cows turn in, horns and all, and settle it with one square fight, and that ends
it. I have often admired this trait in COWS.

Besides Latin, I used to try to teach the cows a little poetry, and it is a very good plan.
It does not do the cows much good, but it is very good exercise for a boy farmer. I used to
commit to memory as good short poems as I could find (the cows liked to listen to "Thanatopsis"
about as well as anything), and repeat them when I went to the pasture, and as I drove the
cows home through the sweet ferns and down the rocky slopes. It improves a boy's elocution
a great deal more than driving oxen.

It is a fact, also, that if a boy repeats "Thanatopsis" while he is milking, that operation
acquires a certain dignity.

II. THE BOY AS A FARMER

Boys in general would be very good farmers if the current notions about farming were not so
very different from those they entertain. What passes for laziness is very often an unwillingness
to farm in a particular way. For instance, some morning in early summer John is told to catch
the sorrel mare, harness her into the spring wagon, and put in the buffalo and the best whip,
for father is obliged to drive over to the "Corners, to see a man" about some cattle, to talk
with the road commissioner, to go to the store for the "women folks," and to attend to other
important business; and very likely he will not be back till sundown. It must be very pressing
business, for the old gentleman drives off in this way somewhere almost every pleasant day,
and appears to have a great deal on his mind.

Meantime, he tells John that he can play ball after he has done up the chores. As if the chores
could ever be "done up" on a farm. He is first to clean out the horse-stable; then to take
a bill-hook and cut down the thistles and weeds from the fence corners in the home mowing-lot
and along the road towards the village; to dig up the docks round the garden patch; to weed
out the beet-bed; to hoe the early potatoes; to rake the sticks and leaves out of the front
yard; in short, there is work enough laid out for John to keep him busy, it seems to him, till
he comes of age; and at half an hour to sundown he is to go for the cows "and mind he don't
run 'em!"

"Yes, sir," says John, "is that all?"

"Well, if you get through in good season, you might pick over those potatoes in the cellar;
they are sprouting; they ain't fit to eat."

John is obliged to his father, for if there is any sort of chore more cheerful to a boy than
another, on a pleasant day, it is rubbing the sprouts off potatoes in a dark cellar. And the
old gentleman mounts his wagon and drives away down the enticing road, with the dog bounding
along beside the wagon, and refusing to come back at John's call. John half wishes he were
the dog. The dog knows the part of farming that suits him. He likes to run along the road and
see all the dogs and other people, and he likes best of all to lie on the store steps at the
Corners--while his master's horse is dozing at the post and his master is talking politics
in the store--with the other dogs of his acquaintance, snapping at mutually annoying flies,
and indulging in that delightful dog gossip which is expressed by a wag of the tail and a sniff
of the nose. Nobody knows how many dogs' characters are destroyed in this gossip, or how a
dog may be able to insinuate suspicion by a wag of the tail as a man can by a shrug of the
shoulders, or sniff a slander as a man can suggest one by raising his eyebrows.

John looks after the old gentleman driving off in state, with the odorous buffalo-robe and
the new whip, and he thinks that is the sort of farming he would like to do. And he cries after
his departing parent,

"Say, father, can't I go over to the farther pasture and salt the cattle?" John knows that
he could spend half a day very pleasantly in going over to that pasture, looking for bird's
nests and shying at red squirrels on the way, and who knows but he might "see" a sucker in
the meadow brook, and perhaps get a "jab" at him with a sharp stick. He knows a hole where
there is a whopper; and one of his plans in life is to go some day and snare him, and bring
him home in triumph. It is therefore strongly impressed upon his mind that the cattle want
salting. But his father, without turning his head, replies,

"No, they don't need salting any more 'n you do!" And the old equipage goes rattling down the
road, and John whistles his disappointment. When I was a boy on a farm, and I suppose it is
so now, cattle were never salted half enough!

John goes to his chores, and gets through the stable as soon as he can, for that must be done;
but when it comes to the out-door work, that rather drags. There are so many things to distract
the attention--a chipmunk in the fence, a bird on a near-tree, and a hen-hawk circling high
in the air over the barnyard. John loses a little time in stoning the chipmunk, which rather
likes the sport, and in watching the bird, to find where its nest is; and he convinces himself
that he ought to watch the hawk, lest it pounce upon the chickens, and therefore, with an easy
conscience, he spends fifteen minutes in hallooing to that distant bird, and follows it away
out of sight over the woods, and then wishes it would come back again. And then a carriage
with two horses, and a trunk on behind, goes along the road; and there is a girl in the carriage
who looks out at John, who is suddenly aware that his trousers are patched on each knee and
in two places behind; and he wonders if she is rich, and whose name is on the trunk, and how
much the horses cost, and whether that nice-looking man is the girl's father, and if that boy
on the seat with the driver is her brother, and if he has to do chores; and as the gay sight
disappears, John falls to thinking about the great world beyond the farm, of cities, and people
who are always dressed up, and a great many other things of which he has a very dim notion.
And then a boy, whom John knows, rides by in a wagon with his father, and the boy makes a face
at John, and John returns the greeting with a twist of his own visage and some symbolic gestures.
All these things take time. The work of cutting down the big weeds gets on slowly, although
it is not very disagreeable, or would not be if it were play. John imagines that yonder big
thistle is some whiskered villain, of whom he has read in a fairy book, and he advances on
him with "Die, ruffian!" and slashes off his head with the bill-hook; or he charges upon the
rows of mullein-stalks as if they were rebels in regimental ranks, and hews them down without
mercy. What fun it might be if there were only another boy there to help. But even war, single
handed, gets to be tiresome. It is dinner-time before John finishes the weeds, and it is cow-time
before John has made much impression on the garden.

This garden John has no fondness for. He would rather hoe corn all day than work in it. Father
seems to think that it is easy work that John can do, because it is near the house! John's
continual plan in this life is to go fishing. When there comes a rainy day, he attempts to
carry it out. But ten chances to one his father has different views. As it rains so that work
cannot be done out-doors, it is a good time to work in the garden. He can run into the house
between the heavy showers. John accordingly detests the garden; and the only time he works
briskly in it is when he has a stent set, to do so much weeding before the Fourth of July.
If he is spry, he can make an extra holiday the Fourth and the day after. Two days of gunpowder
and ball-playing! When I was a boy, I supposed there was some connection between such and such
an amount of work done on the farm and our national freedom. I doubted if there could be any
Fourth of July if my stent was not done. I, at least, worked for my Independence.

III. THE DELIGHTS OF FARMING

There are so many bright spots in the life of a farm-boy, that I sometimes think I should like
to live the life over again; I should almost be willing to be a girl if it were not for the
chores. There is a great comfort to a boy in the amount of work he can get rid of doing. It
is sometimes astonishing how slow he can go on an errand,--he who leads the school in a race.
The world is new and interesting to him, and there is so much to take his attention off, when
he is sent to do anything. Perhaps he himself couldn't explain why, when he is sent to the
neighbor's after yeast, he stops to stone the frogs; he is not exactly cruel, but he wants
to see if he can hit 'em. No other living thing can go so slow as a boy sent on an errand.
His legs seem to be lead, unless he happens to espy a woodchuck in an adjoining lot, when he
gives chase to it like a deer; and it is a curious fact about boys, that two will be a great
deal slower in doing anything than one, and that the more you have to help on a piece of work
the less is accomplished. Boys have a great power of helping each other to do nothing; and
they are so innocent about it, and unconscious. "I went as quick as ever I could," says the
boy: his father asks him why he did n't stay all night, when he has been absent three hours
on a ten-minute errand. The sarcasm has no effect on the boy.

Going after the cows was a serious thing in my day. I had to climb a hill, which was covered
with wild strawberries in the season. Could any boy pass by those ripe berries? And then in
the fragrant hill pasture there were beds of wintergreen with red berries, tufts of columbine,
roots of sassafras to be dug, and dozens of things good to eat or to smell, that I could not
resist. It sometimes even lay in my way to climb a tree to look for a crow's nest, or to swing
in the top, and to try if I could see the steeple of the village church. It became very important
sometimes for me to see that steeple; and in the midst of my investigations the tin horn would
blow a great blast from the farmhouse, which would send a cold chill down my back in the hottest
days. I knew what it meant. It had a frightfully impatient quaver in it, not at all like the
sweet note that called us to dinner from the hay-field. It said, "Why on earth does n't that
boy come home? It is almost dark, and the cows ain't milked!" And that was the time the cows
had to start into a brisk pace and make up for lost time. I wonder if any boy ever drove the
cows home late, who did not say that the cows were at the very farther end of the pasture,
and that "Old Brindle" was hidden in the woods, and he couldn't find her for ever so long!
The brindle cow is the boy's scapegoat, many a time.

No other boy knows how to appreciate a holiday as the farm-boy does; and his best ones are
of a peculiar kind. Going fishing is of course one sort. The excitement of rigging up the tackle,
digging the bait, and the anticipation of great luck! These are pure pleasures, enjoyed because
they are rare. Boys who can go a-fishing any time care but little for it. Tramping all day
through bush and brier, fighting flies and mosquitoes, and branches that tangle the line, and
snags that break the hook, and returning home late and hungry, with wet feet and a string of
speckled trout on a willow twig, and having the family crowd out at the kitchen door to look
at 'em, and say, "Pretty well done for you, bub; did you catch that big one yourself?"--this
is also pure happiness, the like of which the boy will never have again, not if he comes to
be selectman and deacon and to "keep store."

But the holidays I recall with delight were the two days in spring and fall, when we went to
the distant pasture-land, in a neighboring town, maybe, to drive thither the young cattle and
colts, and to bring them back again. It was a wild and rocky upland where our great pasture
was, many miles from home, the road to it running by a brawling river, and up a dashing brook-side
among great hills. What a day's adventure it was! It was like a journey to Europe. The night
before, I could scarcely sleep for thinking of it! and there was no trouble about getting me
up at sunrise that morning. The breakfast was eaten, the luncheon was packed in a large basket,
with bottles of root beer and a jug of switchel, which packing I superintended with the greatest
interest; and then the cattle were to be collected for the march, and the horses hitched up.
Did I shirk any duty? Was I slow? I think not. I was willing to run my legs off after the frisky
steers, who seemed to have an idea they were going on a lark, and frolicked about, dashing
into all gates, and through all bars except the right ones; and how cheerfully I did yell at them.

It was a glorious chance to "holler," and I have never since heard any public speaker on the
stump or at camp-meeting who could make more noise. I have often thought it fortunate that
the amount of noise in a boy does not increase in proportion to his size; if it did, the world
could not contain it.

The whole day was full of excitement and of freedom. We were away from the farm, which to a
boy is one of the best parts of farming; we saw other farms and other people at work; I had
the pleasure of marching along, and swinging my whip, past boys whom I knew, who were picking
up stones. Every turn of the road, every bend and rapid of the river, the great bowlders by
the wayside, the watering-troughs, the giant pine that had been struck by lightning, the mysterious
covered bridge over the river where it was, most swift and rocky and foamy, the chance eagle
in the blue sky, the sense of going somewhere,--why, as I recall all these things I feel that
even the Prince Imperial, as he used to dash on horseback through the Bois de Boulogne, with
fifty mounted hussars clattering at his heels, and crowds of people cheering, could not have
been as happy as was I, a boy in short jacket and shorter pantaloons, trudging in the dust
that day behind the steers and colts, cracking my black-stock whip.

I wish the journey would never end; but at last, by noon, we reach the pastures and turn in
the herd; and after making the tour of the lots to make sure there are no breaks in the fences,
we take our luncheon from the wagon and eat it under the trees by the spring. This is the supreme
moment of the day. This is the way to live; this is like the Swiss Family Robinson, and all
the rest of my delightful acquaintances in romance. Baked beans, rye-and-indian bread (moist,
remember), doughnuts and cheese, pie, and root beer. What richness! You may live to dine at
Delmonico's, or, if those Frenchmen do not eat each other up, at Philippe's, in Rue Montorgueil
in Paris, where the dear old Thackeray used to eat as good a dinner as anybody; but you will
get there neither doughnuts, nor pie, nor root beer, nor anything so good as that luncheon
at noon in the old pasture, high among the Massachusetts hills! Nor will you ever, if you live
to be the oldest boy in the world, have any holiday equal to the one I have described. But
I always regretted that I did not take along a fishline, just to "throw in" the brook we passed.
I know there were trout there.

IV. NO FARMING WITHOUT A BOY

Say what you will about the general usefulness of boys, it is my impression that a farm without
a boy would very soon come to grief. What the boy does is the life of the farm. He is the factotum,
always in demand, always expected to do the thousand indispensable things that nobody else
will do. Upon him fall all the odds and ends, the most difficult things. After everybody else
is through, he has to finish up. His work is like a woman's,--perpetual waiting on others.
Everybody knows how much easier it is to eat a good dinner than it is to wash the dishes afterwards.
Consider what a boy on a farm is required to do; things that must be done, or life would actually
stop.

It is understood, in the first place, that he is to do all the errands, to go to the store,
to the post office, and to carry all sorts of messages. If he had as many legs as a centipede,
they would tire before night. His two short limbs seem to him entirely inadequate to the task.
He would like to have as many legs as a wheel has spokes, and rotate about in the same way.
This he sometimes tries to do; and people who have seen him "turning cart-wheels" along the
side of the road have supposed that he was amusing himself, and idling his time; he was only
trying to invent a new mode of locomotion, so that he could economize his legs and do his errands
with greater dispatch. He practices standing on his head, in order to accustom himself to any
position. Leapfrog is one of his methods of getting over the ground quickly. He would willingly
go an errand any distance if he could leap-frog it with a few other boys. He has a natural
genius for combining pleasure with business. This is the reason why, when he is sent to the
spring for a pitcher of water, and the family are waiting at the dinner-table, he is absent
so long; for he stops to poke the frog that sits on the stone, or, if there is a penstock,
to put his hand over the spout and squirt the water a little while. He is the one who spreads
the grass when the men have cut it; he mows it away in the barn; he rides the horse to cultivate
the corn, up and down the hot, weary rows; he picks up the potatoes when they are dug; he drives
the cows night and morning; he brings wood and water and splits kindling; he gets up the horse
and puts out the horse; whether he is in the house or out of it, there is always something
for him to do. Just before school in winter he shovels paths; in summer he turns the grindstone.
He knows where there are lots of winter-greens and sweet flag-root, but instead of going for
them, he is to stay in-doors and pare apples and stone raisins and pound something in a mortar.
And yet, with his mind full of schemes of what he would like to do, and his hands full of occupations,
he is an idle boy who has nothing to busy himself with but school and chores! He would gladly
do all the work if somebody else would do the chores, he thinks, and yet I doubt if any boy
ever amounted to anything in the world, or was of much use as a man, who did not enjoy the
advantages of a liberal education in the way of chores.

