THUS have I drawn together my Thoughts upon this Subject at the Request of several Ministers
and private Christians who practise Psalmody in this Method themselves, and sing the Songs
of the {275} Lamb as well as the Psalms of David in their publick and private Worship, and
especially at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper. I had design'd and almost prepar'd a larger
Discourse, wherein the Duty of Singing and the Manner of Performance would have been consider'd.
But this Essay has already swell'd beyond the Bulk propos'd: There are many that would rejoice
to see Evangelic Songs more universally encouraged to the Honour of their Lord Jesus, and to
the Joy and Consolation of their Fellow-saints. If the Spirit of God shall make any of these
Arguments I have used successful to attain this glorious End, I shall take pleasure in the
Release of their Souls from that part of Judaism which they have so long indulged. I hope the
Difficulties that appear'd frightful and discouraging will be lost, and vanish by a diligent
and fair Perusal of what is written; yet those that pay a sacred Reverence to the Inspired
Writings, may still find it hard to yield to the Conviction; Scruples and Reliques of an old
Opinion will perhaps hang about their Consciences still: A Fear and Jealousy of admitting any
Forms humane Composure in the Worship of Singing will scarce permit their Lips to practise
that to which their Understandings have given their Assent. I would intreat such to give this
Discourse a thoughtful Review; and tho they may not judge every Argument conclusive, nor every
Objection sufficiently remov'd, yet if there be but one unanswerable Reason it ought to be
attended to; and the whole put together may give such Light and Satisfaction as may incourage
the Practice of this Duty. 'Tis very easy to make Cavils and Replies to the strongest Reasonings;
but let us have a Care lest we rob our Souls and the Churches of those Divine Comforts of evangelic
Psalmody, by a Fondness of our old and preconceived Opinions. He that believeth may eat all
Things, and should not be forbidden: He may partake of Flesh {276} and drink Wine; he may tast
of the various Pleasure of the Gospel, and sing the New Song: Another who is weak eateth Herbs,
and satisfies himself with ancient Melody. 2.

If the Hymns and spiritual Songs which are here presented to the World are so unhappy as to
discourage the Design of this Essay, I will censure and reprove them my self: If they are condemned
as being unsuitable to the Capacity or Experience of plain Christians, I will easily confess
a Variety of Faults in them; 'twas hard to restrain my Verse always within the Bounds of my
Design; 'Twas hard to sink every Line to the Level of a whole Congregation, and yet to keep
it above Contempt. However among so great a Number of Songs I hope there will be some found
that speak the very Language, and Desires and Sense of the meanest Souls, and will be an Assistance
to their Joy and Worship. The Blemishes of the rest may serve to awaken some more pious and
judicious Fancy to a more successful Attempt; and whoever shall have the Honour of such a Performance,
I promise my self a large Share in the Pleasure. But we must despair of hearing the New Song
of the Lamb in its Perfection and Glory, till Babylon the Great is fallen, and the Kingdoms
of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, till the New Heavens and
the New Earth appear, till all the former things are passed away, and all things are made New.