 I cannot tell what a profound distress
overpowered my heart.

How incongruous seemed the mem-sahibs there, in their evening-dresses, the hum of English conversation,
and the ripples of laughter! How richly true for us is our India of the ages; how cheap and
false the hollow courtesies of an English dinner-party!

CUTTACK,

March 1893.

If we begin to attach too much importance to the applause of Englishmen, we shall have to be
rid of much in us that is good, and to accept from them much that is bad.

We shall grow ashamed of going about without socks, and cease to feel shame at the sight of
their ball dresses. We shall have no compunction in throwing overboard our ancient manners,
nor any in emulating their lack of courtesy.

We shall leave off wearing our achgans because they are susceptible of improvement, but think
nothing of surrendering our heads to their hats, though no headgear could well be uglier.

In short, consciously or unconsciously, we shall have to cut our lives down according as they
clap their hands or not.

Wherefore I apostrophise myself and say: "O Earthen Pot! For goodness sake keep away from that
Metal Pot! Whether he comes to you in anger or merely to give you a patronising pat on the
back, you are done for, cracked in either case. So pay heed to old Aesop's sage counsel, I
pray--and keep your distance."

Let the metal pot ornament wealthy homes; you have work to do in those of the poor. If you
let yourself be broken, you will have no place in either, but merely return to the dust; or,
at best, you may secure a corner in a bric-a-brac cabinet--as a curiosity, and it is more glorious
far to be used for fetching water by the meanest of village women.

SHELIDAH,

8th May 1893.

Poetry is a very old love of mine--I must have been engaged to her when I was only Rathi's[1]
age. Long ago the recesses under the old banyan tree beside our tank, the inner gardens, the
unknown regions on the ground floor of the house, the whole of the outside world, the nursery
rhymes and tales told by the maids, created a wonderful fairyland within me. It is difficult
to give a clear idea of all the vague and mysterious happenings of that period, but this much
is certain, that my exchange of garlands[2] with Poetic Fancy was already duly celebrated.

[Footnote 1: Rathi, his son, was then five years old.]

[Footnote 2: The betrothal ceremony.]

I must admit, however, that my betrothed is not an auspicious maiden--whatever else she may
bring one, it is not good fortune. I cannot say she has never given me happiness, but peace
of mind with her is out of the question. The lover whom she favours may get his fill of bliss,
but his heart's blood is wrung out under her relentless embrace. It is not for the unfortunate
creature of her choice ever to become a staid and sober householder, comfortably settled down
on a social foundation.

Consciously or unconsciously, I may have done many things that were untrue, but I have never
uttered anything false in my poetry--that is the sanctuary where the deepest truths of my life
find refuge.

SHELIDAH,

10th May 1893.

Here come black, swollen masses of cloud; they soak up the golden sunshine from the scene in
front of me like great pads of blotting-paper. Rain must be near, for the breeze feels moist
and tearful.

Over there, on the sky-piercing peaks of Simla, you will find it hard to realise exactly what
an important event the coming of the clouds is here, or how many are anxiously looking up to
the sky, hailing their advent. 

"If he stirs cut his throat. Now, you, if you move a finger you're done." The steward straddled
across the Scorpion, and held the knife up in a sarcastic way.
Hindhaugh went swiftly on deck, and stepped right among the jabbering
Spaniards. But no sooner
is their hunger satisfied than they forget all their past sufferings.