"You are right, Lady Emily," said Edith, drying her eyes and endeavouring to resume her natural
manner, though still betrayed by her faltering voice and the paleness of her cheeks,--"you
are quite right; Lord Evandale merits such usage from no one, least of all from her whom he
has honoured with his regard. But if I have given way, for the last time, to a sudden and irresistible
burst of feeling, it is my consolation, Lady Emily, that your brother knows the cause, that
I have hid nothing from him, and that he at least is not apprehensive of finding in Edith Bellenden
a wife undeserving of his affection. But still you are right, and I merit your censure for
indulging for a moment fruitless regret and painful remembrances. It shall be so no longer;
my lot is cast with Evandale, and with him I am resolved to bear it. Nothing shall in future
occur to excite his complaints or the resentment of his relations; no idle recollections of
other days shall intervene to prevent the zealous and affectionate discharge of my duty; no
vain illusions recall the memory of other days--"

As she spoke these words, she slowly raised her eyes, which had before been hidden by her hand,
to the latticed window of her apartment, which was partly open, uttered a dismal shriek, and
fainted. Lady Emily turned her eyes in the same direction, but saw only the shadow of a man,
which seemed to disappear from the window, and, terrified more by the state of Edith than by
the apparition she had herself witnessed, she uttered shriek upon shriek for assistance. Her
brother soon arrived, with the chaplain and Jenny Dennison; but strong and vigorous remedies
were necessary ere they could recall Miss Bellenden to sense and motion. Even then her language
was wild and incoherent.

"Press me no farther," she said to Lord Evandale,--"it cannot be; Heaven and earth, the living
and the dead, have leagued themselves against this ill-omened union. Take all I can give,--my
sisterly regard, my devoted friendship. I will love you as a sister and serve you as a bondswoman,
but never speak to me more of marriage."

The astonishment of Lord Evandale may easily be conceived. "Emily," he said to his sister,
"this is your doing. I was accursed when I thought of bringing you here; some of your confounded
folly has driven her mad!"

"On my word, Brother," answered Lady Emily, "you're sufficient to drive all the women in Scotland
mad. Because your mistress seems much disposed to jilt you, you quarrel with your sister, who
has been arguing in your cause, and had brought her to a quiet hearing, when, all of a sudden,
a man looked in at a window, whom her crazed sensibility mistook either for you or some one
else, and has treated us gratis with an excellent tragic scene."

"What man?  What window?" said Lord Evandale, in impatient displeasure. "Miss Bellenden is
incapable of trifling with me; and yet what else could have--"

"Hush! hush!" said Jenny, whose interest lay particularly in shifting further inquiry; "for
Heaven's sake, my lord, speak low, for my lady begins to recover."

