Applied Psychology

                              INITIATIVE
                            PSYCHIC ENERGY

                   Being the Sixth of a Series of
                  Twelve Volumes on the Applications
                   of Psychology to the Problems of
                         Personal and Business
                              Efficiency

                                  BY

                      WARREN HILTON, A.B., L.L.B.
             FOUNDER OF THE SOCIETY OF APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY

                     ISSUED UNDER THE AUSPICES OF
                          THE LITERARY DIGEST
                                  FOR
                  The Society of Applied Psychology
                          NEW YORK AND LONDON
                                 1920

                            COPYRIGHT 1914
                    BY THE APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY PRESS
                             SAN FRANCISCO

CONTENTS

Chapter

I. MENTAL SECOND WIND

   STICKING TO THE JOB
   THE LAGGING BRAIN
   RESERVE SUPPLIES OF POWER
   "BLUE" MONDAYS
   HOW TO STRIKE ONE'S STRIDE
   THE SPUR OF DESIRE
   HOW TO RELEASE STORED-UP ENERGIES
   THE LAWYER WHO "OVERWORKS"
   EXCITEMENT AND THE HERO
   ENDURING POWER OF MIND

II. RESERVES OF POWER

   MAN'S POTENTIAL AND KINETIC ENERGIES
   HOLDING THE TOP PACE
   GENIUS AND THE MASTER MAN
   MENTAL EFFECTS OF CITY LIFE
   NEW-FOUND ENERGIES EXPLAINED
   QUICKENED MENTALITY
   FAST LIVING AND LONG LIVING
   PROFESSOR PATRICK'S EXPERIMENTS
   RATIO BETWEEN REPAIR AND DEMAND
   PYGMIES AND GIANTS
   TRANSFORMING INERTNESS INTO ALERTNESS
   HOW THE MIND ACCUMULATES ENERGY
   THE THRESHOLD OF INHIBITION
   HIDDEN STRENGTH
   GIVING A MAN SCOPE

III. THE INITIATIVE ENERGY OF SUCCESS

   SOURCES OF PERSISTENCE
   IMPORTANCE OF THE MENTAL SETTING
   IDEAS ALL MEN RESPOND TO
   HOW TO EXALT THE PERSONALITY
   "GOOD STARTERS" AND "STRONG FINISHERS"
   STEPS IN SELF-DEVELOPMENT
   SAVING A THOUSAND A YEAR
   LOOKING FOR A "SOFT SNAP"
   DRAWING POWER FROM ON HIGH
   THE MAN WHO LASTS

IV. HOW TO AVOID WASTES THAT DRAIN THE ENERGY OF SUCCESS

   SPEEDING THE BULLET WITHOUT AIMING
   WHY MOST MEN FAIL
   THE SUCCESSFUL PROMOTER
   THE HUMAN DYNAMO
   COOL BRAINS AND HOT BOXES
   MARVELOUS INCREASED EFFICIENCY HANDLING "PIG"
   "OVERLOADED" HUMAN ENGINES
   SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT OF SELF
   PHYSIOLOGICAL CAUSES OF WASTE
   TESTS FOR SENSORY DEFECTS
   MENTAL FRICTION AND INNER WHIRLWINDS
   PROMINENT TRAITS OF GREAT ACHIEVERS
   WHY A MAN BREAKS DOWN
   HOW TO ECONOMIZE EFFORT
   HOW YOUR MENTAL CAPITAL IS DISSIPATED
   CONQUERING INDECISION
   WHY "CHRISTIAN SCIENCE" WORKS
   HOW TO RELEASE PENT-UP POWER
   PROPER RATIO BETWEEN WORK AND REST
   DETERMINING YOUR NORM OF EFFICIENCY

V. THE SECRET OF MENTAL EFFICIENCY

   WHERE ENERGY IS STORED
   BODILY EFFECTS OF IDEAS
   IMPULSES AND INHIBITIONS
   TRAINING FOR MENTAL "TEAM-WORK"
   RUST AND THE "DAILY GRIND"
   IDEAS THAT HARMONIZE
   FIVE RULES FOR CONSERVING ENERGY
   BUSINESS LUCK AND "BLUE-SKY" THEORIES
   DEVICES FOR COMMERCIAL EFFICIENCY

CHAPTER I

MENTAL SECOND WIND

[Sidenote: Sticking to the Job]

Are you an unusually persevering and persistent person? Or, like most of us, do you sometimes
find it difficult to stick to the job until it is done? What is your usual experience in this
respect?

Is it not this, that you work steadily along until of a sudden you become conscious of a feeling
of weariness, crying "Enough!" for the time being, and that you then yield to the impulse to stop?

[Sidenote: The Lagging Brain]

Assuming that this is what generally happens, does this feeling of fatigue, this impulse to
rest, mean that your mental energy is exhausted?

Suppose that by a determined effort of the will you force your lagging brain to take up the
thread of work. There will invariably come a new supply of energy, a "second wind," enabling
you to forge ahead with a freshness and vigor that is surprising after the previous lassitude.

Nor is this all. The same process may be repeated a second time and a third time, each new
effort of the will being followed by a renewal of energy.

[Sidenote: Reserve Supplies of Power]

Many a man will tell you that he does his best work in the wee watches of the morning, after
tedious hours of persevering but fruitless effort. Instead of being exhausted by its long hours
of persistent endeavor, the mind seems now to rise to the acme of its power, to achieve its
supreme accomplishments. Difficulties melt into thin air, profound problems find easy solution.
Flights of genius manifest themselves. Yet long before midnight such a one had perhaps felt
himself yield to fatigue and had tied a wet towel around his head or had taken stimulants to
keep himself awake.

The existence of this reserve supply of energy is manifested in physical as well as mental effort.

Men who work with their heads and men who work with their hands, scholars and Marathon runners,
must alike testify to the existence of reserve supplies of power not ordinarily drawn upon.

[Sidenote: "Blue" Mondays]

If we do not always or habitually utilize this reserve power, it is simply because we have
accustomed ourselves to yield at once to the first strong feeling of fatigue.

Evidence of this same fact appears in our feelings on different days. How often does a man
get up from his breakfast-table after a long night's rest, when he should be feeling fresh
and invigorated, and say to himself, "I don't feel like working today." And it may take him
until afternoon to get into his workaday stride, if, indeed, he reaches it at all.

[Sidenote: How to Strike One's Stride]

You cannot yourself be immune from the feeling on certain days that you are not at your best.
Somehow or other, your wits seem befogged. You hesitate to undertake important interviews.
Your interest lags. And though crises arise in your business, you feel weighted down and unable
to meet them with that shrewd discernment and decisiveness of action of which you know yourself
capable.

But you realize, in your inmost self, that if you continue to exert the will and persistently
hold yourself to the business in hand, sooner or later you will warm to the work, enthusiasm
will come, the clouds will be dispelled, the husks will fly. Yet you have had no rest; on the
contrary, you have, by continued conscious effort, consumed more and more of your vital energy.

[Sidenote: The Spur of Desire]

Obviously it was not rest that you needed.

What you required was the impulse of some strong desire that should carry you over the threshold
of that first inertia into the wide field of reserve energy so rarely called upon and so rich
in power.

Under the lashings of necessity, or the spur of love or ambition, men accomplish feats of mental
and physical endurance of which they would have supposed themselves incapable. Here is what
a certain lawyer says of his early struggles:

[Sidenote: How to Release Stored-Up Energies]

"When I was twenty-three years old, married, and with a family to support, I entered the law
course of a great university. Of the many students in my class, seven, including me, were making
a living while studying law.

"By special arrangement, I was relieved from attendance at lectures and simply required to
pass examinations on the various subjects, and was thus enabled to retain my place as principal
of a large public school. During the third and last year of my law course, I was principal
of a public day school of two thousand children and an alternate night school with an enrolment
of seven hundred and fifty, and I worked at the law three nights in the week and all day Sunday.

[Sidenote: The Lawyer Who "Overworks"]

"After eight months of this, the final examinations came around. They consumed a full week--from
nine in the morning until five or six at night. I had no opportunity for review, so I rented
a room near the law school to save the time going and coming and reviewed each night the subjects
of examination for the following day.

"I did not sleep more than two hours any night in that week. On Thursday, while bolting a bit
of luncheon, a fishbone stuck in my throat. Fearful of losing the result of my year's effort,
I returned to my work, suffering much pain, and kept at it until Saturday night, when the examinations
were concluded. The next day the surgeon who removed the fishbone said there was no reason
why I should not have had 'a bad case of gangrene.'

"When I look back on that year's work I don't see how I stood it. I don't see how I kept myself
at it, day in, day out, month after month without rest, recreation or relief. I am sure I could
never go through it again, even if I had the courage to undertake it.

"I ranked second in a class of one hundred and eighty in my law examinations, won the second
prize for the best graduating thesis, received a complimentary vote for class oratorship, and
much to my surprise was soon after offered an assistant superintendency of the public schools
by the school board, who knew nothing of my studies and thought my work as a teacher worthy
of promotion.

"It was not only the hardest year's work but the best year's work I ever did. It exemplifies
my invariable experience that the more we want to do the more we can do and the better we can
do it." We were sadly crippled by cholera, and it was almost appalling to me to find that out
of twenty-seven officers I could only muster fifteen for the operations of the attack. However,
it was done,--and after it was done came the collapse.

Such is the profound resourcefulness and enduring power of the human mind.

CHAPTER II

RESERVES OF POWER

[Sidenote: Man's Potential and Kinetic Energies]

Stored-up energy not in use has been given a name by scientific men. They call it potential
energy. In this way it is distinguished from kinetic or circulating energy by which is meant
energy that is at work. For example, a ton of coal in the bin contains a certain amount of
potential energy, which is capable of being converted into kinetic energy by combustion.

[Sidenote: Holding the Top Pace]

You have a vast amount of potential energy over and above what you actually use. You have formed
the habit of giving up trying a thing as soon as you have spent the usual amount of effort
on it, and this without regard to whether or not you have accomplished anything.

While we all have the power of sustained mental activity, not one in ten thousand of us holds
to the top pace.

Worse still, even such mental energy as we do consume is dispersed and scattered over a multitude
of trivial interests instead of being focused upon some one possessing aim.

We intend to show you how you can lose yourself in your work with an absorbing passion and
how you can at any time make special requisition upon your hidden stores of potential energy
and draw new supplies of power that will sweep you on to your goal.

[Sidenote: Genius and the Master Man]

More than anything else, it is the ability to do this that lifts the great men of the race
above the common run of mortals.

It is this that distinguishes genius from mediocrity. The master man transforms his vast stores
of reserve or potential energy into circulating or kinetic energy. His work glows with living fire. 

Not of his music could Lucy Larcom say, as she so happily does of our bird of the meadow,--

"Sounds the meadow-lark's refrain Just as sad and clear."

Nor could his sonorous song be characterized by Clinton Scollard's
exquisite verse,--

"From whispering winds your plaintive notes were
drawn."

For the brilliant solo of Colorado's bird is not in the least like the charming minor chant of
our Eastern lark. So powerful that it is heard at great distances in the clear air, it is still not
in the slightest degree strained or harsh, but is sweet and rich, whether it be close at one's side
in the silence, or shouted from the housetop in the tumult of a busy
street.

It has, moreover, the same tender winsomeness that charms us in our own lark song; something
that fills the sympathetic listener with delight, that satisfies his whole being; a siren strain
that he longs to listen to forever. The whole breadth and grandeur of the great West is in this
song, its freedom, its wildness, the height of its mountains, the
sweep of its rivers, the beauty of its flowers,--all in the wonderful
performance.

Even after months of absence, the bare memory of the song of the mesa will move its lover to
an almost painful yearning.

Nor is the variety of the lark song less noteworthy than its quality.

That each bird has a large répertoire I cannot assert, for my opportunities for study have been
too limited; but it is affirmed by those who know him better, that
he has, and I fully believe it.

One thing is certainly true of nearly if not quite all of our native
birds, that no two sing exactly alike, and the close observer soon
learns to distinguish between the robins and the song-sparrows of
a neighborhood, by their notes alone.

The Western lark seems even more than others to individualize his utterances, so that constant surprises
reward the discriminating listener. During two months' bird-study in that delightful cañon-hidden
grove at the foot of Cheyenne Mountain, one particular bird song
was for weeks an unsolved mystery.

The strain consisted of three notes in loud, ringing tones, which
syllabled themselves very plainly in my ear as "Whip-for-her."

This unseemly, and most emphatic, demand came always from a distance,
and apparently from the top of some tall tree, and it proved to be
most tantalizing; for although the first note invariably brought me
out, opera-glass in hand, I was never able to come any nearer to a
sight of the unknown than the sway of a twig he had just left.

One morning, however, before I was up, the puzzling songster visited
the little grove under my windows, and I heard his whole song, of
which it now appeared the three notes were merely the conclusion.

The performance was eccentric. It began with a soft warble, apparently for his sole entertainment,
then suddenly, as if overwhelmed by memory of wrongs received or
of punishment deserved, he interrupted his tender melody with a loud,
incisive "Whip-for-her!" in a totally different manner.

His nearness, however, solved the mystery; the ring of the meadow-lark
was in his tones, and I knew him at once.

I had not suspected his identity, for the Western bird does not take much trouble to keep out of
sight, and, moreover, his song is rarely less than six or eight notes in length.

Another unique singer of the highlands is the horned lark.

One morning in June a lively carriage party passing along the mountain side, on a road so bare
and bleak that it seemed nothing could live there, was startled by
a small gray bird, who suddenly dashed out of the sand beside the
wheels, ran across the path, and flew to a fence on the other side.

 He
caused three young men to remain awake for four successive days and nights. They were then
allowed to go to sleep, the purpose of the experiment being to determine just how much time
Nature required to recuperate from the long vigil. They were allowed to sleep themselves out,
and all woke up thoroughly rested. Yet the one who slept the longest slept only one-third longer
than his customary night's sleep.

You have doubtless had the same experience yourself many times. It all goes to show that if
we are awake four times as long as usual, we do not make up for it by sleeping four times as
long, but four times as soundly, as customary. The hard-working mechanic requires no more hours
of sleep than the corner loafer, the active man of affairs no more than the dawdler.

[Sidenote: Ratio Between Repair and Demand]

The time of tissue repair is about the same with all men under all conditions. It is the rate
of repair that varies with the demand that has been put upon the body.

Again, look at the same subject from the standpoint of food supply. On what you now eat and
drink you have a certain average weight. Eat, digest and assimilate a larger quantity of food
and your weight will increase. This increase will be greatest at the start and will gradually
slow up until you shall have reached the point beyond which you can gain no more. Given the
same hygienic conditions that you have been accustomed to, you will maintain yourself at the
increased weight on the increased supply of food.

[Sidenote: Pygmies and Giants]

Now, all this involves clearly enough a greatly increased rate of activity on the part of the
bodily organs of assimilation and repair. It is a situation on all fours with that of the countryman
whose rate of brain activity has been stimulated by an increased mental demand.

No man will maintain that better, more nourishing and more liberal food rations, transformed
into increased bodily tissue, with a consequent greater weight and greater muscular strength,
would result in a loss of vitality or the shortening of a man's life.

[Sidenote: Transforming Inertness into Alertness]

Pygmies cannot become giants physically or intellectually. But as the puny youth can by systematic
exercise broaden his frame and develop his muscles into at least a semblance of the athlete,
and can then through his healthier appetite and his faster rate of repair maintain himself
without effort at the new standard; so can the mentally inert call forth their reserves of
energy and maintain a higher standard of activity and fruitfulness.

Few men live on the plane of their highest efficiency. Few search the recesses of the well-springs
of power. The lives of most of us are passed among the shallows of the mind without thought
of the possibilities that lurk within the deeper pools.

[Sidenote: How the Mind Accumulates Energy]

This accumulation of potential subconscious reserve energy is a result of the evolution of
man and the growing complexity of his life.

No man could, if he would, respond to all the impulses to muscular action aroused in him by
sense-impressions. It would be still less possible for him to respond to every impulse to muscular
action awakened from the past with the remembered thought with which it is associated.

Desire, interest, attention and the selective will must pick and choose among these multitudinous
tendencies to action.

Here, then, is another fact that has immediate bearing upon your ability to carry out any ambition
you may have. Your every action is the net result of selection among a number of impulses and
inhibitory forces or tendencies.

[Sidenote: The Threshold of Inhibition]

As a general thing, consciousness is made up of a number of conflicting ideas, each with its
associated feeling and its impulse to action. Just what you do in any particular case depends
upon what mental picture is strongest, is most vivid in consciousness, and thus able to overcome
all contrary tendencies.

As life becomes more and more complex, the number and variety of our sensory experiences increase
correspondingly. And so it comes about, that we have untold millions of sensory experiences,
carrying with them the impulses to muscular response, none of which, on account of the multiplicity
of conflicting ideas, is ever allowed to find release and actually take form in muscular activity.

[Sidenote: Hidden Strength]

The consequence is that only an exceedingly small proportion of the mental energy that is developed
within us is ever actually displayed. The rest is somehow and somewhere locked up behind the
inhibitory threshold. It is stored away in subconsciousness with the sensory experiences of
the past with which it is associated.

[Sidenote: Giving a Man Scope]

Quoting Mr. Waldo P. Warren: "Much of the strength within men is hidden, awaiting an occasion
to reveal it. The head of a department in a great manufacturing concern severed his connection
with the firm, his work falling upon a young man of twenty-five years. The young man rose to
the occasion, and in a very short time was conceded to be the stronger executive of the two.
He had been with the concern for several years, and was regarded as a bright fellow, but his
marked success was a surprise to all who knew him--even to himself.

"The fact is, the young man had that ability all the time and didn't know it; and his employers
didn't know it. He might have been doing greater things all along if there had been the occasion
to reveal his strength.

"Do you employers and superior officers in business realize how much of this hidden strength
there is in your men? Perhaps a word from you, giving certain men more scope, would liberate
that ability for the development of both your business and your men.

"Do you workers know your own strength? Are you working up to your capacity? Or are you accepting
the limits which the circumstances place about you?"

CHAPTER III

THE INITIATIVE ENERGY OF SUCCESS

[Sidenote: Sources of Persistence]

In such instances as we have recounted, men have found that persistent effort along certain
lines has had the effect of making presently available what would otherwise be simply unused
storage batteries of reserve power. What was the source and inspiration for this persistent effort?

You will say that it was ambition or patriotism or some similar semi-emotional influence. And
so it was. But what is ambition, what is patriotism, what is any desire but a picturing to
the mind's eye of the things desired, an awakening of a mental image of the result to be attained,
the reward that is to follow certain efforts? And these mental pictures coming into consciousness
have brought with them their associated emotions and their associated impulses to muscular
action, impulses appropriate to the picture and automatically tending to work its realization.

These impulses constitute the whole of man's achieving power. They are the Initiative Energy
of all Success.

[Sidenote: Importance of the Mental Setting]

When you are afflicted with doubt and fear, timidity and lack of confidence, this means that
your mental inhibitions are too numerous, too high or too strong. Remove them and access is
had to the latent energy of accumulated and creative thought complexes. You will then become
buoyant, cheerful, overflowing with enthusiasm, and ready for a fresh, definite, active part
in life.

Ideas, then, when latent, may be considered as possessing an energizing influence.

The same idea does not necessarily have the same effect upon the same persons at different
times. What its effect may be at any time or with any individual depends upon the make-up of
the consciousness in which it finds itself.

[Sidenote: Ideas All Men Respond to]

The setting of consciousness may be entirely different upon the present appearance of the particular
idea from what it was on the occasion when this same idea last appeared. Yesterday there may
have been present no conflicting tendencies, and this particular idea may therefore have been
allowed free and joyous expression. Today other thoughts may be in the ascendency so that we
look upon the idea of yesterday with a feeling of revulsion.

The thought that aroused new energy in you yesterday may then sicken you at your task today.
The thought that stirs the soul of a vigorous man may shock the sensibilities of a delicate woman.

[Sidenote: How to Exalt the Personality]

Yet there are some ideas to which all men in varying degrees seem alike to respond. How often
in battle have the failing spirits of an army been revived by the appearance of the leader
shouting his battle-cry and waving his shining sword! How often have men been roused to heights
of heroic achievement by the strains of martial music! How often have troops spent with exhaustion
responded to the call of such simple phrases as "The Flag," "Our Country," "Liberty," or such
songs as "The Marseillaise," "God Save the King," "Dixie"! These phrases are but the signs
of ideas, yet the sounding of these phrases has summoned these ideas into consciousness, and
the summoning of these ideas into consciousness has placed undreamed-of and immeasurable foot-pounds
of energy on the hair-trigger of action.

[Sidenote: "Good Starters" and "Strong Finishers"]

And so it is with you. Down deep in the inmost chambers of your soul are untouched stores of
energy that properly applied will exalt your personality and illumine your career.

But to find and claim these hidden riches you must persevere. You must endure.

In a Marathon race it is endurance that wins. The graceful sprinter who is off with a leap
at the bark of the pistol soon falls by the wayside.

Life is a Marathon in which persistence triumphs.

There are many "good starters," but few "strong finishers." That is why the failures so outnumber
the successes.

[Sidenote: Steps in Self-Development]

The man who travels fastest does more than he is told to do. To merely comply with a fixed
routine is to fall short of one's duty. The progressive man adds to the work of today his preparation
for the work of tomorrow. He delights in attempting more and more difficult tasks, because
in every task he sets himself he sees a step forward in the development of his own abilities.
He loves his work more than he loves his pay, and he delves deeper than the exigencies of the
moment require, because he craves the power to do more.

Most men start with enthusiasm. No hours are too long, no task too difficult. But soon they
tire. And lacking will-power to persist, they succumb to the lure of distracting interests.
They become disheartened and indifferent. And so they fail.

[Sidenote: Saving a Thousand a Year]

A young man married. He was proprietor of a flourishing "general" store in Princeton, Indiana.
He and his bride forthwith resolved that they could and would lay aside out of their income
a thousand dollars a year for ten years, by which time they would have ten thousand dollars
and accumulated interest and could go into business in a big city. At the end of the first
year, when they took stock of their savings, they decided that thereafter, instead of trying
to save a thousand dollars a year for ten years, they would undertake to save ten dollars a
year for a thousand years and would be more apt to succeed. Today they are just where they began.

You all know such men--men who are always starting and never finishing.

[Sidenote: Looking for a "Soft Snap"]

Ninety-five per cent of the men who go into business are "quitters." The very first disappointment
sends them scurrying to cover. They begin to look for a "soft snap" away from the firing line.
Is it any wonder that so few reach any great success?

That there is an enormous lack of appropriation of energy in most men's lives is an undoubted
fact. Just where this energy is stored, and just what its eternal significance may be, is immaterial
to our purpose.

It may be that this reserve is Nature's safeguard against our extravagance.

It may be, as some philosophers contend, that the subconscious, with its vast stores of energy,
is a higher, more spiritual phase of man.

[Sidenote: Drawing Power from on High]

It may be that the subconscious is for each one of us his individual segment of the Divine
Essence--that it marks our "at-one-ment" with God.

It may be that to evoke these latent energies is to call upon those resources of our being
which are the embodiment within us of the spirit of the Creator of all things.

It may be that this Divine Essence, if adequately aroused, may exert an absolute transcendence
over material things and lift humanity to a God-like plane. "I said, ye are gods," quoth the
Psalmist. "Be ye perfect, even as your Father," was the injunction of the Master.

Whatever the eternal significance of your latent energy may be, the fact remains that it is
yours, and yours to use.

If you are to succeed, if you are to do big things, you must be a man of "doggedness." You
must keep your eyes trained everlastingly upon the vision of the thing you want. You must stay
in the race until you get your "second wind." You must be master of yourself and draw freely
on your stored-up powers.

[Sidenote: The Man Who Lasts]

Do as we shall tell you in this Course and you will become a master man, the kind of man who
"lasts," the kind of man who works his imagination overtime, the kind of man who can strain
his energies to the utmost and then, finding himself still a failure, can rise "like the glow
of the sun" to do bolder and bigger things--the kind of man who wins.

CHAPTER IV

HOW TO AVOID WASTES THAT DRAIN THE ENERGY OF SUCCESS

[Sidenote: Speeding the Bullet Without Aiming]

We have shown you that you have within you the potentialities of success in the form of latent
mental energy. We have shown you that your ability to achieve depends upon your ability to
utilize to the full your underground mental resources.

But success demands that you do more than merely use all your mental energies. You must use
them intelligently.

[Sidenote: Why Most Men Fail]

Most men fail because they speed the bullet without aiming. They fire at random, and so bag
no game.

Your pent-up mental energy is the powder in the cartridge. Its usefulness depends upon the
man behind the gun.

To succeed in business you must intelligently control and direct (1) your own mental energies,
(2) the mental energies of others.

The course of the average man through life is an aimless zigzag. It has neither direction nor
purpose. It represents wasted energy capriciously expended.

Mental energy is like water: it has a tendency to scatter. It is diffusive. It seeks release
in a thousand different directions at the same time.

As a boy, first learning to write, you were unable to prevent the simultaneous squirming of
tongue and legs, all ludicrously irrelevant to your purpose of writing. So now, as a business
man, unless you have learned the secret of self-mastery, you are unable to concentrate your
efforts, your attention is easily distracted, you exhaust yourself in displays of passion,
you are forever doing things during business hours that have no relation to your business,
you are forever doing things in connection with your business that do not contribute to its
progress, you expend just as much energy as the accomplished executive or the successful "hustler,"
but you fritter it away in unprofitable activities.

[Sidenote: The Successful Promoter]

To correct this is to gain mastery and power.

Concentrate your mental energies on one thing at a time. Stop spreading them around. The promoter
may have a dozen big enterprises under way at once, but he takes them up one at a time. He
transfers his whole mind and thought from one to the next. You cannot of course be eternally
doing the same thing; but make no mistake about it, the only way to succeed at anything is
to consciously control your mental energies. You may throw them now into this attack, now into
another; but you must always have a tight grip on yourself, or you cannot succeed.

[Sidenote: The Human Dynamo]

You will often hear some "live-wire" business man spoken of as a "human dynamo." He has the
faculty of turning out a stupendous amount of work in a comparatively short time. How he can
carry in his mind the details of so many large projects, how he can accomplish so much in actual,
tangible results in many directions, how he can pull the strings of so many enterprises without
getting lost in the maze of detail, is the marvel of his associates. And yet this man is never
"hurried, nor flurried, nor worried." But every word and every act is straight to the point
and productive of results worth while.

[Sidenote: Cool Brains and Hot Boxes]

"A cool brain is the reverse of a hot box. It carries the business of the day along with a
steady drive, and is invariably the mark of the big man. The man who dispatches his work quietly,
promptly and efficiently, with no trace of fuss and flurry, is a big man. It is not the hurrying,
clattering and chattering individual who turns off the most work. He may imagine he is getting
over a lot of track, but he wastes far more than the necessary amount of steam in doing it.
The fable of the hare and the tortoise would not be a bad primer for a number of us, and the
lesson relearned would not only be beneficial in a business-producing way, but it would help
us in the full enjoyment of our work."

[Sidenote: Marvelous Increased Efficiency Handling "Pig"]

Progress in mental efficiency must result from the application of knowledge of the mental machine.
Just as we watch the steam-engine and the electric motor to see that they are not "overloaded,"
so we must watch the mental machine, that no more power be turned on than can be profitably
employed.

This principle has already been applied to physical labor by Mr. Frederick W. Taylor in his
ground-breaking studies in "scientific management." Mr. Taylor's celebrated experiments in
the handling of pig-iron, by which the quantity handled in a day by one man was increased from
twelve and one-half tons to forty-seven and one-half tons, "showed that a man engaged in such
extremely heavy work could only be under load forty-three per cent of the working day, and
must be entirely free from load for fifty-seven per cent, to attain the maximum efficiency."

[Sidenote: "Overloaded" Human Engines]

There is no reason why efficiency in mental effort should not be gauged just as accurately
as in muscular activity. If there are times when your wits are not as keen, when you have not
the same grasp of fundamentals, as at other times, it is because you are mentally "overloaded."
It may be the result of a great variety of causes. It may be from too many hours of continuous
mental effort. But the probabilities are that it is the result of vexation, worry, dissipation,
or allowing the mind to be burdened with the strain of vicious, or at least irrelevant and
distracting, impulses and desires. And so efficiency is lost.

[Sidenote: Scientific Management of Self]

The "human dynamo" is a man who long ago learned the lesson of scientific management of his
own mental forces. He does one thing at a time, and does it the best he knows how. He directs
the whole power of his mentality to the one problem and solves it with accuracy and dispatch.
There is no more of a "load" on his "gray matter" than there is on that of the fretting, fuming,
finger-biting fritterer, but every pound of steam is spent in useful work.

Look at the victim of St. Vitus' dance. There you have an illustration of wasted energy. And
it is mental energy, for every muscular movement represents the release of thought power. The
mental lives of most men are equally aimless. They are lives of ceaseless activity producing
nothing.

[Sidenote: Psychological Causes of Waste]

Sometimes it happens that a man is not working to advantage because of some defect in his physical
make-up. He may have defective vision or some peculiarity of hearing that renders him unable
to respond as quickly as he should to the demands made upon him. If these defects are ascertained,
it is usually a simple matter to correct the defects by mechanical means or readjust the relative
duties of different persons so that the defects will be minimized.

[Sidenote: Tests for Sensory Defects]

Where large numbers of people are employed, it is comparatively easy to use tests for discovering
defects of sight or hearing by simple apparatus without requiring the services of a high-priced
expert. By adopting these test methods any manager of a large industrial establishment can
satisfy himself whether his employees are up to certain normal standards. He can even apply
the tests to himself.

Optical tests can be conducted by securing an ordinary letter chart such as is used by oculists
and opticians. Seat the subject twenty feet away. If he can read all the lines of letters from
the largest down to the smallest his eyesight is practically perfect. In a large percentage
of cases the smaller lines of type are blurred and invisible. To detect the cause and degree
of defects of the eyes it is necessary to try out the eyes by using a trial spectacle frame
and inserting detached lenses before the right eye and the left eye alternately. One of the
most common forms of defective vision is astigmatism. A chart has been designed with a series
of circles and straight lines radiating from the center. If the subject is astigmatic he will
see some of the straight lines distinctly while others will be blurred. For instance, one or
two of the vertical lines may appear very black and strong while all others will look like
a hazy network. This defect, due to unevenness of the spherical surface of the eyeball, is
easily corrected with properly ground glasses.

Defects in hearing can be easily determined by means of an "acoumeter." This little instrument
measures the acuteness of the hearing very accurately by means of shot dropped from varying
heights upon strips of glass, copper and cardboard. Tests with this device indicate whether
the subject's hearing is above or below normal.

[Sidenote: Mental Friction and Inner Whirlwinds]

Stop wasting your energy.

Heretofore you have used your powers in a more or less haphazard way, with a vast amount of
waste and no efficient direction. From now on you are to exercise more intelligence in this
respect and make all your energies contribute to your business progress and your personal success.

You are losing power in fruitless outward activities.

You are losing power in the thinking of useless thoughts. You cannot stop the ceaseless activity
of the mind. But you can conserve its forces by directing them into channels that are worth while.

You are losing power in a turmoil of inward mental strains and inharmonies. Catch yourself
at some moment when you are forging ahead in a crowded day's work. You will then see what an
inner whirlwind of excitement is in progress, what stresses and strains are at work, what contrary
impulses, what frictions and obstacles are being overcome.

Now, to the engineer every one of these words--friction, obstacle, strain--spells loss of efficiency,
and in this Course we shall teach you how you may do away with antagonistic impulses, may bring
your combined mental forces to bear upon the common enemy, and may hurl yourself into the struggles
of business and practical life with a joyful and headlong impetuosity that no obstacle can
withstand.

[Sidenote: Prominent Traits of Great Achievers]

Professor Walter Dill Scott, of Northwestern University, has said: "In studying the lives of
contemporary business men, two facts stand out pre-eminently.

[Sidenote: How to Economize Effort]

The fact is that to be a truly busy man you must be never in a hurry. You must work systematically.
You must economize effort. You must permit no distractions and do your work leisurely. You
must take time to think things over in a natural way. You must waste no thoughts in business
hours on social or pleasurable pursuits that would dissipate your mental capital. You must
work when you work, and you may play when you play, but your business must be the most fascinating
of games and the only one you play during business hours.

[Sidenote: How Your Mental Capital is Dissipated]

Another thing you need is poise. One trouble with you now is that you waste your priceless
powers in useless anxiety.

The minute business falls off you begin to worry. You fritter your mental energies in fretting
until you are incapable of real thought, and being unable to think your way out you get excited.

Remember it is all just a game, and you are in it only for the fun of the thing. You will never
win out if you persist in tearing your hair.

Before he crossed the Rubicon Julius Cæsar was staggered at the greatness of the undertaking
before him. The more he reflected and took counsel of his friends, the greater loomed the difficulties
of the attempt and the more appalling the calamities his passage of that river would bring
upon the Roman world. But when at last with the cry, "The die is cast!" he plunged into the
river, there was an end for him to mental dissension, a freedom to plan and execute, an expansion
of courage and power.

[Sidenote: Conquering Indecision]

So it will be with you. With doubt and uncertainty the pressure may be high in the gauge, but
the engine does not move. Make up your mind, and you release energies previously wasted in
conflicts between opposing thought complexes struggling for supremacy.

[Sidenote: Why "Christian Science" Works]

A fine illustration of this is shown in the religious experience known as conversion. To the
convert, conversion means the profound acceptance of a mighty spiritual truth. It means positive
knowledge taking the place of doubt or indifference. Conflicting ideas are no longer present
in his consciousness. Pent-up energies are released. He wants to do things. His soul is fired
with overmastering impulses to action. He wants to go forth and preach the gospel of his faith.
He is lifted to a high plane of exhilaration. He experiences the "peace that passeth understanding."

"Christian Science," "Truth," "The New Thought," and similar movements all achieve their really
marvelous results in much the same way. All proclaim doctrines of exuberant optimism, having
a tendency to banish fear-thoughts and self-consciousness and self-depreciation, and to set
up in their stead ideas of courage and of achievement and of individual power. If these teachings
are successful--that is to say, if they inherently possess the right appeal for the particular
individual--they have the happy effect of begetting a stoical indifference to petty physical
disorders and social vexations and bringing about a concentration upon the main business of
life of the mental energies thus previously wasted.

[Sidenote: How to Release Pent-Up Power]

Decide the matter that is troubling you. Make an end of hesitation and uncertainty and fear.
Your very act of decision will release large stores of pent-up mental power and add immeasurably
to your effectiveness.

So long as you are in doubt and perplexity conflicting ideas and impulses balance each other.
You are not then a man of action; you are a wavering coward. You are afflicted with paralysis
of will and mental stagnation.

Decide the matter--that is to say, let one mental picture assume a greater vividness than the
other until it possesses your soul--and forthwith the banked fires of your mental energy will
burst into flame.

Another thing: Stop wasting your time.

How much time do you spend in rest and relaxation? How much should you spend? Can you answer
these questions accurately?

[Sidenote: Proper Ratio Between Work and Rest]

Thomas A. Edison has contended for years that four hours' sleep a day was sufficient for any
man. He has conducted experiments with a large number of men, giving careful attention to matters
of diet and exercise, and the results have seemed in a measure to support his theory.

Dr. Fred W. Eastman reports that owing to pressure of work he was recently unable to get more
than three or four hours' sleep out of the twenty-four during a period of many months, and
that so far from being hurt by it he gained five pounds. He says: "If restoration during sleep
is a task so relatively small, the question arises whether, in order to complete restoration,
it is necessary for us to spend so much time in sleep as we do. Perhaps on account of popular
opinion and personal habit, we waste much time in this jelly-fish condition that could more
profitably be spent in active pursuit of our ambitions. The answer, of course, depends upon
the nature of our occupations. If there is muscular effort involved, with a correspondingly
large amount of waste in the cells and blood, eight hours or more are probably necessary. But
if the work is of a sedentary nature, and mainly of the brain, there is naturally a smaller
quantity of accumulated waste, and less time is required for removal. Many are the instances
of great men, past and present, who have lived healthily and worked unceasingly and strenuously
on only four or five hours of sleep, or half the laborer's portion. Surely we do not suppose
that these men were or are physically different from others, but rather that by inclination
or necessity they have developed a habit of sleeping intensely for a short period, with resulting
gain of time and efficiency."

[Sidenote: Determining Your Norm of Efficiency]

So far as this matter of relaxation, rest and sleep is concerned, the rule to follow is obviously
this: Determine accurately by experiment the proper relation between periods of work and periods
of rest in your own case, then increase your efficiency by maintaining this relation.

In Denmark they feed cows scientifically. Day by day they increase the allowance of milk-producing
food. Day by day the yield of milk increases. At last there comes a day when measurement shows
that there is no longer any increase in the production of milk. They then decrease the food
till the output of milk diminishes. So they determine the normal.

So with you and your hours of work and leisure. Give more and more time to your business each
day until there comes an impairment in the quality of your work. Stop short of this. You have
found your norm of efficiency.

CHAPTER V

THE SECRET OF MENTAL EFFICIENCY

[Sidenote: Where Energy Is Stored]

You are called upon to master and conserve the innate energies of your mind. This means that
you must (1) find out where these energies are stored, and (2) learn the conditions that determine
their activity.

All past experiences are conserved within us in the form of complexes. These complexes consist
of ideas, emotions and impulses to muscular activity. By the primary law of association the
recall to consciousness of any one of these component elements of a complex brings with it
all the rest.

[Sidenote: Bodily Effects of Ideas]

For example, the ideas pertaining to any terrifying experience, when recalled to consciousness,
bring with them the trembling, the wildly beating heart, the shaking knees, with which they
were originally accompanied. The victim of stage-fright feels his knees give way and that he
is sinking to the floor; his heart beats tumultuously, cold perspiration covers his body, he
blushes, his mouth is dry, and his voice sticks in his throat. Afterwards, alone in his own
room, the memory of that dreadful moment, the thought of another appearance before that audience,
will be accompanied by the same physiological effects.

[Sidenote: Impulses and Inhibitions]

Every such bodily movement is an expression of energy. The recall to consciousness of the terrifying
experience, the recall of the picture of the assembled audience, these things automatically
produce bodily activities. So we must conclude that Every idea in memory has associated with
it the potential energy necessary for the production of muscular movement.

It does not necessarily follow that the recall to consciousness of a given idea will be invariably
followed by an outwardly visible muscular activity expressive of its energy. Just as the mere
presence of an idea in consciousness tends to bring about a movement, so the presence of a
contrary idea will tend to inhibit it.

Try to imagine that you are bending your forefinger. At the same time hold it straight. Your
finger will actually tremble with the dammed-up energy of the repressed impulse. But the finger
will not actually move, because the idea of its not moving is just as much a part of your consciousness
as the idea of its moving. Put out of your consciousness this thought of the finger's not moving,
and forthwith the finger will bend.

Your conduct during your waking hours is thus always the result of opposing forces, some tending
in one direction, others tending to counteract the first. Thus there comes about a great waste
of mental power and an appalling loss of individual efficiency.

[Sidenote: Training for Mental "Team-Work"]

In the language of sport, you are suffering from a lack of mental "team work." The effect is
the same as if the members of a football team, instead of combining their forces against the
opposing side, should spend their time in restraining one another.

It requires but one step, and not a difficult one at that, to lead you to the conclusion that
the solution of this problem lies in having in consciousness at any one moment only such ideas
as harmonize. Let that condition prevail, and the potential energies of all ideas in consciousness
must flow together in a broad stream of useful and exhilarating activity.

[Sidenote: Rust and the "Daily Grind"]

Your work should be a source of pleasure to you. If it is simply a disagreeable task that has
to be performed, if it is a "daily grind," if you have to hold yourself to it by unremitting
effort of the will, you are no better than a rusty engine, and all your workings will be accompanied
by jars, frictions, and complaining squeaks that bespeak a positively wicked loss of power.

Hold the right thoughts persistently in mind, and you cannot help working steadily on toward
the goal you are thinking of. Keep steadily at work with the right thoughts persistently in
mind and success is sure to come.

Success, then, lies in the concentration of mental energies. I remember clumps of this flower
in my grandmother's old-fashioned garden, but my wildest dreams never
pictured miles of it, so profuse that, looking backward from the train,
the track looked like threads of steel in a broad ribbon of blue.

 There must be a "re-imaging" or imagination
in a literal and practical sense of those ideas only that carry with them impulses to motion
in the same general direction. You must have a set purpose in life, and you must yield your
powers without hindrance and without reservation to the accomplishment of that set purpose.

[Sidenote: Five Rules for Conserving Energy]

I. You must exercise deliberate, patient and persistent watchfulness to detect and repress
all useless bodily movements. You have all sorts of silly habits, twitchings, jerkings, itchings,
winkings, shrugs, frowns, coughs, snifflings and odd and meaningless gestures. Watch yourself.
Do these things no more. Save your eyes and ears and hands and nerves, all your mental energy,
for useful effort.

II. You must give yourself, mind and body, to one thing at a time, disregarding all that would
lure you from your chosen task.

III. You must acquire a self-conscious sense of your own self-mastery. It will help you to
acquire this feeling if you will continually assert, "I can and will accomplish anything that
I am determined upon! I have the power of will! I will accomplish this thing! I will!" Make
these assertions with all the force and intensity of your whole being until you are pervaded
with a sense of your own power. Do this faithfully, and in time this courageous and manly attitude
will become an inherent part of your personality.

IV. I could not have heard a sound ten feet from the tree, nor if I had been stirring myself. I
observed also that a dove can fly in perfect silence; and, moreover, that the whistle of the
wings sometimes continues after the bird has become still. I
have perfect faith in my own powers! I am absolute master of myself and of my career!" Practice
affirmations of this kind persistently, and in time your mind will have permanently acquired
the habit of facing the facts of life in the way essential to success.

V. You must exert a favorable influence upon the mental attitude of those about you. This is
not so difficult as it would appear. You cannot yourself acquire will-power, confidence and
courage without impressing others with your possession of these qualities. Personalities are
revealed one to another by faint and suggestive activities all unconsciously perceived. Your
concentration of energy will inspire others. You will radiate an "atmosphere" of success. You
will subtly influence your associates. You will be a force to reckon with, and the world will
know it. Your air of success will draw others to you, will bring business and goodwill, and
men and money will seek a share in your enterprises.

Master your mental energies, train them, concentrate them,--thus only may you win riches with
honor.

Thus broadly put, there is, or perhaps it would be more accurate to say there seems to be,
nothing startlingly new about this proposition.

The world has always realized that singleness of purpose, concentration of effort, is essential
to success.

But in the past the world has possessed no formula by which these qualities might be acquired.

Men have endeavored to create in themselves the necessary qualities for success, having no
knowledge of the mental elements that went into their composition.

They have tried to run the mental engine knowing nothing of its mechanism.

[Sidenote: Business Luck and "Blue-Sky" Theories]

Some few have been lucky, but the path has been strewn with a thousand failures to one that
passed on to success.

There are some business men who look upon psychology as "blue-sky" theorizing or "new thought."
There are others who have a hazy idea that it is a sort of unfathomable mystery intended to
amuse long-haired scientists. The truth is that every one of these same business men, if he
is getting ahead, is unconsciously using psychological principles to the profit of his own
business every day in the year.

[Sidenote: Devices for Commercial Efficiency]

In the books that are to follow we shall show you the immense practical value of a truly scientific
psychology. You shall come into the psychological laboratory with us and work out rational,
scientific and exact methods by which, without possibility of failure and with but reasonable
effort, you can at any moment completely concentrate your mental powers. You shall be instructed
in simple devices for mastering scattered energies, repressing wasteful habits, banishing depressive
moods and raising yourself to a far higher level of commercial efficiency.

