He shook his head. "My idees and your idees--or anyhow the idees you've got hold of--somewhere--somehow----I
don't know where you get your idees. We haven't got the same idees, anyhow. You got to keep
order in these places--anyhow...."

She perceived that she was in face of a prepared position. "I don't think," she threw out,
"that she does keep order. She represses--and irritates. She gets an idea that certain girls
are against her...."

"And you get an idea she's against certain girls...."

"Practically she expels them. She has in fact just turned one out into the street."

"You got to expel 'em. You got to. You can't run these places on sugar and water. There's a
sort of girl, a sort of man, who makes trouble. There's a sort makes strikes, makes mischief,
gets up grievances. You got to get rid of 'em somehow. You got to be practical somewhere. You
can't go running these places on a lot of littry idees and all that. It's no good."

The phrase "littry idees" held Lady Harman's attention for a moment. But she could not follow
it up to its implications, because she wanted to get on with the issue she had in hand.

"I want to be consulted about these expulsions. Girl after girl has been sent away----"

Sir Isaac's silhouette was obstinate.

"She knows her business," he said.

He seemed to feel the need of a justification. "They shouldn't make trouble."

On that they rested for a little while in silence. She began to realize with a gathering emotion
that this matter was far more crucial than she had supposed. She had been thinking only of
the reinstatement of Alice Burnet, she hadn't yet estimated just what that overriding of Mrs.
Pembrose might involve.

"I don't want to have any girl go until I have looked into her case. It's----It's vital."

"She says she can't run the show unless she has some power."

Neither spoke for some seconds. She had the feeling of hopeless vexation that might come to
a child that has wandered into a trap. "I thought," she began. "These hostels----"

She stopped short.

Sir Isaac's hand tightened on the arm of his chair. "I started 'em to please you," he said.
"I didn't start 'em to please your friends."

She turned her eyes quickly to his grey up-looking face.

"I didn't start them for you and that chap Brumley to play about with," he amplified. "And
now you know about it, Elly."

The thing had found her unprepared. "As if----" she said at last.

"As if!" he mocked.

She stood quite still staring blankly at this unmanageable situation. He was the first to break
silence. He lifted one hand and dropped it again with a dead impact on the arm of his chair.
"I got the things," he said, "and there they are. Anyhow,--they got to be run in a proper way."

She made no immediate answer. She was seeking desperately for phrases that escaped her. "Do
you think," she began at last. "Do you really think----?"

He stared out of the window. He answered in tones of excessive reasonableness: "I didn't start
these hostels to be run by you and your--friend." He gave the sentence the quality of an ultimatum,
an irreducible minimum.

"He's my friend," she explained, "only--because he does work--for the hostels."

Sir Isaac seemed for a moment to attempt to consider that. Then he relapsed upon his predetermined
attitude. "God!" he exclaimed, "but I have been a fool!"

She decided that that must be ignored.

"I care more for those hostels than I care for anything--anything else in the world," she told
him. "I want them to work--I want them to succeed.... And then----"

He listened in sceptical silence.

"Mr. Brumley is nothing to me but a helper. He----How can you imagine, Isaac----? I! How can
you dare? To suggest----!"

"Very well," said Sir Isaac and reflected and made his old familiar sound with his teeth. "Run
the hostels without him, Elly," he propounded. "Then I'll believe."

She perceived that suddenly she was faced by a test or a bargain. In the background of her
mind the figure of Mr. Brumley, as she had seen him last, in brown and with a tie rather to
one side, protested vainly. She did what she could for him on the spur of the moment. "But,"
she said, "he's so helpful. He's so--harmless."

"That's as may be," said Sir Isaac and breathed heavily.

"How can one suddenly turn on a friend?"

"I don't see that you ever wanted a friend," said Sir Isaac.

"He's been so good. It isn't reasonable, Isaac. When anyone has--slaved."

"I don't say he isn't a good sort of chap," said Sir Isaac, with that same note of almost superhuman
rationality, "only--he isn't going to run my hostels."

"But what do you mean, Isaac?"

"I mean you got to choose."

He waited as if he expected her to speak and then went on.

"What it comes to is this, Elly, I'm about sick of that chap. I'm sick of him." He paused for
a moment because his breath was short. "If you go on with the hostels he's--Phew--got to mizzle.
Then--I don't mind--if you want that girl Burnet brought back in triumph.... It'll make Mrs.
Pembrose chuck the whole blessed show, you know, but I say--I don't mind.... Only in that case,
I don't want to see or hear--or hear about--Phew--or hear about your Mr. Brumley again. And
I don't want you to, either.... I'm being pretty reasonable and pretty patient over this, with
people--people--talking right and left. Still,--there's a limit.... You've been going on--if
I didn't know you were an innocent--in a way ... I don't want to talk about that. There you
are, Elly."

It seemed to her that she had always expected this to happen. But however much she had expected
it to happen she was still quite unprepared with any course of action. She wanted with an equal
want of limitation to keep both Mr. Brumley and her hostels.

"But Isaac," she said. "What do you suspect? What do you think? This friendship has been going
on----How can I end it suddenly?"

"Don't you be too innocent, Elly. You know and I know perfectly well what there is between
men and women. I don't make out I know--anything I don't know. I don't pretend you are anything
but straight. Only----"

He suddenly gave way to his irritation. His self-control vanished. "Damn it!" he cried, and
his panting breath quickened; "the thing's got to end. As if I didn't understand! As if I didn't
understand!"

She would have protested again but his voice held her. "It's got to end. It's got to end. Of
course you haven't done anything, of course you don't know anything or think of anything....
Only here I am ill.... You wouldn't be sorry if I got worse.... You can wait; you can.... All
right! All right! And there you stand, irritating me--arguing. You know--it chokes me.... Got
to end, I tell you.... Got to end...."

He beat at the arms of his chair and then put a hand to his throat.

"Go away," he cried to her. "Go to hell!"

§4

I cannot tell whether the reader is a person of swift decisions or one of the newer race of
doubters; if he be the latter he will the better understand how Lady Harman did in the next
two days make up her mind definitely and conclusively to two entirely opposed lines of action.
She decided that her relations with Mr. Brumley, innocent as they were, must cease in the interests
of the hostels and her struggle with Mrs. Pembrose, and she decided with quite equal certainty
that her husband's sudden veto upon these relations was an intolerable tyranny that must be
resisted with passionate indignation. Also she was surprised to find how difficult it was now
to think of parting from Mr. Brumley. She made her way to these precarious conclusions and
on from whichever it was to the other through a jungle of conflicting considerations and feelings.
When she thought of Mrs. Pembrose and more particularly of the probable share of Mrs. Pembrose
in her husband's objection to Mr. Brumley her indignation kindled. She perceived Mrs. Pembrose
as a purely evil personality, as a spirit of espionage, distrust, calculated treachery and
malignant intervention, as all that is evil in rule and officialism, and a vast wave of responsibility
for all those difficult and feeble and likeable young women who elbowed and giggled and misunderstood
and blundered and tried to live happily under the commanding stresses of Mrs. Pembrose's austerity
carried her away. She had her duty to do to them and it overrode every other duty. If a certain
separation from Mr. Brumley's assiduous aid was demanded, was it too great a sacrifice? And
no sooner was that settled than the whole question reopened with her indignant demand why anyone
at any price had the right to prohibit a friendship that she had so conscientiously kept innocent.
If she gave way to this outrageous restriction to-day, what fresh limitations might not Sir
Isaac impose to-morrow? And now, she was so embarrassed in her struggle by his health. She
could not go to him and have things out with him, she could not directly defy him, because
that might mean a suffocating seizure for him....

It was entirely illogical, no doubt, but extremely natural for Lady Harman to decide that she
must communicate her decision, whichever one it was, to Mr. Brumley in a personal interview.
She wrote to him and arranged to meet and talk to him in Kew Gardens, and with a feeling of
discretion went thither not in the automobile but in a taxi-cab. And so delicately now were
her two irrevocable decisions balanced in her mind that twice on her way to Kew she swayed
over from one to the other.

Arrived at the gardens she found herself quite disinclined to begin the announcement of either
decision. She was quite exceptionally glad to see Mr. Brumley; he was dressed in a new suit
of lighter brown that became him very well indeed, the day was warm and bright, a day of scyllas
and daffodils and snow-upon-the-mountains and green-powdered trees and frank sunshine,--and
the warmth of her feelings for her friend merged indistinguishably with the springtime stir
and glow. They walked across the bright turf together in a state of unjustifiable happiness,
purring little admirations at the ingenious elegance of creation at its best as gardeners set
it out for our edification, and the whole tenor of Lady Harman's mind was to make this occasion
an escape from the particular business that had brought her thither.

"We'll look for daffodils away there towards the river under the trees," said Mr. Brumley,
and it seemed preposterous not to enjoy those daffodils at least before she broached the great
issue between an irresistible force and an immoveable post, that occupied her mental background.

Mr. Brumley was quite at his best that afternoon. He was happy, gay and deferential; he made
her realize by his every tone and movement that if he had his choice of the whole world that
afternoon and all its inhabitants and everything, there was no other place in which he would
be, no other companion, no other occupation than this he had. He talked of spring and flowers,
quoted poets and added the treasures of a well-stored mind to the amenities of the day. "It's
good to take a holiday at times," he said, and after that it was more difficult than ever to
talk about the trouble of the hostels.

She was able to do this at last while they were having tea in the little pavilion near the
pagoda. It was the old pavilion, the one that Miss Alimony's suffragettes were afterwards to
burn down in order to demonstrate the relentless logic of women. They did it in the same eventful
week when Miss Alimony was, she declared, so nearly carried off by White Slave Traders (disguised
as nurses but, fortunately for her, smelling of brandy) from the Brixton Temperance Bazaar.
But in those simpler days the pavilion still existed; it was tended by agreeable waiters whose
evening dress was mitigated by cheerful little straw hats, and an enormous multitude of valiant
and smutty Cockney sparrows chirped and squeaked and begged and fluttered and fought, venturing
to the very tables and feet of the visitors. And here, a little sobered from their first elation
by much walking about and the presence of jam and watercress, Mr. Brumley and Lady Harman could
think again of the work they were doing for the reconstitution of society upon collective lines.

She began to tell him of the conflict between Mrs. Pembrose and Alice Burnet that threatened
the latter with extinction. She found it more convenient to talk at first as though the strands
of decision were still all in her hands; afterwards she could go on to the peculiar complication
of the situation through the unexpected weakening of her position in relation to Mrs. Pembrose.
She described the particular of the new trouble, the perplexing issue between the "lady-like,"
for which as a feminine ideal there was so much to be said on the one hand and the "genial,"
which was also an admirable quality, on the other. "You see," she said, "it's very rude to
cough at people and make noises, but then it's so difficult to explain to the others that it's
equally rude to go past people and pretend not to see or hear them. Girls of that sort always
seem so much more underbred when they are trying to be superior than when they are not; they
get so stiff and--exasperating. And this keeping out of the Union because it isn't genteel,
it's the very essence of the trouble with all these employees. We've discussed that so often.
Those drapers' girls seem full of such cold, selfish, base, pretentious notions; much more
full even than our refreshment girls. And then as if it wasn't all difficult enough comes Mrs.
Pembrose and her wardresses doing all sorts of hard, clumsy things, and one can't tell them
just how little they are qualified to judge good behaviour. Their one idea of discipline is
to speak to people as if they were servants and to be distant and crushing. And long before
one can do anything come trouble and tart replies and reports of "gross impertinence" and expulsion.
We keep on expelling girls. This is the fourth time girls have had to go. What is to become
of them? I know this Burnet girl quite well as you know. She's just a human, kindly little
woman.... She'll feel disgraced.... How can I let a thing like that occur?"

She spread her hands apart over the tea things.

Mr. Brumley held his chin in his hand and said "Um" and looked judicial, and admired Lady Harman
very much, and tried to grasp the whole trouble and wring out a solution. He made some admirable
generalizations about the development of a new social feeling in response to changed conditions,
but apart from a remark that Mrs. Pembrose was all organization and no psychology, and quite
the wrong person for her position, he said nothing in the slightest degree contributory to
the particular drama under consideration. From that utterance, however, Lady Harman would no
doubt have gone on to the slow, tentative but finally conclusive statement of the new difficulty
that had arisen out of her husband's jealousy and to the discussion of the more fundamental
decisions it forced upon her, if a peculiar blight had not fallen upon their conversation and
robbed it at last of even an appearance of ease.

This blight crept upon their minds.... It began first with Mr. Brumley.

Mr. Brumley was rarely free from self-consciousness. Whenever he was in a restaurant or any
such place of assembly, then whatever he did or whatever he said he had a kind of surplus attention,
a quickening of the ears, a wandering of the eyes, to the groups and individuals round about
him. And while he had seemed entirely occupied with Lady Harman, he had nevertheless been aware
from the outset that a dingy and inappropriate-looking man in a bowler hat and a ready-made
suit of grey, was listening to their conversation from an adjacent table.

This man had entered the pavilion oddly. He had seemed to dodge in and hesitate. Then he had
chosen his table rather deliberately--and he kept looking, and trying not to seem to look.

That was not all. Mr. Brumley's expression was overcast by the effort to recall something.
He sat elbows on table and leant forward towards Lady Harman and at the blossom-laden trees
outside the pavilion and trifled with two fingers on his lips and spoke between them in a voice
that was speculative and confidential and muffled and mysterious. "Where have I seen our friend
to the left before?"

She had been aware of his distraction for some time.

She glanced at the man and found nothing remarkable in him. She tried to go on with her explanations.

Mr. Brumley appeared attentive and then he said again: "But where have I seen him?"

And from that point their talk was blighted; the heart seemed to go out of her. Mr. Brumley
she felt was no longer taking in what she was saying. At the time she couldn't in any way share
his preoccupation. But what had been difficult before became hopeless and she could no longer
feel that even presently she would be able to make him understand the peculiar alternatives
before her. They drifted back by the great conservatory and the ornamental water, aripple with
ducks and swans, to the gates where his taxi waited.

Even then it occurred to her that she ought to tell him something of the new situation. But
now their time was running out, she would have to be concise, and what wife could ever say
abruptly and offhand that frequent fact, "Oh, by the by, my husband is jealous of you"? Then
she had an impulse to tell him simply, without any explanation at all, that for a time he must
not meet her. And while she gathered herself together for that, his preoccupations intervened
again.

He stood up in the open taxi-cab and looked back.

"That chap," he said, "is following us."

§5

The effect of this futile interview upon Lady Harman was remarkable. She took to herself an
absurd conviction that this inconclusiveness had been an achievement. Confronted by a dilemma,
she had chosen neither horn and assumed an attitude of inoffensive defiance. Springs in England
vary greatly in their character; some are easterly and quarrelsome, some are north-westerly
and wetly disastrous, a bleak invasion from the ocean; some are but the broken beginnings of
what are not so much years as stretches of meteorological indecision. This particular spring
was essentially a south-westerly spring, good and friendly, showery but in the lightest way
and so softly reassuring as to be gently hilarious. It was a spring to get into the blood of
anyone; it gave Lady Harman the feeling that Mrs. Pembrose would certainly be dealt with properly
and without unreasonable delay by Heaven, and that meanwhile it was well to take the good things
of existence as cheerfully as possible. The good things she took were very innocent things.
Feeling unusually well and enjoying great draughts of spring air and sunshine were the chief.
And she took them only for three brief days. She carried the children down to Black Strand
to see her daffodils, and her daffodils surpassed expectation. There was a delirium of blackthorn
in the new wild garden she had annexed from the woods and a close carpet of encouraged wild
primroses. Even the Putney garden was full of happy surprises. The afternoon following her
visit to Black Strand was so warm that she had tea with her family in great gaiety on the lawn
under the cedar. Her offspring were unusually sweet that day, they had new blue cotton sunbonnets,
and Baby and Annette at least succeeded in being pretty. And Millicent, under the new Swiss
governess, had acquired, it seemed quite suddenly, a glib colloquial French that somehow reconciled
one to the extreme thinness and shapelessness of her legs.

Then an amazing new fact broke into this gleam of irrational contentment, a shattering new
fact. She found she was being watched. She discovered that dingy man in the grey suit following
her.

The thing came upon her one afternoon. She was starting out for a talk with Georgina. She felt
so well, so confident of the world that it was intolerable to think of Georgina harbouring
resentment; she resolved she would go and have things out with her and make it clear just how
impossible it was to impose a Director-General upon her husband. She became aware of the man
in grey as she walked down Putney Hill.

She recognized him at once. He was at the corner of Redfern Road and still unaware of her existence.
He was leaning against the wall with the habituated pose of one who is frequently obliged to
lean against walls for long periods of time, and he was conversing in an elucidatory manner
with the elderly crossing-sweeper who still braves the motor-cars at that point. He became
aware of her emergence with a start, he ceased to lean and became observant.

He was one of those men whose face suggests the word "muzzle," with an erect combative nose
and a forward slant of the body from the rather inturned feet. He wore an observant bowler
hat a little too small for him, and there is something about the tail of his jacket--as though
he had been docked.

She passed at a stride to the acceptance of Mr. Brumley's hitherto incredible suspicion. Her
pulses quickened. It came into her head to see how far this man would go in following her.
She went on demurely down the hill leaving him quite unaware that she had seen him.

She was amazed, and after her first belief incredulous again. Could Isaac be going mad? At
the corner she satisfied herself of the grey man's proximity and hailed a taxi-cab. The man
in grey came nosing across to listen to her directions and hear where she was going.

"Please drive up the hill until I tell you," she said, "slowly"--and had the satisfaction,
if one may call it a satisfaction, of seeing the grey man dive towards the taxi-cab rank. Then
she gave herself up to hasty scheming.

She turned her taxi-cab abruptly when she was certain of being followed, went back into London,
turned again and made for Westridge's great stores in Oxford Street. The grey man ticked up
two pences in pursuit. All along the Brompton Road he pursued her with his nose like the jib
of a ship.

She was excited and interested, and not nearly so shocked as she ought to have been. It didn't
somehow jar as it ought to have jarred with her idea of Sir Isaac. Watched by a detective!
This then was the completion of the conditional freedom she had won by smashing that window.
She might have known....

She was astonished and indignant but not nearly so entirely indignant as a noble heroine should
have been. She was certainly not nearly so queenly as Mrs. Sawbridge would have shown herself
under such circumstances. It may have been due to some plebeian strain in her father's blood
that over and above her proper indignation she was extremely interested. She wanted to know
what manner of man it was whose nose was just appearing above the window edge of the taxi-cab
behind. In her inexperienced inattention she had never yet thought it was possible that men
could be hired to follow women.

She sat a little forward, thinking.

How far would he follow her and was it possible to shake him off? Or are such followers so
expert that once upon a scent, they are like the Indian hunting dog, inevitable. She must see.

She paid off her taxi at Westridge's and, with the skill of her sex, observed him by the window
reflection, counting the many doors of the establishment. Would he try to watch them all? There
were also some round the corner. No, he was going to follow her in. She had a sudden desire,
an unreasonable desire, perhaps an instinctive desire to see that man among baby-linen. It
was in her power for a time to wreathe him with incongruous objects. This was the sort of fancy
a woman must control....

He stalked her with an unreal sang-froid. He ambushed behind a display of infants' socks. Driven
to buy by a saleswoman he appeared to be demanding improbable varieties of infant's socks.

Are these watchers and trackers sometimes driven to buying things in shops? If so, strange
items must figure in accounts of expenses. If he bought those socks, would they appear in Sir
Isaac's bill? She felt a sudden craving for the sight of Sir Isaac's Private Detective Account.
And as for the articles themselves, what became of them? She knew her husband well enough to
feel sure that if he paid for anything he would insist upon having it. But where--where did
he keep them?...

But now the man's back was turned; he was no doubt improvising paternity and an extreme fastidiousness
in baby's footwear----Now for it!--through departments of deepening indelicacy to the lift!

But he had considered that possibility of embarrassment; he got round by some other way, he
was just in time to hear the lift gate clash upon a calmly preoccupied lady, who still seemed
as unaware of his existence as the sky.

He was running upstairs, when she descended again, without getting out; he stopped at the sight
of her shooting past him, their eyes met and there was something appealing in his. He was very
moist and his bowler was flagging. He had evidently started out in the morning with misconceptions
about the weather. And it was clear he felt he had blundered in coming into Westridge's. Before
she could get a taxi he was on the pavement behind her, hot but pursuing.

She sought in her mind for corner shops, with doors on this street and that. She exercised
him upon Peter Robinson's and Debenham and Freebody's and then started for the monument. But
on her way to the monument she thought of the moving staircase at Harrod's. If she went up
and down on this, she wanted to know what he would do, would he run up and down the fixed flight?
He did. Several times. And then she bethought herself of the Piccadilly tube; she got in at
Brompton road and got out at Down Street and then got in again and went to South Kensington
and he darted in and out of adjacent carriages and got into lifts by curious retrograde movements,
being apparently under the erroneous impression that his back was less characteristic than
his face.

By this time he was evidently no longer unaware of her intelligent interest in his movements.
It was clear too that he had received a false impression that she wanted to shake him off and
that all the sleuth in him was aroused. He was dishevelled and breathing hard and getting a
little close and coarse in his pursuit, but he was sticking to it with a puckered intensified
resolution. He came up into the South Kensington air open-mouthed and sniffing curiously, but
invincible.

She discovered suddenly that she did not like him at all and that she wanted to go home.

She took a taxi, and then away in the wilds of the Fulham Road she had her crowning idea. She
stopped the cab at a dingy little furniture shop, paid the driver exorbitantly and instructed
him to go right back to South Kensington station, buy her an evening paper and return for her.
The pursuer drew up thirty yards away, fell into her trap, paid off his cab and feigned to
be interested by a small window full of penny toys, cheap chocolate and cocoanut ice. She bought
herself a brass door weight, paid for it hastily and posted herself just within the furniture-shop
door.

Then you see her cab returned suddenly and she got in at once and left him stranded.

He made a desperate effort to get a motor omnibus. She saw him rushing across the traffic gesticulating.
Then he collided with a boy with a basket on a bicycle--not so far as she could see injuriously,
they seemed to leap at once into a crowd and an argument, and then he was hidden from her by
a bend in the road.

§6

For a little while her mind was full of fragments of speculation about this man. Was he a married
man? Was he very much away from home? What did he earn? Were there ever disputes about his
expenses?...

She must ask Isaac. For she was determined to go home and challenge her husband. She felt buoyed
up by indignation and the consciousness of innocence....

And then she felt an odd little doubt whether her innocence was quite so manifest as she supposed?

That doubt grew to uncomfortable proportions.

For two years she had been meeting Mr. Brumley as confidently as though they had been invisible
beings, and now she had to rack her brains for just what might be mistaken, what might be misconstrued.
There was nothing, she told herself, nothing, it was all as open as the day, and still her
mind groped about for some forgotten circumstance, something gone almost out of memory that
would bear misinterpretation.... How should she begin? "Isaac," she would say, "I am being
followed about London." Suppose he denied his complicity! How could he deny his complicity?

The cab ran in through the gates of her home and stopped at the door. Snagsby came hurrying
down the steps with a face of consternation. "Sir Isaac, my lady, has come home in a very sad
state indeed."

Beyond Snagsby in the hall she came upon a lost-looking round-eyed Florence.

"Daddy's ill again," said Florence.

"You run to the nursery," said Lady Harman.

"I thought I might help," said Florence. "I don't want to play with the others."

"No, run away to the nursery."

"I want to see the ossygen let out," said Florence petulantly to her mother's unsympathetic
back. "I never see the ossygen let out. Mum--my!..."

Lady Harman found her husband on the couch in his bedroom. He was propped up in a sitting position
with every available cushion and pillow. His coat and waistcoat and collar had been taken off,
and his shirt and vest torn open. The nearest doctor, Almsworth, was in attendance, but oxygen
had not arrived, and Sir Isaac with an expression of bitter malignity upon his face was fighting
desperately for breath. If anything his malignity deepened at the sight of his wife. "Damned
climate," he gasped. "Wouldn't have come back--except for your foolery."

It seemed to help him to say that. He took a deep inhalation, pressed his lips tightly together,
and nodded at her to confirm his words.

"If he's fanciful," said Almsworth. "If in any way your presence irritates him----"

"Let her stay," said Sir Isaac. "It--pleases her...."

Almsworth's colleague entered with the long-desired oxygen cylinder.

§7

And now every other interest in life was dominated, and every other issue postponed by the
immense urgencies of Sir Isaac's illness. It had entered upon a new phase. It was manifest
that he could no longer live in England, that he must go to some warm and kindly climate. There
and with due precautions and observances Almsworth assured Lady Harman he might survive for
many years--"an invalid, of course, but a capable one."

For some time the business of the International Stores had been preparing itself for this withdrawal.
Sir Isaac had been entrusting his managers with increased responsibility and making things
ready for the flotation of a company that would take the whole network of enterprises off his
hands. Charterson was associated with him in this, and everything was sufficiently definite
to be managed from any continental resort to which his doctors chose to send him. They chose
to send him to Santa Margherita on the Ligurian coast near Rapallo and Porto Fino.

It was old Bergener of Marienbad who chose this place. Sir Isaac had wanted to go to Marienbad,
his first resort abroad; he had a lively and indeed an exaggerated memory of his Kur there;
his growing disposition to distrust had turned him against his London specialist, and he had
caused Lady Harman to send gigantic telegrams of inquiry to old Bergener before he would be
content. But Bergener would not have him at Marienbad; it wasn't the place, it was the wrong
time of year, there was the very thing for them at the Regency Hotel at Santa Margherita, an
entire dépendance in a beautiful garden right on the sea, admirably furnished and adapted in
every way to Sir Isaac's peculiar needs. There, declared Doctor Bergener, with a proper attendant,
due precaution, occasional oxygen and no excitement he would live indefinitely, that is to
say eight or ten years. And attracted by the eight or ten years, which was three more than
the London specialist offered, Sir Isaac finally gave in and consented to be taken to Santa
Margherita.

He was to go as soon as possible, and he went in a special train and with an immense elaboration
of attendance and comforts. They took with them a young doctor their specialist at Marienbad
had recommended, a bright young Bavarian with a perfectly square blond head, an incurable frock
coat, the manners of the less kindly type of hotel-porter and luggage which apparently consisted
entirely of apparatus, an arsenal of strange-shaped shining black cases. He joined them in
London and went right through with them. From Genoa at his request they obtained the services
of a trained nurse, an amiable fluent-shaped woman who knew only Italian and German. For reasons
that he declined to give, but which apparently had something to do with the suffrage agitation,
he would have nothing to do with an English trained nurse. They had also a stenographer and
typist for Sir Isaac's correspondence, and Lady Harman had a secretary, a young lady with glasses
named Summersly Satchell who obviously reserved opinions of a harshly intellectual kind and
had previously been in the service of the late Lady Mary Justin. She established unfriendly
relations with the young doctor at an early date by attempting, he said, to learn German from
him. Then there was a maid for Lady Harman, an assistant maid, and a valet-attendant for Sir
Isaac. The rest of the service in the dépendance was supplied by the hotel management.

It took some weeks to assemble this expedition and transport it to its place of exile. Arrangements
had to be made for closing the Putney house and establishing the children with Mrs. Harman
at Black Strand. There was an exceptional amount of packing up to do, for this time Lady Harman
felt she was not coming back--it might be for years. They were going out to warmth and sunlight
for the rest of Sir Isaac's life.

He was entering upon the last phase in the slow disorganization of his secretions and the progressive
hardening of his arterial tissues that had become his essential history. His appearance had
altered much in the last few months; he had become visibly smaller, his face in particular
had become sharp and little-featured. It was more and more necessary for him to sit up in order
to breathe with comfort, he slept sitting up; and his senses were affected, he complained of
strange tastes in his food, quarrelled with the cook and had fits of sickness. Sometimes, latterly,
he had complained of strange sounds, like air whistling in water-pipes, he said, that had no
existence outside his ears. Moreover, he was steadily more irritable and more suspicious and
less able to control himself when angry. A long-hidden vein of vile and abusive language, hidden,
perhaps, since the days of Mr. Gambard's college at Ealing, came to the surface....

For some days after his seizure Lady Harman was glad to find in the stress of his necessities
an excuse for disregarding altogether the crisis in the hostels and the perplexing problem
of her relations to Mr. Brumley. She wrote two brief notes to the latter gentleman breaking
appointments and pleading pressure of business. Then, at first during intervals of sleeplessness
at night, and presently during the day, the danger and ugliness of her outlook began to trouble
her. She was still, she perceived, being watched, but whether that was because her husband
had failed to change whatever orders he had given, or because he was still keeping himself
minutely informed of her movements, she could not tell. She was now constantly with him, and
except for small spiteful outbreaks and occasional intervals of still and silent malignity,
he tolerated and utilized her attentions. It was clear his jealousy of her rankled, a jealousy
that made him even resentful at her health and ready to complain of any brightness of eye or
vigour of movement. They had drifted far apart from the possibility of any real discussion
of the hostels since that talk in the twilit study. To re-open that now or to complain of the
shadowing pursuer who dogged her steps abroad would have been to precipitate Mr. Brumley's
dismissal.

Even at the cost of letting things drift at the hostels for a time she wished to avoid that
question. She would not see him, but she would not shut the door upon him. So far as the detective
was concerned she could avoid discussion by pretending to be unaware of his existence, and
as for the hostels--the hostels each day were left until the morrow.

She had learnt many things since the days of her first rebellion, and she knew now that this
matter of the man friend and nothing else in the world is the central issue in the emancipation
of women. The difficulty of him is latent in every other restriction of which women complain.
The complete emancipation of women will come with complete emancipation of humanity from jealousy--and
no sooner. All other emancipations are shams until a woman may go about as freely with this
man as with that, and nothing remains for emancipation when she can. In the innocence of her
first revolt this question of friendship had seemed to Lady Harman the simplest, most reasonable
of minor concessions, but that was simply because Mr. Brumley hadn't in those days been talking
of love to her, nor she been peeping through that once locked door. Now she perceived how entirely
Sir Isaac was by his standards justified.

And after all that was recognized she remained indisposed to give up Mr. Brumley.

Yet her sense of evil things happening in the hostels was a deepening distress. It troubled
her so much that she took the disagreeable step of asking Mrs. Pembrose to meet her at the
Bloomsbury Hostel and talk out the expulsions. She found that lady alertly defensive, entrenched
behind expert knowledge and pretension generally. Her little blue eyes seemed harder than ever,
the metallic resonance in her voice more marked, the lisp stronger. "Of course, Lady Harman,
if you were to have some practical experience of control----" and "Three times I have given
these girls every opportunity--every opportunity."

"It seems so hard to drive these girls out," repeated Lady Harman. "They're such human creatures."

"You have to think of the ones who remain. You must--think of the Institution as a Whole."

"I wonder," said Lady Harman, peering down into profundities for a moment. Below the great
truth glimmered and vanished that Institutions were made for man and not man for Institutions.

"You see," she went on, rather to herself than to Mrs. Pembrose, "we shall be away now for
a long time."

Mrs. Pembrose betrayed no excesses of grief.

"It's no good for me to interfere and then leave everything...."

"That way spells utter disorganization," said Mrs. Pembrose.

"But I wish something could be done to lessen the harshness--to save the pride--of such a girl
as Alice Burnet. Practically you tell her she isn't fit to associate with--the other girls."

"She's had her choice and warning after warning."

"I daresay she's--stiff. Oh!--she's difficult. But--being expelled is bitter."

"I've not expelled her--technically."

"She thinks she's expelled...."

"You'd rather perhaps, Lady Harman, that I was expelled."

The dark lady lifted her eyes to the little bridling figure in front of her for a moment and
dropped them again. She had had an unspeakable thought, that Mrs. Pembrose wasn't a gentlewoman,
and that this sort of thing was a business for the gentle and for nobody else in the world.
"I'm only anxious not to hurt anyone if I can help it," said Lady Harman.

She went on with her attempt to find some way of compromise with Mrs. Pembrose that should
save the spirit of the new malcontents. She was much too concerned on account of the things
that lay ahead of them to care for her own pride with Mrs. Pembrose. But that good lady had
all the meagre inflexibilities of her class and at last Lady Harman ceased.

She came out into the great hall of the handsome staircase, ushered by Mrs. Pembrose as a guest
is ushered by a host. She looked at the spacious proportion of the architecture and thought
of the hopes and imaginations she had allowed to centre upon this place. It was to have been
a glowing home of happy people, and over it all brooded the chill stillness of rules and regulations
and methodical suppressions and tactful discouragement. It was an Institution, it had the empty
orderliness of an Institution, Mrs. Pembrose had just called it an Institution, and so Susan
Burnet had prophesied it would become five years or more ago. It was a dream subjugated to reality.

So it seemed to Lady Harman must all dreams be subjugated to reality, and the tossing spring
greenery of the square, the sunshine, the tumult of sparrows and the confused sound of distant
traffic, framed as it was in the hard dark outline of the entrance door, was as near as the
promise of joy could ever come to her. "Caught and spoilt," that seemed to be the very essential
of her life; just as it was of these Hostels, all the hopes, the imaginings, the sweet large
anticipations, the generosities, and stirring warm desires....

Perhaps Lady Harman had been a little overworking with her preparations for exile. Because
as these unhappy thoughts passed through her mind she realized that she was likely to weep.
It was extremely undesirable that Mrs. Pembrose should see her weeping.

But Mrs. Pembrose did see her weeping, saw her dark eyes swimming with uncontrollable tears,
watched her walk past her and out, without a word or a gesture of farewell.

A kind of perplexity came upon the soul of Mrs. Pembrose. She watched the tall figure descend
to her car and enter it and dispose itself gracefully and depart....

"Hysterical," whispered Mrs. Pembrose at last and was greatly comforted.

"Childish," said Mrs. Pembrose sipping further consolation for an unwonted spiritual discomfort.

"Besides," said Mrs. Pembrose, "what else can one do?"

§8

Sir Isaac was greatly fatigued by his long journey to Santa Margherita in spite of every expensive
precaution to relieve him; but as soon as the effect of that wore off, his recovery under the
system Bergener had prescribed was for a time remarkable. In a little while he was out of bed
again and in an armchair. Then the young doctor began to talk of drives. They had no car with
them, so he went into Genoa and spent an energetic day securing the sweetest-running automobile
he could find and having it refitted for Sir Isaac's peculiar needs. In this they made a number
of excursions through the hot beauty of the Italian afternoons, eastward to Genoa, westward
to Sestri and northward towards Montallegro. Then they went up to the summit of the Monte de
Porto Fino and Sir Isaac descended and walked about and looked at the view and praised Bergener.
After that he was encouraged to visit the gracious old monastery that overhangs the road to
Porto Fino.

At first Lady Harman did her duty of control and association with an apathetic resignation.
This had to go on--for eight or ten years. Then her imagination began to stir again. There
came a friendly letter from Mr. Brumley and she answered with a description of the colour of
the sea and the charm and wonder of its tideless shore. The three elder children wrote queer
little letters and she answered them. She went into Rapallo and got herself a carriageful of
Tauchnitz books....

That visit to the monastery on the Porto Fino road was like a pleasant little glimpse into
the brighter realities of the Middle Ages. The place, which is used as a home of rest for convalescent
Carthusians, chanced to be quite empty and deserted; the Bavarian rang a jangling bell again
and again and at last gained the attention of an old gardener working in the vineyard above,
an unkempt, unshaven, ungainly creature dressed in scarce decent rags of brown, who was yet
courteous-minded and, albeit crack-voiced, with his yellow-fanged mouth full of gracious polysyllables.
He hobbled off to get a key and returned through the still heat of the cobbled yard outside
the monastery gates, and took them into cool airy rooms and showed them clean and simple cells
in shady corridors, and a delightful orangery, and led them to a beautiful terrace that looked
out upon the glowing quivering sea. And he became very anxious to tell them something about
"Francesco"; they could not understand him until the doctor caught "Battaglia" and "Pavia"
and had an inspiration. Francis the First, he explained in clumsy but understandable English,
slept here, when he was a prisoner of the Emperor and all was lost but honour. They looked
at the slender pillars and graceful archings about them.

"Chust as it was now," the young doctor said, his imagination touched for a moment by mere
unscientific things....

They returned to their dépendance in a state of mutual contentment, Sir Isaac scarcely tired,
and Lady Harman ran upstairs to change her dusty dress for a fresher muslin, while he went
upon the doctor's arm to the balcony where tea was to be served to them.

She came down to find her world revolutionized.

On the table in the balcony the letters had been lying convenient to his chair and he--it may
be without troubling to read the address, had seized the uppermost and torn it open.

He was holding that letter now a little crumpled in his hand.

She had walked close up to the table before she realized the change. The little eyes that met
hers were afire with hatred, his lips were white and pressed together tightly, his nostrils
were dilated in his struggle for breath. "I knew it," he gasped.

She clung to her dignity though she felt suddenly weak within. "That letter," she said, "was
addressed to me."

There was a gleam of derision in his eyes.

"Look at it!" he said, and flung it towards her.

"My private letter!"

"Look at it!" he repeated.

"What right have you to open my letter?"

"Friendship!" he said. "Harmless friendship! Look what your--friend says!"

"Whatever there was in my letter----"

"Oh!" cried Sir Isaac. "Don't come that over me! Don't you try it! Oooh! phew--" He struggled
for breath for a time. "He's so harmless. He's so helpful. He----Read it, you----"

He hesitated and then hurled a strange word at her.

She glanced at the letter on the table but made no movement to touch it. Then she saw that
her husband's face was reddening and that his arm waved helplessly. His eyes, deprived abruptly
of all the fury of conflict, implored assistance.

She darted to the French window that opened into the dining-room from the balcony. "Doctor
Greve!" she cried. "Doctor Greve!"

Behind her the patient was making distressful sounds. "Doctor Greve," she screamed, and from
above she heard the Bavarian shouting and then the noise of his coming down the stairs.

He shouted some direction in German as he ran past her. By an inspiration she guessed he wanted
the nurse.

Miss Summersley Satchell appeared in the doorway and became helpful.

Then everyone in the house seemed to be converging upon the balcony.

It was an hour before Sir Isaac was in bed and sufficiently allayed for her to go to her own
room. Then she thought of Mr. Brumley's letter, and recovered it from the table on the balcony
where it had been left in the tumult of her husband's seizure.

It was twilight and the lights were on. She stood under one of them and read with two moths
circling about her....

Mr. Brumley had had a mood of impassioned declaration. He had alluded to his "last moments
of happiness at Kew." He said he would rather kiss the hem of her garment than be the "lord
of any other woman's life."

It was all so understandable--looked at in the proper light. It was all so impossible to explain.
And why had she let it happen? Why had she let it happen?

§9

The young doctor was a little puzzled and rather offended by Sir Isaac's relapse. He seemed
to consider it incorrect and was on the whole disposed to blame Lady Harman. He might have
had such a seizure, the young doctor said, later, but not now. He would be thrown back for
some weeks, then he would begin to mend again and then whatever he said, whatever he did, Lady
Harman must do nothing to contradict him. For a whole day Sir Isaac lay inert, in a cold sweat.
He consented once to attempt eating, but sickness overcame him. He seemed so ill that all the
young doctor's reassurances could not convince Lady Harman that he would recover. Then suddenly
towards evening his arrested vitality was flowing again, the young doctor ceased to be anxious
for his own assertions, the patient could sit up against a pile of pillows and breathe and
attend to affairs. There was only one affair he really seemed anxious to attend to. His first
thought when he realized his returning strength was of his wife. But the young doctor would
not let him talk that night.

Next morning he seemed still stronger. He was restless and at last demanded Lady Harman again.

This time the young doctor transmitted the message.

She came to him forthwith and found him, white-faced and unfamiliar-looking, his hands gripping
the quilt and his eyes burning with hatred.

"You thought I'd forgotten," was his greeting.

"Don't argue," signalled the doctor from the end of Sir Isaac's bed.

"I've been thinking it out," said Sir Isaac. "When you were thinking I was too ill to think....
I know better now."

He sucked in his lips and then went on. "You've got to send for old Crappen," he said. "I'm
going to alter things. I had a plan. But that would have been letting you off too easy. See?
So--you send for old Crappen."

"What do you mean to do?"

"Never you mind, my lady, never you mind. You send for old Crappen."

She waited for a moment. "Is that all you want me to do?"

"I'm going to make it all right about those Hostels. Don't you fear. You and your Hostels!
You shan't touch those hostels ever again. Ever. Mrs. Pembrose go! Why! You ain't worthy to
touch the heel of her shoe! Mrs. Pembrose!"

He gathered together all his forces and suddenly expelled with rousing force the word he had
already applied to her on the day of the intercepted letter.

He found it seemed great satisfaction in the sound and taste of it. He repeated it thrice.
"Zut," cried the doctor, "Sssh!"

Then Sir Isaac intimated his sense that calm was imperative. "You send for Crappen," he said
with a quiet earnestness.

She had become now so used to terms of infamy during the last year or so, so accustomed to
forgive them as part of his suffering, that she seemed not to hear the insult.

"Do you want him at once?" she asked. "Shall I telegraph?"

"Want him at once!" He dropped his voice to a whisper. "Yes, you fool--yes. Telegraph. (Phew.)
Telegraph.... I mustn't get angry, you know. You--telegraph."

He became suddenly still. But his eyes were active with hate.

She glanced at the doctor, then moved to the door.

"I will send a telegram," she said, and left him still malignant.

She closed the door softly and walked down the long cool passage towards her own room....

§10

She had to be patient. She had to be patient. This sort of thing had to go on from crisis to
crisis. It might go on for years. She could see no remedy and no escape.

What else was there to do but be patient? It was all amazing unjust, but to be a married woman
she was beginning to understand is to be outside justice. It is autocracy. She had once imagined
otherwise, and most of her life had been the slow unlearning of that initial error. She had
imagined that the hostels were hers simply because he had put it in that way. They had never
been anything but his, and now it was manifest he would do what he liked with his own. The
law takes no cognizance of the unwritten terms of a domestic reconciliation.

She sat down at the writing-table the hotel management had improvised for her.

She rested her chin on her hand and tried to think out her position. But what was there to
think out, seeing that nature and law and custom have conspired together to put women altogether
under the power of jealous and acquisitive men?

She drew the telegram form towards her.

She was going to write a telegram that she knew would bring Crappen headlong--to disinherit
her absolutely. And--it suddenly struck her--her husband had trusted her to write it. She was
going to do what he had trusted her to do.... But it was absurd.

She sat making patterns of little dots with her pencil point upon the telegram form, and there
was a faint smile of amusement upon her lips.

It was absurd--and everything was absurd. What more was to be said or thought about it? This
was the lot of woman. She had made her struggle, rebelled her little bit of rebellion. Most
other women no doubt had done as much. It made no difference in the long run.

But it was hard to give up the hostels. She had been foolish of course, but she had not let
them make her feel real. And she wasn't real. She was a wife--just this....

She sighed and bestirred herself and began to write.

Then abruptly she stopped writing.

For three years her excuse for standing--everything, had been these hostels. If now the hostels
were to be wrenched out of her hands, if at her husband's death she was to be stripped of every
possession and left a helpless dependant on her own children, if for all her good behaviour
she was to be insulted by his frantic suspicions so long as he lived and then disgraced by
his posthumous mistrust; was there any reason why she should go on standing anything any more?
Away there in England was Mr. Brumley, her man, ready with service and devotion....

It was a profoundly comforting thing to think of him there as hers. He was hers. He'd given
so much and on the whole so well. If at last she were to go to him....

Yet when she came to imagine the reality of the step that was in her mind, it took upon itself
a chill and forbidding strangeness. It was like stepping out of a familiar house into empty
space. What could it be like? To take some odd trunks with her, meet him somewhere, travel,
travel through the evening, travel past nightfall? The bleak strangeness of that going out
never to return!

Her imagination could give her no figure of Mr. Brumley as intimate, as habitual. She could
as easily imagine his skeleton. He remained in all this queer speculation something friendly,
something incidental, more than a trifle disembodied, entirely devoted of course in that hovering
way--but hovering....

And she wanted to be free. It wasn't Mr. Brumley she wanted; he was but a means--if indeed
he was a means--to an end. The person she wanted, the person she had always wanted--was herself.
Could Mr. Brumley give her that? Would Mr. Brumley give her that? Was it conceivable he would
carry sacrifice to such a pitch as that?...

And what nonsense was this dream! Here was her husband needing her. And the children, whose
inherent ungainliness, whose ungracious spirits demanded a perpetual palliation of culture
and instilled deportment. What honest over-nurse was there for him or helper and guide and
friend for them, if she withdrew? There was something undignified in a flight for mere happiness.
There was something vindictive in flight from mere insult. To go, because she was disinherited,
because her hostels were shattered,--No! And in short--she couldn't do it....

If Sir Isaac wanted to disinherit her he must disinherit her. If he wanted to go on seizing
and reading her letters, then he could. There was nothing in the whole scheme of things to
stop him if he did not want to stop himself, nothing at all. She was caught. This was the lot
of women. She was a wife. What else in honour was there but to be a wife up to the hilt?...

She finished writing her telegram.

§11

Suddenly came a running in the passage outside, a rap at the door and the nurse entered, scared,
voluble in Italian, but with gestures that translated her.

Lady Harman rose, realized the gravity and urgency of the moment and hurried with her along
the passage. "Est-il mauvais?" the poor lady attempted, "Est-il----"

Oh! what words are there for "taken worse"?

The woman attempted English and failed. She resorted to her native Italian and exclaimed about
the "povero signore." She conveyed a sense of pitiful extremities. Could it be he was in pain
again? What was it? What was it? Ten minutes ago he had been so grimly angry.

At the door of the sick room the nurse laid a warning hand on the arm of Lady Harman and made
an apprehensive gesture. They entered almost noiselessly.

The Bavarian doctor turned his face from the bed at their entrance. He was bending over Sir
Isaac. He held up one hand as if to arrest them; his other was engaged with his patient. "No,"
he said. His attention went back to the sick man, and he remained very still in that position,
leaving Lady Harman to note for the first time how broad and flat he was both between his shoulders
and between his ears. Then his face came round slowly, he relinquished something heavy, stood
up, held up a hand. "Zu spät," he whispered, as though he too was surprised. He sought in his
mind for English and then found his phrase: "He has gone!"

"Gone?"

"In one instant."

"Dead?"

"So. In one instant."

On the bed lay Sir Isaac. His hand was thrust out as though he grasped at some invisible thing.
His open eyes stared hard at his wife, and as she met his eyes he snored noisily in his nose
and throat.

She looked from the doctor to the nurse. It seemed to her that both these people must be mad.
Never had she seen anything less like death. "But he's not dead!" she protested, still standing
in the middle of the room.

"It iss chust the air in his throat," the doctor said. "He went--so! In one instant as I was
helping him."

He waited to see some symptom of feminine weakness. There was a quality in his bearing--as
though this event did him credit.

"But--Isaac!"

It was astounding. The noise in his throat ceased. But he still stared at her. And then the
nurse made a kind of assault upon Lady Harman, caught her--even if she didn't fall. It was
no doubt the proper formula to collapse. Or to fling oneself upon the deceased. Lady Harman
resisted this assistance, disentangled herself and remained amazed; the nurse a little disconcerted
but still ready behind her.

"But," said Lady Harman slowly, not advancing and pointing incredulously at the unwinking stare
that met her own, "is he dead? Is he really dead? Like that?"

The doctor's gesture to the nurse betrayed his sense of the fine quick scene this want of confidence
had ruined. Under no circumstances in life did English people really seem to know how to behave
or what was expected of them. He answered with something bordering upon irony. "Madam," he
said, with a slight bow, "he is really det."

"But--like that!" cried Lady Harman.

"Like that," repeated the doctor.

She went three steps nearer and stopped, open-eyed, wonder-struck, her lips compressed.

§12

For a time astonishment overwhelmed her mind. She did not think of Sir Isaac, she did not think
of herself, her whole being was filled by this marvel of death and cessation. Like that!

Death!

Never before had she seen it. She had expected an extreme dignity, an almost ceremonial sinking
back, a slow ebbing, but this was like a shot from a bow. It stunned her. And for some time
she remained stunned, while the doctor and her secretary and the hotel people did all that
they deemed seemly on this great occasion. She let them send her into another room; she watched
with detached indifference a post-mortem consultation in whispers with a doctor from Rapallo.
Then came a great closing of shutters. The nurse and her maid hovered about her, ready to assist
her when the sorrowing began. But she had no sorrow. The long moments lengthened out, and he
was still dead and she was still only amazement. It seemed part of the extraordinary, the perennial
surprisingness of Sir Isaac that he should end in this way. Dead! She didn't feel for some
hours that he had in any way ended. He had died with such emphasis that she felt now that he
was capable of anything. What mightn't he do next? When she heard movements in the chamber
of death it seemed to her that of all the people there, most probably it was he who made them.
She would not have been amazed if he had suddenly appeared in the doorway of her room, anger-white
and his hand quiveringly extended, spluttering some complaint.

He might have cried: "Here I am dead! And it's you, damn you--it's you!"

It was after distinct efforts, after repeated visits to the room in which he lay, that she
began to realize that death was death, that death goes on, that there was no more any Sir Isaac,
but only a still body he had left behind, that was being moulded now into a stiff image of peace.

Then for a time she roused herself to some control of their proceedings. The doctor came to
Lady Harman to ask her about the meals for the day, the hotel manager was in entanglements
of tactful consideration, and then the nurse came for instructions upon some trivial matter.
They had done what usage prescribes and now, in the absence of other direction, they appealed
to her wishes. She remarked that everyone was going on tiptoe and speaking in undertones....

She realized duties. What does one have to do when one's husband is dead? People would have
to be told. She would begin by sending off telegrams to various people, to his mother, to her
own, to his lawyer. She remembered she had already written a telegram--that very morning to
Crappen. Should she still let the lawyer come out? He was her lawyer now. Perhaps he had better
come, but instead of that telegram, which still lay upon the desk, she would wire the news
of the death to him....

Does one send to the papers? How does one send to the papers?

She took Miss Summersly Satchell who was hovering outside in the sunshine on the balcony, into
her room, and sat pale and businesslike and very careful about details, while Miss Summersly
Satchell offered practical advice and took notes and wrote telegrams and letters....

There came a hush over everything as the day crept towards noon, and the widowed woman sat
in her own room with an inactive mind, watching thin bars of sunlight burn their slow way across
the floor. He was dead. It was going on now more steadfastly than ever. He was keeping dead.
He was dead at last for good and her married life was over, that life that had always seemed
the only possible life, and this stunning incident, this thing that was like the blinding of
eyes or the bursting of eardrums, was to be the beginning of strange new experiences.

She was afraid at first at their possible strangeness. And then, you know, in spite of a weak
protesting compunction she began to feel glad....

She would not admit to herself that she was glad, that she was anything but a woman stunned,
she maintained her still despondent attitude as long as she could, but gladness broke upon
her soul as the day breaks, and a sense of release swam up to the horizons of her mind and
rose upon her, flooding every ripple of her being, as the sun rises over water in a clear sky.
Presently she could sit there no longer, she had to stand up. She walked to the closed Venetians
to look out upon the world and checked herself upon the very verge of flinging them open. He
was dead and it was all over for ever. Of course!--it was all over! Her marriage was finished
and done. Miss Satchell came to summon her to lunch. Throughout that meal Lady Harman maintained
a sombre bearing, and listened with attention to the young doctor's comments on the manner
of Sir Isaac's going. And then,--it was impossible to go back to her room.

"My head aches," she said, "I must go down and sit by the sea," and her maid, a little shocked,
brought her not only her sunshade, but needless wraps--as though a new-made widow must necessarily
be very sensitive to the air. She would not let her maid come with her, she went down to the
beach alone. She sat on some rocks near the very edge of the transparent water and fought her
gladness for a time and presently yielded to it. He was dead. One thought filled her mind,
for a while so filled her mind, that no other thought it seemed could follow it, it had an
effect of being final; it so filled her mind that it filled the whole world; the broad sapphire
distances of the sea, the lapping waves amidst the rocks at her feet, the blazing sun, the
dark headland of Porto Fino and a small sailing boat that hung beyond came all within it like
things enclosed within a golden globe. She forgot all the days of nursing and discomfort and
pity behind her, all the duties and ceremonies before her, forgot all the details and circumstances
of life in this one luminous realization. She was free at last. She was a free woman.

Never more would he make a sound or lift a finger against her life, never more would he contradict
her or flout her; never more would he come peeping through that papered panel between his room
and hers, never more could hateful and humiliating demands be made upon her as his right; no
more strange distresses of the body nor raw discomfort of the nerves could trouble her--for
ever. And no more detectives, no more suspicions, no more accusations. That last blow he had
meant to aim was frozen before it could strike her. And she would have the Hostels in her hands,
secure and undisputed, she could deal as she liked with Mrs. Pembrose, take such advisers as
she pleased.... She was free.

She found herself planning the regeneration of those difficult and disputed hostels, plans
that were all coloured by the sun and sky of Italy. The manacles had gone; her hands were free.
She would make this her supreme occupation. She had learnt her lesson now she felt, she knew
something of the mingling of control and affectionate regard that was needed to weld the warring
uneasy units of her new community. And she could do it, now as she was and unencumbered, she
knew this power was in her. When everything seemed lost to her, suddenly it was all back in
her hands....

She discovered the golden serenity of her mind with a sudden astonishment and horror. She was
amazed and shocked that she should be glad. She struggled against it and sought to subdue her
spirit to a becoming grief. One should be sorrowful at death in any case, one should be grieved.
She tried to think of Sir Isaac with affection, to recall touching generosities, to remember
kind things and tender and sweet things and she could not do so. Nothing would come back but
the white intensities of his face, nothing but his hatred, his suspicion and his pitiless mean
mastery. From which she was freed.

She could not feel sorry. She did her utmost to feel sorry; presently when she went back into
the dépendance, she had to check her feet to a regretful pace; she dreaded the eyes of the
hotel visitors she passed in the garden lest they should detect the liberation of her soul.
But the hotel visitors being English were for the most part too preoccupied with manifestations
of a sympathy that should be at once heart-felt and quite unobtrusive and altogether in the
best possible taste, to have any attention free for the soul of Lady Harman.

The sense of her freedom came and went like the sunlight of a day in spring, though she attempted
her utmost to remain overcast. After dinner that night she was invaded by a vision of the great
open years before her, at first hopeful but growing at last to fear and a wild restlessness,
so that in defiance of possible hotel opinion, she wandered out into the moonlight and remained
for a long time standing by the boat landing, dreaming, recovering, drinking in the white serenities
of sea and sky. There was no hurry now. She might stay there as long as she chose. She need
account for herself to no one; she was free. She might go where she pleased, do what she pleased,
there was no urgency any more....

There was Mr. Brumley. Mr. Brumley made a very little figure at first in the great prospect
before her.... Then he grew larger in her thoughts. She recalled his devotions, his services,
his self-control. It was good to have one understanding friend in this great limitless world....

She would have to keep that friendship....

But the glorious thing was freedom, to live untrammelled....

Through the stillness a little breeze came stirring, and she awoke out of her dream and turned
and faced the shuttered dépendance. A solitary dim light was showing on the verandah. All the
rest of the building was a shapeless mass of grey. The long pale front of the hotel seen through
a grove of orange trees was lit now at every other window with people going to bed. Beyond,
a black hillside clambered up to the edge of the sky.

Far away out of the darknesses a man with a clear strong voice was singing to a tinkling accompaniment.

In the black orange trees swam and drifted a score of fireflies, and there was a distant clamour
of nightingales when presently the unseen voice had done.

§13

When she was in her room again she began to think of Sir Isaac and more particularly of that
last fixed stare of his....

She was impelled to go and see him, to see for herself that he was peaceful and no longer a
figure of astonishment. She went slowly along the corridor and very softly into his room--it
remained, she felt, his room. They had put candles about him, and the outline of his face,
showing dimly through the linen that veiled it, was like the face of one who sleeps very peacefully.
Very gently she uncovered it.

He was not simply still, he was immensely still. He was more still and white than the moonlight
outside, remoter than moon or stars.... She stood surveying him.

He looked small and pinched and as though he had been very tired. Life was over for him, altogether
over. Never had she seen anything that seemed so finished. Once, when she was a girl she had
thought that death might be but the opening of a door upon a more generous feast of living
than this cramped world could give, but now she knew, she saw, that death can be death.

Life was over. She felt she had never before realized the meaning of death. That beautiful
night outside, and all the beautiful nights and days that were still to come and all the sweet
and wonderful things of God's world could be nothing to him now for ever. There was no dream
in him that could ever live again, there was no desire, no hope in him.

And had he ever had his desire or his hope, or felt the intensities of life?

There was this beauty she had been discovering in the last few years, this mystery of love,--all
that had been hidden from him.

She began to realize something sorrowful and pitiful in his quality, in his hardness, his narrowness,
his bickering suspicions, his malignant refusals of all things generous and beautiful. He made
her feel, as sometimes the children made her feel, the infinite pity of perversity and resistance
to the bounties and kindliness of life.

The shadow of sorrow for him came to her at last.

Yet how obstinate he looked, the little frozen white thing that had been Sir Isaac Harman!
And satisfied, wilfully satisfied; his lips were compressed and his mouth a little drawn in
at the corners as if he would not betray any other feeling than content with the bargain he
had made with life. She did not touch him; not for the world would she ever touch that cold
waxen thing that had so lately clasped her life, but she stood for a long time by the side
of his quiet, immersed in the wonder of death....

He had been such a hard little man, such a pursuing little man, so unreasonable and difficult
a master, and now--he was such a poor shrunken little man for all his obstinacy! She had never
realized before that he was pitiful.... Had she perhaps feared him too much, disliked him too
much to deal fairly with him? Could she have helped him? Was there anything she could have
done that she had not done? Might she not at least have saved him his suspicion? Behind his
rages, perhaps he had been wretched.

Could anyone else have helped him? If perhaps someone had loved him more than she had ever
pretended to do----

How strange that she should be so intimately in this room--and still so alien. So alien that
she could feel nothing but detached wonder at his infinite loss.... Alien,--that was what she
had always been, a captured alien in this man's household,--a girl he had taken. Had he ever
suspected how alien? The true mourner, poor woman! was even now, in charge of Cook's couriers
and interpreters, coming by express from London, to see with her own eyes this last still phase
of the son she had borne into the world and watched and sought to serve. She was his nearest;
she indeed was the only near thing there had ever been in his life. Once at least he must have
loved her? And even she had not been very near. No one had ever been very near his calculating
suspicious heart. Had he ever said or thought any really sweet or tender thing--even about
her? He had been generous to her in money matters, of course,--but out of a vast abundance....

How good it was to have a friend! How good it was to have even one single friend!...

At the thought of his mother Lady Harman's mind began to drift slowly from this stiff culmination
of life before her. Presently she replaced the white cloth upon his face and turned slowly
away. Her imagination had taken up the question of how that poor old lady was to be met, how
she was to be consoled, what was to be said to her....

She began to plan arrangements. The room ought to be filled with flowers; Mrs. Harman would
expect flowers, large heavy white flowers in great abundance. That would have to be seen to
soon. One might get them in Rapallo. And afterwards,--they would have to take him to England,
and have a fine great funeral, with every black circumstance his wealth and his position demanded.
Mrs. Harman would need that, and so it must be done. Cabinet Ministers must follow him, members
of Parliament, all Blenkerdom feeling self-consciously and, as far as possible, deeply, the
Chartersons by way of friends, unfamiliar blood relations, a vast retinue of employees....

How could one take him? Would he have to be embalmed? Embalming!--what a strange complement
of death. She averted herself a little more from the quiet figure on the bed, and could not
turn to it again. They might come here and do all sorts of things to it, mysterious, evil-seeming
things with knives and drugs....

She must not think of that. She must learn exactly what Mrs. Harman thought and desired. Her
own apathy with regard to her husband had given way completely now to a desire to anticipate
and meet Mrs. Harman's every conceivable wish.

CHAPTER THE TWELFTH

LOVE AND A SERIOUS LADY

§1

The news of Sir Isaac's death came quite unexpectedly to Mr. Brumley. He was at the Climax
Club, and rather bored; he had had some tea and dry toast in the magazine room, and had been
through the weeklies, and it was a particularly uninteresting week. Then he came down into
the hall, looked idly at the latest bulletins upon the board, and read that "Sir Isaac Harman
died suddenly this morning at Sta. Margherita, in Ligure, whither he had gone for rest and change."

He went on mechanically reading down the bulletin, leaving something of himself behind him
that did not read on. Then he returned to that remarkable item and re-read it, and picked up
that lost element of his being again.

He had awaited this event for so long, thought of it so often in such a great variety of relationships,
dreamt of it, hoped for it, prayed for it, and tried not to think of it, that now it came to
him in reality it seemed to have no substance or significance whatever. He had exhausted the
fact before it happened. Since first he had thought of it there had passed four long years,
and in that time he had seen it from every aspect, exhausted every possibility. It had become
a theoretical possibility, the basis of continually less confident, continually more unsubstantial
day dreams. Constantly he had tried not to think of it, tried to assure himself of Sir Isaac's
invalid immortality. And here it was!

The line above it concerned an overdue ship, the line below resumed a speech by Mr. Lloyd George.
"He would challenge the honourable member to repeat his accusations----"

Mr. Brumley stood quite still before the mauve-coloured print letters for some time, then went
slowly across the hall into the breakfast-room, sat down in a chair by the fireplace, and fell
into a kind of featureless thinking. Sir Isaac was dead, his wife was free, and the long waiting
that had become a habit was at an end.

He had anticipated a wild elation, and for a while he was only sensible of change, a profound
change....

He began to feel glad that he had waited, that she had insisted upon patience, that there had
been no disaster, no scandal between them. Now everything was clear for them. He had served
his apprenticeship. They would be able to marry, and have no quarrel with the world.

He sat with his mind forming images of the prospect before him, images that were at first feeble
and vague, and then, though still in a silly way, more concrete and definite. At first they
were quite petty anticipations, of how he would have to tell people of his approaching marriage,
of how he would break it to George Edmund that a new mother impended. He mused for some time
upon the details of that. Should he take her down to George Edmund's school, and let the boy
fall in love with her--he would certainly fall in love with her--before anything definite was
said, or should he first go down alone and break the news? Each method had its own attractive
possibilities of drama.

Then Mr. Brumley began to think of the letter he must write Lady Harman--a difficult letter.
One does not rejoice at death. Already Mr. Brumley was beginning to feel a generous pity for
the man he had done his utmost not to detest for so long. Poor Sir Isaac had lived like a blind
thing in the sunlight, gathering and gathering, when the pride and pleasure of life is to administer
and spend.... Mr. Brumley fell wondering just how she could be feeling now about her dead husband.
She might be in a phase of quite real sorrow. Probably the last illness had tired and strained
her. So that his letter would have to be very fine and tender and soothing, free from all harshness,
free from any gladness--yet it would be hard not to let a little of his vast relief peep out.
Always hitherto, except for one or two such passionate lapses as that which had precipitated
the situation at Santa Margherita, his epistolary manner had been formal, his matter intellectual
and philanthropic, for he had always known that no letter was absolutely safe from Sir Isaac's
insatiable research. Should he still be formal, still write to "Dear Lady Harman," or suddenly
break into a new warmth? Half an hour later he was sitting in the writing-room with some few
flakes of torn paper on the carpet between his feet and the partially filled wastepaper basket,
still meditating upon this difficult issue of the address.

The letter he achieved at last began, "My dear Lady," and went on to, "I do not know how to
begin this letter--perhaps you will find it almost as difficult to receive...."

In the small hours he woke to one of his habitual revulsions. Was that, he asked himself, the
sort of letter a lover should write to the beloved on her release, on the sudden long prayed-for
opening of a way to her, on the end of her shameful servitude and his humiliations? He began
to recall the cold and stilted sentences of that difficult composition. The gentility of it!
All his life he had been a prey to gentility, had cast himself free from it, only to relapse
again in such fashion as this. Would he never be human and passionate and sincere? Of course
he was glad, and she ought to be glad, that Sir Isaac, their enemy and their prison, was dead;
it was for them to rejoice together. He turned out of bed at last, when he could lie still
under these self-accusations no longer, and wrapped himself in his warm dressing-gown and began
to write. He wrote in pencil. His fountain-pen was as usual on his night table, but pencil
seemed the better medium, and he wrote a warm and glowing love-letter that was brought to an
end at last by an almost passionate fit of sneezing. He could find no envelopes in his bedroom
Davenport, and so he left that honest scrawl under a paper-weight, and went back to bed greatly
comforted. He re-read it in the morning with emotion, and some slight misgivings that grew
after he had despatched it. He went to lunch at his club contemplating a third letter that
should be sane and fine and sweet, and that should rectify the confusing effect of those two
previous efforts. He wrote this letter later in the afternoon.

The days seemed very long before the answer to his first letter came to him, and in that interval
two more--aspects went to her. Her reply was very brief, and written in the large, firm, still
girlishly clear hand that distinguished her.

"I was so glad of your letter. My life is so strange here, a kind of hushed life. The nights
are extraordinarily beautiful, the moon very large and the little leaves on the trees still
and black. We are coming back to England and the funeral will be from our Putney house."

That was all, but it gave Mr. Brumley an impression of her that was exceedingly vivid and close.
He thought of her, shadowy and dusky in the moonlight until his soul swam with love for her;
he had to get up and walk about; he whispered her name very softly to himself several times;
he groaned gently, and at last he went to his little desk and wrote to her his sixth letter--quite
a beautiful letter. He told her that he loved her, that he had always loved her since their
first moment of meeting, and he tried to express just the wave of tenderness that inundated
him at the thought of her away there in Italy. Once, he said, he had dreamt that he would be
the first to take her to Italy. Perhaps some day they would yet be in Italy together.

§2

It was only by insensible degrees that doubt crept into Mr. Brumley's assurances. He did not
observe at once that none of the brief letters she wrote him responded to his second, the impassioned
outbreak in pencil. And it seemed only in keeping with the modest reserves of womanhood that
she should be restrained--she always had been restrained.

She asked him not to see her at once when she returned to England; she wanted, she said, "to
see how things are," and that fell in very well with a certain delicacy in himself. The unburied
body of Sir Isaac--it was now provisionally embalmed--was, through some inexplicable subtlety
in his mind, a far greater barrier than the living man had ever been, and he wanted it out
of the way. And everything settled. Then, indeed, they might meet.

Meanwhile he had a curious little private conflict of his own. He was trying not to think,
day and night he was trying not to think, that Lady Harman was now a very rich woman. Yet some
portions of his brain, and he had never suspected himself of such lawless regions, persisted
in the most vulgar and outrageous suggestions, suggestions that made his soul blush; schemes,
for example, of splendid foreign travel, of hotel staffs bowing, of a yacht in the Mediterranean,
of motor cars, of a palatial flat in London, of a box at the opera, of artists patronized,
of--most horrible!--a baronetcy.... The more authentic parts of Mr. Brumley cowered from and
sought to escape these squalid dreams of magnificences. It shocked and terrified him to find
such things could come out in him. He was like some pest-stricken patient, amazedly contemplating
his first symptom. His better part denied, repudiated. Of course he would never touch, never
even propose--or hint.... It was an aspect he had never once contemplated before Sir Isaac
died. He could on his honour, and after searching his heart, say that. Yet in Pall Mall one
afternoon, suddenly, he caught himself with a thought in his head so gross, so smug, that he
uttered a faint cry and quickened his steps.... Benevolent stepfather!

These distresses begot a hope. Perhaps, after all, probably, there would be some settlement....
She might not be rich, not so very rich.... She might be tied up....

He perceived in that lay his hope of salvation. Otherwise--oh, pitiful soul!--things were possible
in him; he saw only too clearly what dreadful things were possible.

If only she were disinherited, if only he might take her, stripped of all these possessions
that even in such glancing anticipations begot----this horrid indigestion of the imagination!

But then,----the Hostels?...

There he stumbled against an invincible riddle!

There was something dreadful about the way in which these considerations blotted out the essential
fact of separations abolished, barriers lowered, the way to an honourable love made plain and
open....

The day of the funeral came at last, and Mr. Brumley tried not to think of it, paternally,
at Margate. He fled from Sir Isaac's ultimate withdrawal. Blenker's obituary notice in the
Old Country Gazette was a masterpiece of tactful eulogy, ostentatiously loyal, yet extremely
not unmindful of the widowed proprietor, and of all the possible changes of ownership looming
ahead. Mr. Brumley, reading it in the Londonward train, was greatly reminded of the Hostels.
That was a riddle he didn't begin to solve. Of course, it was imperative the Hostels should
continue--imperative. Now they might run them together, openly, side by side. But then, with
such temptations to hitherto inconceivable vulgarities. And again, insidiously, those visions
returned of two figures, manifestly opulent, grouped about a big motor car or standing together
under a large subservient archway....

There was a long letter from her at his flat, a long and amazing letter. It was so folded that
his eye first caught the writing on the third page: "never marry again. It is so clear that
our work needs all my time and all my means." His eyebrows rose, his expression became consternation;
his hands trembled a little as he turned the letter over to read it through. It was a deliberate
letter. It began--

"Dear Mr. Brumley, I could never have imagined how much there is to do after we are dead, and
before we can be buried."

"Yes," said Mr. Brumley; "but what does this mean?"

"There are so many surprises----"

"It isn't clear."

"In ourselves and the things about us."

"Of course, he would have made some complicated settlement. I might have known."

"It is the strangest thing in the world to be a widow, much stranger than anyone could ever
have supposed, to have no one to control one, no one to think of as coming before one, no one
to answer to, to be free to plan one's life for oneself----"

       *       *       *       *       *

He stood with the letter in his hand after he had read it through, perplexed.

"I can't stand this," he said. "I want to know."

He went to his desk and wrote:--

"My Dear, I want you to marry me."

What more was to be said? He hesitated with this brief challenge in his hand, was minded to
telegraph it and thought of James's novel, In the Cage. Telegraph operators are only human
after all. He determined upon a special messenger and rang up his quarter valet--he shared
service in his flat--to despatch it.

The messenger boy got back from Putney that evening about half-past eight. He brought a reply
in pencil.

"My dear Friend," she wrote. "You have been so good to me, so helpful. But I do not think that
is possible. Forgive me. I want so badly to think and here I cannot think. I have never been
able to think here. I am going down to Black Strand, and in a day or so I will write and we
will talk. Be patient with me."

She signed her name "Ellen"; always before she had been "E.H."

"Yes," cried Mr. Brumley, "but I want to know!"

He fretted for an hour and went to the telephone.

Something was wrong with the telephone, it buzzed and went faint, and it would seem that at
her end she was embarrassed. "I want to come to you now," he said. "Impossible," was the clearest
word in her reply. Should he go in a state of virile resolution, force her hesitation as a
man should? She might be involved there with Mrs. Harman, with all sorts of relatives and strange
people....

In the end he did not go.

§3

He sat at his lunch alone next day at one of the little tables men choose when they shun company.
But to the right of him was the table of the politicians, Adolphus Blenker and Pope of the
East Purblow Experiment, and Sir Piper Nicolls, and Munk, the editor of the Daily Rectification,
sage men all and deep in those mysterious manipulations and wire-pullings by which the liberal
party organization was even then preparing for itself unusual distrust and dislike, and Horatio
Blenker was tenoring away after his manner about a case of right and conscience, "Blenking
like Winking" was how a silent member had put it once to Brumley in a gust of hostile criticism.
"Practically if she marries again, she is a pauper," struck on Brumley's ears.

"Of course," said Mr. Brumley, and stopped eating.

"I don't know if you remember the particulars of the Astor case," began Munk....

Never had Mr. Brumley come so frankly to eavesdropping. But he heard no more of Lady Harman.
Munk had to quote the rights and wrongs of various American wills, and then Mr. Pope seized
his opportunity. "At East Purblow," he went on, "in quite a number of instances we had to envisage
this problem of the widow----"

Mr. Brumley pushed back his plate and strolled towards the desk.

It was exactly what he might have expected, what indeed had been at the back of his mind all
along, and on the whole he was glad. Naturally she hesitated; naturally she wanted time to
think, and as naturally it was impossible for her to tell him what it was she was thinking about.

They would marry. They must marry. Love has claims supreme over all other claims and he felt
no doubt that for her his comparative poverty of two thousand a year would mean infinitely
more happiness than she had ever known or could know with Sir Isaac's wealth. She was reluctant,
of course, to become dependent upon him until he made it clear to her what infinite pleasure
it would be for him to supply her needs. Should he write to her forthwith? He outlined a letter
in his mind, a very fine and generous letter, good phrases came, and then he reflected that
it would be difficult to explain to her just how he had learnt of her peculiar situation. It
would be far more seemly to wait either for a public announcement or for some intimation from her.

And then he began to realize that this meant the end of all their work at the Hostels. In his
first satisfaction at escaping that possible great motor-car and all the superfluities of Sir
Isaac's accumulation, he had forgotten that side of the business....

When one came to think it over, the Hostels did complicate the problem. It was ingenious of
Sir Isaac....

It was infernally ingenious of Sir Isaac....

He could not remain in the club for fear that somebody might presently come talking to him
and interrupt his train of thought. He went out into the streets.

These Hostels upset everything.

What he had supposed to be a way of escape was really the mouth of a net.

Whichever way they turned Sir Isaac crippled them....

§4

Mr. Brumley grew so angry that presently even the strangers in the street annoyed him. He turned
his face homeward. He hated dilemmas; he wanted always to deny them, to thrust them aside,
to take impossible third courses.

"For three years," shouted Mr. Brumley, free at last in his study to give way to his rage,
"for three years I've been making her care for these things. And then--and then--they turn
against me!"

A violent, incredibly undignified wrath against the dead man seized him. He threw books about
the room. He cried out vile insults and mingled words of an unfortunate commonness with others
of extreme rarity. He wanted to go off to Kensal Green and hammer at the grave there and tell
the departed knight exactly what he thought of him. Then presently he became calmer, he lit
a pipe, picked up the books from the floor, and meditated revenges upon Sir Isaac's memory.
I deplore my task of recording these ungracious moments in Mr. Brumley's love history. I deplore
the ease with which men pass from loving and serving women to an almost canine fight for them.
It is the ugliest essential of romance. There is indeed much in the human heart that I deplore.
But Mr. Brumley was exasperated by disappointment. He was sore, he was raw. Driven by an intolerable
desire to explore every possibility of the situation, full indeed of an unholy vindictiveness,
he went off next morning with strange questions to Maxwell Hartington.

He put the case as a general case.

"Lady Harman?" said Maxwell Hartington.

"No, not particularly Lady Harman. A general principle. What are people--what are women tied
up in such a way to do?"

Precedents were quoted and possibilities weighed. Mr. Brumley was flushed, vague but persistent.

"Suppose," he said, "that they love each other passionately--and their work, whatever it may
be, almost as passionately. Is there no way----?"

"He'll have a dum casta clause right enough," said Maxwell Hartington.

"Dum----? Dum casta! But, oh! anyhow that's out of the question--absolutely," said Mr. Brumley.

"Of course," said Maxwell Hartington, leaning back in his chair and rubbing the ball of his
thumb into one eye. "Of course--nobody ever enforces these dum casta clauses. There isn't anyone
to enforce them. Ever."--He paused and then went on, speaking apparently to the array of black
tin boxes in the dingy fixtures before him. "Who's going to watch you? That's what I always
ask in these cases. Unless the lady goes and does things right under the noses of these trustees
they aren't going to bother. Even Sir Isaac I suppose hasn't provided funds for a private detective.
Eh? You said something?"

"Nothing," said Mr. Brumley.

"Well, why should they start a perfectly rotten action like that," continued Maxwell Hartington,
now addressing himself very earnestly to his client, "when they've only got to keep quiet and
do their job and be comfortable. In these matters, Brumley, as in most matters affecting the
relations of men and women, people can do absolutely what they like nowadays, absolutely, unless
there's someone about ready to make a row. Then they can't do anything. It hardly matters if
they don't do anything. A row's a row and damned disgraceful. If there isn't a row, nothing's
disgraceful. Of course all these laws and regulations and institutions and arrangements are
just ways of putting people at the mercy of blackmailers and jealous and violent persons. One's
only got to be a lawyer for a bit to realize that. Still that's not our business. That's psychology.
If there aren't any jealous and violent persons about, well, then no ordinary decent person
is going to worry what you do. No decent person ever does. So far as I can gather the only
barbarian in this case is the testator--now in Kensal Green. With additional precautions I
suppose in the way of an artistic but thoroughly massive monument presently to be added----"

"He'd--turn in his grave."

"Let him. No trustees are obliged to take action on that. I don't suppose they'd know if he
did. I've never known a trustee bother yet about post-mortem movements of any sort. If they
did, we'd all be having Prayers for the Dead. Fancy having to consider the subsequent reflections
of the testator!"

"Well anyhow," said Mr. Brumley, after a little pause, "such a breach, such a proceeding is
out of the question--absolutely out of the question. It's unthinkable."

"Then why did you come here to ask me about it?" demanded Maxwell Hartington, beginning to
rub the other eye in an audible and unpleasant manner.

§5

When at last Mr. Brumley was face to face with Lady Harman again, a vast mephitic disorderly
creation of anticipations, intentions, resolves, suspicions, provisional hypotheses, urgencies,
vindications, and wild and whirling stuff generally vanished out of his mind. There beside
the raised seat in the midst of the little rock garden where they had talked together five
years before, she stood waiting for him, this tall simple woman he had always adored since
their first encounter, a little strange and shy now in her dead black uniform of widowhood,
but with her honest eyes greeting him, her friendly hands held out to him. He would have kissed
them but for the restraining presence of Snagsby who had brought him to her; as it was it seemed
to him that the phantom of a kiss passed like a breath between them. He held her hands for
a moment and relinquished them.

"It is so good to see you," he said, and they sat down side by side. "I am very glad to see
you again."

Then for a little while they sat in silence.

Mr. Brumley had imagined and rehearsed this meeting in many different moods. Now, he found
none of his premeditated phrases served him, and it was the lady who undertook the difficult
opening.

"I could not see you before," she began. "I did not want to see anyone." She sought to explain.
"I was strange. Even to myself. Suddenly----" She came to the point. "To find oneself free....
Mr. Brumley,--it was wonderful!"

He did not interrupt her and presently she went on again.

"You see," she said, "I have become a human being----owning myself. I had never thought what
this change would be to me.... It has been----. It has been--like being born, when one hadn't
realized before that one wasn't born.... Now--now I can act. I can do this and that. I used
to feel as though I was on strings--with somebody able to pull.... There is no one now able
to pull at me, no one able to thwart me...."

Her dark eyes looked among the trees and Mr. Brumley watched her profile.

"It has been like falling out of a prison from which one never hoped to escape. I feel like
a moth that has just come out of its case,--you know how they come out, wet and weak but--released.
For a time I feel I can do nothing but sit in the sun."

"It's queer," she repeated, "how one tries to feel differently from what one really feels,
how one tries to feel as one supposes people expect one to feel. At first I hardly dared look
at myself.... I thought I ought to be sorrowful and helpless.... I am not in the least sorrowful
or helpless....

"But," said Mr. Brumley, "are you so free?"

"Yes."

"Altogether?"

"As free now--as a man."

"But----people are saying in London----. Something about a will----."

Her lips closed. Her brows and eyes became troubled. She seemed to gather herself together
for an effort and spoke at length, without looking at him. "Mr. Brumley," she said, "before
I knew anything of the will----. On the very evening when Isaac died----. I knew----I would
never marry again. Never."

Mr. Brumley did not stir. He remained regarding her with a mournful expression.

"I was sure of it then," she said, "I knew nothing about the will. I want you to understand
that--clearly."

She said no more. The still pause lengthened. She forced herself to meet his eyes.

"I thought," he said after a silent scrutiny, and left her to imagine what he had thought....

"But," he urged to her protracted silence, "you care?"

She turned her face away. She looked at the hand lying idle upon her crape-covered knee. "You
are my dearest friend," she said very softly. "You are almost my only friend. But----. I can
never go into marriage any more...."

"My dear," he said, "the marriage you have known----."

"No," she said. "No sort of marriage."

Mr. Brumley heaved a profound sigh.

"Before I had been a widow twenty-four hours, I began to realize that I was an escaped woman.
It wasn't the particular marriage.... It was any marriage.... All we women are tied. Most of
us are willing to be tied perhaps, but only as people are willing to be tied to life-belts
in a wreck--from fear from drowning. And now, I am just one of the free women, like the women
who can earn large incomes, or the women who happen to own property. I've paid my penalties
and my service is over.... I knew, of course, that you would ask me this. It isn't that I don't
care for you, that I don't love your company and your help--and the love and the kindness...."

"Only," he said, "although it is the one thing I desire, although it is the one return you
can make me----. But whatever I have done--I have done willingly...."

"My dear!" cried Mr. Brumley, breaking out abruptly at a fresh point, "I want you to marry
me. I want you to be mine, to be my dear close companion, the care of my life, the beauty in
my life.... I can't frame sentences, my dear. You know, you know.... Since first I saw you,
talked to you in this very garden...."

"I don't forget a thing," she answered. "It has been my life as well as yours. Only----"

The grip of her hand tightened on the back of their seat. She seemed to be examining her thumb
intently. Her voice sank to a whisper. "I won't marry you," she said.

§6

Mr. Brumley leant back, then he bent forward in a desperate attitude with his hands and arms
thrust between his knees, then suddenly he recovered, stood up and then knelt with one knee
upon the seat. "What are you going to do with me then?" he asked.

"I want you to go on being my friend."

"I can't."

"You can't?"

"No,--I've hoped."

And then with something almost querulous in his voice, he repeated, "My dear, I want you to
marry me and I want now nothing else in the world."

She was silent for a moment. "Mr. Brumley," she said, looking up at him, "have you no thought
for our Hostels?"

Mr. Brumley as I have said hated dilemmas. He started to his feet, a man stung. He stood in
front of her and quivered extended hands at her. "What do such things matter," he cried, "when
a man is in love?"

She shrank a little from him. "But," she asked, "haven't they always mattered?"

"Yes," he expostulated; "but these Hostels, these Hostels.... We've started them--isn't that
good enough? We've set them going...."

"Do you know," she asked, "what would happen to the hostels if I were to marry?"

"They would go on," he said.

"They would go to a committee. Named. It would include Mrs. Pembrose.... Don't you see what
would happen? He understood the case so well...."

Mr. Brumley seemed suddenly shrunken. "He understood too well," he said.

He looked down at her soft eyes, at her drooping gracious form, and it seemed to him that indeed
she was made for love and that it was unendurable that she should be content to think of friendship
and freedom as the ultimate purposes of her life....

§7

Presently these two were walking in the pine-woods beyond the garden and Mr. Brumley was discoursing
lamentably of love, this great glory that was denied them.

The shade of perplexity deepened in her dark eyes as she listened. Ever and again she seemed
about to speak and then checked herself and let him talk on.

He spoke of the closeness of love and the deep excitement of love and how it filled the soul
with pride and the world with wonder, and of the universal right of men and women to love.
He told of his dreams and his patience, and of the stormy hopes that would not be suppressed
when he heard that Sir Isaac was dead. And as he pictured to himself the lost delights at which
he hinted, as he called back those covert expectations, he forgot that she had declared herself
resolved upon freedom at any cost, and his rage against Sir Isaac, who had possessed and wasted
all that he would have cherished so tenderly, grew to nearly uncontrollable proportions. "Here
was your life," he said, "your beautiful life opening and full--full of such dear seeds of
delight and wonder, calling for love, ready for love, and there came this Clutch, this Clutch
that embodied all the narrow meanness of existence, and gripped and crumpled you and spoilt
you.... For I tell you my dear you don't know; you don't begin to know...."

He disregarded her shy eyes, giving way to his gathered wrath.

"And he conquers! This little monster of meanness, he conquers to the end--his dead hand, his
dead desires, out of the grave they hold you! Always, always, it is Clutch that conquers; the
master of life! I was a fool to dream, a fool to hope. I forgot. I thought only of you and
I--that perhaps you and I----"

He did not heed her little sound of protest. He went on to a bitter denunciation of the rule
of jealousy in the world, forgetting that the sufferer under that rule in this case was his
own consuming jealousy. That was life. Life was jealousy. It was all made up of fierce graspings,
fierce suspicions, fierce resentments; men preyed upon one another even as the beasts they
came from; reason made its crushed way through their conflict, crippled and wounded by their
blows at one another. The best men, the wisest, the best of mankind, the stars of human wisdom,
were but half ineffectual angels carried on the shoulders and guided by the steps of beasts.
One might dream of a better world of men, of civilizations and wisdom latent in our passion-strained
minds, of calms and courage and great heroical conquests that might come, but they lay tens
of thousands of years away and we had to live, we had to die, no more than a herd of beasts
tormented by gleams of knowledge we could never possess, of happiness for which we had no soul.
He grew more and more eloquent as these thoughts sprang and grew in his mind.

"Of course I am absurd," he cried. "All men are absurd. Man is the absurd animal. We have parted
from primordial motives--lust and hate and hunger and fear, and from all the tragic greatness
of uncontrollable fate and we, we've got nothing to replace them. We are comic--comic! Ours
is the stage of comedy in life's history, half lit and blinded,--and we fumble. As absurd as
a kitten with its poor little head in a bag. There's your soul of man! Mewing. We're all at
it, the poets, the teachers. How can anyone hope to escape? Why should I escape? What am I
that I should expect to be anything but a thwarted lover, a man mocked by his own attempts
at service? Why should I expect to discover beauty and think that it won't be snatched away
from me? All my life is comic--the story of this--this last absurdity could it make anything
but a comic history? and yet within me my heart is weeping tears. The further one has gone,
the deeper one wallows in the comic marsh. I am one of the newer kind of men, one of those
men who cannot sit and hug their credit and their honour and their possessions and be content.
I have seen the light of better things than that, and because of my vision, because of my vision
and for no other reason I am the most ridiculous of men. Always I have tried to go out from
myself to the world and give. Those early books of mine, those meretricious books in which
I pretended all was so well with the world,--I did them because I wanted to give happiness
and contentment and to be happy in the giving. And all the watchers and the grippers, the strong
silent men and the calculating possessors of things, the masters of the world, they grinned
at me. How I lied to please! But I tell you for all their grinning, in my very prostitution
there was a better spirit than theirs in their successes. If I had to live over again----"

He left that hypothesis uncompleted.

"And now," he said, with a curious contrast between his voice and the exaltation of his sentiments,
"now that I am to be your tormented, your emasculated lover to the very end of things, emasculated
by laws I hate and customs I hate and vile foresights that I despise----"

He paused, his thread lost for a moment.

"Because," he said, "I'm going to do it. I'm going to do what I can. I'm going to be as you
wish me to be, to help you, to serve you.... If you can't come to meet me, I'll meet you. I
can't help but love you, I can't do without you. Never in my life have I subscribed willingly
to the idea of renunciation. I've hated renunciation. But if there is no other course but renunciation,
renunciation let it be. I'm bitter about this, bitter to the bottom of my soul, but at least
I'll have you know I love you. Anyhow...."

His voice broke. There were tears in his eyes.

And on the very crest of these magnificent capitulations his soul rebelled. He turned about
so swiftly that for a sentence or so she did not realize the nature of his change. Her mind
remained glowing with her distressed acceptance of his magnificent nobility.

"I can't," he said.

He flung off his surrenders as a savage might fling off a garment.

"When I think of his children," he said.

"When I think of the world filled by his children, the children you have borne him--and I--forbidden
almost to touch your hand!"

And flying into a passion Mr. Brumley shouted "No!"

"Not even to touch your hand!"

"I won't do it," he assured her. "I won't do it. If I cannot be your lover--I will go away.
I will never see you again. I will do anything--anything, rather than suffer this degradation.
I will go abroad. I will go to strange places. I will aviate. I will kill myself--or anything,
but I won't endure this. I won't. You see, you ask too much, you demand more than flesh and
blood can stand. I've done my best to bring myself to it and I can't. I won't have that--that----"

He waved his trembling fingers in the air. He was absolutely unable to find an epithet pointed
enough and bitter enough to stab into the memory of the departed knight. He thought of him
as marble, enthroned at Kensal Green, with a false dignity, a false serenity, and intolerable
triumph. He wanted something, some monosyllable to expound and strip all that, some lung-filling
sky-splitting monosyllable that one could shout. His failure increased his exasperation.

"I won't have him grinning, at me," he said at last. "And so, it's one thing or the other.
There's no other choice. But I know your choice. I see your choice. It's good-bye--and why--why
shouldn't I go now?"

He waved his arms about. He was pitifully ridiculous. His face puckered as an ill-treated little
boy's might do. This time it wasn't just the pathetic twinge that had broken his voice before;
he found himself to his own amazement on the verge of loud, undignified, childish weeping.
He was weeping passionately and noisily; he was over the edge of it, and it was too late to
snatch himself back. The shame which could not constrain him, overcame him. A preposterous
upward gesture of the hands expressed his despair. And abruptly this unhappy man of letters
turned from her and fled, the most grief-routed of creatures, whooping and sobbing along a
narrow pathway through the trees.

§8

He left behind him an exceedingly distressed and astonished lady. She had stood with her eyes
opening wider and wider at this culminating exhibition.

"But Mr. Brumley!" she had cried at last. "Mr. Brumley!"

He did not seem to hear her. And now he was running and stumbling along very fast through the
trees, so that in a few minutes he would be out of sight. Dismay came with the thought that
he might presently go out of sight altogether.

For a moment she seemed to hesitate. Then with a swift decision and a firm large grasp of the
hand, she gathered up her black skirts and set off after him along the narrow path. She ran.
She ran lightly, with a soft rhythmic fluttering of white and black. The long crêpe bands she
wore in Sir Isaac's honour streamed out behind her.

"But Mr. Brumley," she panted unheard. "Mister Brumley!"

He went from her fast, faster than she could follow, amidst the sun-dappled pine stems, and
as he went he made noises between bellowing and soliloquy, heedless of any pursuit. All she
could hear was a heart-wringing but inexpressive "Wa, wa, wooh, wa, woo," that burst from him
ever and again. Through a more open space among the trees she fancied she was gaining upon
him, and then as the pines came together again and were mingled with young spruces, she perceived
that he drew away from her more and more. And he went round a curve and was hidden, and then
visible again much further off, and then hidden----.

She attempted one last cry to him, but her breath failed her, and she dropped her pace to a
panting walk.

Surely he would not go thus into the high road! It was unendurable to think of him rushing
out into the high road--blind with sorrow--it might be into the very bonnet of a passing automobile.

She passed beyond the pines and scanned the path ahead as far as the stile. Then she saw him,
lying where he had flung himself, face downward among the bluebells.

"Oh!" she whispered to herself, and put one hand to her heart and drew nearer.

She was flooded now with that passion of responsibility, with that wild irrational charity
which pours out of the secret depths of a woman's stirred being.

She came up to him so lightly as to be noiseless. He did not move, and for a moment she remained
looking at him.

Then she said once more, and very gently--

"Mr. Brumley."

He started, listened for a second, turned over, sat up and stared at her. His face was flushed
and his hair extremely ruffled. And a slight moisture recalled his weeping.

"Mr. Brumley," she repeated, and suddenly there were tears of honest vexation in her voice
and eyes. "You know I cannot do without you."

He rose to his knees, and never, it seemed to him, had she looked so beautiful. She was a little
out of breath, her dusky hair was disordered, and there was an unwonted expression in her eyes,
a strange mingling of indignation and tenderness. For a moment they stared unaffectedly at
each other, each making discoveries.

"Oh!" he sighed at last; "whatever you please, my dear. Whatever you please. I'm going to do
as you wish, if you wish it, and be your friend and forget all this"--he waved an arm--"loving."

There were signs of a recrudescence of grief, and, inarticulate as ever, she sank to her knees
close beside him.

"Let us sit quietly among these hyacinths," said Mr. Brumley. "And then afterwards we will
go back to the house and talk ... talk about our Hostels."

He sat back and she remained kneeling.

"Of course," he said, "I'm yours--to do just as you will with. And we'll work----. I've been
a bit of a stupid brute. We'll work. For all those people. It will be--oh! a big work, quite
a big work. Big enough for us to thank God for. Only----."

The sight of her panting lips had filled him with a wild desire, that set every nerve aquivering,
and yet for all that had a kind of moderation, a reasonableness. It was a sisterly thing he
had in mind. He felt that if this one desire could be satisfied, then honour would be satisfied,
that he would cease grudging Sir Isaac--anything....

But for some moments he could not force himself to speak of this desire, so great was his fear
of a refusal.

"There's one thing," he said, and all his being seemed aquiver.

He looked hard at the trampled bluebells about their feet. "Never once," he went on, "never
once in all these years--have we two even--once--kissed.... It is such a little thing.... So much."

He stopped, breathless. He could say no more because of the beating of his heart. And he dared
not look at her face....

There was a swift, soft rustling as she moved....

She crouched down upon him and, taking his shoulder in her hand, upset him neatly backwards,
and, doing nothing by halves, had kissed the astonished Mr. Brumley full upon his mouth.

THE END

The following pages contain advertisements of Macmillan books by the same author, and new fiction.

BY THE SAME AUTHOR

The War in the Air

Illustrated. 12mo. $1.50 net.

"It is not every man who can write a story of the improbable and make it appear probable, and
yet that is what Mr. Wells has done in The War in the Air."--The Outlook.

"A more entertaining and original story of the future has probably never been written."--Town
and Country.

" ... displays that remarkable ingenuity for which Mr. Wells is now famous."--Washington Star.

"Forcible in the extreme."--Baltimore Sun.

"It is an exciting tale, a novel military history."--N.Y. Post.

New Worlds for Old

Cloth. 12mo. $1.50 net. Macmillan Standard Library Edition, 50 cents net.

" ... is a readable, straightaway account of Socialism it is singularly informing and all in
an undidactic way."--Chicago Evening Post.

"The book impresses us less as a defense of Socialism than as a work of art. In a literary
sense, Mr. Wells has never done anything better."--Argonaut.

" ... a very good introduction to Socialism. It will attract and interest those who are not
of that faith, and correct those who are."--The Dial.

PUBLISHED BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York

NEW MACMILLAN FICTION

The Mutiny of the Elsinore

By JACK LONDON, Author of "The Sea Wolf," "The Call of the Wild," etc.

With frontispiece in colors by Anton Fischer. Cloth, 12mo. $1.35 net.

Everyone who remembers The Sea Wolf with pleasure will enjoy this vigorous narrative of a voyage
from New York around Cape Horn in a large sailing vessel. The Mutiny of the Elsinore is the
same kind of tale as its famous predecessor, and by those who have read it, it is pronounced
even more stirring. Mr. London is here writing of scenes and types of people with which he
is very familiar, the sea and ships and those who live in ships. In addition to the adventure
element, of which there is an abundance of the usual London kind, a most satisfying kind it
is, too, there is a thread of romance involving a wealthy, tired young man who takes the trip
on the Elsinore, and the captain's daughter. The play of incident, on the one hand the ship's
amazing crew and on the other the lovers, gives a story in which the interest never lags and
which demonstrates anew what a master of his art Mr. London is.

The Three Sisters

By MAY SINCLAIR, Author of "The Divine Fire," "The Return of the Prodigal," etc.

Cloth, 12mo. $1.35 net.

Every reader of The Divine Fire, in fact every reader of any of Miss Sinclair's books, will
at once accord her unlimited praise for her character work. The Three Sisters reveals her at
her best. It is a story of temperament, made evident not through tiresome analyses but by means
of a series of dramatic incidents. The sisters of the title represent three distinct types
of womankind. In their reaction under certain conditions Miss Sinclair is not only telling
a story of tremendous interest but she is really showing a cross section of life. $1.35 net.

In Nathan Burke Mrs. Watts told with great power the story of a man. In this, her new book,
she does much the same thing for a woman. Jennie Cushing is an exceedingly interesting character,
perhaps the most interesting of any that Mrs. Watts has yet given us. The novel is her life
and little else, but it is a life filled with a variety of experiences and touching closely
many different strata of humankind. Throughout it all, from the days when as a thirteen-year-old,
homeless, friendless waif, Jennie is sent to a reformatory, to the days when her beauty is
the inspiration of a successful painter, there is in the narrative an appeal to the emotions,
to the sympathy, to the affections, that cannot be gainsaid.

Saturday's Child

By KATHLEEN NORRIS, Author of "Mother," "The Treasure," etc.

With frontispiece in colors by F. Graham Cootes. Decorated cloth, 12mo. $1.35 net.

"Friday's child is loving and giving, Saturday's child must work for her living."

The title of Mrs. Norris's new novel at once indicates its theme. It is the story of a girl
who has her own way to make in the world. The various experiences through which she passes,
the various viewpoints which she holds until she comes finally to realize that service for
others is the only thing that counts, are told with that same intimate knowledge of character,
that healthy optimism and the belief in the ultimate goodness of mankind that have distinguished
all of this author's writing. The book is intensely alive with human emotions. The reader is
bound to sympathize with Mrs. Norris's people because they seem like real people and because
they are actuated by motives which one is able to understand. Saturday's Child is Mrs. Norris's
longest work. Into it has gone the very best of her creative talent. It is a volume which the
many admirers of Mother will gladly accept. Decorated cloth, 12mo. $1.35 net.

Probably no author to-day has written more powerfully or frankly on the conventions of modern
society than John Helston, who, however, has hitherto confined himself to the medium of verse.
In this novel, the theme of which occasionally touches upon the same problems--problems involving
love, freedom of expression, the right to live one's life in one's own way--he is revealed
to be no less a master of the prose form than of the poetical. While the book is one for mature
minds, the skill with which delicate situations are handled and the reserve everywhere exhibited
remove it from possible criticism even by the most exacting. The title, it should be explained,
refers to a spirited race horse with the fortunes of which the lives of two of the leading
characters are bound up.

Faces in the Dawn

A Story by HERMANN HAGEDORN

With frontispiece in colors. Cloth, 12mo. $1.35 net.

A great many people already know Mr. Hagedorn through his verse. Faces in the Dawn will, however,
be their introduction to him as a novelist. The same qualities that have served to raise his
poetry above the common level help to distinguish this story of a German village. The theme
of the book is the transformation that was wrought in the lives of an irritable, domineering
German pastor and his wife through the influence of a young German girl and her American lover.
Sentiment, humor and a human feeling, all present in just the right measure, warm the heart
and contribute to the enjoyment which the reader derives in following the experiences of the
well drawn characters.

With frontispiece. Decorated cloth, 12mo. $1.25 net.

The many readers who enjoyed The Goodly Fellowship have been eagerly awaiting something more
from the pen of the same author. This is at last announced. In Metzel Changes His Mind, Miss
Schauffler strengthens the impression made by her first book that she is a writer of marked
originality. Here again she has provided an unusual setting for her tale. The scene is largely
laid in a pathological laboratory, surely a new background for a romance. It is a background,
moreover, which is used most effectively by Miss Schauffler in the furtherance of her plot.
Her characters, too, are as interesting as their surroundings--a woman doctor, attractive as
well as sensible, a gruff old German doctor, suspicious of womankind, and a young American.
Around these the action centers, though half a dozen others, vividly sketched, have a hand
in the proceedings. Of course Metzel Changes His Mind is a love story, but not of the ordinary
type.

PUBLISHED BY THE MACMILLAN COMPANY 64-66 Fifth Avenue New York