DEDICATION

To Alice D. Clark, engraver of these illustrations, who has spared no pains to promote the
artistic excellence of this work, and to encourage its progress, these pages are dedicated
with the high regards of THE AUTHOR.

CONTENTS

List of Illustrations
Preface
Introduction
Key to Genera
Classification of Ferns
The Polypodies
The Bracken Group:
  Bracken
  Cliff Brakes
  Rock Brake
The Lip Ferns (Cheilanthes)
The Cloak Fern (Notholæna)
The Chain Ferns
The Spleenworts:
  The Rock Spleenworts. Asplenium
  The Large Spleenworts. Athyrium
Hart's Tongue and Walking Leaf
The Shield Ferns:
  Christmas and Holly Fern
  Marsh Fern Tribe
  The Beech Ferns
  The Fragrant Fern
  The Wood Ferns
  The Bladder Ferns
The Woodsias
The Boulder Fern (Dennstædtia)
Sensitive and Ostrich Ferns
The Flowering Ferns (Osmunda)
Curly Grass and Climbing Fern
Adder's Tongue
The Grape Ferns:
  Key to the Grape Fern
  Moonwort
  Little Grape Fern
  Lance-leaved Grape Fern
  Matricary Fern
  Common Grape Fern
  Rattlesnake Fern
Filmy Fern
Noted Fern Authors
Fern Literature
Time List for Fruiting of Ferns
Glossary
Note: Meaning of Genus and Species
Checklist

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

A Fern Lover Prothallium Diagram Pinnate Frond Bipinnate Frond Pinnatifid Frond Spore Cases
Linen Tester Curly Grass. Schizæa Cinnamon Fern. Osmunda cinnamomea Sensitive Fern. Onoclea
sensibilis Ostrich Fern. Onoclea Struthiopteris Interrupted Fern. Osmunda Claytoniana Climbing
Fern. Lygodium Flowering Fern. Osmunda regalis spectabilis Adder's Tongue. Ophioglossum Grape
Fern. Botrychium Polypody. Polypodium Beech Fern. Phegopteris Cloak Fern. Notholæna Filmy Fern.
Trichomanes Bracken. Pteris Maidenhair. Adiantum Cliff Brake. Pellæa Lip Fern. Cheilanthes
Rock Brake. Cryptogramma Chain Fern. Woodwardia Shield Fern. Polystichum Wood Fern. Aspidium
Bladder Fern. Cystopteris Woodsia Hayscented Fern. Dennstædtia Hart's Tongue. Scolopendrium
Walking Fern. Camptosorus Asplenium Type Athyrium Type Sporangia of the Five Families Indusium
Common Polypody. Polypodium vulgare Sori of Polypody Polypody in mass (Greenwood) Gray Polypody.
Polypodium incanum Brake. Bracken. Sterile Frond Bracken. Fertile Frond Bracken, var. pseudocaudata
Spray of Maidenhair Sori of Maidenhair Maidenhair. Adiantum pedatum Alpine Maidenhair Venus-Hair
Fern. Adiantum capillus-veneris Purple Cliff Brake. Pellæa atropurpurea Dense Cliff Brake.
Cryptogramma densa Slender Cliff Brake. Cryptogramma Stelleri Parsley Fern. Cryptogramma acrostichoides
Alabama Lip Fern. Cheilanthes alabamensis Hairy Lip Fern. Cheilanthes lanosa Slender Lip Fern.
Cheilanthes Féei Pinnæ of Slender Lip Fern Powdery Cloak Fern. Notholæna dealbata Common Chain
Fern. Woodwardia virginica Net-veined Chain Fern. Woodwardia areolata The Spleenworts Pinnatifid
Spleenwort. Asplenium pinnatifidum Scott's Spleenwort. Asplenium ebenoides Green Spleenwort.
Asplenium viride Maidenhair Spleenwort. Asplenium Trichomanes Maidenhair Spleenwort. Asplenium
Trichomanes (Fernery) Ebony Spleenwort. Asplenium platyneuron Bradley's Spleenwort. Asplenium
Bradleyi Mountain Spleenwort. Asplenium montanum Rue Spleenwort. Asplenium Ruta-muraria Rootstock
of Lady Fern (Two parts) Sori of Lady Fern. Athyrium angustum Varieties of Lady Fern Lowland
Lady Fern. Athyrium asplenioides Silvery Spleenwort. Athyrium acrostichoides Narrow-leaved
Spleenwort. Athyrium angustifolium Pinnæ and Sori of Athyrium angustifolium Sori of Scolopendrium
vulgare Hart's Tongue. Scolopendrium vulgare Walking Fern. Camptosorus rhizophyllus Christmas
Fern. Polystichum acrostichoides Varieties of Christmas Fern Braun's Holly Fern. Polystichum
Braunii Holly Fern. Polystichum Lonchitis Marsh Fern. Aspidium Thelypteris Marsh Fern, in the
mass Massachusetts Fern. Aspidium simulatum New York Fern. Aspidium noveboracense Sori of Aspidium
noveboracense Pinnæ and Sori of Aspidium noveboracense Oak Fern. Phegopteris Dryopteris Northern
Oak Fern. Phegopteris Robertiana Broad Beech Fern. Aspidium hexagonoptera Long Beech Fern.
Aspidium polypedioides Fragrant Fern. Aspidium fragrans Marginal Shield Fern. Aspidium marginale
Crown of Fronds of Aspidium marginale Sori of Aspidium marginale Male Fern. Aspidium Filix-mas
Aspidium Filix-mas and details Goldie's Shield Fern. Aspidium Goldianum Aspidium Goldianum,
in the mass Crested Shield Fern. Aspidium cristatum Crested Shield Fern. Aspidium cristatum
(No. 2) Clinton's Shield Fern. Aspidium cristatum var. Clintonianum Crested Marginal Fern.
Aspidium cristatum × marginale Aspidium cristatum × marginale, in the mass Boott's Shield Fern.
Aspidium Boottii Spinulose Shield Fern. Aspidium spinulosum Aspidium spinulosum var. intermedium
Aspidium spinulosum var. americanum Bulblet Bladder Fern. Cystopteris bulbifera Cystopteris
bulbifera with sprouting bulb Fragile Bladder Fern. Cystopteris fragilis Rusty Woodsia. Woodsia
ilvensis Northern Woodsia. Woodsia alpina Details of Alpine Woodsia Blunt-lobed Woodsia. Woodsia
obtusa Smooth Woodsia. Woodsia glabella Hayscented Fern. Dennstædtia punctilobula Forked variety
of Dennstædtia punctilobula Field View of Dennstædtia punctilobula Pinnæ and Sori of Dennstædtia
punctilobula Meadow View of Sensitive Fern Obtusilobata Forms of Sensitive Fern, Leaf to Fruit
Sori of Sensitive Fern Sensitive Fern. Onoclea sensibilis Sensitive Fern, Fertile and Sterile
Fronds on Same Plant Ostrich Fern. Onoclea Struthiopteris. Fertile Fronds Ostrich Fern. Sterile
Fronds Sori and Sporangia of Ostrich Fern Royal Fern. Osmunda regalis spectabilis Sori of Royal
Fern Interrupted Fern. Osmunda Claytoniana Interrupted Fern. Fertile Pinnules Spread Open Cinnamon
Fern. Osmunda cinnamomea Cinnamon Fern. Leaf Gradations Two Varieties of Cinnamon Fern Osmunda
cinnamomea glandulosa Curly Grass. Schizæa pusilla Sporangia of Curly Grass Climbing Fern.
Lygodium palmatum Adder's Tongue. Ophioglossum vulgatum Moonwort. Botrychium Lunaria Moonwort,
Details Little Grape Fern. Botrychium simplex Lance-leaved Grape Fern. Botrychium lanceolatum
Matricary Grape Fern. Botrychium ramosum Common Grape Fern. Botrychium obliquum Botrychium
obliquum var. dissectum Botrychium obliquum var. oneidense Ternate Grape Fern. Botrychium ternatum
var. intermedium Ternate Grape Fern. B. ternatum var. intermedium Rattlesnake Fern. Botrychium
virginianum Filmy Fern. Trichomanes Boschianum Fruiting Pinnules of Filmy Fern Crosiers Noted
Fern Authors Spray of the Bulblet Bladder Fern

PREFACE

A lover of nature feels the fascination of the ferns though he may know little of their names
and habits. Beholding them in their native haunts, adorning the rugged cliffs, gracefully fringing
the water-courses, or waving their stately fronds on the borders of woodlands, he feels their
call to a closer acquaintance. Happy would he be to receive instruction from a living teacher:
His next preference would be the companionship of a good fern book. Such a help we aim to give
him in this manual. If he will con it diligently, consulting its glossary for the meaning of
terms while he quickens his powers of observation by studying real specimens, he may hope to
learn the names and chief qualities of our most common ferns in a single season.

Our most productive period in fern literature was between 1878, when Williamson published his
"Ferns of Kentucky," and 1905, when Clute issued, "Our Ferns in Their Haunts." Between these
flourished D.C. Eaton, Davenport, Waters, Dodge, Parsons, Eastman, Underwood, A.A. Eaton, Slosson,
and others. All their works are now out of print except Clute's just mentioned and Mrs. Parsons'
"How to Know the Ferns." Both of these are valuable handbooks and amply illustrated. Clute's
is larger, more scholarly, and more inclusive of rare species, with an illustrated key to the
genera; while Mrs. Parsons' is more simple and popular, with a naive charm that creates for
it a constant demand.

We trust there is room also for this unpretentious, but progressive, handbook, designed to
stimulate interest in the ferns and to aid the average student in learning their names and
meaning. Its geographical limits include the northeastern states and Canada. Its nomenclature
follows in the main the seventh edition of Gray's Manual, while the emendations set forth in
Rhodora, of October, 1919, and also a few terms of later adoption are embodied, either as synonyms
or substitutes for the more familiar Latin names of the Manual, and are indicated by a different
type. In every case the student has before him both the older and the more recent terms from
which to choose. However, since the book is written primarily for lovers of Nature, many of
whom are unfamiliar with scientific terms, the common English names are everywhere given prominence,
and strange to say are less subject to change and controversy than the Latin. There is no doubt
what species is meant when one speaks of the Christmas fern, the ostrich fern, the long beech
fern, the interrupted fern, etc. The use of the common names will lead to the knowledge and
enjoyment of the scientific terms.

A friend unfamiliar with Latin has asked for pointers to aid in pronouncing the scientific
names of ferns. Following Gray, Wood, and others we have marked each accented syllable with
either the grave (`) or acute (´) accent, the former showing that the vowel over which it stands
has its long sound, while the latter indicates the short or modified sound. Let it be remembered
that any syllable with either of these marks over it is the accented syllable, whose sound
will be long or short according to the slant of the mark.

We have appropriated from many sources such material as suited our purpose. Our interest in
ferns dates back to our college days at Amherst, when we collected our first specimens in a
rough, bushy swamp in Hadley. We found here a fine colony of the climbing fern (Lygodium).
We recall the slender fronds climbing over the low bushes, unique twiners, charming, indeed,
in their native habitat. We have since collected and studied specimens of nearly every New
England fern, and have carefully examined most of the other species mentioned in this book.
By courtesy of the librarian, Mr. William P. Rich, we have made large use of the famous Davenport
herbarium in the Massachusetts Horticultural library, and through the kindness of the daughter,
Miss Mary E. Davenport, we have freely consulted the larger unmounted collection of ferns at
the Davenport homestead, at Medford,[1] finding here a very large and fine assortment of Botrychiums,
including a real B. ternatum from Japan.

[Footnote 1: Recently donated to the Gray Herbarium.]

For numerous facts and suggestions we are indebted to the twenty volumes of the Fern Bulletin,
and also to its able editor, Mr. Willard N. Clute. To him we are greatly obligated for the
use of photographs and plates, and especially for helpful counsel on many items. We appreciate
the helpfulness of the American Fern Journal and its obliging editor, Mr. E.J. Winslow. To
our friend, Mr. C.H. Knowlton, our thanks are due for the revision of the checklist and for
much helpful advice, and we are grateful to Mr. S.N.F. Sanford, of the Boston Society of Natural
History, for numerous courtesies; but more especially to Mr. C.A. Weatherby for his expert
and helpful inspection of the entire manuscript.

The illustrations have been carefully selected; many of them from original negatives bequeathed
to the author by his friend, Henry Lincoln Clapp, pioneer and chief promoter of school gardens
in America. Some have been photographed from the author's herbarium, and from living ferns.
A few are from the choice herbarium of Mr. George E. Davenport, and also a few reprints have
been made from fern books, for which due credit is given. The Scott's spleenwort, on the dedication
page, is reprinted from Clute's "Our Ferns in Their Haunts."

INTRODUCTION

Thoreau tells us, "Nature made a fern for pure leaves." Fern leaves are in the highest order
of cryptogams. Like those of flowering plants they are reinforced by woody fibres running through
their stems, keeping them erect while permitting graceful curves. Their exquisite symmetry
of form, their frequent finely cut borders, and their rich shades of green combine to make
them objects of rare beauty; while their unique vernation and method of fruiting along with
their wonderful mystery of reproduction invest them with marked scientific interest affording
stimulus and culture to the thoughtful mind. By peculiar enchantments these charming plants
allure the ardent Nature-lover to observe their haunts and habits.

  "Oh, then most gracefully they wave
  In the forest, like a sea,
  And dear as they are beautiful
  Are these fern leaves to me."

As a rule the larger and coarser ferns grow in moist, shady situations, as swamps, ravines,
and damp woods; while the smaller ones are more apt to be found along mountain ranges in some
dry and even exposed locality. A tiny crevice in some high cliff is not infrequently chosen
by these fascinating little plants, which protect themselves from drought by assuming a mantle
of light wool, or of hair and chaff, with, perhaps, a covering of white powder as in some cloak
ferns--thus keeping a layer of moist air next to the surface of the leaf, and checking transpiration.

Some of the rock-loving ferns in dry places are known as "resurrection" ferns, reviving after
their leaves have turned sere and brown. A touch of rain, and lo! they are green and flourishing.

Ferns vary in height from the diminutive filmy fern of less than an inch to the vast tree ferns
of the tropics, reaching a height of sixty feet or more.

REPRODUCTION

Ferns are propagated in various ways. A frequent method is by perennial rootstocks, which often
creep beneath the surface, sending up, it may be, single fronds, as in the common bracken,
or graceful leaf-crowns, as in the cinnamon fern. The bladder fern is propagated in part from
its bulblets, while the walking leaf bends over to the earth and roots at the tip.

Ferns are also reproduced by spores, a process mysterious and marvellous as a fairy tale. Instead
of seeds the fern produces spores, which are little one-celled bodies without an embryo and
may be likened to buds. A spore falls upon damp soil and germinates, producing a small, green,
shield-shaped patch much smaller than a dime, which is called a prothállium (or prothallus).
On its under surface delicate root hairs grow to give it stability and nutriment; also two
sorts of reproductive organs known as antherídia and archegònia, the male and female growths
analogous to the stamens and pistils in flowers. From the former spring small, active, spiral
bodies called ántherozòids, which lash about in the moisture of the prothállium until they
find the archegònia, the cells of which are so arranged in each case as to form a tube around
the central cell, which is called the òösphere, or egg-cell, the point to be fertilized. When
one of the entering ántherozòids reaches this point the desired change is effected, and the
canal of the archegònium closes. The empty òösphere becomes the quickened òösphore whose newly
begotten plant germ unfolds normally by the multiplication of cells that become, in turn, root,
stem, first leaf, etc., while the prothállium no longer needed to sustain its offspring withers
away.[1]

[Footnote 1: In the accompanying illustration, it should be remembered that the reproductive
parts of a fern are microscopic and cannot be seen by the naked eye.]

Fern plants have been known to spring directly from the prothállus by a budding process apart
from the organs of fertilization, showing that Nature "fulfills herself in many ways."[2]

[Footnote 2: The scientific term for this method of reproduction is apógamy (apart from marriage).
Sometimes the prothallus itself buds directly from the frond without spores, for which process
the term apóspory is used. (Meaning, literally, without spores.)]

VERNATION

All true ferns come out of the ground head foremost, coiled up like a watch-spring, and are
designated as "fiddle-heads," or crosiers. (A real crosier is a bishop's staff.) Some of these
odd young growths are covered with "fern wool," which birds often use in lining their nests.
This wool usually disappears later as the crosier unfolds into the broad green blade. The development
of plant shoots from the bud is called vernation (Latin, ver meaning spring), and this unique
uncoiling of ferns, "circinnate vernation."

VEINS

The veins of a fern are free, when, branching from the mid-vein, they do not connect with each
other, and simple when they do not fork. When the veins intersect they are said to anastomose
(Greek, an opening, or network), and their meshes are called arèolæ or áreoles (Latin, areola,
a little open space).

EXPLANATION OF TERMS

A frond is said to be pinnate (Latin, pinna, a feather), when its primary divisions extend
to the rachis, as in the Christmas fern (Fig. 1). A frond is bipinnate (Latin, bis, twice)
when the lobes of the pinnæ extend to the midvein as in the royal fern (Fig. 2). These divisions
of the pinnæ are called pinnules. When a frond is tripínnate the last complete divisions are
called ultimate pinnules or segments. A frond is pinnátifid when its lobes extend halfway or
more to the rachis or midvein as in the middle lobes of the pinnátifid spleenwort (Fig. 3).
The pinnæ of a frond are often pinnátifid when the frond itself is pinnate; and a frond may
be pinnate in its lower part and become pinnátifid higher up as in the pinnátifid spleenwort
just mentioned (Fig. 3).

The divisions of a pinnátifid leaf are called segments; of a bipinnátifid or tripinnátifid
leaf, ultimate segments.

SPORÁNGIA AND FRUIT DOTS

Fern spores are formed in little sacs known as spore-cases or sporángia (Fig. 4). They are
usually clustered in dots or lines on the back or margin of a frond, either on or at the end
of a small vein, or in spike-like racemes on separate stalks. Sori (singular sorus, a heap),
or fruit dots may be naked as in the polypody, but are usually covered with a thin, delicate
membrane, known as the indusium (Greek, a dress, or mantle). The family or genus of a fern
is often determined by the shape of its indusium; e.g., the indusium of the woodsias is star-shaped;
of the Dicksonias, cup-shaped; of the aspleniums, linear; of the wood ferns, kidney-shaped, etc.

In many ferns the sporangia are surrounded in whole or in part by a vertical, elastic ring
(annulus) reminding one of a small, brown worm closely coiled (Fig. 4). As the spores mature,
the ring contracts and bursts with considerable force, scattering the spores. The spores of
the different genera mature at different times from May to September. A good time to collect
ferns is just before the fruiting season. (For times of fruiting see individual descriptions
or chronological chart on page 220.)

HELPFUL HINTS

The following hints may be helpful to the young collector:

1. A good lens with needles for dissecting is very helpful in examining the sori, veins, glands,
etc., as an accurate knowledge of any one of these items may aid in identifying a given specimen.
Bausch and Lomb make a convenient two-bladed pocket glass for about two dollars.[1]

[Footnote 1: In the linen tester here figured (cost $1.50) the lens is mounted in a brass frame
which holds it in position, enabling the dissector to use both hands. A tripod lens will also
be found cheap and serviceable.]

2. Do not exterminate or weaken a fern colony by taking more plants than it can spare. In small
colonies of rare ferns take a few and leave the rest to grow. It is decidedly ill-bred to rob
a locality of its precious plants. Pick your fern leaf down close to the root-stock, including
a portion of that also, if it can be spared. Place your fronds between newspaper sheets and
lay "dryers" over them (blotting paper or other absorbent paper). Cover with a board or slat
frame, and lay on this a weight of several pounds, leaving it for twenty-four hours; if the
specimens are not then cured, change the dryers. Mount the prepared specimens on white mounting
sheets. The regulation size is 16-1/2 by 11-1/2 inches. The labels are usually 3-3/4 by 1-3/4
inches. A sample will suggest the proper inscription.

  HERBARIUM OF JOHN DOE
  Ophioglóssum vulgatum, L.
  (Adder's Tongue)
  Willoughby Lake, Vt.
  August 19, 1911. Wet meadow.
  Coll. X.Y.Z. Rather common
  but often overlooked

Place the label at the lower right-hand corner of the sheet, which is now ready to be laid
in the genus cover, usually of manila paper 16-1/2 by 12 inches.

It is well to jot down important memoranda at the time of collecting. This is the method in
use at the Gray Herbarium in Cambridge. It can, of course, be modified to suit one's own taste
or convenience. The young collector can begin by simply pressing his specimens between the
leaves of a book, the older and coarser the better; and he can mount them in a blank book designed
for the purpose, or if he has only a common blank book, he can cut out some of the leaves,
alternately with others left in place, as is often done with a scrap book, that when the book
is full it may not be crowded at the back. Or he can use sheets of blank paper of any uniform
size and mount the specimens on these with gummed strips, and then group them, placing those
of the same genus together. Such an extemporized herbarium, though crude, will serve for a
beginning, while stimulating his interest, and advancing his knowledge of the ferns. Let him
collect, press, and mount as many varieties as possible, giving the name with date and place
of collecting, etc. Such a first attempt may be kept as a reminder of pleasant hours spent
in learning the rudiments of a delightful study.

We cannot insist too strongly upon the necessity of handling and studying the living plant.
Every student needs to observe for himself the haunts, habits, and structure of real ferns.
We would say to the young student, while familiarizing yourself with the English names of the
ferns, do not neglect the scientific names, which often hold the key to their meaning. Repeat
over and over the name of each genus in soliloquy and in conversation until your mind instantly
associates each fern with its family name--"Adiantum," "Polystichum," "Asplenium," and all
the rest. Fix them in the memory for a permanent asset. With hard study and growing knowledge
will come growing attachment. How our great expert, Mr. Davenport, loved the ferns! He would
handle them with gentle touch, fondly stroke their leaves, and devoutly study their structure,
as if inspired by the All-wise Interpreter.

  "Move along these shades
  In gentleness of heart: with gentle hand
  Touch--for there is a spirit in the woods."

KEY TO THE GENERA

This key, in illustrating each genus, follows the method of Clute in "Our Ferns in Their Haunts,"
but substitutes other and larger specimens. Five of these are from Waters' "Ferns" by permission
of Henry Holt & Co.

As the indusium, which often determines the name of a fern, is apt in some species to wither
early, it is important to secure for study not only a fertile frond, but one in as good condition
as possible. For convenience the ferns may be considered in two classes.

I

THOSE WHICH HAVE THE FRUITING PORTION IN GREENISH, BERRY-LIKE STRUCTURES AND NOT ON THE BACK
OF FRONDS

A. FRUITING FRONDS WHOLLY FERTILE

(Fertile and sterile fronds entirely unlike)

1. Fruit in a one-sided spike in two ranks; plants very small; sterile fronds thread-like and
tortuous.

Curly Grass. Schizæa.

2. Fruit in a club-shaped, brown or cinnamon-colored spike loaded with sporangia; fruit in
early spring.

Cinnamon Fern. Osmunda cinnamomea.

3. Fruit in berry-like, greenish structures in a twice pinnate spike, which comes up much later
than the broad and coarse pinnátifid sterile fronds.

Wet ground. Sensitive Fern. Onoclea.

4. Fruit in pod-like or necklace-like pinnæ; fertile frond pinnate; sterile frond tall, pinnátifid;
fruit late.

Ostrich Fern. Onoclea struthiopteris.

B. FRUITING FRONDS PARTLY STERILE

1. Fruiting portion in the middle of the frond; two to four pairs of fertile pinnæ.

Interrupted Fern. Osmunda Claytoniana.

2. Fruiting portion at the apex of the frond. Sterile pinnæ palmate; rachis twining.

Climbing Fern. Lygodium.

Sterile pinnæ pinnate; fronds large, fertile portion green, turning brown, forming a panicle
at the top.

Royal Fern. Osmunda regalis.

3. Fruiting portion seemingly on a separate stock a few inches above the sterile.

Sterile part an entire, ovate, green leaf near the middle; fertile part a spike.

Adder's Tongue. Ophioglossum.

Sterile portion more or less divided; fruit in racemes or panicles, rarely in spikes.

Grape Ferns. Moonwort. Botrychium.

II

THOSE WHICH HAVE THE FRUITING PORTION ON THE BACK OR MARGIN OF FRONDS

A. INDUSIUM WANTING

1. Fruit-dots large, roundish; fronds evergreen. Rock species.

Polypody. Polypodium.

2. Fruit-dots small, roundish; fronds triangular.

Beech Ferns. Phegopteris.

3. Fruit in lines on the margin of the pinnules; under surface of the fronds covered with whitish
powder.

Cloak Ferns. Notholæna.

B. INDUSIUM PRESENT

1. Sori on the edge of a pinnule terminating a vein; sporangia at the base of a long, bristle-like
receptacle surrounded by a cup-shaped indusium.

Filmy Fern. Trichomanes.

2. Indusium formed by the reflexed margin of the pinnules.

(1) Sporangia on a continuous line; fronds large, ternate; indusium narrow. Bracken. Brake. Pteris.

(2) Sporangia in oblong sori under a reflexed tooth of a pinnule; indusium broad; rachis dark
and shining. Maidenhair. Adiantum.

(3) Sori in roundish or elongated masses.

Indusium broad, nearly continuous, fronds mostly smooth, somewhat leathery, pinnate. Rock species.
Cliff brakes. Pellæa.

Indusium narrow, seldom continuous, formed by the margin of separate lobes or of the whole
pinnules; often inconspicuous, fronds usually hairy. Lip Ferns. Cheilanthes.

Indusium of the reflexed edges, at first reaching to the midrib, or nearly so; later opening
out nearly flat; fruiting pinnules pod-like; sterile fronds broad. Rock brakes. Cryptogramma.

3. Indusium never formed of the margin of the frond. Sori various.

(1) Fruit-dots oblong, parallel with the midrib, somewhat sunken in the tissues of the frond.
Water-loving species. Chain Ferns. Woodwardia.

(2) Fruit-dots and indusium roundish.

Indusium shield-shaped, fixed by the center. Evergreen glossy ferns in rocky woods. Shield
Ferns. Polystichum.

Indusium cordate, fixed by the sinus. Wood Ferns. Aspidium.

Indusium hood-shaped, fixed centrally behind the sorus and arching over it, soon withering,
often illusive. Fronds two to three pinnate, very graceful. Moisture-loving species. Bladder
Ferns. Cystopteris.

Indusium star-shaped, of a few irregular segments fixed beneath the sorus, often obscure. Mostly
small, rock-loving plants, usually rather chaffy, at least at the base, and growing in tufts.
Woodsia.

