HUCKLEBERRY FINN

By Mark Twain

Part 7.

CHAPTER XXXI.

WE dasn't stop again at any town for days and days; kept right along down the river.  We was
down south in the warm weather now, and a mighty long ways from home.  We begun to come to
trees with Spanish moss on them, hanging down from the limbs like long, gray beards.  It was
the first I ever see it growing, and it made the woods look solemn and dismal.  So now the
frauds reckoned they was out of danger, and they begun to work the villages again.

First they done a lecture on temperance; but they didn't make enough for them both to get drunk
on.  Then in another village they started a dancing-school; but they didn't know no more how
to dance than a kangaroo does; so the first prance they made the general public jumped in and
pranced them out of town.  Another time they tried to go at yellocution; but they didn't yellocute
long till the audience got up and give them a solid good cussing, and made them skip out. 
They tackled missionarying, and mesmerizing, and doctoring, and telling fortunes, and a little
of everything; but they couldn't seem to have no luck.  So at last they got just about dead
broke, and laid around the raft as she floated along, thinking and thinking, and never saying
nothing, by the half a day at a time, and dreadful blue and desperate.

And at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in the wigwam and talk
low and confidential two or three hours at a time. Jim and me got uneasy.  We didn't like the
look of it.  We judged they was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever.  We turned
it over and over, and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into somebody's
house or store, or was going into the counterfeit-money business, or something. So then we
was pretty scared, and made up an agreement that we wouldn't have nothing in the world to do
with such actions, and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold shake and
clear out and leave them behind. The quartz ledges dip and turn, so tunnels and cross-cuts are run
to follow the golden vein, and all these are timbered with heavy wooden supports to keep the
earth and rock from falling in on the men. The miners work in day and night gangs, using dynamite
to break up the hard rock, and sending ore up in great iron buckets, or in cars if the tunnel
ends in daylight, on the hillside. Sometimes the miners strike water, and that must be pumped
out to keep the mine from being flooded.

The ore is crushed by heavy stamps, or hammers, and then mixed with water and quicksilver. This
curious metal, quicksilver, or mercury, is fond of gold and hunts out every little bit, the
two metals mixing together and making what is called an amalgam. This is heated in an iron vessel,
and the quicksilver goes off in steam or vapor, leaving the gold free. The quicksilver, being
valuable, is saved and used again, while the gold, now called bullion, is sent to the mint
to be coined into bright twenties, or tens, or five-dollar pieces.

Some of the gold in the crushed ore will not mix with the quicksilver, and this is treated to
a bath of cyanide, a peculiar acid that melts the gold as water does a lump of sugar. So all of
value is saved, and the worthless "tailings" go to the dump. Even the black sands on the ocean
beach have gold in them. In the desert also there is gold, which is "dry-washed" by putting
the sand into a machine and with a strong blast of air blowing away
all but the heavy scales of gold.

Though the Argonauts of '49 found much wealth in yellow gold, our "Golden State," on hillsides, in river-beds,
or deep down in hidden quartz ledges, still holds great fortunes
waiting to be found.

MINING STORIES

A large book might be filled
with the stories told by the men who found gold in the early days.
Their "lucky strikes" in the "dry-diggings" sound like fairy tales.
Imagine turning over a big rock and then picking up pieces of gold
enough to half fill a man's hat from the little nest that rock had
been lying in for years and years!  Then I set down and cried; I couldn't help it. But
I couldn't set still long.  Pretty soon I went out on the road, trying to think what I better
do, and I run across a boy walking, and asked him if he'd seen a strange nigger dressed so
and so, and he says:

"Yes."

"Whereabouts?" says I.

"Down to Silas Phelps' place, two mile below here.  He's a runaway nigger, and they've got
him.  Was you looking for him?"

"You bet I ain't!  I run across him in the woods about an hour or two ago, and he said if I
hollered he'd cut my livers out--and told me to lay down and stay where I was; and I done it.
Been there ever since; afeard to come out."

"Well," he says, "you needn't be afeard no more, becuz they've got him. He run off f'm down
South, som'ers."

"It's a good job they got him."

"Well, I RECKON!  There's two hunderd dollars reward on him.  It's like picking up money out'n
the road."

"Yes, it is--and I could a had it if I'd been big enough; I see him FIRST. Who nailed him?"

"It was an old fellow--a stranger--and he sold out his chance in him for forty dollars, becuz
he's got to go up the river and can't wait.  Think o' that, now!  You bet I'D wait, if it was
seven year."

"That's me, every time," says I.  "But maybe his chance ain't worth no more than that, if he'll
sell it so cheap.  Maybe there's something ain't straight about it."

"But it IS, though--straight as a string.  I see the handbill myself.  It tells all about him,
to a dot--paints him like a picture, and tells the plantation he's frum, below NewrLEANS. 
No-sirree-BOB, they ain't no trouble 'bout THAT speculation, you bet you.  Say, gimme a chaw
tobacker, won't ye?"

I didn't have none, so he left.  I went to the raft, and set down in the wigwam to think. 
But I couldn't come to nothing.  I thought till I wore my head sore, but I couldn't see no
way out of the trouble.  After all this long journey, and after all we'd done for them scoundrels,
here it was all come to nothing, everything all busted up and ruined, because they could have
the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that, and make him a slave again all his life, and amongst
strangers, too, for forty dirty dollars.

Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to be a slave at home where
his family was, as long as he'd GOT to be a slave, and so I'd better write a letter to Tom
Sawyer and tell him to tell Miss Watson where he was.  But I soon give up that notion for two
things: she'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her, and
so she'd sell him straight down the river again; and if she didn't, everybody naturally despises
an ungrateful nigger, and they'd make Jim feel it all the time, and so he'd feel ornery and
disgraced. And then think of ME!  It would get all around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to
get his freedom; and if I was ever to see anybody from that town again I'd be ready to get
down and lick his boots for shame.  That's just the way:  a person does a low-down thing, and
then he don't want to take no consequences of it. Thinks as long as he can hide, it ain't no
disgrace.  That was my fix exactly.  The more I studied about this the more my conscience went
to grinding me, and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling. And at last,
when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the
face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up there in heaven,
whilst I was stealing a poor old woman's nigger that hadn't ever done me no harm, and now was
showing me there's One that's always on the lookout, and ain't a-going to allow no such miserable
doings to go only just so fur and no further, I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared.
Well, I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung
up wicked, and so I warn't so much to blame; but something inside of me kept saying, "There
was the Sunday-school, you could a gone to it; and if you'd a done it they'd a learnt you there
that people that acts as I'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire."

It made me shiver.  And I about made up my mind to pray, and see if I couldn't try to quit
being the kind of a boy I was and be better.  So I kneeled down.  But the words wouldn't come.
Why wouldn't they?  It warn't no use to try and hide it from Him.  Nor from ME, neither.  I
knowed very well why they wouldn't come.  It was because my heart warn't right; it was because
I warn't square; it was because I was playing double.  I was letting ON to give up sin, but
away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all.  I was trying to make my mouth
SAY I would do the right thing and the clean thing, and go and write to that nigger's owner
and tell where he was; but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie, and He knowed it.  You can't
pray a lie--I found that out.

So I was full of trouble, full as I could be; and didn't know what to do. At last I had an
idea; and I says, I'll go and write the letter--and then see if I can pray.  Why, it was astonishing,
the way I felt as light as a feather right straight off, and my troubles all gone.  So I got
a piece of paper and a pencil, all glad and excited, and set down and wrote:

Miss Watson, your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikesville, and Mr. Phelps
has got him and he will give him up for the reward if you send.

HUCK FINN.

I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life, and
I knowed I could pray now.  But I didn't do it straight off, but laid the paper down and set
there thinking--thinking how good it was all this happened so, and how near I come to being
lost and going to hell.  And went on thinking.  And got to thinking over our trip down the
river; and I see Jim before me all the time:  in the day and in the night-time, sometimes moonlight,
sometimes storms, and we a-floating along, talking and singing and laughing.  But somehow I
couldn't seem to strike no places to harden me against him, but only the other kind.  I'd see
him standing my watch on top of his'n, 'stead of calling me, so I could go on sleeping; and
see him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog; and when I come to him again in the
swamp, up there where the feud was; and such-like times; and would always call me honey, and
pet me and do everything he could think of for me, and how good he always was; and at last
I struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small-pox aboard, and he was so grateful,
and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in the world, and the ONLY one he's got now;
and then I happened to look around and see that paper.

It was a close place.  I took it up, and held it in my hand.  I was a-trembling, because I'd
got to decide, forever, betwixt two things, and I knowed it.  I studied a minute, sort of holding
my breath, and then says to myself:

"All right, then, I'll GO to hell"--and tore it up.

It was awful thoughts and awful words, but they was said.  And I let them stay said; and never
thought no more about reforming.  I shoved the whole thing out of my head, and said I would
take up wickedness again, which was in my line, being brung up to it, and the other warn't.
And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again; and if I could think
up anything worse, I would do that, too; because as long as I was in, and in for good, I might
as well go the whole hog.

Then I set to thinking over how to get at it, and turned over some considerable many ways in
my mind; and at last fixed up a plan that suited me.  So then I took the bearings of a woody
island that was down the river a piece, and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with
my raft and went for it, and hid it there, and then turned in.  I slept the night through,
and got up before it was light, and had my breakfast, and put on my store clothes, and tied
up some others and one thing or another in a bundle, and took the canoe and cleared for shore.
I landed below where I judged was Phelps's place, and hid my bundle in the woods, and then
filled up the canoe with water, and loaded rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her
again when I wanted her, about a quarter of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on
the bank.

Then I struck up the road, and when I passed the mill I see a sign on it, "Phelps's Sawmill,"
and when I come to the farm-houses, two or three hundred yards further along, I kept my eyes
peeled, but didn't see nobody around, though it was good daylight now.  But I didn't mind,
because I didn't want to see nobody just yet--I only wanted to get the lay of the land. According
to my plan, I was going to turn up there from the village, not from below.  So I just took
a look, and shoved along, straight for town. Well, the very first man I see when I got there
was the duke.  He was sticking up a bill for the Royal Nonesuch--three-night performance--like
that other time.  They had the cheek, them frauds!  I was right on him before I could shirk.
He looked astonished, and says:

"Hel-LO!  Where'd YOU come from?"  Then he says, kind of glad and eager, "Where's the raft?--got
her in a good place?"

I says:

"Why, that's just what I was going to ask your grace."

Then he didn't look so joyful, and says:

"What was your idea for asking ME?" he says. 

For two or three years surveyors and explorers tried to find the easiest way to build this great
overland road. Several railroad acts or bills were passed by Congress, and the California Legislature
gave the United States the right of way for a road to join the two
oceans.  A man up and offered me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to
fetch a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat, and the man left
me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him along, he was too strong for me and
jerked loose and run, and we after him.  We didn't have no dog, and so we had to chase him
all over the country till we tired him out.  We never got him till dark; then we fetched him
over, and I started down for the raft.  When I got there and see it was gone, I says to myself,
'They've got into trouble and had to leave; and they've took my nigger, which is the only nigger
I've got in the world, and now I'm in a strange country, and ain't got no property no more,
nor nothing, and no way to make my living;' so I set down and cried.  I slept in the woods
all night.  But what DID become of the raft, then?--and Jim--poor Jim!"

"Blamed if I know--that is, what's become of the raft.  That old fool had made a trade and
got forty dollars, and when we found him in the doggery the loafers had matched half-dollars
with him and got every cent but what he'd spent for whisky; and when I got him home late last
night and found the raft gone, we said, 'That little rascal has stole our raft and shook us,
and run off down the river.'"

"I wouldn't shake my NIGGER, would I?--the only nigger I had in the world, and the only property."

"We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we'd come to consider him OUR nigger; yes, we
did consider him so--goodness knows we had trouble enough for him.  So when we see the raft
was gone and we flat broke, there warn't anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another
shake. And I've pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.  Where's that ten cents? Give
it here."

I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to spend it for something
to eat, and give me some, because it was all the money I had, and I hadn't had nothing to eat
since yesterday.  He never said nothing.  The next minute he whirls on me and says:

"Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us?  We'd skin him if he done that!"

"How can he blow?  Hain't he run off?"

"No!  That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money's gone."

"SOLD him?"  I says, and begun to cry; "why, he was MY nigger, and that was my money.  Where
is he?--I want my nigger."

"Well, you can't GET your nigger, that's all--so dry up your blubbering. Looky here--do you
think YOU'D venture to blow on us?  Blamed if I think I'd trust you.  Why, if you WAS to blow
on us--"

He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes before. I went on a-whimpering,
and says:

"I don't want to blow on nobody; and I ain't got no time to blow, nohow. I got to turn out
and find my nigger."

He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills fluttering on his arm, thinking,
and wrinkling up his forehead.  At last he says:

"I'll tell you something.  We got to be here three days.  If you'll promise you won't blow,
and won't let the nigger blow, I'll tell you where to find him." 

"Mother Carey's chickens," and are sure a storm is coming up when
petrels follow the ship.

The albatross, petrel, and a gull-like bird called a shearwater belong to the "tube-nosed swimmers,"
on account of their curious long beaks.

Along the coast, and wading in the shallow waters around the bays,
are some strange birds known as pelicans and shags.

They are good fishers, and drive the darting, finny fellows before them as they wade in the water
till they can see and gobble them up.

Most waders have under their beaks a skin-pocket deep enough to hold
a fish while carrying it to their nestlings, or making ready to swallow
it.

All of these sea-birds raise their young as far from the shore and from hunters as possible.
  Just keep a tight tongue in your head and move right along, and then you won't
get into trouble with US, d'ye hear?"

That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played for.  I wanted to be left free to
work my plans.

"So clear out," he says; "and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want to. Maybe you can get
him to believe that Jim IS your nigger--some idiots don't require documents--leastways I've
heard there's such down South here.  And when you tell him the handbill and the reward's bogus,
maybe he'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for getting 'em out.  Go
'long now, and tell him anything you want to; but mind you don't work your jaw any BETWEEN
here and there."

So I left, and struck for the back country.  I didn't look around, but I kinder felt like he
was watching me.  But I knowed I could tire him out at that.  I went straight out in the country
as much as a mile before I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps'.
I reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling around, because I wanted
to stop Jim's mouth till these fellows could get away.  I didn't want no trouble with their
kind.  I'd seen all I wanted to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them.

CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and sunshiny; the hands was gone
to the fields; and there was them kind of faint dronings of bugs and flies in the air that
makes it seem so lonesome and like everybody's dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along and
quivers the leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel like it's spirits whispering--spirits
that's been dead ever so many years--and you always think they're talking about YOU.  As a
general thing it makes a body wish HE was dead, too, and done with it all.

Phelps' was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they all look alike.  A rail
fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like
barrels of a different length, to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on
when they are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in the big yard, but mostly
it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the nap rubbed off; big double log-house for the
white folks--hewed logs, with the chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these mud-stripes
been whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen, with a big broad, open but roofed
passage joining it to the house; log smoke-house back of the kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins
in a row t'other side the smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away down against the back
fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the other side; ash-hopper and big kettle to bile
soap in by the little hut; bench by the kitchen door, with bucket of water and a gourd; hound
asleep there in the sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away off in
a corner; some currant bushes and gooseberry bushes in one place by the fence; outside of the
fence a garden and a watermelon patch; then the cotton fields begins, and after the fields
the woods. 

The other orange growers had been cultivating "seedlings," trees which bore smaller fruit, with
many bitter seeds and a thick skin. Many of these growers now cut back their seedlings to bare
limbs, and grafted the new orange on these branches. This is called "budding," and is done by cutting
off a thin slip of bark with a tiny folded-up leaf-bud on it, inserting
the graft in the branch to be budded and securing it there with wax
to keep the air out.



When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went for me, and of course
I stopped and faced them, and kept still.  And such another powwow as they made!  In a quarter
of a minute I was a kind of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle
of fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses stretched up towards
me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you could see them sailing over fences and around
corners from everywheres.

A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her hand, singing out,
"Begone YOU Tige! you Spot! begone sah!" and she fetched first one and then another of them
a clip and sent them howling, and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them
come back, wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me.  There ain't no harm
in a hound, nohow.

And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger boys without anything
on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their mother's gown, and peeped out from behind
her at me, bashful, the way they always do.  And here comes the white woman running from the
house, about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick in her hand;
and behind her comes her little white children, acting the same way the little niggers was
going.  She was smiling all over so she could hardly stand--and says:

"It's YOU, at last!--AIN'T it?"

I out with a "Yes'm" before I thought.

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands and shook and shook;
and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over; and she couldn't seem to hug and shake enough,
and kept saying, "You don't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don't care for that, I'm so glad to see you!  Dear, dear, it does seem like I could
eat you up!  Children, it's your cousin Tom!--tell him howdy."

But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and hid behind her.  So
she run on:

"Lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away--or did you get your breakfast on the boat?"

I said I had got it on the boat.  So then she started for the house, leading me by the hand,
and the children tagging after. But the patient Padres taught them to raise grain and fruit, to
build their fine churches, to weave cloth and blankets, and to tan
leather for shoes, saddles, or harness.

But although the Indians learned to be good workmen, they liked idleness, dancing, and feasting
much better, and when the Missions were given up the Indians soon went back to their former
habits.

There were no distinct tribes among these Indians, and they had no
laws.

Nor was there a king or chief over many natives. They lived in small villages or rancherias,
each having a name and ruled by a captain. Each rancheria had its special place to hunt or fish,
and had to fight its own battles with the other families of Indians.

The men did nothing but hunt and fish, or make bows, stone arrow-heads,
nets and traps for game.

The women not only had to gather grass seeds, acorns, and nuts or
berries, but they had to do all the field-work and carry the heavy
burdens, usually with a baby strapped in its basket above the load.

In preparing food for cooking, these mahalas, or squaws, put seed
or acorns in a stone mortar and pounded them to coarse meal or paste.

Sometimes a grass-woven basket was filled with water, and hot stones
were thrown in till the water began to boil.

Then acorn or seed meal was put in and cooked into mush. This meal, or that from wild oats,
was also mixed into a dough and baked on hot stones into bread. Game or fish was eaten raw, or broiled
a little on the coals of the camp-fire.
 But it didn't save him.  Yes, it was mortification--that
was it.  He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection. They say
he was a sight to look at.  Your uncle's been up to the town every day to fetch you. And he's
gone again, not more'n an hour ago; he'll be back any minute now. You must a met him on the
road, didn't you?--oldish man, with a--"

"No, I didn't see nobody, Aunt Sally.  The boat landed just at daylight, and I left my baggage
on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country, to put in
the time and not get here too soon; and so I come down the back way."

"Who'd you give the baggage to?"

"Nobody."

"Why, child, it 'll be stole!"

"Not where I hid it I reckon it won't," I says.

"How'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat?"

It was kinder thin ice, but I says:

"The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have something to eat before I went
ashore; so he took me in the texas to the officers' lunch, and give me all I wanted."

I was getting so uneasy I couldn't listen good.  I had my mind on the children all the time;
I wanted to get them out to one side and pump them a little, and find out who I was.  But I
couldn't get no show, Mrs. Phelps kept it up and run on so.  Pretty soon she made the cold
chills streak all down my back, because she says:

"But here we're a-running on this way, and you hain't told me a word about Sis, nor any of
them.  Now I'll rest my works a little, and you start up yourn; just tell me EVERYTHING--tell
me all about 'm all every one of 'm; and how they are, and what they're doing, and what they
told you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of."

Well, I see I was up a stump--and up it good.  Providence had stood by me this fur all right,
but I was hard and tight aground now.  I see it warn't a bit of use to try to go ahead--I'd
got to throw up my hand.  So I says to myself, here's another place where I got to resk the
truth.  I opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind the bed, and says:

"Here he comes!  Stick your head down lower--there, that'll do; you can't be seen now.  Don't
you let on you're here.  I'll play a joke on him. Children, don't you say a word."

I see I was in a fix now.  But it warn't no use to worry; there warn't nothing to do but just
hold still, and try and be ready to stand from under when the lightning struck.

I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in; then the bed hid him. 
Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says:

"Has he come?"

"No," says her husband.

"Good-NESS gracious!" she says, "what in the warld can have become of him?"

"I can't imagine," says the old gentleman; "and I must say it makes me dreadful uneasy."

"Uneasy!" she says; "I'm ready to go distracted!  He MUST a come; and you've missed him along
the road.  I KNOW it's so--something tells me so."

"Why, Sally, I COULDN'T miss him along the road--YOU know that."

"But oh, dear, dear, what WILL Sis say!  He must a come!  You must a missed him.  He--"

"Oh, don't distress me any more'n I'm already distressed.  I don't know what in the world to
make of it.  I'm at my wit's end, and I don't mind acknowledging 't I'm right down scared.
But there's no hope that he's come; for he COULDN'T come and me miss him.  Sally, it's terrible--just
terrible--something's happened to the boat, sure!"

"Why, Silas!  Look yonder!--up the road!--ain't that somebody coming?"

He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted.
She stooped down quick at the foot of the bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when
he turned back from the window there she stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire,
and I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside.  The old gentleman stared, and says:

"Why, who's that?"

"Who do you reckon 't is?"

"I hain't no idea.  Who IS it?"

"It's TOM SAWYER!"

By jings, I most slumped through the floor!  But there warn't no time to swap knives; the old
man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on shaking; and all the time how the woman did
dance around and laugh and cry; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid, and
Mary, and the rest of the tribe.

But if they was joyful, it warn't nothing to what I was; for it was like being born again,
I was so glad to find out who I was.  Well, they froze to me for two hours; and at last, when
my chin was so tired it couldn't hardly go any more, I had told them more about my family--I
mean the Sawyer family--than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.  And I explained all
about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of White River, and it took us three days
to fix it.  Which was all right, and worked first-rate; because THEY didn't know but what it
would take three days to fix it.  If I'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just as well.

Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty uncomfortable all up the
other.  Being Tom Sawyer was easy and comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till
by and by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the river.  Then I says to myself, s'pose
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat?  And s'pose he steps in here any minute, and sings out
my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet?

Well, I couldn't HAVE it that way; it wouldn't do at all.  I must go up the road and waylay
him.  So I told the folks I reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my baggage. 
The old gentleman was for going along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse myself,
and I druther he wouldn't take no trouble about me.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

SO I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a wagon coming, and sure
enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and waited till he come along.  I says "Hold on!" and
it stopped alongside, and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed
two or three times like a person that's got a dry throat, and then says:

"I hain't ever done you no harm.  You know that.