NEW BURLESQUES

by

Bret Harte

CONTENTS

  RUPERT THE RESEMBLER [After Rupert of Hentzau and Prisoner of Zenda]

  THE STOLEN CIGAR CASE By A. CO--N D--LE

  GOLLY AND THE CHRISTIAN, OR THE MINX AND THE MANXMAN By H-LL C--NE

  THE ADVENTURES OF JOHN LONGBOWE, YEOMAN
    BEING A MODERN-ANTIQUE REALISTIC ROMANCE
    (COMPILED FROM SEVERAL EMINENT SOURCES)

  DAN'L BOREM BY E. N---S W--T---T

  STORIES THREE BY R-DY--D K-PL--G

  "ZUT-SKI" THE PROBLEM OF A WICKED FEME SOLE BY M-R-E C-R-LLI

RUPERT THE RESEMBLER

By A--TH--Y H-PE

CHAPTER I

RUDOLPH OF TRULYRURALANIA

When I state that I was own brother to Lord Burleydon, had an income of two thousand a year,
could speak all the polite languages fluently, was a powerful swordsman, a good shot, and could
ride anything from an elephant to a clotheshorse, I really think I have said enough to satisfy
any feminine novel-reader of Bayswater or South Kensington that I was a hero.  My brother's
wife, however, did not seem to incline to this belief.

"A more conceited, self-satisfied little cad I never met than you," she said.  "Why don't you
try to do something instead of sneering at others who do?  You never take anything seriously--except
yourself, which isn't worth it.  You are proud of your red hair and peaked nose just because
you fondly believe that you got them from the Prince of Trulyruralania, and are willing to
think evil of your ancestress to satisfy your snobbish little soul.  Let me tell you, sir,
that there was no more truth about that than there was in that silly talk of her partiality
for her husband's red-haired gamekeeper in Scotland.  Ah! that makes you start--don't it? 
But I have always observed that a mule is apt to remember only the horse side of his ancestry!"

Whenever my pretty sister-in-law talks in this way I always try to forget that she came of
a family far inferior to our own, the Razorbills.  Indeed, her people--of the Nonconformist
stock--really had nothing but wealth and rectitude, and I think my brother Bob, in his genuine
love for her, was willing to overlook the latter for the sake of the former.

My pretty sister-in-law's interest in my affairs always made me believe that she secretly worshiped
me--although it was a fact, as will be seen in the progress of this story, that most women
blushed on my addressing them.  I used to say it "was the reflection of my red hair on a transparent
complexion," which was rather neat--wasn't it?  And subtle? But then, I was always saying such
subtle things.

"My dear Rose," I said, laying down my egg spoon (the egg spoon really had nothing to do with
this speech, but it imparted such a delightfully realistic flavor to the scene), "I'm not to
blame if I resemble the S'helpburgs."

"It's your being so beastly proud of it that I object to!" she replied. "And for Heaven's sake,
try to BE something, and not merely resemble things!  The fact is you resemble too much--you're
ALWAYS resembling. You resemble a man of fashion, and you're not; a wit, and you're not; a
soldier, a sportsman, a hero--and you're none of 'em.  Altogether, you're not in the least
convincing.  Now, listen!  There's a good chance for you to go as our attache with Lord Mumblepeg,
the new Ambassador to Cochin China.  In all the novels, you know, attaches are always the confidants
of Grand Duchesses, and know more state secrets than their chiefs; in real life, I believe
they are something like a city clerk with a leaning to private theatricals.  Say you'll go!  Do!"

"I'll take a few months' holiday first," I replied, "and then," I added in my gay, dashing
way, "if the place is open--hang it if I don't go!"

"Good old bounder!" she said, "and don't think too much of that precious Prince Rupert.  He
was a bad lot."

She blushed again at me--as her husband entered.

"Take Rose's advice, Rupert, my boy," he said, "and go!"

And that is how I came to go to Trulyruralania.  For I secretly resolved to take my holiday
in traveling in that country and trying, as dear Lady Burleydon put it, really to be somebody,
instead of resembling anybody in particular.  A precious lot SHE knew about it!

CHAPTER II

IN WHICH MY HAIR CAUSES A LOT OF THINGS

You go to Trulyruralania from Charing Cross.  In passing through Paris we picked up Mlle. Beljambe,
who was going to Kohlslau, the capital of Trulyruralania, to marry the Grand Duke Michael,
who, however, as I was informed, was in love with the Princess Flirtia. She blushed on seeing
me--but, I was told afterwards, declined being introduced to me on any account.  However, I
thought nothing of this, and went on to Bock, the next station to Kohlslau.  At the little
inn in the forest I was informed I was just in time to see the coronation of the new king the
next day. "Where?
where to? "he said.

Natalie sobbed like a child.

Natalie Arnold looked to upset.

Then he fought through the increasingly dense Crowd a way to the
tent of Valescottschen Women, which lots they offered for sale, and
that was to all lots, only one hit, a golden chrysanthemum.

"What you pay for one ticket?" Arnold said, stepping in front of the tent.

"That is for you," said Dora.

He threw five florins on the board and drew a laugh. It was nothing. The second and third time,
without success. He took a hundred-guilder note of the wallet and chose for eight p.m. Lots.
From all sides came the curious and asked hastily pressing in close semi-circle on. Behind the
tents of the ladies of the party and several men were seen. Anna Borromeo Arnold showed no movement
from his eyes. "I no more money" have said Arnold, looking around. "But credit as much as you
want," cried Dora. He took two handfuls of smiling Lose a promissory note and wrote over five hundred
guilders. "Bravo Narcissus' cried Valescott, the was also entered between the tents, the women
clapped their hands, and some were behülflich him to open the rolls.

The people crowded closer. Arnold reached for two still filled shells, they waved in the arms and
threw the contents of easy flying the heads of the people away. Countless hands stretched
out, and becoming much gyration the whole mass turned himself in the middle of the great reputation
of being sounded: "The Emperor! The Emperor! "

The bands got together and played the anthem, the soldiers pushed
apart the quantity and it formed a lane, striding up, through which
the Emperor came from far.

A Showers Arnold drove through the body. As in a previous life he saw himself, with foolish
expectations at the time was so distant figure of the monarch sighted.
Stood the Prince barely five yards away, smiled and nodded and walked
over, silent by the people.

It was evening. On the balustrade at
the top end of the garden was firework.

The booths were closed, and
the fashionable world gathered in the palace, to the dances and view
live images.

Possibly this delicate mot on the approaching marriage of the King was lost in the translation,
for the stranger strode abruptly away. I learned, however, that the King was actually then
in Bock, at the castle a few miles distant, in the woods.  I resolved to stroll thither.

It was a fine old mediaeval structure.  But as the singular incidents I am about to relate
combine the romantic and adventurous atmosphere of the middle ages with all the appliances
of modern times, I may briefly state that the castle was lit by electricity, bad fire-escapes
on each of the turrets, four lifts, and was fitted up by one of the best West End establishments.
The sanitary arrangements were excellent, and the drainage of the most perfect order, as I
had reason to know personally later.  I was so affected by the peaceful solitude that I lay
down under a tree and presently fell asleep.  I was awakened by the sound of voices, and, looking
up, beheld two men bending over me.  One was a grizzled veteran, and the other a younger dandyfied
man; both were dressed in shooting suits.

"Never saw such a resemblance before in all my life," said the elder man.  "'Pon my soul! if
the King hadn't got shaved yesterday because the Princess Flirtia said his beard tickled her,
I'd swear it was he!"

I could not help thinking how lucky it was--for this narrative--that the King HAD shaved, otherwise
my story would have degenerated into a mere Comedy of Errors.  Opening my eyes, I said boldly:

"Now that you are satisfied who I resemble, gentlemen, perhaps you will tell me who you are?"

"Certainly," said the elder curtly.  "I am Spitz--a simple colonel of his Majesty's, yet, nevertheless,
the one man who runs this whole dynasty--and this young gentleman is Fritz, my lieutenant.
And you are--?"

"My name is Razorbill--brother to Lord Burleydon," I replied calmly.

"Good heavens! another of the lot!" he muttered.  Then, correcting himself, he said brusquely:
"Any relation to that Englishwoman who was so sweet on the old Rupert centuries ago?"

Here, again, I suppose my sister-in-law would have had me knock down the foreign insulter of
my English ancestress--but I colored to the roots of my hair, and even farther--with pleasure
at this proof of my royal descent!  And then a cheery voice was heard calling "Spitz!" and
"Fritz!" through the woods.

"The King!" said Spitz to Fritz quickly.  "He must not see him."

"Too late," said Fritz, as a young man bounded lightly out of the bushes.

I was thunderstruck!  It was as if I had suddenly been confronted with a mirror--and beheld
myself!  Of course he was not quite so good-looking, or so tall, but he was still a colorable
imitation! I was delighted.

Nevertheless, for a moment he did not seem to reciprocate my feeling. He stared at me, staggered
back and passed his hand across his forehead.  "Can it be," he muttered thickly, "that I've
got 'em agin? Yet I only had--shingle glash!"

But Fritz quickly interposed.

"Your Majesty is all right--though," he added in a lower voice, "let this be a warning to you
for to-morrow!  This gentleman is Mr. Razorbill--you know the old story of the Razorbills?--Ha!
ha!"

But the King did not laugh; he extended his hand and said gently, "You are welcome--my cousin!"
Indeed, my sister-in-law would have probably said that--dissipated though he was--he was the
only gentleman there.

"I have come to see the coronation, your Majesty," I said.

"And you shall," said the King heartily, "and shall go with us! The show can't begin without
us--eh, Spitz?" he added playfully, poking the veteran in the ribs, "whatever Michael may do!"

Then he linked his arms in Spitz's and mine.  "Let's go to the hut--and have some supper and
fizz," he said gayly.

We went to the hut.  We had supper.  We ate and drank heavily.  We danced madly around the
table.  Nevertheless I thought that Spitz and Fritz were worried by the King's potations, and
Spitz at last went so far as to remind his Majesty that they were to start early in the morning
for Kohlslau.  I noticed also that as the King drank his speech grew thicker and Spitz and
Fritz exchanged glances.  At last Spitz said with stern significance:

"Your Majesty has not forgotten the test invariably submitted to the King at his coronation?"

"Shertenly not," replied the King, with his reckless laugh.  "The King mush be able to pronounsh--name
of his country--intel-lillil-gibly: mush shay (hic!): 'I'm King of--King of--Tootoo-tooral-looral-anyer.'"
He staggered, laughed, and fell under the table.

"He cannot say it!" gasped Fritz and Spitz in one voice.  "He is lost!"

"Unless," said Fritz suddenly, pointing at me with a flash of intelligence, "HE can personate
him, and say it.  Can you?" he turned to me brusquely.

It was an awful moment.  I had been drinking heavily too, but I resolved to succeed.  "I'm
King of Trooly-rooly--" I murmured; but I could not master it--I staggered and followed the
King under the table.

"Is there no one here," roared Spitz, "who can shave thish dynasty, and shay 'Tooral--'?  No!
---- it!  I mean 'Trularlooral--'" but he, too, lurched hopelessly forward.

"No one can say 'Tooral-looral--'" muttered Fritz; and, grasping Spitz in despair, they both
rolled under the table.

How long we lay there, Heaven knows!  I was awakened by Spitz playing the garden hose on me.
He was booted and spurred, with Fritz by his side.  The King was lying on a bench, saying feebly:
"Blesh you, my chillen."

"By politely acceding to Black Michael's request to 'try our one-and-six sherry,' he has been
brought to this condition," said Spitz bitterly.  "It's a trick to keep him from being crowned.
In this country if the King is crowned while drunk, the kingdom instantly reverts to a villain--no
matter who.  But in this case the villain is Black Michael.  Ha! What say you, lad?  Shall
we frustrate the rascal, by having YOU personate the King?"

I was--well!--intoxicated at the thought!  But what would my sister-in-law say?  Would she--in
her Nonconformist conscience--consider it strictly honorable?  But I swept all scruples aside.
A King was to be saved!  "I will go," I said.  "Let us on to Kohlslau--riding like the wind!"
We rode like the wind, furiously, madly.  Mounted on a wild, dashing bay--known familiarly
as the "Bay of Biscay" from its rough turbulence--I easily kept the lead. But our horses began
to fail.  Suddenly Spitz halted, clapped his hand to his head, and threw himself from his horse.
"Fools!" he said, "we should have taken the train!  It will get there an hour before we will!"
He pointed to a wayside station where the 7.15 excursion train for Kohlslau was waiting.

"But how dreadfully unmediaeval!--What will the public say?" I began.

"Bother the public!" he said gruffly.  "Who's running this dynasty--you or I?  Come!"  With
the assistance of Fritz he tied up my face with a handkerchief to simulate toothache, and then,
with a shout of defiance, we three rushed madly into a closely packed third-class carriage.

Never shall I forget the perils, the fatigue, the hopes and fears of that mad journey.  Panting,
perspiring, packed together with cheap trippers, but exalted with the one hope of saving the
King, we at last staggered out on the Kohlslau platform utterly exhausted.  As we did so we
heard a distant roar from the city. Fritz turned an ashen gray, Spitz a livid blue.  "Are we
too late?" he gasped, as we madly fought our way into the street, where shouts of "The King!
The King!" were rending the air.  "Can it be Black Michael?"  But here the crowd parted, and
a procession, preceded by outriders, flashed into the square.  And there, seated in a carriage
beside the most beautiful red-haired girl I had ever seen, was the King,--the King whom we
had left two hours ago, dead drunk in the hut in the forest!

CHAPTERS III TO XXII (Inclusive)

IN WHICH THINGS GET MIXED

We reeled against each other aghast!  Spitz recovered himself first. "We must fly!" he said
hoarsely.  "If the King has discovered our trick--we are lost!"

"But where shall we go?" I asked.

"Back to the hut."

We caught the next train to Bock.  An hour later we stood panting within the hut.  Its walls
and ceiling were splashed with sinister red stains.  "Blood!" I exclaimed joyfully.  "At last
we have a real mediaeval adventure!"

"It's Burgundy, you fool," growled Spitz; "good Burgundy wasted!" At this moment Fritz appeared
dragging in the hut-keeper.

"Where is the King?" demanded Spitz fiercely of the trembling peasant.

"He was carried away an hour ago by Black Michael and taken to the castle."

"And when did he LEAVE the castle?" roared Spitz.

"He never left the castle, sir, and, alas! I fear never will, alive!" replied the man, shuddering.

We stared at each other!  Spitz bit his grizzled mustache.  "So," he said bitterly, "Black
Michael has simply anticipated us with the same game!  We have been tricked.  I knew it could
not be the King whom they crowned!  No!" he added quickly, "I see it all--it was Rupert of
Glasgow!"

"Who is Rupert of Glasgow?" I cried.

"Oh, I really can't go over all that family rot again," grunted Spitz. "Tell him, Fritz."

Then, taking me aside, Fritz delicately informed me that Rupert of Glasgow--a young Scotchman--claimed
equally with myself descent from the old Rupert, and that equally with myself he resembled
the King. That Michael had got possession of him on his arrival in the country, kept him closely
guarded in the castle, and had hid his resemblance in a black wig and false mustache; that
the young Scotchman, however, seemed apparently devoted to Michael and his plots; and there
was undoubtedly some secret understanding between them.  That it was evidently Michael's trick
to have the pretender crowned, and then, by exposing the fraud and the condition of the real
King, excite the indignation of the duped people, and seat himself on the throne! "But," I
burst out, "shall this base-born pretender remain at Kohlslau beside the beautiful Princess
Flirtia? Let us to Kohlslau at once and hurl him from the throne!"

"One pretender is as good as another," said Spitz dryly.  "But leave HIM to me.  'Tis the King
we must protect and succor!  As for that Scotch springald, before midnight I shall have him
kidnaped, brought back to his master in a close carriage, and you--YOU shall take his place
at Kohlslau."

"I will," I said enthusiastically, drawing my sword; "but I have done nothing yet.  Please
let me kill something!"

"Aye, lad!" said Spitz, with a grim smile at my enthusiasm. "There's a sheep in your path.
Go out and cleave it to the saddle. And bring the saddle home!"

My sister-in-law might have thought me cruel--but I did it.

CHAP XXIII AND SOME OTHER CHAPS

I know not how it was compassed, but that night Rupert of Glasgow was left bound and gagged
against the door of the castle, and the night-bell pulled.  And that night I was seated on
the throne of the S'helpburgs.  As I gazed at the Princess Flirtia, glowing in the characteristic
beauty of the S'helpburgs, and admired her striking profile, I murmured softly and half audibly:
"Her nose is as a tower that looketh toward Damascus."

She looked puzzled, and knitted her pretty brows.  "Is that poetry?" she asked.

"No" I said promptly.  "It's only part of a song of our great Ancestor."  As she blushed slightly,
I playfully flung around her fair neck the jeweled collar of the Order of the S'helpburgs--three
golden spheres pendant, quartered from the arms of Lombardy---with the ancient Syric motto,
El Ess Dee.

She toyed with it a moment, and then said softly: "You have changed, Rupert.  Do ye no ken hoo?"

I looked at her--as surprised at her dialect as at the imputation.

"You don't talk that way, as you did.  And you don't say, 'It WILL be twelve o'clock,' when
you mean, 'It IS twelve o'clock,' nor 'I will be going out,' when you mean 'I AM.'  And you
didn't say, 'Eh, sirs!' or 'Eh, mon,' to any of the Court--nor 'Hoot awa!' nor any of those
things.  And," she added with a divine little pout, "you haven't told me I was 'sonsie' or
'bonnie' once."

I could with difficulty restrain myself.  Rage, indignation, and jealousy filled my heart almost
to bursting.  I understood it all; that rascally Scotchman had made the most of his time, and
dared to get ahead of me!  I did not mind being taken for the King, but to be confounded with
this infernal descendant of a gamekeeper--was too much! Yet with a superhuman effort I remained
calm--and even smiled.

"You are not well?" said the Princess earnestly.  "I thought you were taking too much of the
Strasbourg pie at supper!  And you are not going, surely--so soon?" she added, as I rose.

"I must go at once," I said.  "I have forgotten some important business at Bock."

"Not boar hunting again?" she said poutingly.

"No, I'm hunting a red dear," I said with that playful subtlety which would make her take it
as a personal compliment, though I was only thinking of that impostor, and longing to get at
him, as I bowed and withdrew.

In another hour I was before Black Michael's castle at Bock.  These are lightning changes,
I know--and the sovereignty of Trulyruralania WAS somewhat itinerant--but when a kingdom and
a beautiful Princess are at stake, what are you to do?  Fritz had begged me to take him along,
but I arranged that he should come later, and go up unostentatiously in the lift.  I was going
by way of the moat.  I was to succor the King, but I fear my real object was to get at Rupert
of Glasgow.

I had noticed the day before that a large outside drain pipe, decreed by the Bock County Council,
ran from the moat to the third floor of the donjon keep.  I surmised that the King was imprisoned
on that floor. Examining the pipe closely, I saw that it was really a pneumatic dispatch tube,
for secretly conveying letters and dispatches from the castle through the moat beyond the castle
walls.  Its extraordinary size, however, gave me the horrible conviction that it was to be
used to convey the dead body of the King to the moat.  I grew cold with horror--but I was determined.

I crept up the pipe.  As I expected, it opened funnel-wise into a room where the poor King
was playing poker with Black Michael.  It took me but a moment to dash through the window into
the room, push the King aside, gag and bind Black Michael, and lower him by a stout rope into
the pipe he had destined for another.  Having him in my power, I lowered him until I heard
his body splash in the water in the lower part of the pipe.  Then I proceeded to draw him up
again, intending to question him in regard to Rupert of Glasgow. But this was difficult, as
his saturated clothing made him fit the smooth pipe closely.  At last I had him partly up,
when I was amazed at a rush of water from the pipe which flooded the room.  I dropped him and
pulled him up again with the same result.  Then in a flash I saw it all.  His body, acting
like a piston in the pipe, had converted it into a powerful pump.  Mad with joy, I rapidly
lowered and pulled him up again and again, until the castle was flooded--and the moat completely
drained!  I had created the diversion I wished; the tenants of the castle were disorganized
and bewildered in trying to escape from the deluge, and the moat was accessible to my friends.
Placing the poor King on a table to be out of the water, and tying up his head in my handkerchief
to disguise him from Michael's guards, I drew my sword and plunged downstairs with the cataract
in search of the miscreant Rupert.  I reached the drawbridge, when I heard the sounds of tumult
and was twice fired at,--once, as I have since learned, by my friends, under the impression
that I was the escaping Rupert of Glasgow, and once by Black Michael's myrmidons, under the
belief that I was the King.  I was struck by the fact that these resemblances were confusing
and unfortunate!  At this moment, however, I caught sight of a kilted figure leaping from a
lower window into the moat.  Some instinct impelled me to follow it.  It rapidly crossed the
moat and plunged into the forest, with me in pursuit.  I gained upon it; suddenly it turned,
and I found myself again confronted with MYSELF--and apparently the King!  But that very resemblance
made me recognize the Scotch pretender, Rupert of Glasgow.  Yet he would have been called a
"braw laddie," and his handsome face showed a laughing good humor, even while he opposed me,
claymore in hand.

"Bide a wee, Maister Rupert Razorbill," he said lightly, lowering his sword, "before we slit
ane anither's weasands.  I'm no claimin' any descent frae kings, and I'm no acceptin' any auld
wife's clavers against my women forbears, as ye are!  I'm just paid gude honest siller by Black
Michael for the using of ma face and figure--sic time as his Majesty is tae worse frae trink!
And I'm commeesioned frae Michael to ask ye what price YE would take to join me in performing
these duties--turn and turn aboot.  Eh, laddie--but he would pay ye mair than that daft beggar,
Spitz."

Rage and disgust overpowered me.  "And THIS is my answer," I said, rushing upon him.

I have said earlier in these pages that I was a "strong" swordsman. In point of fact, I had
carefully studied in the transpontine theatres that form of melodramatic mediaeval sword-play
known as "two up and two down."  To my disgust, however, this wretched Scotchman did not seem
to understand it, but in a twinkling sent my sword flying over my head. Before I could recover
it, he had mounted a horse ready saddled in the wood, and, shouting to me that he would take
my "compleements" to the Princess, galloped away. Even then I would have pursued him afoot,
but, hearing shouts behind me, I turned as Spitz and Fritz rode up.

"Has the King escaped to Kohlslau?" asked Fritz, staring at me.

"No," I said, "but Rupert of Glasgow"--

"--Rupert of Glasgow," growled Spitz.  "We've settled him!  He's gagged and bound and is now
on his way to the frontier in a close carriage."

"Rupert--on his way to the frontier?" I gasped.

"Yes.  Two of my men found him, disguised with a handkerchief over his face, trying to escape
from the castle.  And while we were looking for the King, whom we supposed was with you, they
have sent the rascally Scotchman home."

"Fool!" I gasped.  "Rupert of Glasgow has just left me!  YOU HAVE DEPORTED YOUR OWN KING."
And overcome by my superhuman exertions, I sank unconscious to the ground.

When I came to, I found myself in a wagon lit, speeding beyond the Trulyruralania frontier.
On my berth was lying a missive with the seal of the S'helpburgs.  Tearing it open I recognized
the handwriting of the Princess Flirtia.

MY DEAR RUPERT,--Owing to the confusion that arises from there being so many of you, I have
concluded to accept the hand of the Duke Michael. I may not become a Queen, but I shall bring
rest to my country, and Michael assures me in his playful manner that "three of a kind," "even
of the same color," do not always win at poker.  It will tranquilize you somewhat to know that
the Lord Chancellor assures me that on examining the records of the dynasty he finds that my
ancestor Rupert never left his kingdom during his entire reign, and that consequently your
ancestress has been grossly maligned.  I am sending typewritten copies of this to Rupert of
Glasgow and the King.  Farewell.

FLIRTIA.

Once a year, at Christmastide, I receive a simple foreign hamper via Charing Cross, marked
"Return empty."  I take it in silence to my own room, and there, opening it, I find--unseen
by any other eyes but my own--a modest pate de foie gras, of the kind I ate with the Princess
Flirtia.  I take out the pate, replace the label, and have the hamper reconveyed to Charing Cross.

THE STOLEN CIGAR CASE

By A. CO--N D--LE

I found Hemlock Jones in the old Brook Street lodgings, musing before the fire.  With the freedom
of an old friend I at once threw myself in my usual familiar attitude at his feet, and gently
caressed his boot. I was induced to do this for two reasons: one, that it enabled me to get
a good look at his bent, concentrated face, and the other, that it seemed to indicate my reverence
for his superhuman insight.  So absorbed was he even then, in tracking some mysterious clue,
that he did not seem to notice me.  But therein I was wrong--as I always was in my attempt
to understand that powerful intellect.

"It is raining," he said, without lifting his head.

"You have been out, then?" I said quickly.

"No.  But I see that your umbrella is wet, and that your overcoat has drops of water on it."

I sat aghast at his penetration.  After a pause he said carelessly, as if dismissing the subject:
"Besides, I hear the rain on the window. Listen."

I listened.  I could scarcely credit my ears, but there was the soft pattering of drops on
the panes.  It was evident there was no deceiving this man!

"Have you been busy lately?" I asked, changing the subject.  "What new problem--given up by
Scotland Yard as inscrutable--has occupied that gigantic intellect?"

He drew back his foot slightly, and seemed to hesitate ere he returned it to its original position.
Then he answered wearily: "Mere trifles--nothing to speak of.  The Prince Kupoli has been here
to get my advice regarding the disappearance of certain rubies from the Kremlin; the Rajah
of Pootibad, after vainly beheading his entire bodyguard, has been obliged to seek my assistance
to recover a jeweled sword.  The Grand Duchess of Pretzel-Brauntswig is desirous of discovering
where her husband was on the night of February 14; and last night"--he lowered his voice slightly--"a
lodger in this very house, meeting me on the stairs, wanted to know why they didn't answer
his bell."

I could not help smiling--until I saw a frown gathering on his inscrutable forehead.

"Pray remember," he said coldly, "that it was through such an apparently trivial question that
I found out Why Paul Ferroll Killed His Wife, and What Happened to Jones!"

I became dumb at once.  He paused for a moment, and then suddenly changing back to his usual
pitiless, analytical style, he said: "When I say these are trifles, they are so in comparison
to an affair that is now before me.  A crime has been committed,--and, singularly enough, against
myself.  You start," he said.  "You wonder who would have dared to attempt it.  So did I; nevertheless,
it has been done.  I have been ROBBED!"

"YOU robbed!  You, Hemlock Jones, the Terror of Peculators!" I gasped in amazement, arising
and gripping the table as I faced him.

"Yes!  Listen.  I would confess it to no other.  But YOU who have followed my career, who know
my methods; you, for whom I have partly lifted the veil that conceals my plans from ordinary
humanity,--you, who have for years rapturously accepted my confidences, passionately admired
my inductions and inferences, placed yourself at my beck and call, become my slave, groveled
at my feet, given up your practice except those few unremunerative and rapidly decreasing patients
to whom, in moments of abstraction over MY problems, you have administered strychnine for quinine
and arsenic for Epsom salts; you, who have sacrificed anything and everybody to me,--YOU I
make my confidant!"

I arose and embraced him warmly, yet he was already so engrossed in thought that at the same
moment he mechanically placed his hand upon his watch chain as if to consult the time.  "Sit
down," he said.  "Have a cigar?"

"I have given up cigar smoking," I said.

"Why?" he asked.

I hesitated, and perhaps colored.  I had really given it up because, with my diminished practice,
it was too expensive.  I could afford only a pipe.  "I prefer a pipe," I said laughingly. "But
tell me of this robbery.  What have you lost?"

He arose, and planting himself before the fire with his hands under his coattails, looked down
upon me reflectively for a moment.  "Do you remember the cigar case presented to me by the
Turkish Ambassador for discovering the missing favorite of the Grand Vizier in the fifth chorus
girl at the Hilarity Theatre?  It was that one. I mean the cigar case.  It was incrusted with
diamonds."

"And the largest one had been supplanted by paste," I said.

"Ah," he said, with a reflective smile, "you know that?"

"You told me yourself.  I remember considering it a proof of your extraordinary perception.
But, by Jove, you don't mean to say you have lost it?"

He was silent for a moment.  "No; it has been stolen, it is true, but I shall still find it.
And by myself alone!  In your profession, my dear fellow, when a member is seriously ill, he
does not prescribe for himself, but calls in a brother doctor.  Therein we differ.  I shall
take this matter in my own hands."

"And where could you find better?" I said enthusiastically.  "I should say the cigar case is
as good as recovered already."

"I shall remind you of that again," he said lightly.  "And now, to show you my confidence in
your judgment, in spite of my determination to pursue this alone, I am willing to listen to
any suggestions from you."

He drew a memorandum book from his pocket and, with a grave smile, took up his pencil.

I could scarcely believe my senses.  He, the great Hemlock Jones, accepting suggestions from
a humble individual like myself!  I kissed his hand reverently, and began in a joyous tone:

"First, I should advertise, offering a reward; I should give the same intimation in hand-bills,
distributed at the 'pubs' and the pastry-cooks'.  I should next visit the different pawnbrokers;
I should give notice at the police station.  I should examine the servants.  I should thoroughly
search the house and my own pockets. I speak relatively," I added, with a laugh.  "Of course
I mean YOUR own."

He gravely made an entry of these details.

"Perhaps," I added, "you have already done this?"

"Perhaps," he returned enigmatically.  "Now, my dear friend," he continued, putting the note-book
in his pocket and rising, "would you excuse me for a few moments?  Make yourself perfectly
at home until I return; there may be some things," he added with a sweep of his hand toward
his heterogeneously filled shelves, "that may interest you and while away the time.  There
are pipes and tobacco in that corner."

Then nodding to me with the same inscrutable face he left the room. I was too well accustomed
to his methods to think much of his unceremonious withdrawal, and made no doubt he was off
to investigate some clue which had suddenly occurred to his active intelligence.

Left to myself I cast a cursory glance over his shelves.  There were a number of small glass
jars containing earthy substances, labeled "Pavement and Road Sweepings," from the principal
thoroughfares and suburbs of London, with the sub-directions "for identifying foot-tracks."
There were several other jars, labeled "Fluff from Omnibus and Road Car Seats," "Cocoanut Fibre
and Rope Strands from Mattings in Public Places," "Cigarette Stumps and Match Ends from Floor
of Palace Theatre, Row A, 1 to 50." Everywhere were evidences of this wonderful man's system
and perspicacity.

I was thus engaged when I heard the slight creaking of a door, and I looked up as a stranger
entered.  He was a rough-looking man, with a shabby overcoat and a still more disreputable
muffler around his throat and the lower part of his face.  Considerably annoyed at his intrusion,
I turned upon him rather sharply, when, with a mumbled, growling apology for mistaking the
room, he shuffled out again and closed the door.  I followed him quickly to the landing and
saw that he disappeared down the stairs.  With my mind full of the robbery, the incident made
a singular impression upon me.  I knew my friend's habit of hasty absences from his room in
his moments of deep inspiration; it was only too probable that, with his powerful intellect
and magnificent perceptive genius concentrated on one subject, he should be careless of his
own belongings, and no doubt even forget to take the ordinary precaution of locking up his
drawers.  I tried one or two and found that I was right, although for some reason I was unable
to open one to its fullest extent.  The handles were sticky, as if some one had opened them
with dirty fingers.  Knowing Hemlock's fastidious cleanliness, I resolved to inform him of
this circumstance, but I forgot it, alas! until--but I am anticipating my story.

His absence was strangely prolonged.  I at last seated myself by the fire, and lulled by warmth
and the patter of the rain on the window, I fell asleep.  I may have dreamt, for during my
sleep I had a vague semi-consciousness as of hands being softly pressed on my pockets--no doubt
induced by the story of the robbery.  When I came fully to my senses, I found Hemlock Jones
sitting on the other side of the hearth, his deeply concentrated gaze fixed on the fire.

"I found you so comfortably asleep that I could not bear to awaken you," he said, with a smile.

I rubbed my eyes.  "And what news?" I asked.  "How have you succeeded?"

"Better than I expected," he said, "and I think," he added, tapping his note-book, "I owe much
to YOU."

Deeply gratified, I awaited more.  But in vain.  I ought to have remembered that in his moods
Hemlock Jones was reticence itself.  I told him simply of the strange intrusion, but he only
laughed.

Later, when I arose to go, he looked at me playfully.  "If you were a married man," he said,
"I would advise you not to go home until you had brushed your sleeve.  There are a few short
brown sealskin hairs on the inner side of your forearm, just where they would have adhered
if your arm had encircled a seal-skin coat with some pressure!"

"For once you are at fault," I said triumphantly; "the hair is my own, as you will perceive;
I have just had it cut at the hairdresser's, and no doubt this arm projected beyond the apron."

He frowned slightly, yet, nevertheless, on my turning to go he embraced me warmly--a rare exhibition
in that man of ice.  He even helped me on with my overcoat and pulled out and smoothed down
the flaps of my pockets.  He was particular, too, in fitting my arm in my overcoat sleeve,
shaking the sleeve down from the armhole to the cuff with his deft fingers.  "Come again soon!"
he said, clapping me on the back.

"At any and all times," I said enthusiastically; "I only ask ten minutes twice a day to eat
a crust at my office, and four hours' sleep at night, and the rest of my time is devoted to
you always, as you know."

"It is indeed," he said, with his impenetrable smile.

Nevertheless, I did not find him at home when I next called.  One afternoon, when nearing my
own home, I met him in one of his favorite disguises,--a long blue swallow-tailed coat, striped
cotton trousers, large turn-over collar, blacked face, and white hat, carrying a tambourine.
Of course to others the disguise was perfect, although it was known to myself, and I passed
him--according to an old understanding between us--without the slightest recognition, trusting
to a later explanation.  At another time, as I was making a professional visit to the wife
of a publican at the East End, I saw him, in the disguise of a broken-down artisan, looking
into the window of an adjacent pawnshop.  I was delighted to see that he was evidently following
my suggestions, and in my joy I ventured to tip him a wink; it was abstractedly returned.

Two days later I received a note appointing a meeting at his lodgings that night.  That meeting,
alas! was the one memorable occurrence of my life, and the last meeting I ever had with Hemlock
Jones!  I will try to set it down calmly, though my pulses still throb with the recollection of it.

I found him standing before the fire, with that look upon his face which I had seen only once
or twice in our acquaintance--a look which I may call an absolute concatenation of inductive
and deductive ratiocination--from which all that was human, tender, or sympathetic was absolutely
discharged.  He was simply an icy algebraic symbol! Indeed, his whole being was concentrated
to that extent that his clothes fitted loosely, and his head was absolutely so much reduced
in size by his mental compression that his hat tipped back from his forehead and literally
hung on his massive ears.

After I had entered he locked the doors, fastened the windows, and even placed a chair before
the chimney.  As I watched these significant precautions with absorbing interest, he suddenly
drew a revolver and, presenting it to my temple, said in low, icy tones:

"Hand over that cigar case!"

Even in my bewilderment my reply was truthful, spontaneous, and involuntary.  "I haven't got
it," I said.

He smiled bitterly, and threw down his revolver.  "I expected that reply!  Then let me now
confront you with something more awful, more deadly, more relentless and convincing than that
mere lethal weapon,--the damning inductive and deductive proofs of your guilt!" He drew from
his pocket a roll of paper and a note-book.

"But surely," I gasped, "you are joking!  You could not for a moment believe"--

"Silence!  Sit down!"  I obeyed.

"You have condemned yourself," he went on pitilessly.  "Condemned yourself on my processes,--processes
familiar to you, applauded by you, accepted by you for years!  We will go back to the time
when you first saw the cigar case.  Your expressions," he said in cold, deliberate tones, consulting
his paper, "were, 'How beautiful!  I wish it were mine.'  This was your first step in crime--and
my first indication. From 'I WISH it were mine' to 'I WILL have it mine,' and the mere detail,
'HOW CAN I make it mine?' the advance was obvious.  Silence! But as in my methods it was necessary
that there should be an overwhelming inducement to the crime, that unholy admiration of yours
for the mere trinket itself was not enough.  You are a smoker of cigars."

"But," I burst out passionately, "I told you I had given up smoking cigars."

"Fool!" he said coldly, "that is the SECOND time you have committed yourself.  Of course you
told me!  What more natural than for you to blazon forth that prepared and unsolicited statement
to PREVENT accusation.  Yet, as I said before, even that wretched attempt to cover up your
tracks was not enough.  I still had to find that overwhelming, impelling motive necessary to
affect a man like you. That motive I found in the strongest of all impulses--Love, I suppose
you would call it," he added bitterly, "that night you called!  You had brought the most conclusive
proofs of it on your sleeve."

"But--" I almost screamed.

"Silence!" he thundered.  "I know what you would say.  You would say that even if you had embraced
some Young Person in a sealskin coat, what had that to do with the robbery? Wait in any case we have the next twenty-four Hours from.
"

The conversation with a stranger Anna had calmed a little. She sat down to dinner, took a few
bites and left the house soon after to go to Arnold. He had gone out; she waited. An hour passed.
They rang for the servants and asked for a glass of water. Another half an hour stole out,
then came Arnold. He went in, still in the jacket, the hat in the flaccid hanging arm holding.
His face, now is the perfect oval of mental suffering People showed,
looked pained.

"I have to wait up? How long have you been here? "He asked hurriedly. He sat down beside her and
took kindly and gracious movement both her hands.

"Leave only, Arnold," she answered, withdrew his hand, seized him by the chin and raised his
Head slightly upward. He smiled, he looked at her neck. "That reminds me a bit," said he "I will
give something." He hurried from the room. During her brief solitude had Anna Borromeo a frightening
thought. She put both hands to his forehead and thought after.

Uncertainty it was the most hated of all feelings, so they decided to still their to make an
end to doubt. But had in their usually impenetrable face during the little time go so much that Arnold,
as he came back, looked at her silently questioning.

He brought a small box in which an old-fashioned jewelry on black velvet was. It was a bunch of
flowers, stems, bound-free, were made of gold, the calyx were prepared by finely crafted colored
gemstones. "This is still" from my mother, Arnold said, "and you shall have it."

Anna looked at it without her help having a strange chill could slow
the trickled down her back.

"And you think I should wear it," she said. "This is on "No way. The steel-blue eyes fastened without
passion of Arnold, the end darkened. "What are we to do," he said as if to himself, casting
a timid View of the sky.

"Oh, I could imagine it, Arnold, that you would tell him the whole truth. So deep must we do not
fall but that prevents us pity or fear, or fear it. Or have we are only a small pleasure procured
outside of the permissible?

Bethink thee only, Arnold, and try to do something different than what I expect from you and
what you owe are. And if after the first sentence that you said to him, I do not quiet this pretty
brooch will be able to carry. "She took the jewelry from her fingertips and pressed the Lips to
it.

And Anna Borromeo said these words to try to, that was it. Not they believed that Arnold would
stand before Borromeo with a confession, but she wanted to see what it would be when the hour
had come. For now they only had one thing in mind: to learn whether Frederick Borromeo suspected
or knew something pristine and whether the bed on this night Related
to this knowledge was.

Arnold felt ashamed and gave their right. But he blanched when he imminence in the picture tried to
see, and felt, when pallor spread over the tongue and palate into
the interior of the body.

"I think of it," he said, going around, "whether Borromeo not Podolin want to live. It will lure
you to be alone and to have peace. "

They went away together.

By Arnold on Anna's side went through the streets, he cut with grim determination of all the
past now and decided to give only the presence of live to seize the
moment and what enemies on the other hand got destroyed.

It clung himself to harden his heart with a semblance of law can.

"Is the master at home?" Anna Borromeo asked once, when they had opened the girl and the answer
was affirmative. "Well," continued Anna, by veil, hat and jacket decreased, "we want in a
quarter of an hour for dinner.

Notify the Lord that I am waiting for him, I just, you know? No one
else is present.

"

They entered the dining room. "What does that mean?" Asked Arnold. "Why should not he know, I'm
here? "

Anna Borromeo was close to Arnold and said, by the nails of their attention Hand saw, "He's come
last night, although we have heard him, and I fear -"

Arnold made a jerk with the whole body.

Then suddenly he struck his hands together and turned away.

Anna looked at him sternly. The girl came in and reported: "The gracious Lord has not answered me. "

"So
we take the time being court, Arnold," Anna said in a social tone.

As soon as she sat, then opened the door and Borromeo appeared on the threshold. And no sooner
had Arnold at the table he sees as his face got the white color and becomes red. No one had ever
seen him. With limp, blinking eye he looked at Arnold, then He came back again, shut the door noiselessly
and Anna and Arnold were alone again. They were silent for a long time.

"Your idea Podolin is very good," said Anna Borromeo at last with a peculiar smile, "So it
could not go on. He has already stopped a long time among people . Live For him it is the best
and for us it is the quietest and easiest. "

Arnold did not answer.

"I will not hesitate so, I will immediately talk to him."

"Yes, do it alone," said Arnold dull, and his eyes blazed in that deceitful determination who
had attacked him.

Anna got up and left. As she stepped into the corridor, she heard
strange sounds.

The front Part of the hall was lit, to go to Borromeo's room, she had, even in semi-darkness,
turn a corner. But here they suddenly saw Borromeo. He stood motionless
and murmuring to himself.

Frederick! Friedrich, "said Anna frightened.

He sat down to answer his murmur "I can not continue, it is dark":
fort, from which finally wrestled the audible words.

Anna gulped down their terror, went back, lit a candle, and they avoided it, one of the servants
to draw attention, and shone in a forward to her husband.

It was cold in the Borromeo Room.

He took a rotkarrierten scarf and wrapped it around his Shoulders. Anna put down the candle on
the table and looked thoughtful for a while in the Flame.

"It has now been done, Friedrich," she said then. "It has done well to - for many reasons. But you
feel you have to yourself and spare us the superfluous and Distressing. I suggest you spend the
next few years quietly in the country. Your nerves are destroyed, and it will be good for you
in every way. "

Borromeo, stood leaning against the door, shivering, motionless. "I can not live in the country,"
he said.

"And in the city you feel not well," said Anne reproachfully amiable.

"So where you live then? In Nothing? "

"In nothing. That's right. In nothing, "whispered Borromeo.

"You want the scandal?" Continued the woman continued more seriously.

"Do you want me to go?"

"I do not want to live alone out in nature, Anna. That makes me kaput, "said Borromeo at once
excited, completely contrary to his art, he was trembling all over.

"So you want to travel, Friedrich," asked Anna with love.

He shook his head wearily.

"Hear me," Anna began again.

"How about if you went and there after Podolin -. Man you would give the best care ... "She trailed
off. Borromeo his wife looked great and cold, and replied slowly: "Podolin? "I? He came to
the table and leaned both arms on the plate. "Wither rather the same," he muttered to himself.

Anna
Borromeo was surprised. "Arnold would have it," she said he "even makes you the offer and considers
it to be good. "

As Borromeo began to glow in his eyes and his face covered himself again with redness. "Arnold?"
he asked, and nodded his head frantically. "Will -? That's not true! That does Arnold not! That
is a lie ... It is a lie. "He had his arm outstretched, pointing the moving finger into the void,
as if he saw the lie with my eyes. His whole being was turned sinister.

Anna anxiously clutched his hand. Borromeo closed his eyes for a few seconds, breathing deep and
his face was pale again the previous color.

"It's not a lie," said Anna, almost timidly. She had no idea what at this moment was going on in the
man.

"Well," said Borromeo with brooding and sad expression. »Podolin - that is bad bad for me. For many
reasons, as you put up. But, he "rose again his voice, which then did not sound loud, but to
behave themselves in endless anger and grief appeared, "but if Arnold hertritt front of me and tells
me this, Uncle Borromeo, I want this I think for good, now and then ... I want to go Podolin. "

Anna bowed her head, still thought for a moment and silently left
the room.

Fifty-sixth chapter

"He will not, Arnold. He struggles against it as against fire, "said Anna Borromeo, as she
returned to the dining room. "He was so excited as I never saw him. I think it would be bad for him
to go to Podolin. "

Arnold was surprised. "It does not have to be yes," he said.

"If Arnold decease before me and says, I will want to go, well then I am, he says. The In his
own words. "Anna lay exhausted on the sofa.

Arnold stopped. The idea that knowledge could Borromeo, which bound him to Anna said, it suddenly
largest in the fear.

The next day, told Anna that Borromeo had ordered the servant to his bed in the room set up, which
was met on his own. He wandered through the rooms in the house, went into the upper floor,
turned to the servants, without saying anything.

The people began to to be afraid of him. At night he opened the window and peered up the road
and down. This went on until the end of the week. His behavior was always gentle and quiet. And
as on Monday Anna in her salon visits received, turned suddenly and Borromeo, looked each individual
in the face of a contemplative expression, sat down near the stove and seemed closely follow
the talks. If someone spoke to him myself, he nodded or shook the head. He remained seated until
the last one was gone and came to Arnold.

Now step Borromeo Relaxed out for a while wandering in the hallway and down until he woke, she looked
around, Took his hat and coat and went into the street.

Anna's mood darkened slowly under her gaze inexplicable Borromeo. Its proximity let them freeze,
not to be breaking silence filled her with dread. She did hardly more to leave the house, and
when she was alone with Arnold, both came involuntarily in a whisper. This could not stand
Arnold. to stand so crouch and wait for the approximate tortured his pride and destroyed his
softer feelings. Lust for lust boiled up in his heart, and he sought Anna going to move there,
where he himself previously held back had. But they seemed paralyzed.
Find a Rat! spoke their eyes.

He did not recognize what he should have done, and he no longer could. He thought back to those
first Way out: Podolin! And he came to the conclusion that it's only got himself to him that Borromeo
had made the decision himself dependent. He needed to talk. As if community Spoiled it met
both on this point, he shared with Anna quiet, which he considered the best. She did not agree,
but not advised as they remained silent.

Then came the evening. Borromeo, it was said, had just come home. Arnold went over and knocked
at the door and entered. Borromeo was sitting at the table in front of the lamp. He saw Arnold,
and it was as if a long held back, great fear in his face now openly at kick. Arnold sought by the
sight of objects around the room to collect. Then he began. "It is better for you to be there
alone, as here," he said, among other things. »Podolin is a certain sense, the family seat for us
now. Nothing is going to comfort you missing, and it will not be long until you recover you from
your suffering unexplained have. Podolin is healthy for the mind.

"

Arnold could not help it, he had to dip his views in those Borromeo, and he tried not even
him to turn away. And he forgot that look through the dream, sleep and Violence kept his same
guards. Only now he perceived that Borromeo knew everything. But that made him almost indifferent
to the one word, the invisible eyes of Borromeo flocked to him: Unfair!

Borromeo was on a bit cumbersome, and said curtly: "Well, go me. Forsake the Room, Arnold. "

When Arnold was out to put Borromeo upright position to the window and cried. But he was ashamed
of his tears even before the night and would have liked his head drilled into the earth. An
hour passed. The servant brought the food. Borromeo not noticed. To midnight He stood almost
motionless. Then he sat down at the desk, and his head fell to the breast. Soon he began to dream.

He
found himself completely alone on a small barren island, the sea was moving around , but was
still as lead. Furthermore, he woke up, but the horror remained. He feared Before Podolin like
a child before going into the darkness. But Arnold did not want and of subordination or insight,
Borromeo said, but Arnold to prove how much he was acting in the wrong, because Borromeo felt what
was coming. He had also completed with everything that tied him to life.

The Servant Christian, a devoted man who, eleven years in the home should Borromeo accompany
and stay with him. He packed clothes and dresses in the suitcase and lunch for two Clock, they
should go to the station. Borromeo was on the bed and stared into
the air.

His View seemed to not be removed from the immediate circle of his body can. Often sighed it
deep and long. Anna came, gave orders to the servant, demanded his daily report, then They stood
silently before Borromeo, who got up slowly and walked past her. The servant took the trunk,
Borromeo was in a stooped posture, looking forward not, not sideways but inwardly as an almost
blind. Anna was shaking all over the skin, as she looked after. She locked to Borromeo's room
and put the key in her pocket.

Half an hour later, Arnold.

He had telegraphed yesterday to the statement Inclusion in Podolin hit and died there the young doctor
who was old, with a Cart appointed to the ward. He shared with Anna Borromeo, but they took
it to cool. Silently, he sat with her until a dull anger had accumulated in it. He grabbed both
hands, her head turned him over to him and asked through his teeth by his eyes wide open before
her half-closed was: "Looks for the fulfillment of other ? Than the desire And Anna replied whisper.
"Yes," Since Arnold got up, laughed and left. Like to have him recalled Anna, but she could
not. Their curiosity had nothing expected. Freedom and Geheimnislosigkeit was what they least
desired. It sank in a desolate grief. She mourned the fact that they had to pay their debts by
Arnold , And let it only appeared much in common and ugly, what an adventure before the meeting
had been. Quickly had fulfilled all that he had given too much, little too much and, because
they had nothing by himself. They cursed their lives.

In the Registry and the friend was told to rest for a few Borromeo
was traveled weeks after the Moravian farm of his nephew.

But rumors surfaced, other licked up and about, had to respect Anna
Borromeo.

You could feel it, because people like they only carry the air of this special world their particular
lives, suffer a Kind of death, if they do not know is respected equal. Strangely, from the
hour when Borromeo left the house, Anna and Arnold were cut off from each other. Restlessness
and confusion reigned in Arnold's tasks. He was so preoccupied with himself, that everything
had lost its importance lying outside.

And yet, when he points to the came when it could have been light, so he stopped and began
to dream. He lost appetite and sleep, he got to participate in the people who had admired him
and loved him. He demanded an account of himself, but the first reply, that his reason or his
heart was, he recoiled. He had no measure of the course of days, he respected the Time no
longer. Captured caught and appeared himself, swallowed up by something monstrous. He could
feel the vibration of a storm, but not himself suffered, but a detached from him being who
drove around in empty space like a car without a rudder and mast. Cafe, theater, games, society,
everything attracted him and pushed him, hardly enjoyed again from. He could not understand
what had happened the matter with him, and he cherished febrile Wish wish to find a new earth,
another wandering star to there again To begin, what was here so unnatural to drill in misfortune
and adversity. Resistant he thought, to breathe hot air and a strange fear filled him, think and .
Look He often sat alone, staring, staring like a castaway on the water, which always threatens
to become quiet and refuses to drive further even the bar to which it adheres.

One evening at the twilight hour, it was already late into the fall, he sought Anna Borromeo on.
She showed him the reports of Christian's and doctor of Podolin.

Both had each other sought to conceal what was going on, but the last letter of the faithful
Servant was as follows: "Madame, the gracious Lord looks now always faces in the Air. He believes
someone wants to kill him. He will take no food, the gracious Lord, because he thinks someone
wants to poison him. He says he hears voices, and the doctor of Podolin says the knight loses
his mind.

He also says the lord, he will go to court to obtain his rights. "

Anna Borromeo read aloud. Arnold had grabbed the back of a chair, they pressed against his
knees, so tight that the back seat suddenly broke in two on.

With a strange sound he jumped on, went to the window, saw nothing but the fog that is bluish-white
as milk pressed against the panes. Then he mumbled a greeting, threw out his coat in haste
around and left. He burned his face, neck, chest and feet. He ran
through the streets, as if life and death depended on the rapidity
of his action to suddenly stand remain together and with clenched
fists and open eyes in despair as a to the fever-bed runaway look
around, leaning against a wall, groping in the fog as if he were a
creation of his imagination. As he looked over on the other side of
the road the open doors of a church. A solemn dark reddish expanded
in the blank Space. He went over and entered the church, fell in a
dark corner on his knees and prayed, prayed hastily aufblicklos, faithless,
with closed, stormy, stormy an abyss rolling down soul.

Fifty-seventh
chapter

He came into the street and saw nothing, he did not even
see the road, much less the people. He stumbled more than he did,
he whispered, sighed and made drunken with the poor Movements. "Yes,
yes," he said, stopping and stretching his arm into the air, an old
Man after that had passed quietly satisfied about him, "yes, yes.
The old man turned around, shocked, and laughed.

At home, he made
light in all rooms. An electrical fire him was not enough He also
lit candles. He was cold, as if he from the furnace heat of a room
would be stepped on an ice field. No subject was able to tie the look
in his eyes; a just and terrible power suddenly rolled up the thread
of his life backwards from Arnold and forced to turn round and follow
the violence. The first hours of the night passed in a complete stupor.
He rushed incessantly by flight the room. Totally exhausted, he threw
himself at length on a sofa. Nevertheless approached picture on screen,
painful as the dreams on the border of awakening. He put his head
between his hands and fell asleep, just as the first day's beam pierced
the darkness outside. He dreamed He was imprisoned in a poor wagon,
which drove through snow and rain after Podolin. A terrible lightning
illuminated the dark and Arnold saw that he was against the whip Borromeo
swung. For no horse was biased, but pulled the Borromeo crunching
vehicle by the deep mud and mire, and the flare of the flash Arnold
saw the tense Neck skin and the tired head bowed. But suddenly turned
Borromeo step on Arnold and wanted to talk, because Arnold was awakened
by the touch of the servant of his Lord complacent to be believed
that if he helped him from so uncomfortable to sleep.

He went to
the bathroom had a jet of cold water run over your head, dried and
combed his hair and left the house. He slowly walked through the immovable
morning fog. After half an hour he was standing in front of the house,
where once Verena had lived. A voice rose from a distance, cried,
cried ... Arnold could not understand. It was Verena's voice? Foreign
Verena was him. How dark were the way!

Valescott met him. "As you
look, dear friend," cried the lieutenant. "You may probably not, eh?
Should I get a car? notify the doctor? nothing "of it all. Arnold
escaped to the worried. Every human face inspired him with fear, for
in all he saw changed his own, all good instincts deprived, empty,
arrogant and deceitful.

Without an intent would have directed his
steps, he found himself suddenly at the North Station. In the hall,
he studied the Zugsplan and saw that he go in an hour Podolin could.  Go on with your shoveling
at present, and shut the door behind you; there's a terrible draught in these corridors."

For three days John Gale underwent an agony of doubt and determination, and it still snowed
in Bishopsgate Street.

On the fourth evening he went to Brother Bones.

"Would you like to have an evening out?"

"I would," said Brother Bones.

"What would you do?"

"I would go to see my remaining sister."  His left eyelid trembled slowly in his cadaverous face.

"But if you should hear she was ruined like the other?  What would you do?"

A shudder passed over the man.  "I have not got my little knife," he said vacantly.

True, he had not!  The Brotherhood had no pockets,--or rather only a corporate one, which belonged
to the Superior.  John Gale lifted his eyes in sublime exaltation.  "You shall go out," he
said with decision. "Muffle up until you are well out of Bishopsgate Street, where it still snows."

"But how did you get the keys?" said Brother Bones.

"From under the Father Superior's door-mat."

"But that was wrong, Brother."

"The mat bore the inscription, 'Salve,' which you know in Latin means 'Welcome,'" returned
John Gale.  "It was logically a permission."

The two men gazed at each other silently.  A shudder passed over the two left eyelids of their
wan spiritual faces.

"But I have no money," said Brother Bones.

"Nor have I.  But here is a 'bus ticket and a free pass to the Gaiety. You will probably find
Golly somewhere about.  Tell her," he said in a hollow voice, "that I'm getting on."

"I will," said Brother Bones, with a deep cough.

The gate opened and he disappeared in the falling snow.  The bloodhound kept by the monastery--one
of the real Bishopsgate breed--bayed twice, and licked its huge jaws in ghastly anticipation.
"I wonder," said John Gale as he resumed his shoveling, "if I have done exactly right. Candor
compels me to admit that it is an open question."

BOOK V

Early the next morning, Brother Bones was brought home by Policeman X, his hat crushed, his
face haggard, his voice husky and unintelligible. He only said vaguely, "Washertime?"

"It is," said John Gale timidly, in explanation to Policeman X, "a case of spiritual exhaustion
following a vigil."

"That warn't her name," said Policeman X sternly.  "But don't let this 'ere appen again."

John Gale turned to Brother Bones.  "Then you saw her--Golly?"

"No," said Brother Bones.

"Why?  What on earth have you been doing?"

"Dunno!  Found myself in stashun--zis morning!  Thashall!"

Then John Gale sought the Superior in an agony of remorse, and confessed all.  "I am unfit
to remain doorkeeper.  Remove me," he groaned bitterly.

The old man smiled gently.  "On the contrary, I should have given you the keys myself.  Hereafter
you can keep them.  The ways of our Brotherhood are mysterious,--indeed, you may think idiotic,--but
we are not responsible for them.  It's all Brother Caine's doing--it's 'All Caine!"

BOOK VI

Nevertheless, John Gale left the monastery.  "The Bishopsgate Street winter does not suit me,"
he briefly explained to the Superior.  "I must go south or southwest."

But he did neither.  He saw Golly, who was living west.  He upbraided her for going on the
stage.  She retorted: "Whose life is the more artificial, yours or mine?  It is true that we
are both imperfectly clothed," she added, glancing at a photograph of herself in a short skirt,
"and not always in our right mind--but you've caught nothing but a cold!  Nevertheless, I love
you and you love me."

Then he begged her to go with him to the South Seas and take the place of Father Damien among
the colony of lepers.  "It is a beautiful place, and inexpensive, for we shall live only a
few weeks.  What do you say, dearest?  You know," he added, with a faint, sad smile, glancing
at another photograph of her,--executing the high kick,--"you're quite a leaper yourself."

But that night she received an offer of a new engagement.  She wrote to John Gale: "The South
Seas is rather an expensive trip to take simply to die.  Couldn't we do it as cheaply at home?
Or couldn't you prevail on your Father Superior to set up his monastery there?  I'm afraid
I'm not up to it.  Why don't you try the old 'Oilan,' nearer home?  There's lots of measles
and diphtheria about there lately."

When the heartbroken John Gale received this epistle, he also received a letter from his uncle,
the First Lord of the Admiralty. "I don't fancy this Damien whim of yours.  If you're really
in earnest about killing yourself, why not take a brief trial trip in one of our latest ironclads?
It's just as risky, although--as we are obliged to keep these things quiet in the Office--you
will not of course get that publicity your noble soul craves."

Abandoned by all in his noble purposes, John Gale took the first steamer to the Isle of Man.

BOOK VII

But he did not remain there long.  Once back in that epistolary island, he wrote interminable
letters to Golly.  When they began to bore each other, he returned to London and entered the
Salvation Army.  Crowds flocked to hear him preach.  He inveighed against Society and Wickedness
as represented in his mind by Golly and her friends, and praised a perfect Christianity represented
by himself and HIS friends. A panic of the same remarkable character as the Bishopsgate Street
winter took possession of London.  Old Moore's, Zadkiel's, and Mother Shipton's prophecies
were to be fulfilled at an early and fixed date, with no postponement on account of weather.
Suddenly Society, John Drake, and Antichrist generally combined by ousting him from his church,
and turning it into a music-hall for Golly!  Then John Gale took his last and sublime resolve.
His duty as a perfect Christian was to kill Golly!  His logic was at once inscrutable, perfect,
and--John Galish!

With this sublime and lofty purpose, he called upon Golly.  The heroic girl saw his purpose
in his eye--an eye at once black, murderous, and Christian-like.  For an instant she thought
it was better to succumb at once and thus end this remarkable attachment. Suddenly through
this chaos of Spiritual, Religious, Ecstatic, Super-Egotistic whirl of confused thought, darted
a gleam of Common, Ordinary Horse Sense!  John Gale saw it illumine her blue eyes, and trembled.
God in Mercy!  If it came to THAT!

"Sit down, John," she said calmly.  Then, in her sweet, clear voice, she said: "Did it ever
occur to you, dearest, that a more ridiculous, unconvincing, purposeless, insane, God-forsaken
idiot than you never existed?  That you eclipse the wildest dreams of insanity?  That you are
a mental and moral 'What-is-it?'"

"It has occurred to me," he replied simply.  "I began life with vast asinine possibilities
which fall to the lot of few men; yet I cannot say that I have carried even THEM to a logical
conclusion! But YOU, love! YOU, darling! conceived in extravagance, born to impossibility,
a challenge to credulity, a problem to the intellect, a 'missing word' for all ages,--are you
aware of any one as utterly unsympathetic, unreal, and untrue to nature as you are, existing
on the face of the earth, or in the waters under the earth?"

"You are right, dearest; there are none," she returned with the same calm, level voice.  "It
is true that I have at times tried to do something real and womanly, and not, you know, merely
to complicate a--a"--her voice faltered--"theatrical situation--but I couldn't! Something impelled
me otherwise.  Now you know why I became an actress! But even there I fail!  THEY are allowed
reasoning power off the stage--I have none at any time!  I laugh in the wrong place--I do the
unnecessary, extravagant thing.  Endowed by some strange power with extraordinary attributes,
I am supposed to make everybody love me, but I don't--I satisfy nobody; I convince none!  I
have no idea what will happen to me next.  I am doomed to--I know not what."

"And I," he groaned bitterly, "I, in some rare and lucid moments, have had a glimpse of this
too.  We are in the hands of some inscrutable but awful power.  Tell me, Golly, tell me, darling,
who is it?"

Again that gleam of Common or Ordinary Horse Sense came in her eye.

"I have found out who," she whispered.  "I have found out who has created us, and made us as
puppets in his hands."

"Is it the Almighty?" he asked.

"No; it is"--she said, with a burst of real laughter--"it is--The 'All Caine!"

"What! our countryman the Manxman?  The only great Novelist?  The beloved of Gladstone?" he gasped.

"Yes--and he intends to kill YOU--and we're only to be married at your deathbed!"

John Gale arose with a look of stern determination.  "I have suffered much and idiotically--but
I draw a line at this.  I shall kick!"

Golly clapped her hands joyfully.  "We will!"

"And we'll chuck him."

"We will."

They were choking with laughter.

"And go and get married in a natural, simple way like anybody else--and try--to do our duty--to
God--to each other--and to our fellow-beings--and quit this--damned--nonsense--and in-fer-nal
idiocy forever!"

"Amen!"

PUBLISHER'S NOTE.--"In that supreme work of my life, 'The Christian,'" said the gifted novelist
to a reporter in speaking of his methods, "I had endowed the characters of Golly and John Gale
with such superhuman vitality and absolute reality that--as is well known in the experience
of great writers--they became thinking beings, and actually criticised my work, and even INTERFERED
and REBELLED to the point of altering my climax and the end!"  The present edition gives that
ending, which of course is the only real one.  So, though I offend some, I shall yet convince
all, the which lieth closer to my purpose.  Thus, it was in the year 1560, or 1650, or mayhap
1710--for my memory is not what it hath been and I ever cared little for monkish calendars
or such dry-as-dust matter, being active as becometh one who hath to make his way in the world--yet
I wot well it was after the Great Plague, which I have great cause to remember, lying at my
cozen's in Wardour Street, London, in that lamentable year, eating of gilly flowers, sulphur,
hartes tongue and many stynking herbes; touching neither man nor mayd, save with a great tongs
steept in pitch; wearing a fine maske of silk with a mouth piece of aromatic stuff--by reason
of which acts of hardihood and courage I was miraculously preserved.  This much I shall say
as to the time of these happenings, and no more.  I am a plain, blunt man--mayhap rude of speech
should occasion warrant---so let them who require the exactness of a scrivener or a pedagogue
go elsewhere for their entertainment and be hanged to them!

Howbeit, though no scholar, I am not one of those who misuse the English speech, and, being
foolishly led by the hasty custom of scriveners and printers to write the letters "T" and "H"
joined together, which resembleth a "Y," do incontinently jump to the conclusion the THE is
pronounced "Ye,"--the like of which I never heard in all England.  And though this be little
toward those great enterprises and happenings I shall presently shew, I set it down for the
behoof of such malapert wights as must needs gird at a man of spirit and action--and yet, in
sooth, know not their own letters.

So to my tale.  There was a great frost when my Lord bade me follow him to the water gate near
our lodgings in the Strand.  When we reached it we were amazed to see that the Thames was frozen
over and many citizens disporting themselves on the ice--the like of which no man had seen
before.  There were fires built thereon, and many ships and barges were stuck hard and fast,
and my Lord thought it vastly pretty that the people were walking under their bows and cabbin
windows and climbing of their sides like mermen, but I, being a plain, blunt man, had no joy
in such idlenesse, deeming it better that in these times of pith and enterprise they should
be more seemly employed.  My Lord, because of one or two misadventures by reason of the slipperiness
of the ice, was fain to go by London Bridge, which we did; my Lord as suited his humor ruffling
the staid citizens as he passed or peering under the hoods of their wives and daughters--as
became a young gallant of the time.  I, being a plain, blunt man, assisted in no such folly,
but contented myself, when they complayned to me, with damning their souls for greasy interfering
varlets.  For I shall now make no scruple in declaring that my Lord was the most noble Earl
of Southampton, being withheld from so saying before through very plainness and bluntness,
desiring as a simple yeoman to make no boast of serving a man of so high quality.

We fared on over Bankside to the Globe playhouse, where my Lord bade me dismount and deliver
a secret message to the chief player--which message was, "had he diligently perused and examined
that he wot of, and what said he thereof?"  Which I did.  Thereupon he that was called the
chief player did incontinently proceed to load mine arms and wallet with many and divers rolls
of manuscripts in my Lord's own hand, and bade me say unto him that there was a great frost
over London, but that if he were to perform those plays and masques publickly, there would
be a greater frost there--to wit, in the Globe playhouse.  This I did deliver with the Manuscripts
to my Lord, who changed countenance mightily at the sight of them, but could make nought of
the message. At which the lad who held the horses before the playhouse--one Will Shakespeare--split
with laughter.  Whereat my Lord cursed him for a deer-stealing, coney-catching Warwickshire
lout, and cuffed him soundly.  I wot there will be those who remember that this Will Shakespeare
afterwards became a player and did write plays--which were acceptable even to the Queen's Majesty's
self--and I set this down not from vanity to shew I have held converse with such, nor to give
a seemingness and colour to my story, but to shew what ill-judged, misinformed knaves were
they who did afterwards attribute friendship between my Lord and this Will Shakespeare, even
to the saying that he made sonnets to my Lord.  Howbeit, my Lord was exceeding wroth, and I,
to beguile him, did propose that we should leave our horses and cargoes of manuscript behind
and cross on the ice afoot, which conceit pleased him mightily.  In sooth it chanced well with
what followed, for hardly were we on the river when we saw a great crowd coming from Westminster,
before a caravan of strange animals and savages in masks, capering and capricolling, dragging
after them divers sledges quaintly fashioned like swannes, in which were ladies attired as
fairies and goddesses and such like heathen and wanton trumpery, which I, as a plain, blunt
man, would have fallen to cursing, had not my Lord himself damned me under his breath to hold
my peace, for that he had recognized my Lord of Leicester's colours and that he made no doubt
they were of the Court. As forsooth this did presently appear; also that one of the ladies
was her Gracious Majesty's self--masked to the general eye, the better to enjoy these miscalled
festivities.  I say miscalled, for, though a loyal subject of her Majesty, and one who hath
borne arms at Tilbury Fort in defence of her Majesty, it inflamed my choler, as a plain and
blunt man, that her Mightiness should so degrade her dignity.  Howbeit, as a man who hath his
way to make in the world, I kept mine eyes well upon the anticks of the Great, while my Lord
joined the group of maskers and their follies.  I recognized her Majesty's presence by her
discourse in three languages to as many Ambassadors that were present--though I marked well
that she had not forgotten her own tongue, calling one of her ladies "a sluttish wench," nor
her English spirit in cuffing my Lord of Essex's ears for some indecorum--which, as a plain
man myself, curt in speech and action, did rejoice me greatly. But I must relate one feat,
the like of which I never saw in England before or since.  There was a dance of the maskers,
and in the midst of it her Majesty asked the Ambassador from Spayne if he had seen the latest
French dance.  He replied that he had not.  Whereupon Her Most Excellent Majesty skipt back
a pace and forward a pace, and lifting her hoop, delivered a kick at his Excellency's hat which
sent it flying the space of a good English ell above his head!  Howbeit so great was the acclamation
that her Majesty was graciously moved to repeat it to my Lord of Leicester, but, tripping back,
her high heels caught in her farthingale, and she would have fallen on the ice, but for that
my Lord, with exceeding swiftness and dexterity, whisked his cloak from his shoulder, spreading
it under her, and so received her body in its folds on the ice, without himself touching her
Majesty's person.  Her Majesty was greatly pleased at this, and bade my Lord buy another cloak
at her cost, though it swallowed an estate; but my Lord replyed, after the lying fashion of
the time, that it was honour enough for him to be permitted to keep it after "it had received
her Royal person."  I know that this hap hath been partly related of another person--the shipman
Raleigh--but I tell such as deny me that they lie in their teeth, for I, John Longbowe, have
cause--miserable cause enough, I warrant--to remember it, and my Lord can bear me out!  For,
spite of his fair speeches, when he was quit of the Royal presence, he threw me his wet and
bedraggled cloak and bade me change it with him for mine own, which was dry and warm.  And
it was this simple act which wrought the lamentable and cruel deed of which I was the victim,
for, as I followed my Lord, thus apparelled, across the ice, I was suddenly set upon and seized,
a choke-pear clapt into my mouth so that I could not cry aloud, mine eyes bandaged, mine elbows
pinioned at my side in that fatall cloak like to a trussed fowl, and so I was carried to where
the ice was broken, and thrust into a boat.  Thence I was conveyed in the same rude sort to
a ship, dragged up her smooth, wet side, and clapt under hatches.  Here I lay helpless as in
a swoon.  When I came to, it was with a great trampling on the decks above and the washing
of waves below, and I made that the ship was moving--but where I knew not. After a little space
the hatch was lifted from where I lay, the choke-pear taken from my mouth; but not the bandage
from mine eyes, so I could see nought around me.  But I heard a strange voice say: "What coil
is this?  This is my Lord's cloak in sooth, but not my Lord that lieth in it!  Who is this
fellow?"  At which I did naturally discover the great misprise of those varlets who had taken
me for my dear Lord, whom I now damned in my heart for changing of the cloaks!  Howbeit, when
I had fetched my breath with difficulty, being well nigh spent by reason of the gag, I replyed
that I was John Longbowe, my Lord's true yeoman, as good a man as any, as they should presently
discover when they set me ashore.  That I knew--  "Softly, friend," said the Voice, "thou knowest
too much for the good of England and too little for thine own needs.  Thou shalt be sent where
thou mayest forget the one and improve thy knowledge of the other."  Then as if turning to
those about him, for I could not see by reason of the blindfold, he next said: "Take him on
your voyage, and see that he escape not till ye are quit of England."  And with that they clapt
to the hatch again, and I heard him cast off from the ship's side. There was I, John Longbowe,
an English yeoman,--I, who but that day had held converse with Will Shakespeare and been cognizant
of the revels of Her Most Christian Majesty even to the spying of her garter!--I was kidnapped
at the age of forty-five or thereabout--for I will not be certain of the year--and forced to
sea for that my Lord of Southampton had provoked the jealousie and envy of divers other great
nobles.

CHAPTERS I TO XX

I AM FORCED TO SEA AND TO BECOME A PIRATE!  I SUFFER LAMENTABLY FROM SICKNESS BY REASON OF
THE BIGNESSE OF THE WAVES.  I COMMIT MANY CRUELTIES AND BLOODSHED.  BUT BY THE DIVINE INTERCESSION
I EVENTUALLY THROW THE WICKED CAPTAIN OVERBOARD AND AM ELECTED IN HIS STEAD.  I DISCOVER AN
ISLAND OF TREASURE, OBTAIN POSSESSION THEREOF BY A TRICKE, AND PUT THE NATIVES TO THE SWORD.

I marvel much at those who deem it necessary in the setting down of their adventures to gloze
over the whiles between with much matter of the country, the peoples, and even their own foolish
reflections thereon, hoping in this way to cozen the reader with a belief in their own truthfulness,
and encrease the extravagance of their deeds.  I, being a plain, blunt man, shall simply say
for myself that for many days after being taken from the bilboes and made free of the deck,
I was grievously distempered by reason of the waves, and so collapsed in the bowels that I
could neither eat, stand, nor lie.  Being thus in great fear of death, from which I was miraculously
preserved, I, out of sheer gratitude to my Maker, did incontinently make oath and sign articles
to be one of the crew--which were buccaneers.  I did this the more readily as we were to attack
the ships of Spayne only, and through there being no state of Warre at that time between England
and that country, it was wisely conceived that this conduct would provoke it, and we should
thus be forearmed, as became a juste man in his quarrel. For this we had the precious example
of many great Captains.  We did therefore heave to and burn many ships--the quality of those
engagements I do not set forth, not having a seaman's use of ship speech, and despising, as
a plain, blunt man, those who misuse it, having it not.

But this I do know, that, having some conceit of a shipman's ways and of pirates, I did conceive
at this time a pretty song for my comradoes, whereof the words ran thus:--

     Yo ho! when the Dog Watch bayeth loud
       In the light of a mid-sea moon!
     And the Dead Eyes glare in the stiffening Shroud,
       For that is the Pirate's noon!
     When the Night Mayres sit on the Dead Man's Chest
       Where no manne's breath may come--
     Then hey for a bottle of Rum! Rum! Rum!
       And a passage to Kingdom come!

I take no credit to myself for the same, except so far as it may shew a touch of my Lord of
Southampton's manner--we being intimate--but this I know, that it was much acclaimed by the
crew.  Indeed they, observing that the Captain was of a cruel nature, would fain kill him and
put me in his stead, but I, objecting to the shedding of precious blood in such behoof, did
prevent such a lamentable and inhuman action by stealthily throwing him by night from his cabbin
window into the sea--where, owing to the inconceivable distance of the ship from shore, he
was presently drowned.  Which untoward fate had a great effect upon my fortunes, since, burthening
myself with his goods and effects, I found in his chest a printed proclamation from an aged
and infirm clergyman in the West of England covenanting that, for the sum of two crowns, he
would send to whoso offered, the chart of an island of great treasure in the Spanish Main,
whereof he had had confession from the lips of a dying parishioner, and the amount gained thereby
he would use for the restoration of his parish church.  Now I, reading this, was struck by
a great remorse and admiration for our late Captain, for that it would seem that he was, like
myself, a staunch upholder of the Protestant Faith and the Church thereof, as did appear by
his possession of the chart, for which he had no doubt paid the two good crowns.  As an act
of penance I resolved upon finding the same island by the aid of the chart, and to that purpose
sailed East many days, and South, and North, and West as many other days--the manner whereof
and the latitude and longitude of which I shall not burden the reader with, holding it, as
a plain, blunt man, mere padding and impertinence to fill out my narrative, which helpeth not
the general reader.  So, I say, when we sighted the Island, which seemed to be swarming with
savages, I ordered the masts to be stripped, save but for a single sail which hung sadly and
distractedly, and otherwise put the ship into the likeness of a forlorn wreck, clapping the
men, save one or two, under hatches. This I did to prevent the shedding of precious blood,
knowing full well that the ignorant savages, believing the ship in sore distress, would swim
off to her with provisions and fruit, bearing no arms.  Which they did, while we, as fast as
they clomb the sides, despatched them at leisure, without unseemly outcry or alarms.  Having
thus disposed of the most adventurous, we landed and took possession of the island, finding
thereon many kegs of carbuncles and rubies and pieces of eight--the treasure store of those
lawless pirates who infest the seas, having no colour of war or teaching of civilisation to
atone for their horrid deeds.

I discovered also, by an omission in the chart, that this was not the Island wot of by the
good and aged Devonshire divine--and so we eased our consciences of accounting for the treasure
to him.  We then sailed away, arriving after many years' absence at the Port of Bristol in
Merrie England, where I took leave of the "Jolly Roger," that being the name of my ship; it
was a strange conceit of seamen in after years ever to call the device of my FLAG--to wit,
a skull and bones made in the sign of a Cross--by the NAME my ship bore, and if I have only
corrected the misuse of history by lying knaves, I shall be content with this writing.  But
alas! such are the uncertainties of time; I found my good Lord of Southampton dead and most
of his friends beheaded, and the blessed King James of Scotland--if I mistake not, for these
also be the uncertainties of time--on the throne.  In due time I married Mistress Marian Straitways.
I might have told more of trifling, and how she fared, poor wench! in mine absence, even to
the following of me in another ship, in a shipboy's disguise, and how I rescued her from a
scheming Pagan villain; but, as a plain, blunt man, I am no hand at the weaving of puling love
tales and such trifling diversions for lovesick mayds and their puny gallants--having only
consideration for men and their deeds, which I have here set down bluntly and even at mine
advanced years am ready to maintain with the hand that set it down.

DAN'L BOREM

BY E. N---S W--T---T

I

Dan'l Borem poured half of his second cup of tea abstractedly into his lap.

"Guess you've got suthin' on yer mind, Dan'l," said his sister.

"Mor'n likely I've got suthin' on my pants," returned Dan'l with that exquisitely dry, though
somewhat protracted humor which at once thrilled and bored his acquaintances.  "But--speakin'
o' that hoss trade"--

"For goodness' sake, don't!" interrupted his sister wearily; "yer allus doin' it.  Jest tell
me about that young man--the new clerk ye think o' gettin'."

"Well, I telegraphed him to come over, arter I got this letter from him," he returned, handing
her a letter.  "Read it out loud."

But his sister, having an experienced horror of prolixity, glanced over it.  "Far as I kin
see he takes mor'n two hundred words to say you've got to take him on trust, and sez it suthin'
in a style betwixt a business circular and them Polite Letter Writers.  I thought you allowed
he was a tony feller."

"Ef he does not brag much, ye see, I kin offer him small wages," said Dan'l, with a wink. 
"It's kinder takin' him at his own figger."

"And THAT mightn't pay!  But ye don't think o' bringin' him HERE in this house?  'Cept you're
thinkin' o' tellin' him that yarn o' yours about the hoss trade to beguile the winter evenings.
I told ye ye'd hev to pay yet to get folks to listen to it."

"Wrong agin--ez you'll see!  Wot ef I get a hundred thousand folks to pay me for tellin' it?
But, speakin' o' this young feller, I calkilated to send him to the Turkey Buzzard Hotel;"
and he looked at his sister with a shrewd yet humorous smile.

"What!" said his sister in alarm.  "The Turkey Buzzard!  Why, he'll be starved or pizoned!
He won't stay there a week."

"Ef he's pizoned to death he won't be able to demand any wages; ef he leaves because he can't
stand it--it's proof positive he couldn't stand me.  Ef he's only starved and made weak and
miserable he'll be easy to make terms with.  It may seem hard what I'm sayin', but what seems
hard on the other feller always comes mighty easy to you.  The thing is NOT to be the 'other
feller.'  Ye ain't listenin'.  Yet these remarks is shrewd and humorous, and hez bin thought
so by literary fellers."

"H'm!" said his sister.  "What's that ye was jest sayin' about folks bein' willin' to pay ye
for tellin' that hoss trade yarn o' yours?"

"Thet's only what one o' them smart New York publishers allowed it was worth arter hearin'
me tell it," said Dan'l dryly.

"Go way!  You or him must be crazy.  Why, it ain't ez good as that story 'bout a man who had
a balky hoss that could be made to go only by buildin' a fire under him, and arter the man
sells that hoss and the secret, and the man wot bought him tries it on, the blamed hoss lies
down over the fire, and puts it out."

"I've allus allowed that the story ye hev to tell yourself is a blamed sight funnier than the
one ye're listenin' to," said Dan'l. "Put that down among my sayin's, will ye?"

"But your story was never anythin' more than one o' them snippy things ye see in the papers,
drored out to no end by you.  It's only one o' them funny paragraphs ye kin read in a minit
in the papers that takes YOU an hour to tell."

To her surprise Dan'l only looked at his sister with complacency.

"That," he said, "is jest what the New York publisher sez.  'The 'Merrikan people,' sez he,
'is ashamed o' bein' short and peart and funny; it lacks dignity,' sez he; 'it looks funny,'
sez he, 'but it ain't deep-seated nash'nul literature,' sez he.  'Them snips o' funny stories
and short dialogues in the comic papers--they make ye laff,' sez he, 'but laffin' isn't no
sign o' deep morril purpose,' sez he, 'and it ain't genteel and refined.  Abraham Linkin with
his pat anecdotes ruined our standin' with dignified nashuns,' sez he. 'We cultivated publishers
is sick o' hearin' furrin' nashuns roarin' over funny 'Merrikan stories; we're goin' to show
'em that, even ef we haven't classes and titles and sich, we kin be dull. We're workin' the
historical racket for all that it's worth,--ef we can't go back mor'n a hundred years or so,
we kin rake in a Lord and a Lady when we do, and we're gettin' in some ole-fashioned spellin'
and "methinkses" and "peradventures."  We're doin' the religious bizness ez slick ez Robert
Elsmere, and we find lots o' soul in folks--and heaps o quaint morril characters,' sez he."

"Sakes alive, Dan'l!" broke in his sister; "what's all that got to do with your yarn 'bout
the hoss trade?"

"Everythin'," returned Dan'l.  "'For,' sez he, 'Mr. Borem,' sez he, 'you're a quaint morril
character.  You've got protracted humor,' sez he.  'You've bin an hour tellin' that yarn o'
yours!  Ef ye could spin it out to fill two chapters of a book--yer fortune's made!  For you'll
show that a successful hoss trade involves the highest nash'nul characteristics.  That what
common folk calls "selfishness," "revenge," "mean lyin'," and "low-down money-grubbin' ambishun"
is really "quaintness," and will go in double harness with the bizness of a Christian banker,'
sez he."

"Created goodness, Dan'l!  You're designin' ter"--

Dan'l Borem rose, coughed, expectorated carefully at the usual spot in the fender, his general
custom of indicating the conclusion of a subject or an interview, and said dryly: "I'm thar!"

II

To return to the writer of the letter, whose career was momentarily cut off by the episode
of the horse trade (who, if he had previously received a letter written by somebody else would
have been an entirely different person and not in this novel at all): John Lummox--known to
his family as "the perfect Lummox"--had been two years in college, but thought it rather fine
of himself--a habit of thought in which he frequently indulged--to become a clerk, but finally
got tired of it, and to his father's relief went to Europe for a couple of years, returning
with some knowledge of French and German, and the cutting end of a German student's blunted
dueling sword.  Having, as he felt, thus equipped himself for the hero of an American "Good
Society" novel, he went on board a "liner," where there would naturally be susceptible young
ladies. One he thought he recognized as a girl with whom he used to play "forfeits" in the
vulgar past of his boyhood.  She sat at his table, accompanied by another lady whose husband
seemed to be a confirmed dyspeptic.  His remarks struck Lummox as peculiar.

"Shall I begin dinner with pudding and cheese or take the ordinary soup first?  I quite forget
which I did last night," he said anxiously to his wife.

But Mrs. Starling hesitated.

"Tell me, Mary," he said, appealing to Miss Bike, the young lady.

"I should begin with the pudding," said Miss Bike decisively, "and between that and the arrival
of the cheese you can make up your mind, and then, if you think better, go back to the soup."

"Thank you so much.  Now, as to drink?  Shall I take the Friedrichshalle first or the Benedictine?
You know the doctor insists upon the Friedrichshalle, but I don't think I did well to mix them
as I did yesterday.  Or shall I take simply milk and beer?"

"I should say simplicity was best.  Besides, you can always fill up with champagne later."

How splendidly this clear-headed, clear-eyed girl dominated the man! Lummox felt that REALLY
he might renew her acquaintance!  He did so.

"I remembered you," she said.  "You've not changed a bit since you were eight years old."

John, wishing to change the subject, said that he thought Mr. Starling seemed an uncertain man.

"Very!  He's even now in his stateroom sitting in his pyjamas with a rubber shoe on one foot
and a pump on the other, wondering whether he ought to put on golf knickerbockers with a dressing-gown
and straw hat before he comes on deck.  He has already put on and taken off about twenty suits."

"He certainly is very trying," returned Lummox.  He paused and colored deeply.  "I beg," he
stammered, "I hope--you don't think me guilty of a pun!  When I said 'trying' I referred entirely
to the effect on your sensitiveness of these tentative attempts toward clothing himself."

"I should never accuse YOU of levity, Mr. Lummox," said the young lady, gazing thoughtfully
upon his calm but somewhat heavy features,--"never."

Yet he would have liked to reclaim himself by a show of lightness. He was leaning on the rail
looking at the sea.  The scene was beautiful.

"Without that undue depreciation of one's self which must ever be a sign of self-conscious
demerit," said the young girl lightly, "I may say that I am not generally good at Johnsonese;
but it may relieve your mind to know that had you kept silence one instant longer, I should
have taken the risk of lowering your opinion of my taste, provided, of course, that you have
one to lower and are capable of that exertion--if such indeed it may be termed--by remarking
that this is perfectly magnificent."

"Do you think," he said gloomily, still leaning on the rail, "that we can keep this kind of
thing up--perhaps I should say down--much longer? For myself, I am feeling far from well; it
may have been the lobster--or that last sentence--but"--

They were both silent.  "Yet," she said, after a pause, "you can at least take Mr. Starling
and his dyspepsia off my hands.  You might be equal to that exertion."

"I suppose that by this time I ought to be doing something for somebody," he said thoughtfully.
"Yes, I will."

That evening after dinner he took Mr. Starling into the smoking-room and card-room.  They had
something hot.  At 4 A. M., with the assistance of the steward, he projected Mr. Starling into
Mrs. Starling's stateroom, delicately withdrawing to evade the lady's thanks.  At breakfast
he saw Miss Bike.  "Thank you so much," she said; "Mrs. Starling found Starling greatly improved.
He himself admitted he was 'never berrer' and, far from worrying about what night-clothes he
should wear, went to bed AS HE WAS--even to his hat.  Mrs. Starling calls you 'her preserver,'
and Mr. Starling distinctly stated that you were a 'jolly-good-fler.'"

"And you?" asked John Lummox.

"In your present condition of abnormal self-consciousness and apperceptive egotism, I really
shouldn't like to say."

When the voyage was ended Mr. Lummox went to see Mary Bike at her house, and his father--whom
he had not seen for ten years--at HIS house.  With a refined absence of natural affection he
contented himself with inquiring of the servants as to his father's habits, and if he still
wore dress clothes at dinner.  The information thus elicited forced him to the conclusion that
the old gentleman's circumstances were reduced, and that it was possible that he, John Lummox,
might be actually compelled to earn his own living.  He communicated that suspicion to his
father at dinner, and over the last bottle of "Mouton," a circumstance which also had determined
him in his resolution.  "You might," said his father thoughtfully, "offer yourself to some
rising American novelist as a study for the new hero,--one absolutely without ambition, capacity,
or energy; willing, however, to be whatever the novelist chooses to make him, so long as he
hasn't to choose for himself.  If your inordinate self-consciousness is still in your way,
I could give him a few points about you, myself."

"I had thought," said John, hesitatingly, "of going into your office and becoming your partner
in the business.  You could always look after me, you know."

A shudder passed over the old man.  Then he tremblingly muttered to himself:

"Thank heaven!  There is one way it may still be averted!" Retiring to his room he calmly committed
suicide, thoughtfully leaving the empty poison bottle in the fender.

And this is how John Lummox came to offer himself as a clerk to Dan'l Borem.  The ways of Providence
are indeed strange, yet those of the novelist are only occasionally novel.

III

John K. Lummox lived for a week at the Turkey Buzzard Hotel exclusively on doughnuts and innuendoes.
He was informed by Mr. Borem's clerk--whose place he was to fill--that he wouldn't be able
to stand it, and thus received the character of his employer from his last employee.

"I suppose," said Dan'l Borem, chuckling, "that he said I was a old skinflint, good only at
a hoss trade, uneddicated, ignorant, and unable to keep accounts, and an oppressor o' the widder
and orphan. Allowed that my cute sayin's was a kind o' ten-cent parody o' them proverbs in
Poor Richard's Almanack!"

"Omitting a few expletives, he certainly did," returned Lummox with great delicacy.

"He allowed to me," said Dan'l thoughtfully, "that YOU was a poor critter that hadn't a single
reason to show for livin': that the fool-killer had bin shadderin' you from your birth, and
that you hadn't paid a cent profit on your father's original investment in ye, nor on the assessments
he'd paid on ye ever since.  He seems to be a cute feller arter all, and I'm rather sorry he's
leavin'."

"I am quite willing to abandon my position in his favor, now," said Lummox with alacrity.

"No," said Dan'l, rubbing his chin argumentatively; "the only way for us to do is to circumvent
him like in a hoss trade--with suthin' unexpected.  When he thinks you're goin' to sleep in
the shafts you'll run away; and when he think's I'm vicious I'll let a woman or a child drive me."

IV

"Well, Dan'l, how's that new clerk o' yours gettin' on?" said Mrs. Bigby a week later.

"Purty fine!  He's good at accounts and hez got to know the Bank's customers by this time.
But I allus reckoned he'd get stuck with some o' them counterfeit notes--and he hez!  Ye see
he ain't accustomed to look at a five or a ten dollar note as sharp as some men, and he's already
taken in two tens and a five counterfeits."

"Gracious!" said Mrs. Bigsby.  "What did the poor feller do?"

"Oh, he ups and tells me, all right, after he discovered it.  And sez he: 'I've charged my
account with 'em,' sez he, 'so the Bank won't lose it.'"

"Why, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby, "ye didn't let that poor feller"--

"You hol' on!" said her brother; "business is business; but I sez to him: 'Ye oughter put it
down to Profit and Loss account.  Or perhaps we'll have a chance o' gettin' rid o' them,--not
in Noo York, where folks is sharp, but here in the country, and then ye kin credit yourself
with the amount arter you've got rid o' them.'"

"Laws!  I'm sorry ye did that, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby.

"With that he riz up," continued Dan'l, ignoring his sister, "and, takin' them counterfeit
notes from my hand, sez he: 'Them notes belong to ME now,' sez he, 'and I'm goin' to destroy
'em.'  And with that he walks over to the fire as stiff as a poker, and held them notes in
it until they were burnt clean up."

"Well, but that was honest and straightforward in him!" said Mrs. Bigsby.

"Um! but it wasn't business--and ye see"--  Dan'l paused and rubbed his chin.

"Well, go on!" said Mrs. Bigsby impatiently.

"Well, ye see, neither him nor me was very smart in detectin' counterfeits, or even knowin'
'em, and"--

"Well!  For goodness' sake, Dan'l, speak out!"

"Well--THE DUM FOOL BURNT UP THREE GOOD BILLS, and we neither of us knew it!"

V

The "unexpected" which Dan'l Borem had hinted might characterize his future conduct was first
intimated by his treatment of the "Widow Cully," an aged and impoverished woman whose property
was heavily mortgaged to him.  He had curtly summoned her to come to his office on Christmas
Day and settle up.  Frightened, hopeless, and in the face of a snowstorm, the old woman attended,
but was surprised by receiving a "satisfaction piece" in full from the banker, and a gorgeous
Christmas dinner.  "All the same," said Mrs. Bigsby to Lummox, "Dan'l might hev done all this
without frightenin' the poor old critter into a nervous fever, chillin' her through by makin'
her walk two miles through the snow, and keepin' her on the ragged edge o' despair for two
mortal hours!  But it's his humorous way."

"Did he give any reason for being so lenient to the widow?" asked Lummox.

"He said that her son had given him a core of his apple when they were boys together.  Dan'l
ez mighty thoughtful o' folks that was kind to him in them days."

"Is that all?" said Lummox, astonished.

"Well--I've kinder thought suthin' else," said Mrs. Bigsby hesitatingly.

"What?"

"That its bein' Christmas Day--and as I've heard tell that's NO DAY IN LAW, but just like Sunday--Dan'l
mebbe thought that he might crawl outer that satisfaction piece, ef he ever wanted ter!  Dan'l
is mighty cute."

VI

Mr. John Lummox was not behind his employer in developing unexpected traits of character. 
Hitherto holding aloof from his neighbors in Old Folksville, he suddenly went to a social gathering,
and distinguished himself as the principal and popular guest of the evening.  As Dan'l Borem
afterward told his sister: "He was one o' them Combination Minstrels and Variety Shows in one.
He sang through a whole opery, made the pianner jest howl, gave some recitations, Casabianker
and Betsy and I are Out; imitated all them tragedians; did tricks with cards and fetched rabbits
outer hats, besides liftin' the pianner with two men sittin' on it, jest by his teeth.  Created
snakes!" said Borem, concluding his account, which here is necessarily abbreviated, "ef he
learnt all that in his two years in Europe I ain't sayin' anythin' more agin' eddication and
furrin' travel after this!  Why, the next day there was quite a run on the Bank jest to see
HIM.  He is makin' the bizness pop'lar."

"Then ye think ye'll get along together?"

"I reckon we'll hitch hosses," said Dan'l, with a smile.

A few weeks later, one evening, Dan'l Borem sat with his sister alone. John Lummox, who was
now residing with them, was attending a social engagement.  Mrs. Bigsby knew that Dan'l had
something to communicate, but knew that he would do so in his own way.

"Speakin' o' hoss trades," he began.

"We WASN'T and we ain't goin' to," said Mrs. Bigsby with great promptness.  "I've heard enough
of 'em."

"But this here one hez suthin' to do with your fr'en', John Lummox," said Dan'l, with a chuckle.

Mrs. Bigsby stared.  "Go on, then," she said, "but, for goodness' sake, cut it short."

Dan'l threw away his quid and replenished it from his silver tobacco box.  Mrs. Bigsby shuddered
slightly as she recognized the usual preliminary to prolixity, but determined, as far as possible,
to make her brother brief.

"It mout be two weeks ago," began Dan'l, "that I see John Lummox over at Palmyra, where he'd
bin visitin'.  He was drivin' a hoss, the beautifulest critter--for color--I ever saw.  It
was yaller, with mane and tail a kinder golden, like the hair o' them British Blondes that
was here in the Variety Show."

"Dan'l!" exclaimed Mrs. Bigsby, horrified.  "And you allowed you never went thar!"

"Saw 'em on the posters--and mebbe the color was a little brighter thar," said Dan'l carelessly--"but
who's interruptin' now?"

"Go on," said Mrs. Bigsby.

"'Got a fine hoss thar,' sez I; 'reckon I never see such a purty color,' sez I.  'He is purty,'
sez he, 'per'aps too purty for ME to be a-drivin', but he isn't fast.'  'I ain't speakin' o'
that,' sez I; 'it's his looks that I'm talkin' of; whar might ye hev got him?' 'He was offered
to me by a fr'en' o' me boyhood,' sez he; 'he's a pinto mustang,' sez he, 'from Californy,
whar they breed 'em.' 'What's a pinto hoss?' sez I.  'The same ez a calico hoss,' sez he; 'what
they have in cirkises, but ye never see 'em that color.'  En he was right, for when I looked
him over I never DID see such a soft and silky coat, and his mane and tail jest glistened.
'It IS a little too showy for ye,' sez I, 'but I might take him at a fair price.  What's your
fr'en' askin'?'  'He won't sell him to anybody but me,' sez Lummox; 'he's a horror o' hoss
traders, anyway, and his price is more like a gift to a fr'en'.'  'What might that price be,
ef it's a fair question?' sez I, for the more I looked at the hoss the more I liked him.  'A
hundred and fifty dollars,' sez he; 'but my fr'en' would ask YOU double that.' 'Couldn't YOU
and ME make a trade?' sez I; 'I'll exchange ye that roan mare, that's worth two hundred, for
this hoss and fifty dollars.'  With that he drew himself up, and sez he: 'Mr. Borem,' sez he,
'I share my fr'en's opinion about hoss tradin', and I promised my mother I'd never swap hosses.
You ought to know me by this time.'"

"That's so!" said Mrs. Bigsby; "I'm wonderin' ye dared to ax him."

Dan'l passed his hand over his mouth, and continued: "'I dunno but you're right, Lummox,' sez
I; 'per'aps it's jest as well as thar wasn't TWO in the Bank in that bizness.'  But the more
I looked at the hoss the more I hankered arter him.  'Look here,' sez I, 'I tell ye what I'll
do!  I'll LEND you my hoss and you'll LEND me yourn.  I'll draw up a paper to that effect,
and provide that in case o' accidents, ef I don't return you your hoss, I'll agree to pay you
a hundred and fifty dollars.  You'll give me the same kind o' paper about my hoss--with the
proviso that you pay me two hundred for him!'  'Excuse me, Mr. Borem,' sez he, 'but that difference
of fifty makes a hoss trade accordin' to my mind.  It's agin' my principles to make such an
agreement.'"

"An' he was right, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby approvingly.

But Dan'l wiped his mouth again, leaving, however, a singular smile on it.  "Well, ez I wanted
that hoss, I jest thought and thought! I knew I could get two hundred and fifty for him easy,
and that Lummox didn't know anythin' of his valoo, and I finally agreed to make the swap even.
'What do you call him?' sez I.  'Pegasus,' sez he,--'the poet's hoss, on account o' his golden
mane,' sez he. That made me laff, for I never knew a poet ez could afford to hev a hoss,--much
less one like that! But I said: 'I'll borry Pegasus o' you on those terms.'  The next day I
took the hoss to Jonesville; Lummox was right: he wasn't FAST, but, jest as I expected, he
made a sensation!  Folks crowded round him whenever I stopped; wimmin followed him and children
cried for him.  I could hev sold him for three hundred without leavin' town!  'So ye call him
Pegasus,' sez Doc Smith, grinnin'; 'I didn't known ye was subject to the divine afflatus, Dan'l.'
'I don' offen hev it,' sez I, 'but when I do I find a little straight gin does me good.'  'So
did Byron,' sez he, chucklin'.  But even if I had called him 'Beelzebub' the hull town would
hev bin jest as crazy over him.  Well, as it was comin' on to rain I started jest after sundown
for home.  But it came ter blow, an' ter pour cats and dogs, an' I was nigh washed out o' the
buggy, besides losin' my way and gettin' inter ditches and puddles, and I hed to stop at Staples'
Half-Way House and put up for the night. In the mornin' I riz up early and goes into the stable
yard, and the first thing I sees was the 'ostler.  'I hope ye giv' my hoss a good scrub down,'
I sez, 'as I told ye, for his color is that delicate the smallest spot shows.  It's a very
rare color for a hoss.'  'I was hopin' it might be,' sez he.  I was a little huffed at that,
and I sez: 'It's considered a very beautiful color.' 'Mebbe it is,' sez he, 'but I never cared
much for fireworks.' 'What yer mean?' sez I.  'Look here, Squire!' sez he; 'I don't mind scourin'
and rubbin' down a hoss that will stay the same color TWICE, but when he gets to playin' a
kaladeoskope on me, I kick!' 'Trot him out,' sez I, beginnin' to feel queer.  With that he
fetched out the hoss!  For a minit I hed to ketch on to the fence to keep myself from fallin'.
I swonny! ef he didn't look like a case of measles on top o' yaller fever--'cept where the
harness had touched him, and that was kinder stenciled out all over him.  Thar was places whar
the 'ostler had washed down to the foundation color, a kind o' chewed licorice!  Then I knew
that somebody had bin sold terrible, and I reckoned it might be me!  But I said nothin' to
the 'ostler, and waited until dark, when I drove him over here, and put him in the stables,
lettin' no one see him.  In the mornin' Lummox comes to me, and sez he: 'I'm glad to see you
back,' sez he, 'for my conscience is troublin' me about that hoss agreement; it looks too much
like a hoss trade,' sez he, 'and I'm goin' to send the hoss back.'  'Mebbe your conscience,'
sez I, 'may trouble you a little more ef you'll step this way;' and with that I takes his arm
and leads him round to the stable and brings out the hoss.

"Well, Lummox never changes ez much as a hair, ez he puts up his eyeglasses.  'I'm not good
at what's called "Pop'lar Art,"' sez he. 'Is it a chromo, or your own work?' sez he, critical like.

"'It's YOUR HOSS,' sez I.

"He looks at me a minit and then drors a paper from his pocket. 'This paper,' sez he in his
quiet way, 'was drored up by you and is a covenant to return to me a yaller hoss with golden
mane and tail--or a hundred and fifty dollars.  Ez I don't see the hoss anywhere--mebbe you've
got the hundred and fifty dollars handy?' sez he. 'Suppose I hadn't the money?' sez I.  'I
should be obliged,' sez he in a kind o' pained Christian-martyr way, 'ter sell YOUR hoss for
two hundred, and send the money to my fr'en'.'  We looked at each other steddy for a minit
and then I counts him out a hundred and fifty.  He took the money sad-like and then sez: 'Mr.
Borem,' sez he, 'this is a great morril lesson to us,' and went back to the office.  In the
arternoon I called in an old hoss dealer that I knew and shows him Pegasus.

"'He wants renewin',' sez he.

"'Wot's that?' sez I.

"'A few more bottles o' that British Blonde Hair Dye to set him up ag'in.  That's wot they
allus do in the cirkis, whar he kem from.'

"Then I went back to the office and I took down my sign.  'What's that you re doin'?' sez Lummox,
with a sickly kind o' smile.  'Are you goin' out o' the bizness?'

"'No, I'm only goin' to change that sign from "Dan'l Borem" to "Borem and Lummox,"' sez I.
'I've concluded it's cheaper for me to take you inter partnership now than to continue in this
way, which would only end in your hevin' to take me in later.  I preferred to DO IT FUST.'"

VII

A rich man, and settled in business, John Lummox concluded that he would marry Mary Bike. 
With that far-sighted logic which had always characterized him he reasoned that, having first
met her on a liner, he would find her again on one if he took passage to Europe.  He did--but
she was down on the passenger list as Mrs. Edwin Wraggles.  The result of their interview was
given to Mrs. Bigsby by Dan'l Borem in his own dialect.

"Ez far as I kin see, it was like the Deacon's Sunday hoss trade, bein' all 'Ef it wassent.'
'Ef ye wasn't Mrs. Wraggles,' sez Lummox, sez he, 'I'd be tellin' ye how I've loved ye ever
sence I first seed ye.  Ef ye wasn't Mrs. Wraggles, I'd be squeezin' yer hand,' sez he; 'ef
ye wasn't Mrs. Wraggles, I'd be askin' ye to marry me.'  Then the gal ups and sez, sez she:
'But I AIN'T Mrs. Wraggles,' sez she; 'Mrs. Wraggles is my sister, and couldn't come, so I'm
travelin' on her ticket, and that's how my name is Wraggles on the passenger list.'  'But why
didn't ye tell me so at once?' sez Lummox.  'This is an episoode o' protracted humor,' sez
she, 'and I'M bound to have a show in it somehow!'"

"Well!" said Mrs. Bigsby breathlessly; "then he DID marry her?"

"Darned ef I know.  He never said so straight out--but that's like Lummox."

STORIES THREE

BY R-DY--D K-PL--G

I

FOR SIMLA REASONS

Some people say that improbable things don't necessarily happen in India--but these people
never find improbabilities anywhere.  This sounds clever, but you will at once perceive that
it really means the opposite of what I intended to say.  So we'll drop it.  What I am trying
to tell you is that after Sparkley had that affair with Miss Millikens a singular change came
over him.  He grew abstracted and solitary,--holding dark seances with himself,--which was
odd, as everybody knew he never cared a rap for the Millikens girl.  It was even said that
he was off his head--which is rhyme.  But his reason was undoubtedly affected, for he had been
heard to mutter incoherently at the Club, and, strangest of all, to answer questions THAT WERE
NEVER ASKED!  This was so awkward in that Branch of the Civil Department of which he was a
high official--where the rule was exactly the reverse--that he was presently invalided on full
pay!  Then he disappeared.  Clever people said it was because the Department was afraid he
had still much to answer for; stupid people simply envied him.

Mrs. Awksby, whom everybody knew had been the cause of breaking off the match, was now wild
to know the reason of Sparkley's retirement.  She attacked heaven and earth, and even went
a step higher--to the Viceroy. At the vice-regal ball I saw, behind the curtains of a window,
her rolling violet-blue eyes with a singular glitter in them.  It was the reflection of the
Viceroy's star, although the rest of his Excellency was hidden in the curtain.  I heard him
saying, "Come now! really, now, you are--you know you are!" in reply to her cooing questioning.
Then she made a dash at me and captured me.

"What did you hear?"

"Nothing I should not have heard."

"Don't be like all the other men--you silly boy!" she answered.  "I was only trying to find
out something about Sparkley.  And I will find it out too," she said, clinching her thin little
hand.  "And what's more," she added, turning on me suddenly, "YOU shall help me!"

"I?" I said in surprise.

"Don't pretend!" she said poutingly.  "You're too clever to believe he's cut up over the Millikens.
No--it's something awful or--another woman!  Now, if I knew as much of India as you do--and
wasn't a woman, and could go where I liked--I'd go to Bungloore and find him."

"Oh! You have his address?" I said.

"Certainly!  What did you expect I was behind the curtain with the Viceroy for?" she said,
opening her violet eyes innocently.  "It's Bungloore--First Turning to the Right--At the End
of the passage."

Bungloore--near Ghouli Pass--in the Jungle!  I knew the place, a spot of dank pestilence and
mystery.  "You never could have gone there," I said.

"You do not know WHAT I could do for a FRIEND," she said sweetly, veiling her eyes in demure
significance.

"Oh, come off the roof!" I said bluntly.

She could be obedient when it was necessary.  She came off.  Not without her revenge.  "Try
to remember you are not at school with the Stalkies," she said, and turned away.

I went to Bungloore,--not on her account, but my own.  If you don't know India, you won't know
Bungloore.  It's all that and more.  An egg dropped by a vulture, sat upon and addled by the
Department. But I knew the house and walked boldly in.  A lion walked out of one door as I
came in at another.  We did this two or three times--and found it amusing.  A large cobra in
the hall rose up, bowed as I passed, and respectfully removed his hood.

I found the poor old boy at the end of the passage.  It might have been the passage between
Calais and Dover,--he looked so green, so limp and dejected.  I affected not to notice it,
and threw myself in a chair.

He gazed at me for a moment and then said, "Did you hear what the chair was saying?"

It was an ordinary bamboo armchair, and had creaked after the usual fashion of bamboo chairs.
I said so.

He cast his eyes to the ceiling.  "He calls it 'creaking,'" he murmured.  "No matter," he continued
aloud, "its remark was not of a complimentary nature.  It's very difficult to get really polite
furniture."

The man was evidently stark, staring mad.  I still affected not to observe it, and asked him
if that was why he left Simla.

"There were Simla reasons, certainly," he replied.  "But you think I came here for solitude!
SOLITUDE!" he repeated, with a laugh. "Why, I hold daily conversations with any blessed thing
in this house, from the veranda to the chimney-stack, with any stick of furniture, from the
footstool to the towel-horse.  I get more out of it than the gabble at the Club.  You look
surprised.  Listen!  I took this thing up in my leisure hours in the Department.  I had read
much about the conversation of animals.  I argued that if animals conversed, why shouldn't
inanimate things communicate with each other?  You cannot prove that animals don't converse--neither
can you prove that inanimate objects DO NOT.  See?"

I was thunderstruck with the force of his logic.

"Of course," he continued, "there are degrees of intelligence, and that makes it difficult.
For instance, a mahogany table would not talk like a rush-bottomed kitchen chair."  He stopped
suddenly, listened, and replied, "I really couldn't say."

"I didn't speak," I said.

"I know YOU didn't.  But your chair asked me 'how long that fool was going to stay.'  I replied
as you heard.  Pray don't move--I intend to change that chair for one more accustomed to polite
society.  To continue: I perfected myself in the language, and it was awfully jolly at first.
Whenever I went by train, I heard not only all the engines said, but what every blessed carriage
thought, that joined in the conversation.  If you chaps only knew what rot those whistles can
get off!  And as for the brakes, they can beat any mule driver in cursing. Then, after a time,
it got rather monotonous, and I took a short sea trip for my health.  But, by Jove, every blessed
inch of the whole ship--from the screw to the bowsprit--had something to say, and the bad language
used by the garboard strake when the ship rolled was something too awful!  You don't happen
to know what the garboard strake is, do you?"

"No," I replied.

"No more do I.  That's the dreadful thing about it.  You've got to listen to chaps that you
don't know.  Why, coming home on my bicycle the other day there was an awful row between some
infernal 'sprocket' and the 'ball bearings' of the machine, and I never knew before there were
such things in the whole concern."

I thought I had got at his secret, and said carelessly: "Then I suppose this was the reason
why you broke off your engagement with Miss Millikens?"

"Not at all," he said coolly.  "Nothing to do with it.  That is quite another affair.  It's
a very queer story; would you like to hear it?"

"By all means."  I took out my notebook.

"You remember that night of the Amateur Theatricals, got up by the White Hussars, when the
lights suddenly went out all over the house?"

"Yes," I replied, "I heard about it."

"Well, I had gone down there that evening with the determination of proposing to Mary Millikens
the first chance that offered.  She sat just in front of me, her sister Jane next, and her
mother, smart Widow Millikens,--who was a bit larky on her own account, you remember,--the
next on the bench.  When the lights went out and the panic and tittering began, I saw my chance!
I leaned forward, and in a voice that would just reach Mary's ear I said, 'I have long wished
to tell you how my life is bound up with you, dear, and I never, never can be happy without
you'--when just then there was a mighty big shove down my bench from the fellows beyond me,
who were trying to get out.  But I held on like grim death, and struggled back again into position,
and went on: 'You'll forgive my taking a chance like this, but I felt I could no longer conceal
my love for you,' when I'm blest if there wasn't another shove, and though I'd got hold of
her little hand and had a kind of squeeze in return, I was drifted away again and had to fight
my way back.  But I managed to finish, and said, 'If the devotion of a lifetime will atone
for this hurried avowal of my love for you, let me hope for a response,' and just then the
infernal lights were turned on, and there I was holding the widow's hand and she nestling on
my shoulder, and the two girls in hysterics on the other side.  You see, I never knew that
they were shoved down on their bench every time, just as I was, and of course when I got back
to where I was I'd just skipped one of them each time!  Yes, sir!  I had made that proposal
in THREE sections--a part to each girl, winding up with the mother!  No explanation was possible,
and I left Simla next day.  Naturally, it wasn't a thing they could talk about, either!"

"Then you think Mrs. Awksby had nothing to do with it?" I said.

"Nothing--absolutely nothing.  By the way, if you see that lady, you might tell her that I
have possession of that brocade easy-chair which used to stand in the corner of her boudoir.
You remember it,--faded white and yellow, with one of the casters off and a little frayed at
the back, but rather soft-spoken and amiable?  But of course you don't understand THAT.  I
bought it after she moved into her new bungalow."

"But why should I tell her that?" I asked in wonder.

"Nothing--except that I find it very amusing with its reminiscences of the company she used
to entertain, and her confidences generally. Good-by--take care of the lion in the hall.  He
always couches on the left for a spring.  Ta-ta!"

I hurried away.  When I returned to Simla I told Mrs. Awksby of my discoveries, and spoke of
the armchair.

I fancied she colored slightly, but quickly recovered.

"Dear old Sparkley," she said sweetly; "he WAS a champion liar!"

II.

A PRIVATE'S HONOR

I had not seen Mulledwiney for several days.  Knowing the man--this looked bad.  So I dropped
in on the Colonel.  I found him in deep thought.  This looked bad, too, for old Cockey Wax--as
he was known to everybody in the Hill districts but himself--wasn't given to thinking. I guessed
the cause and told him so.

"Yes," he said wearily, "you are right!  It's the old story. Mulledwiney, Bleareyed, and Otherwise
are at it again,--drink followed by Clink.  Even now two corporals and a private are sitting
on Mulledwiney's head to keep him quiet, and Bleareyed is chained to an elephant."

"Perhaps," I suggested, "you are unnecessarily severe."

"Do you really think so?  Thank you so much!  I am always glad to have a civilian's opinion
on military matters--and vice versa--it broadens one so!  And yet--am I severe? "What are you doing now in Podolin" she asked, startled from her reverie. "It's
still cold outside. Have you stopped to work and make you vacation? I would like even know
even know what it is like to have vacation. "

Unpleasantly touched by her voice as by what she said, "said Arnold,
the holidays a lady would begin probably in Heaven.

Anna Borromeo's lips twisted into arrogance. She leaned forward, placed a hand on the Arnold,
and her eyes were emerald green, as she replied: "Can you with my
heart Dreams?

No. There is only one single moment, which I am daily, namely who, if I extinguish the lights
at night. "

Arnold shrugged and said he must hurry.

When he wanted to go, came Borromeo.

Anna Arnold told him of plans. He stopped and shook his head, then he asked Arnold, when he wanted
to travel. Now, in an hour. "Then I'll walk to the station, if It's all right. "

"Certainly."

Arnold gave his pack a wagon, while he himself with his uncle went on foot. "How long you want to stay?
"said Borromeo. "And why are you going anyway? Pull it up or down do you have a specific purpose?
It is a bad season. "

The soft, velvety essence of this man lacked all signs of living together outside. But his demeanor
was such a shy, seemingly unconscious clinging to the person Arnold, surprised that this was all
about. Until shortly before the departure of the train remained Borromeo rather quiet, in
the final minutes, he was talkative at once and gave advice and opinions in regard to the management
in Podolin. The train began to move and Borromeo waited until the station hall was empty.

The stormy weather had remained unchanged, as Arnold in the morning twilight of the station went
to Podolin. The car groaned in Straßenkot and on the Gravel, and the fields were without form, and
the fog shrouded the forest. Ursula was not a little surprised about the arrival the young
master. The Bohemian administrator, who was employed since the summer, stood with bared Head
at the gate. His red face was frozen expressed slavish deference. Ursula wanted to submit invoices
and complete the correspondence reports of the administrator, but Arnold meant to her that
he wanted nothing to do with time being.

"They are bigger and more beautiful become, "said Ursula and admired his clothes, changed its
course, - no escape its harmless observation. But their behavior changed after the first hour.
On First she tried the old rumbling sound playful Befehlshaberei adopt again, but They soon
realized that he was not sure was received. From that moment she saw a distant, cold Mr. Arnold
was in and a stranger. They surrounded him with a cloud of respect, all of which living memory veiled grumpy.

Arnold
rested for a short period of driving.

From well-known he took a cup of breakfast; everything expected of
him to new and small.

The room was small, bare and bleak. The windows were as tiny slits, furniture and equipment from
uncomfortable poverty. Arnold smiled in themselves into it like an old man who thinks of his
youth. As he walked through the front garden, to go over to Podolin, he thought about how he would
take it, if he stay here would be forced. He shook such a concept piece from itself.

Forty-Third Chapter

Nevertheless, when walking across the meadows trembled a breath after that mighty movement which
it once driven away from this plane, like the breeze that from a distant hurricane has lost
in quieter regions. He rejoiced in the vast sky, the clouds, a thin Blue began to give way, he
stopped dreaming on the banks of the river and blackish amused at the screeching of the crows. Are there
more pleasant tones, he thought, when traveling on, as the softly
gurgling of water in the meadows?

The prying eyes of the Podoliner excited his hilarity. He was surprised, each cottage still
be found on his spot, looking from doorway to doorway with a smile and walked over the Square up
against the churchyard. The butcher Uravar stood in the doorway of his shop, as if he was all
the time had not moved through from there. The spider was still in wait. Arnold stopped and
gave a friendly nod, and it seemed to him that he would always friendly Relations to the man
talk. Uravar stared and made a respectful compliment.

Still lay the cemetery, the wooden crosses were of wind and weather wrong, withered and broken.
From here, was the widest view of the plane, the first in the distance mountainous forms accepted
and smooth as a vast bay hindehnte. The grave of the woman lay on Ansorge an outcrop of the fortress-like
charges and limited space.

A simple stone adorned the hill. Arnold leaned back against the low wall-mount and examined
the to recreate the form of the dead. But it interfered too much into it experienced, colorful
Tails grasped the meaning and only dim, barely the border edge of the grave was a noble outline
visible. Arnold did not expect that he had not believed that he so alone here would. When
he turned towards the door, he saw quite a Angle between the church and down walls, a rain
faded, small grave stone, in the the faded photograph of a beautiful, proud-looking man entered
an appearance and by a hidden piece of glass was. On the surface of the stone read: Fumagalli,
circus rider from Milan. # Times chi fa tanta Fè obblia. #

Arnold smiled. How did Mr. Fumagalli be advised to Podolin? Never before, he had the ancient stone
with the sweet and lovely portrait noticed. With difficulty he deciphered the meaning of the
Italian words: bad for those who forget so much loyalty. A strange sadness seized him, loyalty, this
seemed really the essence of all life and cohesion to mean anything good, and as if to protect
itself against a self-reproach, called he and his inner voice, the name of Verena. accompanied
him on the way back her beautified Image and when he was home, he felt desire for her a thousand
times and wondered why they have gone. It seemed certain that he would see her in town again,
and the Solitude in which he had placed himself came to him like
a voluntary self-examination.

In the courtyard waiting for a young peasant woman.

She immediately ran to Arnold and flowed from her lips an incomprehensible torrent of words.
Only gradually was able to Arnold to bring out what It was a question. The young person was the wife of
the cottager Kubu, a former railway staff and had been taken over the past five years the economy
of his father. Because of a Tax arrears of sixty guilders had been seized him a couple of young
steers and today he had received the news that the two animals had to be auctioned if no tax pay
cash. To this money and the woman begged, swore by the Mother of God, that she would pay it back
at harvest properly.

Arnold, too much occupied with its internal state, but voted soft, but only for himself, dismissed
the woman, whose noisy fuss it was not pleasant. She stood still for a while with a gloomy,
the earth is turned face and Arnold went into the house.

When he made the next morning after his walk Podolin to letters to the post office to , Who he
saw before one of the first farms are a lot of people whose faces passionate Excitement betrayed.
Behind the fence of the court were six policemen. Arnold wanted a surveys of farmers, but a
fat man with gold spectacles came up to him and asked, short of breath, whether he was Mr.
Anson and whether the wife of the Kubu had been with him yesterday to borrow money. He was
the train Expeditor and have previously been located in the Kubu, which an ordinary Man would be.
"If this is the property of the Kubu?" Arnold asked about it.

The Expeditor told that at twelve clock of the control-executor of the Kubu Sobielska accompanied
two gendarmes appeared. Kubu locked to the stable and told the Commission that he The oxen would
not pass. He had eight years of paying the taxes correctly currently he is but because of the
bad harvest of last year not able to pay. He offered to house and home as security and added,
without the cattle, I am a dead man's wife promised that she would borrow the money from their
sponsors and they asked with raised hands prolongation of order. It was in vain. The executor decided:
either pay or the oxen her!

Kubu cried, I admit it is not her, I would rather go the same basis, except that I later with
my family perish. The whole village were gathered together and took a threatening Attitude. Sobielska
was sent for further police and waited until they came. They turned against Kubu to tie him.
It did not succeed. A policeman drew his sword now. The woman threw herself at him and pleaded,
not on the head! She started on the beat, the the Kubu of modest means and was so hurt by the
hand, that a finger only on the skin hung. Then put all the police on two meters away from Kubu
and cried to him: they would shoot if he did not surrender. As Kubu bleed saw his wife, he jumped
in the stable, seized a pitchfork and shouted out, the Ox can only over my dead body be. The
woman snatched the pitchfork, stood before him and covered him on against the him storming police.
Finally it was the men to pull the woman from the cottagers and to tie him. The executor untied
the seized oxen and left them with four policemen .

Continued drive

While Arnold all heard this, he was so pale that the Expeditor asked if he feel sick. Arnold took
out his wallet from his coat, counted out seventy guilders, presented them to the Expeditor and
said, "Enter the the tax officials, and I'll pay for the cottagers. Two guilders I get back. "The kindhearted
Expeditor seemed very pleased and expressed Arnold moves the hand. Even among the Podolinern
the news spread by the generosity the young squire. Several crowded to him and called out to
him words of appreciation. Arnold had to think back to another day, then he had wanted them to
sacrifice his whole being, and they had stones thrown at him, and today they cheered him on
late seventy Florins. He began to understand this and unreasoning hate gang bitter. But he cheated
with this feeling. His carrier has become one heart felt pain of
shame that allows the Mind told not and could not tell.

On a lonely road that led over to the forest, was Arnold and murmured
with a Expression of wonder and enlightenment uncanny: "It should
be possible," He Imagine a tree and stared at the bark.

Then suddenly he began the real reason suspect of Verena's flight. He walked a few steps up
to the edge of the forest and sat are felled a tree trunk. Yes, he understood. No longer appeared
to him as a misunderstanding, which so clearly showed the face of a fate. But gradually he was
looking for but, to .

Defend The deep and serious, which assigned him terribly light for
a moment, made vague hopes of space and solitude of the forest moved
him because he touched his grief.

No sound broke the silence. White, broad, gently rising curved, the road hill ward higher
and buried itself as its own power through the thicket of trunks and low bushes. Arnold felt
a desire for comfort, peace and lightheadedness.

The next day it rained, and the second day. Arnold turned to Ursula in the kitchen yawn and said,
"What one start in such weather!"

"Tell me. How do you like living in the city, "asked the old woman.

"Yes, that's something for themselves, Ursula. Of these, one is never finished. It's a hell
roundabout. Since is it on eyes. Every day brings something new. Here you never know whether
it morning, noon or Evening. But there, between soup and dessert, the world is different, and
who sit still like that has to jump and dance. "

"But if it rains, there's also wet. This is not a difference, "said Ursula.

Arnold made a cunning face. "If it rains or snows," he said, "it is realized not in the city
because all the streets and squares have glass roofs and furnaces. It is always warm and dry.
"

Ursula replied angrily and uncertainty, "an old woman can tell you
that the weaver makes the potatoes.

"

Arnold stood in the door.

A desperate weather, he thought, and spiced this monotonous Observation with a humorous sigh. He decided,
in spite of the rain after Podolin to go. When he had come down to the main square, he had to
seek protection in a hallway, for a real downpour the Progressing impossible. A curved shape,
with black Leather pack on his back, fled in. also, the package was based on the Wall paragraph
and wiped her wet face and dripping beard. Arnold recognized élass. The Jew held out his hand
and his face beamed with pleasure as he recognized him had. "Oh my lord," he said. "Right now
I'm me does, it is a known Face. If you are back here now? Un where you were on time? "

"Yes, I'm here," Arnold said lukewarm and embarrassed. "How are you?"

"No, let it live. You have to just to keep. The whip must drive a man's. " He laughed.

Arnold was silent and looked tense in the thick rain.

He would like the protected space leave, because it disturbed the musty smell that emanated from
the Jews and of foul ground. Arnold was a question on the tongue, but it was not possible
to ask him. He felt as am a believer before him, who failed to do so out of delicacy, to remind
him, and he said to himself: I will pay it soon, sooner than he thinks.

At

last, dilute the flow of water. Arnold nodded and returned hastily to the peddler back home.

Forty-fourth chapter

The following day was a bright spring day.

The sky was the earth, nor a thorough Washing submitted before he
pulled her dress over the spring that still shivering shoulders.

Arnold's mood improved, and his wanderlust awoke, and he walked for
hours on long known and novel ways.

When he rested somewhere or in a village for milk and cheese its
Hunger appeased, he took a book from his pocket, because he could
not long be idle throughout sit or lie.

Sometimes impatience took hold of his senses. The solitude of the fields then it was oppressive and
meaningless.

Nuisance to him seemed the picture of the landscape, the soft, shadowy full valleys just lowered
no deeper than a plate under his Edge, the dirty farms, the scanty
grass of the meadows, the uncomfortable east wind, the curious children
in the villages. Unrest flared up in him.

On Palm Sunday, he went
through Podolin back home. He had not yet the main square achieved,
as someone with a deep voice called out his name. He turned and saw
Alexander Hanka approaching. 

"I heard only yesterday that you are
here, and" through the letter carrier, said Hanka Arnold's hand and
pressed it with warmth and joy. He seemed larger than his figure had
become even more gaunt, his face longer and colorless, and the black
eyes had a Expression of perfect seriousness.

Arnold joy to watch
again, Hanka, was not entirely free from bias. "Where are you from?"
he asked. "Where were you so long?"

"I was in Rome, Sicily and Tunis,"
reported Hank, "and now I'm here because my Sister is ill. "

"Really?
What it lacks, then? "

Hanka shrugged his shoulders. "The nerves,
the blood."

"Stay here long?" He asked. "Is not you bored?"

Arnold
shook his head and smiled. "I never get bored," he said.

"That is
a big word," said Hank, nodding thoughtfully. "As for me, I get bored
me in an excellent way. "

The general sluggishness, heraufbrummte
with the O Hanka made from the entrails, Arnold . Laugh

"Ha!" roared McFeckless, springing to his feet, "ye will be using such language of the bonniest"--

"You will excuse me, gentlemen," said Sir Midas,--who hated scenes unless he had a trusted
reporter with him,--"but I think it is time for me to go upstairs and put on my Windsor uniform,
which I find exceedingly convenient for these mixed assemblies."  He withdrew, caressing his
protuberant paunch with some dignity, as the two men glanced fiercely at each other.

In another moment they might have sprung at each other's throats. But luckily at this instant
a curtain was pushed aside as if by some waiting listener, and a thin man entered, dressed
in cap and gown,--which would have been simply academic but for his carrying in one hand behind
him a bundle of birch twigs.  It was Dr. Haustus Pilgrim, a noted London practitioner and specialist,
dressed as "Ye Olde-fashioned Pedagogue."  He was presumably spending his holiday on the Nile
in a large dahabiyeh with a number of friends, among whom he counted the two momentary antagonists
he had just interrupted; but those who knew the doctor's far-reaching knowledge and cryptic
researches believed he had his own scientific motives.

The two men turned quickly as he entered; the angry light faded from their eyes, and an awed
and respectful submission to the intruder took its place.  He walked quietly toward them, put
a lozenge in the mouth of one and felt the pulse of the other, gazing critically at both.

"We will be all right in a moment," he said with professional confidence.

"I say!" said Fitz-Fulke, gazing at the doctor's costume, "you look dooced smart in those togs,
don'tcherknow."

"They suit me," said the doctor, with a playful swish of his birch twigs, at which the two
grave men shuddered.  "But you were speaking of somebody's beautiful eyes."

"The Princess Zut-Ski's," returned McFeckless eagerly; "and this daft callant said"--

"He didn't like them," put in Fitz-Fulke promptly.

"Ha!" said the doctor sharply, "and why not, sir?"  As Fitz-Fulke hesitated, he added brusquely:
"There!  Run away and play!  I've business with this young man," pointing to McFeckless.

As Fitz-Fulke escaped gladly from the room, the doctor turned to McFeckless.  "It won't do,
my boy.  The Princess is not for you--you'll only break your heart and ruin your family over
her!  That's my advice. Chuck her!"

"But I cannot," said McFeckless humbly.  "Think of her weirdly beautiful eyes."

"I see," said the doctor meditatively; "sort of makes you feel creepy? Kind of all-overishness,
eh?  That's like her.  But whom have we here?"

He was staring at a striking figure that had just entered, closely followed by a crowd of admiring
spectators.  And, indeed, he seemed worthy of the homage.  His magnificent form was closely
attired in a velveteen jacket and trousers, with a singular display of pearl buttons along
the seams, that were absolutely lavish in their quantity; a hat adorned with feathers and roses
completed his singularly picturesque equipment.

"Chevalier!" burst out McFeckless in breathless greeting.

"Ah, mon ami!  What good chance?" returned the newcomer, rushing to him and kissing him on
both cheeks, to the British horror of Sir Midas, who had followed.  "Ah, but you are perfect!"
he added, kissing his fingers in admiration of McFeckless's Florentine dress.

"But you?--what is this ravishing costume?" asked McFeckless, with a pang of jealousy.  "You
are god-like."

"It is the dress of what you call the Koster, a transplanted Phenician tribe," answered the
other.  "They who knocked 'em in the road of Old Kent--know you not the legend?"  As he spoke,
he lifted his superb form to a warrior's height and gesture.

"But is this quite correct?" asked Fitz-Fulke of the doctor.

"Perfectly," said the doctor oracularly.  "The renowned ''Arry Axes'--I beg his pardon," he
interrupted himself hastily, "I mean the Chevalier--is perfect in his archaeology and ethnology.
The Koster is originally a Gypsy, which is but a corruption of the word 'Egyptian,' and, if
I mistake not, that gentleman is a lineal descendant."

"But he is called 'Chevalier,' and he speaks like a Frenchman," said Fluffy.

"And, being a Frenchman, of course knows nothing outside of Paris," said Sir Midas.

"We are in the Land of Mystery," said the doctor gravely in a low voice.  "You have heard of
the Egyptian Hall and the Temple of Mystery?"

A shudder passed through many that were there; but the majority were following with wild adulation
the superb Koster, who, with elbows slightly outward and hands turned inward, was passing toward
the ballroom.  McFeckless accompanied him with conflicting emotions.  Would he see the incomparable
Princess, who was lovelier and even still more a mystery than the Chevalier?  Would she--terrible
thought!--succumb to his perfections?

III

The Princess was already there, surrounded by a crowd of admirers, equal if not superior to
those who were following the superb Chevalier. Indeed, they met almost as rivals!  Their eyes
sought each other in splendid competition.  The Chevalier turned away, dazzled and incoherent.
"She is adorable, magnificent!" he gasped to McFeckless. "I love her on the instant!  Behold,
I am transported, ravished! Present me."

Indeed, as she stood there in a strange gauzy garment of exquisite colors, apparently shapeless,
yet now and then revealing her perfect figure like a bather seen through undulating billows,
she was lovely. Two wands were held in her taper fingers, whose mystery only added to the general
curiosity, but whose weird and cabalistic uses were to be seen later. It was a very elegant and expensive house, But
Arnold had got the desire to eat good and rare things. Such drives were for him in the air.
It gave him pleasure to watch a waiter, who snapped together in front of him like a knife. As he sat
at the table, he saw over on the opposite wall Maxim Specht and Beatrice. Specht greeted with
a cold careless tilt of his head. Two Diamond rings sparkled on his hand, and a pea-sized bead
stuck in his tie. Beatrice was wearing a light green cloth dress in the English style. Her face
was extremely pale, tired, drawn out and had the expression of a mask-like, cold decency.
As Arnold said hello, they just laughed in his face. Woodpecker seemed to struggle internally;
he whispered to Beatrice, after a while he came over and squeezed the hand of Arnold. He showed
a malicious formality in his manner.

"It seems to you good to go?" Said Arnold. His face looked any unnecessary approximation in advance
dismissed.

"I am now the editor of the needle blade," Specht told and took a slight bow Place. "Also you have
much success, as I hear," he continued, and laid his head slightly questioning against a shoulder.
"They have speculated advantageously in the Bulgarian pension, is
told themselves.

"

Arnold put his trout apart and scrape the white meat carefully from the bones. He smiled.

"By the way I have to" tell you something, Maxim woodpecker suddenly said in a cheerful animations,
"And it's good that I'll meet you. A very eerie parallel story, as you soon 'll see. I had arranged
with a small company of actors. We wanted eat after the theater in the basement and Stephan had
ordered a separated small room. I telephone in the afternoon, and the head waiter to tell me
of the number of the room. The Theatre is over, I go, the waiter who knows me very well, let
me pass, and I hear a noise from far our society. As I passed the accident, I must forget the
room number that I now see and open the wrong door, who believe You?

The young Baron Valescott and - "

"Not more woodpecker," said Arnold imperiously and put the fork on the table.

Specht lowered the high-arched eyelids and said, "names are frowned upon, you are right. But
I hope you understand me. I later saw the same lady, wrapped up tightly in a opaque veil, it
was midnight when they left. Baron Valescott had the Kellner asked
and was very upset about the stupid mistake that had happened to me.
I I just thought, you could make here as successful as it was the
truth man Hanka opposite.

She was indeed alone, in the centre of the ballroom--with outstretched arms revolving in an
occult, weird, dreamy, mystic, druidical, cabalistic circle.  They now for the first time perceived
the meaning of those strange wands which appeared to be attached to the many folds of her diaphanous
skirts and involved her in a fleecy, whirling cloud. Yet in the wild convolutions of her garments
and the mad gyrations of her figure, her face was upturned with the seraphic intensity of a
devotee, and her lips parted as with the impassioned appeal for "Light! more light!"  And the
appeal was answered.  A flood of blue, crimson, yellow, and green radiance was alternately
poured upon her from the black box of a mysterious Nubian slave in the gallery.  The effect
was marvelous; at one moment she appeared as a martyr in a sheet of flame, at another as an
angel wrapped in white and muffled purity, and again as a nymph of the cerulean sea, and then
suddenly a cloud of darkness seemed to descend upon her, through which for an instant her figure,
as immaculate and perfect as a marble statue, showed distinctly--then the light went out and
she vanished!

The whole assembly burst into a rapturous cry.  Even the common Arab attendants who were peeping
in at the doors raised their melodious native cry, "Alloe, Fullah!  Aloe, Fullah!" again and again.

A shocked silence followed.  Then the voice of Sir Midas Pyle was heard addressing Dr. Haustus
Pilgrim:

"May we not presume, sir, that what we have just seen is not unlike that remarkable exhibition
when I was pained to meet you one evening at the Alhambra?"

The doctor coughed slightly.  "The Alhambra--ah, yes!--you--er--refer, I presume, to Granada
and the Land of the Moor, where we last met.  The music and dance are both distinctly Moorish--which,
after all, is akin to the Egyptian.  I am gratified indeed that your memory should be so retentive
and your archaeological comparison so accurate.  But see! the ladies are retiring.  Let us follow."

IV

The intoxication produced by the performance of the Princess naturally had its reaction.  The
British moral soul, startled out of its hypocrisy the night before, demanded the bitter beer
of self-consciousness and remorse the next morning.  The ladies were now openly shocked at
what they had secretly envied.  Lady Pyle was, however, propitiated by the doctor's assurance
that the Princess was a friend of Lady Fitz-Fulke, who had promised to lend her youthful age
and aristocratic prestige to the return ball which the Princess had determined to give at her
own home.  "Still, I think the Princess open to criticism," said Sir Midas oracularly.

"Damn all criticism and critics!" burst out McFeckless, with the noble frankness of a passionate
and yet unfettered soul.  Sir Midas, who employed critics in his business, as he did other
base and ignoble slaves, drew up himself and his paunch and walked away.

The Chevalier cast a superb look at McFeckless.  "Voila!  Regard me well!  I shall seek out
this Princess when she is with herself! Alone, comprenez?  I shall seek her at her hotel in
the Egyptian Hall!  Ha! ha!  I shall seek Zut-Ski!  Zut!"  And he made that rapid yet graceful
motion of his palm against his thigh known only to the true Parisian.

"It's a rum hole where she lives, and nobody gets a sight of her," said Flossy.  "It's like
a beastly family vault, don't you know, outside, and there's a kind of nigger doorkeeper that
vises you and chucks you out if you haven't the straight tip.  I'll show you the way, if you like."

"Allons, en avant!" said the Chevalier gayly.  "I precipitate myself there on the instant."

"Remember!" hissed McFeckless, grasping his arm, "you shall account to me!"

"Bien!" said the Chevalier, shaking him off lightly.  "All a-r-r-right."  Then, in that incomparable
baritone, which had so often enthralled thousands, he moved away, trolling the first verse
of the Princess's own faint, sweet, sad song of the "Lotus Lily," that thrilled McFeckless
even through the Chevalier's marked French accent:--

     "Oh, a hard zing to get is ze Lotus Lillee!
      She lif in ze swamp--in ze watair chillee;
      She make your foot wet--and you look so sillee,
      But you buy her for sixpence in Piccadillee!"

In half an hour the two men reached the remote suburb where the Princess lived, a gloomy, windowless
building.  Pausing under a low archway over which in Egyptian characters appeared the faded
legend, "Sta Ged Oor," they found a Nubian slave blocking the dim entrance.

"I leave you here," said Flossy hurriedly, "as even I left once before--only then I was lightly
assisted by his sandaled foot," he added, rubbing himself thoughtfully.  "But better luck to you."

As his companion retreated swiftly, the Chevalier turned to the slave and would have passed
in, but the man stopped him.  "Got a pass, boss?"

"No," said the Chevalier.

The man looked at him keenly.  "Oh, I see! one of de profesh."

The Chevalier nodded haughtily.  The man preceded him by devious, narrow ways and dark staircases,
coming abruptly upon a small apartment where the Princess sat on a low divan.  A single lamp
inclosed in an ominous wire cage flared above her.  Strange things lay about the floor and
shelves, and from another door he could see hideous masks, frightful heads, and disproportionate
faces.  He shuddered slightly, but recovered himself and fell on his knees before her.  "I
lofe you," he said madly.  "I have always lofed you!"

"For how long?" she asked, with a strange smile.

He covertly consulted his shirt cuff.  "For tree tousand fife hundred and sixty-two years,"
he said rapidly.

She looked at him disdainfully.  "The doctor has been putting you up to that!  It won't wash!
I don't refer to your shirt cuff," she added with deep satire.

"Adorable one!" he broke out passionately, attempting to embrace her, "I have come to take
you."  Without moving, she touched a knob in the wall.  A trap-door beyond him sank, and out
of the bowels of the earth leaped three indescribable demons.  Then, rising, she took a cake
of chalk from the table and, drawing a mystic half circle on the floor, returned to the divan,
lit a cigarette, and leaning comfortably back, said in a low, monotonous voice, "Advance one
foot within that magic line, and on that head, although it wore a crown, I launch the curse
of Rome."

"I--only wanted to take you--with a kodak," he said, with a light laugh to conceal his confusion,
as he produced the instrument from his coat-tail pocket.

"Not with that cheap box," she said, rising with magnificent disdain. "Come again with a decent
instrument--and perhaps"-- Then, lightly humming in a pure contralto, "I've been photographed
like this--I've been photographed like that," she summoned the slave to conduct him back, and
vanished through a canvas screen, which nevertheless seemed to the dazed Chevalier to be the
stony front of the pyramids.

V

"And you saw her?" said the doctor in French.

"Yes; but the three-thousand-year gag did not work!  She spotted you, cher ami, on the instant.
And she wouldn't let me take her with my kodak."

The doctor looked grave. "I see," he mused thoughtfully.  "You must have my camera, a larger
one and more bulky perhaps to carry; but she will not object to that,--she who has stood for
full lengths. I will give you some private instructions."

"But, cher doctor, this previous-existence idea--at what do you arrive?"

"There is much to say for it," said the doctor oracularly.  "It has survived in the belief
of all ages. But the Devil
was in him. As the caretaker inside the key in the lock, put wished Arnold good night, bowed in
reverence, and was funny.

Verena could not sleep. Long hours, she wandered around in her room. As previously still and
burrowed away in it, then broke through the terrible shells and coaxed her question on issues
facing cowardly rebound was not in her nature. If it is between her and Arnold was not turned
out the way they wanted, it had never been able to be so. The Nature itself then called her
predetermined "no" in the future without joy. She did not want Wait until Arnold had himself forgotten.
She wanted to go before him into hiding in the flood, on the banks of the memory for him began.
The only way I can help him Verena thought, just so I can return it yourself and keep me at the
same time for him. Once it would come but that he pushed me off the road and then I was imprisoned
there like a beggar, while I still can take a piece of him forever. I know what I know; the
end of a word has four letters, and if you look at it ten times to write, but not five from it.
After the last kiss is not a last.

Dressed she lay on the bed and fell asleep gradually. But woke up at six clock she was able to
find any more sleep and was quite tired, unable to think that Work she expected that day,
the first morning mists over after a blue sky City-stressed. The sun drove up Verena. She undressed,
poured cold water on the down that affected their hair, then she moved in with so melancholy slowness,
as could they inhibit the feared advance by the hour. They just wanted to make ready to go to
the hospital, as Arnold did. For the first time he was so early in Verena. "I was wicked yesterday, "forgive
me, he immediately said, taking her hand. "And today, Verena, you must not diligent, today
we will come - "He hesitated, when he told her indecision and tired face saw "- into the country."

"I
can not" lose a whole day, said Verena, "is an important exam before
... "

Back and forth going out, and excited by their refusal, "said Arnold," I will, however, that
you, caller, Verena.  The beautiful shoulders were there, dimly as in a dream--but
beneath was the empty clavicle, the knotty joint, the hollow sternum, and the ribs of a skeleton
half length!

The doctor's voice broke the silence.  "My friend," he said dryly, "you see only the truth!
You see what she really is, this peerless Princess of yours.  You see her as she is to-day,
and you see her kinship to the bones that have lain for centuries in yonder pyramid.  Yet they
were once as fair as this, and this was as fair as they--in effect the same! You that have
madly, impiously adored her superficial beauty, the mere dust of tomorrow, let this be a warning
to you!  You that have no soul to speak of, let that suffice you!  Take her and be happy.  Adieu!"

Yet, as he passed out of the fitting tomblike gloom of the apartment and descended the stairs,
he murmured to himself: "Odd that I should have lent him my camera with the Rontgen-ray attachment
still on.  No matter!  It is not the first time that the Princess has appeared in two parts
the same evening."

VII

In spite of envy, jealousy, and malice, a certain curiosity greater than all these drew everybody
to the Princess Zut-Ski's ball.  Lady Fitz-Fulke was there in virgin white, looking more youthful
than ever, in spite of her sixty-five years and the card labeled "Fresh Paint" which somebody
had playfully placed upon her enameled shoulder.  The McFecklesses, the Pyles, Flossy, the
doctor, and the Chevalier--looking still anxious--were in attendance.

The mysterious Nubian doorkeeper admitted the guests through the same narrow passages, much
to the disgust of Lady Pyle and the discomfiture of her paunchy husband; but on reaching a
large circular interior hall, a greater surprise was in store for them. It was found that the
only entrance to the body of the hall was along a narrow ledge against the bare wall some distance
from the floor, which obliged the guests to walk slowly, in single file, along this precarious
strip, giving them the attitudes of an Egyptian frieze, which was suggested in the original
plaster above them.  It is needless to say that, while the effect was ingenious and striking
from the centre of the room, where the Princess stood with a few personal friends, it was exceedingly
uncomfortable to the figures themselves, in their enforced march along the ledge,--especially
a figure of Sir Midas Pyle's proportions. Suddenly an exclamation broke from the doctor.

"Do you see," he said to the Princess, pointing to the figure of the Chevalier, who was filing
along with his sinewy hands slightly turned inward, "how surprisingly like he is to the first
attendant on the King in the real frieze above?  And that," added the doctor, "was none other
than 'Arry Axes, the Egyptian you are always thinking of."  And he peered curiously at her.

"Goodness me!" murmured the Princess, in an Arabic much more soft and fluent than the original
gum.  "So he does--look like him."

"And do you know you look like him, too?  Would you mind taking a walk around together?"

They did, amid the acclamations of the crowd.  The likeness was perfect.  The Princess, however,
was quite white as she eagerly rejoined the doctor. 

"I will tell you everything now, mother, one by one," he said, adding he leaning against a
bale of hay. "Look down there first time the small, skinny little boy, it's not a good piece
of clothing on the body, has said none of the good word and each This calls only the stupid.
"

The mother was looking at the This, the hinaufspaehte like a hawk
after Senn, if he such as would fall down again.

"And now?" the mother asked curious.

"He saved my life, mother WOULD! If this little boy would not have been so I still outside on the
ground in a deadly fever, or perhaps it would be already over me.

"And now Franz Anton told everything that since yesterday afternoon had occurred. As the This
left him the whole night and it refreshed and updated have had, like the smartest person in the
world would have done it any better.

The mother had to repeatedly wipe the tears. She imagined, when she Franz Anton alone and abandoned
in his thirst, and perhaps there would have located outside the fever been completely consumed would
be, and no one would have known something about him. And then did
a thank you and a joy in her heart had to, that they cry out: "God
be praised and thanks! God be praised! "But such a love for the poor
This they overcame, they said quite eagerly: "Franz Anton, This is
no longer at my wife Haelmli-Sepp Back!  A thousand rumors had been in circulation.  Sir Midas Pyle looked up from the "Times"
with his usual I-told-you-so expression.

"It is the most extraordinary thing, don'tcherknow," said Fitz-Fulke. "It seems that Dr. Haustus
Pilgrim was here professionally--as a nerve specialist--in the treatment of hallucinations
produced by neurotic conditions, you know."

"A mad doctor, here!" gasped Sir Midas.

"Yes.  The Princess, the Chevalier, McFeckless, and even my mother were all patients of his
on the dahabiyeh.  He believed, don'tcherknow, in humoring them and letting them follow out
their cranks, under his management.  The Princess was a music-hall artist who imagined she
was a dead and gone Egyptian Princess; and the queerest of all, 'Arry Axes was also a music-hall
singer who imagined himself Chevalier--you know, the great Koster artist--and that's how we
took him for a Frenchman. McFeckless and my poor old mother were the only ones with any real
rank and position--but you know what a beastly bounder Mac was, and the poor mater DID overdo
the youthful!  We never called the doctor in until the day she wanted to go to a swell ball
in London as Little Red Riding-hood. But the doctor writes me that the experiment was a success,
and they'll be all right when they get back to London."

"Then, it seems, sir, that you and I were the only sane ones here," said Sir Midas furiously.

"Really it's as much as I can do to be certain about myself, old chappie," said Fitz-Fulke,
turning away.

