In the casket of the Dauphin there were several papers he had asked me for.  I had drawn them
up in all confidence; he had preserved them in the same manner.  There was one, very large,
in my hand, which if seen by the King, would have robbed me of his favour for ever; ruined
me without hope of return.  We do not think in time of such catastrophes.  The King knew my
handwriting; he did not know my mode of thought, but might pretty well have guessed it.  I
had sometimes supplied him with means to do so; my good friends of the Court had done the rest.
The King when he discovered my paper would also discover on what close terms of intimacy I
had been with the Dauphin, of which he had no suspicion.  My anguish was then cruel, and there
seemed every reason to believe that if my secret was found out, I should be disgraced and exiled
during all the rest of the King's reign.

What a contrast between the bright heaven I had so recently gazed upon and the abyss now yawning
at my feet! It was not an ingenuity, nor a subtilty, nor a ceremony. It involved no speculation
or argument. Its essence was personal and emotional, and not intellectual. The true analogy of
religion, in short, is that of simple affection and trust.  I was
obliged to reflect in order to return to it from time to time. Regret for this incomparable
Dauphin pierced my heart, and suspended all the faculties of my soul.  For a long time I wished
to fly from the Court, so that I might never again see the deceitful face of the world; and
it was some time before prudence and honour got the upper hand.

It so happened that the, Duc de Beauvilliers himself was able to carry this casket to the King,
who had the key of it.  M. de Beauvilliers in fact resolved not to trust it out of his own
hands, but to wait until he was well enough to take it to the King, so that he might then try
to hide my papers from view.  This task was difficult, for he did not know the position in
the casket of these dangerous documents, and yet it was our only resource.  This terrible uncertainty
lasted more than a fortnight.

On Tuesday, the 1st of March, M. de Beauvilliers carried the casket to the King.  He came to
me shortly after, and before sitting down, indicated by signs that there was no further occasion
for fear.  He then related to me that he had found the casket full of a mass of documents,
finance projects, reports from the provinces, papers of all kinds, that he had read some of
them to the King on purpose to weary him, and had succeeded so well that the King soon was
satisfied by hearing only the titles; and, at last, tired out by not finding anything important,
said it was not worth while to read more, and that there was nothing to do but to throw everything
into the fire.  The Duke assured me that he did not wait to be told twice, being all the more
anxious to comply, because at the bottom of the casket he had seen some of my handwriting,
which he had promptly covered up in taking other papers to read their titles to the King; and
that immediately the word "fire" was uttered, he confusedly threw all the papers into the casket,
and then emptied it near the fire, betweein the King and Madame de Maintenon, taking good care
as he did so that my documents should not be seen,--even cautiously using the tongs in order
to prevent any piece flying away, and not quitting the fireplace until he had seen every page
consumed.  We embraced each other, in the relief we reciprocally felt, relief proportioned
to the danger we had run.