By the time we got within doors, after our unsuccessful stroll, we were quite tired, and well
prepared to enjoy our dinner. The dignified air assumed by our guide, evidently for the purpose
of showing off, and the ostentatious liberality with which he proffered the goodly viands sent
by the commandant, amused us highly. An account of our fare may be acceptable to the gastronomic
reader, who will thus be enabled to determine whether he should envy or pity the voyager to
the distant shores of Timor. First came tea and coffee; then, in the course of an hour, followed
fowls, cooked in all sorts of ways, with a proportion of rice. The good things were brought
in by a train of domestics some fifty yards long, headed by a paunchy, elderly man, who greatly
reminded us of Caleb Balderston. If there was a word said by any of the lookers-on--for many
came to have a gaze at the lions--he was out in a moment, and brought the offender to account.
In short, by his officious attention he afforded us much amusement, and greatly contributed
to our proper enjoyment of the dinner. Our candles were original ones--a few threads of cotton
drawn through a roll of bees' wax.

Dinner being over, we retired to pass as cold a night as we had felt for some time, having
only a few coarse mats to cover us; so that long before daylight we were obliged to get up
and walk about for the purpose of warming ourselves. The first of the morning we spent again
pigeon-shooting; the birds were large and wild, yet we managed to get a few.

THE HILLS IN A MIST.

This excursion gave us an opportunity of beholding the mountains of Timor under a remarkable
aspect. From various openings in the woody plain we could perceive their sides, clothed in
grey mist, above which sometimes we caught a glimpse of a pinnacle rising through the clear
air, and just touched by the rays of the morning sun. Here and there the slopes of the hills
were dimly seen through the vapour, which in other places, however, rolled along in thick masses,
completely hiding the uplands from view. Nearly every gorge and valley was filled with heavy
volumes of fog, whilst in some, a slight steam only rising, allowed the trees to be faintly
discovered. There is nothing more grand than the aspect of lofty peaks and crags and precipices
imperfectly revealed through a morning mist. It seems as though the darkness of night, unwilling
to depart, lingers still fondly around them. Their hollows and recesses are still wrapt in
gloom, when all else around is beaming with light. Within the tropics the contrast thus afforded
has a startling effect; but the influence of the sun is not long to be resisted; the mist soon
begins to disperse; valley after valley opens its depths to the view; the outline of each rocky
peak becomes more and more defined against the deep blue sky, and presently the whole scene
appears before you clear and bright, with every line sharply drawn, every patch of colour properly
discriminated, a splendid panorama of towering hills and waving forests.

Whilst I was gazing at this picture, the report of a fowling piece behind me drew my attention,
and on turning I was surprised to see the old commandant out shooting likewise, and with him
no less a person than Caleb Balderston, as we had christened his faithful domestic. In their
company we returned to Pritie.

MUSTER OF THE PARTY.

Soon after breakfast our party began to muster, each man armed with a long-condemned Tower
musket. On one of them I was surprised to recognize the name of a marine who had belonged to
the Beagle in 1827. The powder they used was of the coarsest kind, carried in small pieces
of bamboo, each containing a charge, and fitted in a case of skin, something like our cartouch
boxes. As a substitute for balls they used BOLTS OF STONE, from two to three inches long. Besides
a musket, each had a huge knife or chopper, stuck in his belt. I was much struck with the simple
contrivance they had for shoes: a piece of the fan palm plaited together and tied under the
foot. The number of uses to which this tree is applied is astonishing--for making water-buckets,
for thatching houses, filling up the panel-work of doors, and a variety of others I could mention.

It was late before we could muster all our force; but we at length got away, commandant and
all. I was much pleased with the respect everyone paid him, especially as he was one of those
mild kind persons who require very little. Soon after leaving the village we halted in a shady
spot, near a stream of water, some of our party being still missing. This gave me a good opportunity
of comparing the features of the Malay and Timoree, for some of both were in attendance. The
Malay has a much more open countenance than the Timoree, but is not so handsome, the latter
having a more aquiline nose.

THE SHOOTING ARRANGEMENTS.

When they all arrived I counted fifty armed men. There were some whose grey hairs proclaimed
their lengthened years; though there was a keenness in their eyes that revealed that the principle
of vitality was strong within them yet; in others all the dash and vigour of youth was perceptible;
many had a truly wild appearance, with their long bushy hair and ever restless eye. It was
a picturesque sight to behold fifty such fine fellows scattered about in small groups in the
deep shade of these solitudes.

All the necessary arrangements being made, we once more started. An hour's walk brought us
to a rather large plain, where I and my companions were stationed, about a hundred yards asunder,
whilst the rest of the party formed a circle, driving all the game in our direction. Unfortunately
those on the left commenced hallooing before those on the right, in which latter direction
the only three deer in the circle ran from the noise, instead of towards us. Two of them were
shot, and by the stone bolts above mentioned. We now went to fresh ground, when, provoking
to say, the same thing happened again, not without our suspicions being raised that this was
purposely contrived; so that after all we were obliged to leave without a single shot. Each
deer, the largest of which, a doe, must have weighed a hundred pounds, was shot STANDING, for
the natives have a peculiar cry, which arrests the animal's progress for a moment, while they fire.

THE JAVANESE COMMANDANT.

The deer were all brought up to the commandant, who begged our acceptance of them. We thanked
him, and took the two smallest. By the time we reached Pritie they were skinned and hung up,
ready to be put into the boats. The persons who had shot them had received their stone bolts
again very little injured; the hole they make is enormous. We rewarded these people; but to
the commandant we were really at a loss how to express our obligations. At length we thought
of giving him some powder and shot, which was a present he seemed right glad to receive. I
afterwards learnt the history of this excellent old Javanese, and was surprised and grieved
to hear that a person so universally esteemed had been banished from Java and his family for
some trifling political offence. His property was sold to purchase his freedom, and the proceeds
were entrusted to the captain of a ship, who ran off with the whole, thus at once ruining a
most worthy family, and reducing my good friend the commandant to the necessity of remaining
in exile. I was glad to hear, on my second visit to Timor, that he was still alive and well,
though without any prospect of an alleviation to his condition.

Wishing him farewell, we left Pritie with some regret. By dark we had crossed Babao Bay, and
reached the ship at half-past eight. It may be as well to mention that, looking from Coepang,
the valley of Pritie is situated immediately under Timor Peak, the highest over the northern
shore of Babao Bay. A small hut, on a projecting shingle point, close to the westward, marks
the landing place, where several canoes are generally to be seen hauled up. At high tide a
boat can get in; but, as we have already said, there is a long mud flat at low-water.

THE TIMOREES.

The Timorees do not bear the character of being very industrious; the small portion of land
they cultivate is turned up in the following manner: a slight fence is placed round the part
required for the purposes of agriculture and a drove of bullocks is driven furiously backwards
and forwards over it; which very much resembles the mode adopted for thrashing corn in some
parts of South America.

The Rajahs of the western portion of Timor receive their appointment from the Resident at Coepang;
and their installation I am told is rather a grand affair. Nearly all the Timorees speak Malay,
a soft pleasant-sounding tongue, apparently easy to be acquired; but there were few of the
Coepang people that spoke the native language. Some of the Timor customs are singular: if a
woman, for example, dies in childbirth, she is buried on the spot where she breathes her last.

DUTCH SETTLEMENT IN NEW GUINEA.

During our stay at Coepang I met the doctor of the Dutch settlement at Triton Bay, on the west
coast of New Guinea. He gave me a very poor account of the inhabitants. The Dutch settlers,
he says, can scarcely venture out of the fort; as the natives have bows and arrows, as well
as muskets, with which they are excellent marksmen. Their firearms they obtain in exchange
for birds of paradise, tortoise-shell and birds-nests, from vessels from the Arru, and other
islands in the Eastern Archipelago. When a vessel arrives on the coast they flock down from
the interior to trade, which cannot be done without an interpreter. It is even then attended
with great risk, owing to the extreme treachery of the natives. Knives, stained blue, and cotton
goods are in great request; but, although they of aware of the superiority of Europeans, they
will not on any account allow them to live in their country. The inhabitants, however, are
better disposed on the shores of Great Bay, a deep indentation on the north-east side of the
island, where great quantities of nutmeg grow.

On the 5th the Mangles arrived from Sydney by the outer route through Torres Strait, having
lost all her anchors, and been nearly wrecked in a south-east gale near Halfway Island. She
was commanded by the same master, Mr. Carr, to whom I have before alluded as having given the
first information concerning the survivors of the crew of the Charles Eaton.

ISLAND OF ROTTEE.

The next afternoon we weighed, and the following morning anchored, the water being deep, close
in near Tykale Inlet, on the south-west side of Rottee, for observations,* and for the purpose
of better determining the position of Pulo Douw, and the other islands in its neighbourhood.

(*Footnote. They placed the south point of the inlet in latitude 10 degrees 46 minutes 18 seconds
South and longitude 0 degrees 43 minutes 50 seconds West of Coepang.)

An extensive coral flat fronts this part of Rottee, connecting it with the small islands lying
off it.

We got from the natives some shells of a kind of small green mussel of a very peculiar shape.
The old men from whom I got them was making a meal from some rare shell-fish. He did not understand
the value of money; and, strange to say, not a word of the Malay language. The same was the
case with all his companions. At the part of Samow I visited the people all understood it,
which is very remarkable, as only a narrow strait separates the islands. In this state of ignorance
they may perhaps be purposely kept.

I here recognised several Australian shrubs and palms. The rock of which this port of Rottee
is formed appeared of a madreporic nature, scattered about in huge blocks. At a little distance
from the water it formed low broken cliffs from twenty to thirty feet in length; these were
everywhere undermined by the sea, from which the land here was evidently emerging. I noticed
several deserted huts and broken walls or fences, which bore the appearance of having had much
labour bestowed on them at some time or other. They added much to the lonely appearance of
the place, for there is nothing that imparts so great an air of desolation to a scene as the
signs that it has once been inhabited by man. Tracts which have never before been trodden by
human foot may be gazed on with pleasurable emotions; but there are always melancholy associations
connected with a spot which our fellow-creatures have once inhabited and abandoned.

The natives we saw belonged to the southern side of Tykale Inlet. They were occupied in looking
after some weirs, from the size and number of which it would appear that they chiefly live on fish.

JEWELLERS OF PULO DOUW.

The inhabitants of Pulo Douw are a small wandering tribe from Savu, chiefly jewellers, as the
Resident at Coepang informed me. It is a strange place for them to take up their abode in;
perhaps they do not like the idea of living under a Rajah. They are, I believe, beautiful workmen;
but with them all is not gold that glitters. There are plenty of coconuts in the island, but
little water; the landing at all times is bad.

When at Coepang we saw some specimens of the gold, collected after heavy rains from the washings
of the hills, and brought down for barter to the merchants in grains enclosed in small lengths
of bamboo, containing each from six to eighteen drams. Thirty miles south-west of Diely, also,
are some mines of virgin copper.

Leaving Rottee we passed, soon after dark, round the western end of Pulo Douw, and stood for
the position of a shoal reported by Mr. Lewis of the Colonial schooner, Isabella, to be in
latitude 14 degrees 43 minutes South, and longitude 119 degrees 20 minutes East. Our inducement
to search for this shoal was the fact of its being supposed to lie in the direct route of vessels
sailing between Timor and the West coast of Australia. But after searching from the 9th to
the 14th, and sounding repeatedly without getting bottom, we came to the conclusion that it
did not exist. Breakers could have been seen at least ten miles from the Beagle's masthead,
as there was a considerable swell from the south-west.

LIGHT WINDS.

On the 15th we were in latitude 16 degrees 05 minutes South and longitude 118 degrees 16 minutes
East. After one of those stagnant calms so frequently met with near the equator, we got a light
westerly breeze on the morning of the 18th. Towards midnight it freshened, veering from South-West
by South to West-South-West with some rather sharp rain squalls. It appears that the westerly
winds had already set in, and that the calm we experienced on the 17th was an unoccupied space
between the easterly and westerly winds. There are few parts of the globe where light winds
prevail so much as on the North-west coast of New Holland, particularly between the latitudes
of 13 and 17 degrees, and from one to two hundred miles from the land. They are, however, excepting
in the months of January, February, and March, from the eastward, south-east in the morning
and east in the afternoon. These winds prevented us from making the coast on the eastward of
Depuch Island; and as we had failed in getting a supply of provisions at Timor, we were compelled
to relinquish the plan of continuing the examination of that part of the coast between the
Turtle Islands and Roebuck Bay.

BEZOUT ISLAND.

The Beagle was consequently anchored under Bezout Island, one of the eastern isles of Dampier's
Archipelago, and boats were sent to examine the coast on the southward of Cape Lambert.

It may, perhaps, be worthy of remark, that should a vessel be brought by any chance to this
dreary part of the world in May, June, or July, anchorages exposed to easterly winds should
be left at or before daylight--that being the time they set in; by noon all is again quiet.
Bezout Island is of the same formation as Depuch; and so are many of the broken ridges, with
bare stony summits, of a dark brown hue, on the main near Cape Lambert, trending South-South-West.
A more dreary sterile country can scarcely be seen; yet it still maintains inhabitants.

August 26.

The weather has been truly strange for the last four days. The winds, instead of being easterly
have been from South-west to North-west, light with the former during the mornings, and moderate
with the latter in the evenings. On this day they were from all quarters, with distant thunder
in the north-west, and several rain squalls. In the night it settled at east, a fresh breeze
bringing with it fine weather. In connection with our former remarks on striking vicissitudes
in the weather occurring near the change of the moon, we should mention that it was new moon
the day following.

The material for the chart collected in this part consists of the main from below Picard Island
to nearly twenty miles west of Cape Lambert, with the neighbouring islands, an extent of nearly
forty-five miles. The part near Picard Island was carefully examined by Mr. Forsyth. He reported
the main to the South-South-West of that island, forming the head of the bay between Cape Lambert
and Depuch, to be extensive flats of mud and sand, over which the sea sometimes passed. Between
Picard and Cape Lambert the shore is cut up by mangrove creeks. On a hill up one of these,
several small kangaroos were seen. Near the Cape Mr. Forsyth perceived twenty-seven natives,
seven of whom were children, in one party.

DELAMBRE ISLAND.

On the 27th we crossed over to Delambre Island, on which a large party landed in the afternoon.
A few turtle were here taken, of a different kind from any we had seen before, and apparently
a cross between the Hawk's Bill and the Green Turtle; several nests were also found, in one
of which were 138 eggs. This island terminates, like Bezout Island, to the northward, in cliffs
about 90 feet high, with deep water close to; on the east and west sides it is fronted by a
reef nearly a mile in extent; but we could see no traces of those lying three miles to the
North-North-West of the North-West point, laid down by Captain King. The passage between Huiy
Island and Delambre is five miles wide, though clear for two miles only, and in working out
we found that it had a very uneven bottom, over which a two-knot tide causes heavy ripplings.
We noticed that a hill, lying nine miles to the south-west of Bezout Island, called in the
chart Round-backed Hill, bearing between South 5 degrees East, and South 15 degrees East, clears
the reefs on either side the channel; and that the same hill bearing South 24 degrees West
leads between Bezout and Delambre, and South 8 degrees West clears the reef off the eastern
side of the latter.

THE MONTEBELLO GROUP.

From Delambre we proceeded to the Montebello Islands, principally in order to set at rest two
points of great interest, namely, the position of Ritchie's Reef, and of the long lost Tryal
Rocks. On the 31st, in the afternoon, we anchored in 6 fathoms on the eastern side of Tremouille
Island, a cliffy islet off the south-east end of which bore South 42 degrees East two miles.
The tide was ebbing and setting to the North-North-East two knots an hour. We found the Montebello
Group to be confined by a coral reef encircling it. The two principal islands are Tremouille
and Hermite Islands. The fact that these and their neighbours are not separated in the charts
fully evinced the necessity of our visit. Leaving a boat to examine them, the ship proceeded
towards the northern end of Barrow's Island, being anxious to avoid the southerly winds to
which the anchorage off Tremouille is exposed. These usually commenced at midnight, blowing
from south-west, freshening and veering to south by 8 A.M., and by about 10 moderating at South-South-East.
On our way to Barrow's Island they were so violent as to cause the ship to drive with two anchors
ahead, there appearing to be no holding ground, but simply a coating of sand over a rocky ledge.
During the prevalence of these winds the temperature varied from 66 to 76 degrees.

Near Barrow's Island, on our passage, I shot (from the quarter-boat) the largest sea-snake
ever killed. It is figured and described in the Appendix, by Mr. J.E. Gray, as Hydrus major,
and measured eight feet one inch in length, by three inches broad; the colour was a dark yellow:
several smaller ones striped brown and white were also seen.

BARROW'S ISLAND.

We found that from the Montebello Group a long series of reefs and small islands, the largest
and most central of which is called Lowendal, extends towards Barrow's Island, leaving a winding
channel* along the north side of the latter. Near the centre of the western side of the reef
is a cluster which proved to be the long-lost Tryal Rocks; the middle and largest of which
is in latitude 20 degrees 35 minutes South and longitude 0 degrees 17 minutes West of Swan
River.** The reef continues along the eastern side of Barrow's Island, extending off three
miles; our anchorage was consequently little more than that distance from the shore. We examined
the northern and eastern sides; the former is composed of red sandstone cliffy projections,
separated by sandy bays, fronted for nearly two miles by a coral reef, partly dry at low-water;
but the south part of the eastern side becomes very low; and where the cliffs end there is
a remarkable valley trending westwards. There were recent marks of the sea many feet above
the ordinary reach of the tides, bespeaking occasional strong south-east winds. A number of
stony-topped hills, from 150 to 200 feet in height, were scattered over the northern parts
of the island. In the valleys was a little sandy soil, nourishing the spinifex, and a stunted
kind of wood sufficiently large for fuel.

(*Footnote. Lowendal Island, bearing east, leads into it.)

(**Footnote. We recognised them from a sketch furnished by the Admiralty, and made in 1719
by a Dutch sloop sent in search of them from Batavia. They placed them eight degrees west from
the coast of New Holland. If we take leagues instead of degrees it would bring them near their
actual distance from the shore. Van Keulen says they were seen in the ship Vaderland Getrouw,
and found to be in 20 degrees 30 seconds south. In 1777 they were seen by Captain Joss, of
the Danish ship Frederisberg Castel, who places them in 20 degrees 40 minutes South. It was
by his description that I recognised them beyond a doubt, although his longitude would place
them thirteen degrees more to the westward, and near the position they have occupied for years
in the charts. The centre of them bears North by East five miles and a quarter from Cape Dupuis,
the north-west point of Barrow's Island.)

NEW KANGAROO.

We found a new kind of kangaroo and wallaby on Barrow's Island; but the only specimen obtained
of the former was destroyed through the neglect of the person in whose charge it was left.
It was a buck, weighing fifty pounds, of a cinnamon colour on the back and a dirty white on
the belly; the hair was fine and long; the head of a peculiar shape, resembling a dog's, with
a very blunt nose; the forearms were very short; the hind feet cushioned like those inhabiting
rocky ground. The does appeared to be much lighter; but all were very wary and scarce. From
the number of red sandhills, too, scattered over the island, they were difficult to be seen
at a distance. From our description of this specimen it has been named Osphranter isabellinus.
With the wallaby we were more fortunate, Mr. Bynoe and myself succeeding in knocking over four,
weighing from five to eight pounds; they also had blunt noses, and were of a light brown colour,
quite different from those on the Abrolhos.

Two iguanas, measuring seven feet in length, and nearly black, striped slightly with white,
were also killed here.

We did not find any surface water; everything wore a dry parched appearance. No traces of natives
were discovered, except some charred pieces of wood. Indeed I may remark that we saw signs
of fire on every part of the continent we visited. From the south extremity of the island a
long reef trended in the direction of the mainland, where Captain King traced it extending
off some distance, thus connecting with the shore the whole of these islands, which seem to
lie in a line with each other, like the various parts of a submerged piece of land. The small
isles, especially between the Montebello Group and Barrow's Island, have all the same direction;
so that it seems fair to conclude that they were once a part of the main, being in fact fragments
of a promontory, forming a gulf similar to Exmouth Gulf, lying on the south-west of it. I had
been led to expect this from the fact of our finding the flood-stream coming from the north-east,
whereas the direction of it in the offing is North-North-West.

SUPPLY OF TURTLES.

Barrow's Island, being about twelve miles broad and twenty long, would, in the event of a penal
settlement being formed in this neighbourhood, make a good second Norfolk Island. On leaving
we brought away with us seven tons of turtles from the abundant supplies its shores afforded.
Many of them we gave to our friends at Swan River on our arrival. We cannot quit this island
without reminding our readers that it was named after the distinguished Secretary to the Admiralty,
who has just retired from office after a period of service of nearly half a century, during
which time he was the promoter of all geographical research, and mainly instrumental in founding
a society which is of growing importance to Great Britain, and who has established a lasting
reputation both by his travels and his literary productions.

On our return to Tremouille Island Mr. Fitzmaurice joined us, having completed the examination
of the Montebello Group, a large proportion of chart material, in a very short space of time,
considering the number of small islands, which would render it an endless labour to attempt
any description, further than that they lie something in the shape of a scythe.

RITCHIE'S REEF.

A hill 145 feet high, the loftiest point of the group, rises near the centre of Tremouille,
the north-east island, off the north-west end of which a ledge extends in the direction of
an out-lying reef, bearing North 55 degrees West (magnetic) nine miles and a half, which places
it in latitude 20 degrees 17 minutes South and longitude 0 degrees 26 minutes West of Swan
River; or 115 degrees 21 minutes East. This could be no other than that which we had so often
looked for as Ritchie's Reef, as our former tracks to the westward had assured us that it did
not lie in that direction. In latitude it agreed with the position given to it on the charts,
but in longitude it differed considerably, lying full half a degree to the eastward. It therefore
appeared not to be a discovery of Lieutenant Ritchie's, as it had been not only seen previously
by the French, who had considered it as a reef extending off Tremouille Island, but many years
before by Captain Clerke, who placed it in latitude 20 degrees 18 minutes South, nine or ten
miles North-West (magnetic) from what he thought to be Rosemary Island, but which it is very
evident was Tremouille. The name then of Clerke's Reef should be given it instead of Ritchie's.

WALLABY SHOOTING.

Mr. Fitzmaurice having seen plenty of wallaby on the larger islands, a party of us went on
shore in the evening, after securing observations for the rates of the chronometers on a small
islet called Flag Islet, near the centre of the rocky cluster fronting the eastern side of
Hermite Island. This can be recognised by it alone having a sandy point on the south-west end,
which we placed in latitude 20 degrees 27 minutes 47 seconds South and longitude 0 degrees
8 minutes 20 seconds west of Swan River. The time of high-water here at full and change, was
about 10 o'clock, when the tide rose fourteen feet; the flood-stream came from the northward.

We found that Tremouille was as scantily supplied with vegetation as Barrow's Island; in one
or two places was growing a stunted kind of wood, sufficient for fuel for a small-sized ship;
but there was no sign of water. The wallaby, which were very numerous, must have got their
supply of moisture from the copious dews. They were found lying very close in the wiry prickly
grass, allowing us to kick them out, when they went off at speed, affording excellent sport,
quite equal to any rabbit shooting; among three guns we managed, in a couple of hours, to bag
nearly twenty. It was quite a new kind of wallaby, and has been classed, from a specimen we
brought away, as Lagorchester conspicillata. It had a blunt nose, similar to those at Barrow's
Island, and was about the same size, though its colour was lighter, and it had a back exactly
like a European hare. The tail tapered away like a rat's, and the flesh was by no means good
to eat, tasting very strong; this was the only instance in which we found wallaby at all unpalatable.

Although our exploration in this neighbourhood did not lead to our finding any of the land
fertile, yet from the new feature our chart will give to this part of the coast, the necessity
of the Beagle's visit will be evident. Our object had been satisfactorily attained, inasmuch
as we had cleared up the doubts respecting Ritchie's Reef, and the long-lost Tryal Rocks. We
had also been so fortunate as to add to the stores of natural history a new kangaroo and two
kinds of wallaby, besides a large water-snake.

RITCHIE'S REEF.

September 9.

We left Tremouille Island in the morning, and passing round the north side, soon came in sight
of Clerke's, alias Ritchie's Reef. It was our intention to have gone round the northern end
of it, but the tide setting two knots an hour forced us to the southward. In a line midway
between it and Tremouille the depth was 17 and 20 fathoms. The reef was nearly three miles
long, in a north-east and south-west direction, and one mile and a half wide; the centre being
partly dry. Two miles and a half South-West by West of it we crossed a patch of 13 fathoms,
with 22 and 25 fathoms on each side, the northern part of Hermite Island bearing South 62 degrees
East fourteen miles, soon after which it was lost sight of from the poop.

