The work was written upon a commission given by the Cecilien Verein of Frankfort in 1831; but
it was not produced until May 22, 1836, on the occasion of the Lower Rhine Festival at Düsseldorf.
The principal parts were sung by Madame Fischer-Achten, Mademoiselle Grabau, Herren Schmetzer
and Wersing, the latter artist taking the part of Paul. The second performance was given at
Liverpool, Oct. 3, 1836; and between the two performances Mendelssohn revised the work and
cut out fourteen numbers.

After a long and expressive overture for orchestra and organ, the first part opens with a strong
and exultant chorus ("Lord! Thou alone art God"). It is massively constructed, and in its middle
part runs into a restless, agitated theme ("The Heathen furiously rage"). It closes, however,
in the same energetic and jubilant manner which characterizes its opening, and leads directly
to a chorale ("To God on High"), set to a famous old German hymn-book tune, "Allein Gott in
der Höh' sei Ehr," which is serenely beautiful in its clearly flowing harmony. The martyrdom
of Stephen follows. The basses in vigorous recitative accuse him of blasphemy, and the people
break out in an angry chorus ("Now this Man ceaseth not to utter blasphemous Words"). At its
close Stephen sings a brief but beautiful solo ("Men, Brethren, and Fathers!"); and as the
calm protest dies away, again the full chorus gives vent to a tumultuous shout of indignation
("Take him away"). A note of warning is heard in the fervent soprano solo, "Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Prophets;" but it is of no avail. Again the chorus hurls its imprecations
more furiously than before ("Stone him to death"). The tragedy occurs. A few bars of recitative
for tenor, full of pathos, tell the sad story, and then follows another beautiful chorale of
submission ("To Thee, O Lord, I yield my Spirit"). Saul's participation in the tragedy is barely
touched upon. The lament for Stephen is followed by the chorus, "Happy and blest are they,"
which is beautifully melodious in character. Saul now appears, "breathing out threatenings
and slaughter" against the apostles. His first aria ("Consume them all") is a bass solo which
is fiery in its energy. It is followed by the lovely arioso for alto, "But the Lord is mindful
of His own,"--fitting companion to the equally beautiful "O rest in the Lord" from "Elijah,"
and much resembling it in general style. Then occurs the conversion. The voice from heaven
("Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?") is represented, as was often done in the passion-music,
by the soprano choir, which gives it peculiar significance and makes it stand out in striking
contrast with the rest of the work. A forcible orchestral interlude, worked up in a strong
crescendo, leads to the vigorous chorus, "Rise up! arise!" in which the powerful orchestral
climax adds great strength to the vocal part. It is a vigorously constructed chorus, and is
followed by a chorale ("Sleepers, wake! a Voice is calling"), which still further heightens
the effect by its trumpet notes between the lines. At the close of the imposing harmony the
music grows deeper and more serious in character as Saul breathes out his prayer, "O God, have
Mercy upon me;" and again, after the message of forgiveness and mercy delivered by Ananias,
more joyful and exultant in the bass solo with chorus ("I praise Thee, O Lord, my God"), Saul
receives his sight, and straightway begins his ministrations. A grand reflective chorus ("O
great is the Depth of the Riches of Wisdom"), strong and jubilant in character, and rising
to a powerful climax, closes the first part.

The second part opens with the five-part chorus, "The Nations are now the Lord's,"--a clear
fugue, very stately and dignified in its style, leading, after a tenor and bass duet ("Now
all are Ambassadors in the Name of Christ"), to the beautifully melodious chorus, "How lovely
are the Messengers that preach us the Gospel of Peace," and the equally beautiful soprano arioso,
"I will sing of Thy great Mercies." After the chorus, "Thus saith the Lord," and a second tumultuous
chorus expressive of rage and scorn ("Is this He who in Jerusalem"), another chorale occurs
("O Thou, the true and only Light"), in which the Church prays for direction. The tenor recitative
announcing the departure of Paul and Barnabas to the Gentiles, followed by the tenor and bass
duet, "For so hath the Lord Himself commanded," bring us to the scene of the sacrifice at Lystra,
in which the two choruses, "The Gods themselves as Mortals," and "O be gracious, ye Immortals,"
are full of genuine Greek sensuousness and in striking contrast with the seriousness and majestic
character of the harmony in the Christian chorus ("But our God abideth in Heaven") which follows.
Once more the Jews interfere, in the raging, wrathful chorus, "This is Jehovah's Temple." In
a pathetic tenor aria ("Be thou faithful unto Death") Paul takes a sorrowful leave of his brethren,
and in response comes an equally tender chorus, "Far be it from thy Path." Two stately choruses
("See what Love hath the Father," and "Now only unto Him") close the work.

                             Hymn of Praise.

The "Lobgesang" ("Hymn of Praise") was written at Leipsic in 1840, the occasion which gave
birth to it being the fourth centennial celebration of the art of printing. The musical features
of the festival were intrusted to Mendelssohn, the ceremonies occupying two days, June 24 and
25 of the above year. On the evening of the 23d there was a performance of Lortzing's opera,
"Hans Sachs," written for the occasion. On the morning of the 24th there was a service in the
church, followed by the unveiling of the statue of Guttenberg in the public square, and an
open-air performance of the composer's "Festgesang" for two choirs, with trombone accompaniment,
David conducting one choir, and Mendelssohn the other. In the afternoon of the 25th the "Hymn
of Praise" was given for the first time in St. Thomas's Church, preceded by Weber's "Jubilee
Overture" and Handel's "Dettingen Te Deum." Lampadius, who was present at the performance, says:--

  "The work called out the greatest enthusiasm, which could hardly be
  repressed within bounds even by the fact that the audience were seated
  within the walls of a church. After the first duet a subdued whisper of
  applause ran through the edifice and betrayed the suppressed delight of
  the listeners. On one of the evenings following, a torchlight
  procession was made in honor of the great composer. Mendelssohn, who
  then lived in Lurgenstein's Garden, appeared at the window, his face
  lighted up with joy. 'Gentlemen,' he said in his neat, quiet way, with
  a sensible trembling of the voice, 'you know that it is not my manner
  to make many words; but I heartily thank you.' A loud 'Hoch!' three
  times shouted, was our reply."

Its next performance was at Birmingham, Sept. 23, 1840, Mendelssohn himself conducting. After
this performance it was considerably changed, and the whole scene of the watchman was added.
The idea occurred to him after a sleepless night, during which, as he informed a friend, the
words, "Will the night soon pass?" incessantly came into his mind.

The title given to the "Hymn of Praise," "a symphony-cantata," was first suggested by his friend
Carl Klingemann, of London, as will be seen by the following interesting extract from a letter
written by Mendelssohn to him, Nov. 18, 1840:--

  "My 'Hymn of Praise' is to be performed the end of this month for the
  benefit of old invalided musicians. I am determined, however, that it
  shall not be produced in the imperfect form in which, owing to my
  illness, it was given in Birmingham; so that makes me work hard. Four
  new pieces are to be added, and I have also much improved the three
  sets of symphonies, which are now in the hands of the copyist. As an
  introduction to the chorus, 'The Night is passed,' I have found far
  finer words in the Bible, and admirably adapted to the music. By the
  by, you have much to answer for in the admirable title you hit on so
  cleverly; for not only have I sent forth the piece into the world as a
  symphony-cantata, but I have serious thoughts of resuming the first
  'Walpurgis Night' (which has been so long lying by me) under the same
  cognomen, and finishing and getting rid of it at last. It is singular
  enough that at the very first suggestion of this idea I should have
  written to Berlin that I was resolved to compose a symphony with a
  chorus. Subsequently I had not courage to begin, because the three
  movements were too long for an introduction; and yet I never could
  divest myself of the impression that something was wanting in the shape
  of an introduction. Now the symphony is to be inserted according to my
  original intention, and the piece brought out at once."

The text to the "Hymn of Praise" is not in narrative form, nor has it any particular dramatic
significance. It is what its name indicates,--a tribute of praise. Lampadius says the composer
undertook to show "the triumph at the creation of light over darkness. With his pious and believing
heart he could easily enter into that theme, and show with matchless power and skill the closing-in
of those ancient foes, and the victory of light when darkness cowered and ignobly shrank away."
The expression of delight over this victory is very well brought out, not only in the music,
but also in the arrangement of the Scriptural texts, which begin with exhortations of praise,
and appeals to those who have been in distress and affliction to trust the Lord. The tenor,
who may be regarded as the Narrator, calls upon the Watchman, "What of the night?" The response
comes that the night has passed. In exultation over the victory, once more the text ascribes
praise to the Lord. "All that has life and breath" sings to His name.

