The peasant's daughter grew up as beautiful and as wise as all the gifts of Fairyland could
make her.  Everything she did was as well done as the cleverest people in the world, all put
together, could have done it; and everything she said was as wise as the contents of all the
books in the King's library.  When she cooked the Sunday dinner, she made it taste like a banquet
of twenty courses; she had only to look at the flowers in the garden, and they bloomed as luxuriantly
as though they had been brought straight from Fairyland.  She helped all the village people
when they were in a difficulty, for her advice was the very best that could be had; and they
soon forgot that she was only a child, and they called her "Little Wisdom" instead of the ordinary
name by which she had been christened.  She loved to sit by herself in the cherry orchard,
and she wondered how the other children could laugh and play when there was so much thinking
to be done.  She never laughed nor played herself, for the fairies had been so anxious to make
her wise and beautiful, that they had not thought of giving her anything so ordinary as happiness.
Every one envied her parents for having such a wonderful daughter; but for all that the peasant
and his wife were not satisfied.

"It is a great pity," grumbled her father, "that all the gifts of Fairyland should have been
wasted on a girl.  If the child had been a boy, now, she would have made some stir in the world."

"For my part," sighed her mother, "I would gladly see her lose all the gifts of Fairyland if
she would only laugh and cry like other children."

In the meantime the little Prince Charming was growing up without the help of a single gift
from Fairyland.  Never had the palace contained such an idle, careless little Prince; he laughed
at everything that happened, morning, noon, and night; he played tricks on all his Professors
instead of learning his lessons, and he could not keep grave long enough even to say the alphabet.
He was so determined to look on the bright side of everything, that when people were angry
with him he thought it was only their way of being amusing; and when they tried to punish him,
he found it such a good joke that they very soon gave up the attempt.  The people, one and
all, loved the merry little Prince who laughed at life from his royal nursery and refused to
grow any older; but the King viewed the matter in quite another light.

"What will become of the country," said his Majesty, "if the boy does not learn to be serious?"

"He is so happy," said the Queen, apologetically.  "Is not that enough?"

The King evidently thought it was not nearly enough, for he despatched a page at once to fetch
Prince Charming from the nursery.  The Prince came whistling into the room, with his hands
in his pockets, which was not a princely way of behaving, to begin with.

"You are eleven years old," began the King, solemnly.

"Everybody tells me that," said the Prince, smiling gaily.  He supposed grown-up people could
not help saying the same thing so often; at all events he did not mean to let it trouble him.

"It is time you learned to be serious," continued the King, still more solemnly.

"To be serious?  What is that?  Is it a new game?" asked Prince Charming, eagerly.

"Hush!" whispered the Queen, anxiously.  "It is what every one has to be,--the Prime Minister,
and the Head Cook, and everybody."

"Surely," laughed the little Prince, "if so many people are occupied in being serious there
is no need for me to bother about it!"

"You cannot even read," said the King, frowning.

"No; but my Professor can," said Prince Charming.  "He can read the longest words in the dictionary
without taking breath.  When any one in the kingdom can read so beautifully as that, it would
surely be impolite to try to imitate him!"

"The poorest children in the kingdom know far more than you do," said the King, who was rapidly
losing patience.

"Then there are plenty of people to tell me everything I want to know," smiled the Prince.
"What is the use of knowing just as much as everybody else?  There would be nothing left to
talk about."

The King looked at the Queen in despair.

"It is not the boy's fault," said the Queen soothingly; "you see, the fairies did not come
to his christening."

"And the wymps did," sighed the King.  "I suppose that is why we have a stupid son without
an idea in his head."

Prince Charming took off his crown and felt his head very carefully.

"What is an idea?" he asked.  "And why have I no idea in my head?  Have you got one in your
head, father?"

The King was so angry at being asked whether he had an idea in his head, that he sent Prince
Charming straight back to the nursery. However, as that was where the Prince liked best to
be, he laughed more than ever and was not in the least bit ashamed of himself.

Now, Prince Charming was known to be so light-hearted and so careless, that all the flowers
and all the animals told him their secrets; for it is always safe to tell a secret to some
one who is not taken seriously by other people.  And the Prince, for his part, delighted in
talking to the flowers and the animals, because they never reminded him that he was eleven
years old, nor told him to stop laughing as all the other people did, the people who were too
clever to worry their heads about flowers and animals at all.  So the Prince soon jumped out
of the nursery window into his own little garden, where his name was written several times
in mustard and cress, and where the tiger lilies fought with the scarlet poppies because they
had been planted one on the top of the other, and where the guinea-pigs and the rabbits and
the white mice ran wild and did what they liked.  He took a very large watering-can and watered
himself and a very small rose tree for the third time since sunrise, and then sat down and
looked at the mould on his fingers.

"How funny everything is," said Prince Charming, laughing heartily.  "I have done nothing but
water my rose tree, and yet all my fingers are covered with mould!  Now, the Prime Minister
might water fifty rose trees and he would never get a speck of mould even on his shoe buckles.
I suppose it is because the Prime Minister has learnt to be serious. Oh dear!  I do wish I
had an idea in my head!"

"What are you saying?" asked the rose tree, shaking off the effects of the Prince's overwhelming
attentions.  "Why do you wish to have an idea in your head?"

"Just to see what it would feel like," answered the Prince.  "I don't even know what an idea
is.  Do you?"

"An idea," replied the rose tree in a superior tone, "is what somebody remembers to have heard
somebody else say."

"I shall never have an idea, then," said Prince Charming; "for I never remember what anybody
says.  Is there no other way of getting an idea?"

"To be sure there is," answered the rose tree; "but very few people know of it.  You can go
to the Red Rock Goblin, if you like, and get a whole new idea for yourself.  He has quantities
of ideas, piled up in heaps; but very few people succeed in getting one."

"I shall never succeed, then," said the Prince; "for I am the stupidest boy in the world."

"That doesn't matter," said the rose tree.  "The Red Rock Goblin does not care much about clever
people, I fancy.  Go and try."

"I think I will," said the Prince.  "It is sure to be amusing, at all events.  What must I
do to get there?"

"It is of no use to do anything," answered the rose tree.  "If you are the right sort of boy
you will find yourself there, that's all."

