It is not wise to specialize too much in the pursuit of the fad. Suppose the busy man, having
conceded the value of some out-of-door study, decides that he will learn the lumber industry,
but take no interest in the shade trees. He will not materially broaden his interests in this
way. He will rather add to his burdens another business. If he applies to this new business
the same conscientious methods which are wearing him out in his present one, the value of the
fad is gone, the new study has done him more harm than good, and when on his vacation, unless
there is a sawmill in the neighborhood, he finds himself stranded with only worry for company.
Similarly, if the study of history is taken up in the way a fad should be taken up, anything
in the way of a book will now interest the worrier, for hardly a book worth reading fails to
contain either a bit of travel, geography, biography, law, or something on manners and customs.

Permanent freedom from worry involves a change in one's whole view of life and method of thought.
But the means by which introspection may be temporarily alleviated are by no means to be despised.
Among these comes the pursuit of the golf-ball. Many a business and professional man who thinks
he has no time for golf can easily escape for an hour's play at the end of the day, twice a
week, and in the long run it will prove to be time well expended. In point of fact, most are
hindered rather by the notion that it is not worth while to visit the links unless one can
play eighteen holes, or that it is not worth while to take up the game at all unless one can
excel. But the exercise is the same, and the air equally bracing whether we win or lose; the
shower-bath will refresh us just the same whether we have played nine holes or twenty-seven.

The automobile ride, the drive, and, best of all, the ride on horseback, will often serve to
banish the vapors. Many neglect these methods, not from lack of time or money, but from indisposition.

A busy professional man recently assured me that he had renewed his youth by going three times
a week to the gymnasium and joining the "old man's class." Here is an opportunity open to practically
everyone; it is a desirable practice if continued. The drawback is the lack of incentive when
the novelty has passed. Such incentive is furnished by the fad, in the satisfaction of gaining
new knowledge and broadening the thought-associations.

XVIII.

HOME TREATMENT

Submit to what is unavoidable, banish the impossible from the mind, and look around for some
new object of interest in life.

Goethe.

In the treatment of faulty mental habits the chief reliance is the training of the mind; physical
measures are merely supplementary. This fact has always been recognized in a general way. The
need of such training was emphasized by Epictetus thus:

"Not to be disappointed of our desire, nor incur our aversion. To this ought our training be
directed. For without vigorous and steady training, it is not possible to preserve our desire
undisappointed and our aversion unincurred."

But there has always been an undercurrent of dissatisfaction with purely mental treatment,
and a desire for the drug, which has more than once, doubtless, been prescribed for the purpose
of "suggestion" only.

The movement for psychic treatment on scientific principles, of faulty mental disorders, not
of organic nature, is well under way. That the American profession takes an active interest
in this movement is shown by the exhaustive paper on psycho-therapy by Dr. E. W. Taylor, recently
read at a combined meeting held in Boston and discussed by such representative neurologists
as Drs. Mills, Dercum, J. K. Mitchell, and Sinkler, of Philadelphia; Drs. Dana, Sachs, Collins,
Hunt, Meacham, and Jelliffe, of New York; Dr. White of Washington, and Drs. Putnam and Prince,
of Boston.

Such faulty mental habits as worry and obsession, doubting folly, and hypochondria, are no
more amenable to physical treatment than the habit of swearing, or of over-indulgence in food
and drink. Even the psychic treatment, by another, of such disorders, as of such habits, labors
under the disadvantage that all attempts to influence another by exhortation, ridicule, or
reproach are met by active or passive resistance on the part of the individual toward whom
these efforts are directed. A conscientious resolve on the part of the individual himself,
whether started by a casual hint or by a new line of thought, is often more effective than
any amount of outside pressure, however well directed.

It is my hope and belief that the over-solicitous individual will be influenced by reading
these descriptions to adopt, of his own initiative, some of these suggestions. His most striking
peculiarity is his conviction that he cannot take the chances others do, that the criticisms
he receives are peculiarly annoying, and that his sources of worry are something set apart
from the experience of ordinary mortals. This conviction leads him to meet argument by argument,
reproach and ridicule by indignant protest or brooding silence. The perusal of these sections
may lead him to alter his ideals. Suggestions for home treatment have been scattered through
the various pages; it only remains to sum them up.

We have traced worry back to exaggerated self-consciousness and obsession; it is against these
two faulty tendencies that training may be directed.

The first step is the initiation of a new attitude, namely, the commonplace. The establishment
of this attitude involves the sacrifice of self-love, and of the melancholy pleasure of playing
the martyr. The oversensitive individual must recognize the fact that if people do not want
him round it may be because he inflicts his ego too obtrusively upon his associates. He must
realize that others are more interested in their own affairs than in his, and that however
cutting their comments and unjust their criticisms, and however deeply these may sink into
his soul, they are only passing incidents with them.

He must realize that if two people whisper they are not necessarily whispering about him, and
if they are it is of no consequence, and merely shows their lack of breeding. On public occasions
he must remember that others are thinking of themselves, or of the subject in hand, quite as
much as they are of him and how he behaves. He must realize that even if he does something
foolish it will only make a passing impression on others, and that they will like him none
the less for it.

He must practice externalizing his thoughts. If criticised, he must ask himself whether the
criticism is just or unjust. If just, he must learn to accept and act upon it; if unjust, he
must learn to classify the critic, as unreasonable, thoughtless, or ill-natured, place him
in the appropriate mental compartment, throw the criticism into the intellectual waste-basket,
and proceed upon his way. This practice, difficult at first, will, if assiduously cultivated,
become more and more automatic, and will materially modify a fruitful source of worry.

The next step is to practice the control of the dominating impulses (obsessions). If one finds
himself impelled continually to drum, or walk the floor, he will find the habit cannot be dropped
at once, but if he can refrain from it for a few moments once or twice in the day, no matter
how lost he feels without it, and sit for a few minutes relaxed and motionless, the intervals
can be gradually increased. Even the chronic doubter may appreciate the fact that this practice
aids in preparing one for taking and keeping, at night, the quiet and immobile position which
favors sleep. The bearing of this training upon worry may not be immediately obvious, but if
one cannot overcome these simple physical compulsions he will find it still harder to overcome
the doubts, the fears, and the scruples which underlie his worry.

It is hard to give up the idea that we are so peculiarly constituted that it produces a special
disgust in our case if another constantly clears his throat, and a peculiar annoyance if he
rocks. It is difficult to relinquish the belief that, however callous others may be, our nervous
system is so delicately adjusted that we cannot work when others make unnecessary noise, and
we cannot sleep if a clock ticks in our hearing. But if one persistently cultivates the commonplace,
he will at last find himself seeking instead of avoiding the objects of his former torture,
merely to exercise his new-found mastery of himself, and to realize that "He that ruleth his
spirit is better than he that taketh a city."

It is the imperative duty of every sufferer from doubting folly to say to himself, "I will
perform this act once with my whole attention, then leave it and turn my mind in other channels
before I have dulled my perception by repetition."

If one is prone to chronic indecision, he must remind himself that it is better to do the wrong
thing with single mind, than to work himself into a frenzy of anxious doubt. In case the choice
is not an important one, he must learn to pounce upon either task, and waste no further time.
If the doubt concerns an important matter, he must learn to devote only that attention to the
matter which is commensurate with its importance, then decide it one way or the other, realizing
that it is better to make a mistake, even in an important matter than to worry one's self into
utter helplessness by conflicting emotions. 

In a letter written to her on March 22, 1820, he stated, with his usual downright common sense,
all that there is to be said on this subject. "Supposing I was surprised; I won the battle; and
what could you have had more, even if I had not been surprised?"

It is known on the authority of his niece, Lady Burghersh, that the
Duke "never read poetry," but his "real love of music," to which Lady
Shelley alludes, will perhaps come as a surprise to many.

 Most children
seem to be brought up on maxims which presuppose mental deficiency and constitutional carelessness.
But the naturally over-thoughtful and too-conscientious child, the child to whom applies Sir
John Lubbock's observation that the term "happy childhood" is sometimes a misnomer, needs no
admonition to "Try, try again," and to "Never weary of well doing."

Among other sayings, whether of home manufacture or acquired, I have often found comfort in
a suggestion first called to my attention by my friend, Dr. Maurice Richardson, who carries,
I believe, Epictetus in his bag, but who does not despise the lesser prophets. One day when
I was borrowing trouble about some prospective calamity, he said he always drew consolation
from the old farmer's observation:

"Mebbe 'taint so!"

Much unintentional self-suggestion is conveyed in one's habitual method of expressing his attitude
toward annoyances, thus: "That simply drives me wild." Suppose, now, one should try a little
substitution; for example:

  That    \
            drives me wild.
  Nothing /

                       (but that).
  I can stand anything
                       (at all).

        (not)          (this)
  I can       sleep in        position.
        (---)           (any)

The quieting effect is immediately perceptible.

Nor is the injurious effect of the explosive habit of speech limited to the person who indulges
it. The other day a lady, apparently in no haste, sauntered into a station of the "Elevated"
ahead of me, holding by the hand a small boy. The boy was enjoying himself immensely, gazing
about him with the wide-awake, but calmly contemplative air peculiar to childhood. Suddenly
the lady saw that a train was about to leave the station, and was seized by the not uncommon
compulsion to take the last train instead of the next one. She hurried the boy across the platform
only to meet the closed door of the departing train.

"Isn't that provoking!" she exclaimed. And the boy began to whimper.

Although the main object of this book is to call attention to the mental rather than the physical
treatment of these states, I cannot forbear reminding the reader of certain routine measures
which facilitate the desired improvement in mental attitude.

It is well to start the day with a quick plunge in cold water, that is, in water of the natural
temperature excepting in the cold season, when the extreme chill may be taken off to advantage.
A brisk rub with rough towels should follow. One should proceed immediately from the warm bed
to the bath, and should not first "cool off." A few setting-up exercises (bending the trunk
forward and back, sidewise, and with a twist) may precede the bath, and a few simple arm exercises
follow it. A few deep breaths will inevitably accompany these procedures. When one returns
to his room he no longer notices the chill in the air, and he has made a start toward accustoming
himself to, and really enjoying, lower temperatures than he fancied he could stand at all.

Every healthy adult should walk at least two miles daily in the open. We have been forced to
readjust our ideas as to the distance even an elderly person can walk without harm since a
pedestrian of sixty-nine has, without apparent injury, covered over one thousand miles, over
ordinary roads, at an average of fifty miles a day.

The day's work should be started with the resolution that every task shall be taken up in its
turn, without doubts and without forebodings, that bridges shall not be crossed until they
are reached, that the vagaries of others shall amuse and interest, not distress us, and that
we will live in the present, not in the past or the future. We must avoid undertaking too much,
and whatever we do undertake we must try not to worry as to whether we shall succeed. This
only prevents our succeeding. We should devote all our efforts to the task itself, and remember
that even failure under these circumstances may be better than success at the expense of prolonged
nervous agitation.

"Rest must be complete when taken and must balance the effort in work--rest meaning often some
form of recreation as well as the passive rest of sleep. Economy of effort should be gained
through normal concentration--that is, the power of erasing all previous impressions and allowing
a subject to hold and carry us, by dropping every thought or effort that interferes with it,
in muscle, nerve, and mind." (Annie Payson Call, "Power Through Repose.")

The over-scrupulous and methodical individual who can neither sleep nor take a vacation until
all the affairs of his life are arranged must remind himself that this happy consummation will
not be attained in his lifetime.

XIX.

HOME TREATMENT (CONTINUED)

Happiness and success in life do not depend on circumstances, but on ourselves.

Sir John Lubbock.

The obsession to "arrive" is a fertile source of fret and worry. This habit of mind leads to
frantic and impatient labor and blocks our pleasure at every point. The person who plays a
game only to see who wins loses half the benefit of the recreation. Here are two ways of walking
the half-mile to and from my office:

Suppose I start out with my mind on my destination, thinking only of what I shall do when I
get there, and how I shall do it. This thought influences my whole body. I am all "keyed up,"
my muscles are tense, my breathing, even, is constricted and the walk does me comparatively
little good.

