As soon as the Adamant was brought up with her head to the wind she opened fire upon the repeller.
The latter vessel could easily have sailed out of the range of a motionless enemy, but her
orders forbade this.  Her director had been instructed by the Syndicate to expose his vessel
to the fire of the Adamant's heavy guns.  Accordingly the repeller steamed nearer, and turned
her broadside toward the British ship.

Scarcely had this been done when the two great bow guns of the Adamant shook the air with tremendous
roars, each hurling over the sea nearly a ton of steel.  One of these great shot passed over
the repeller, but the other struck her armoured side fairly amidship.  There was a crash and
scream of creaking steel, and Repeller No. 7 rolled over to windward as if she had been struck
by a heavy sea.  In a moment she righted and shot ahead, and, turning, presented her port side
to the enemy.  Instant examination of the armour on her other side showed that the two banks
of springs were uninjured, and that not an air-buffer had exploded or failed to spring back
to its normal length.

Firing from the Adamant now came thick and fast, the crab, in obedience to signals, turning
her about so as to admit the firing of some heavy guns mounted amidships.  Three enormous solid
shot struck the repeller at different points on her starboard armour without inflicting damage,
while the explosion of several shells which hit her had no more effect upon her elastic armour
than the impact of the solid shot.

It was the desire of the Syndicate not only to demonstrate to its own satisfaction the efficiency
of its spring armour, but to convince Great Britain that her heaviest guns on her mightiest
battle-ships could have no effect upon its armoured vessels.  To prove the absolute superiority
of their means of offence and defence was the supreme object of the Syndicate.  For this its
members studied and worked by day and by night; for this they poured out their millions; for
this they waged war.  To prove what they claimed would be victory.

When Repeller No. 7 had sustained the heavy fire of the Adamant for about half an hour, it
was considered that the strength of her armour had been sufficiently demonstrated; and, with
a much lighter heart than when he had turned her broadside to the Adamant, her director gave
orders that she should steam out of the range of the guns of the British ship.  During the
cannonade Crab J had quietly slipped away from the vicinity of the Adamant, and now joined
the repeller.

The great ironclad battle-ship, with her lofty sides plated with nearly two feet of solid steel,
with her six great guns, each weighing more than a hundred tons, with her armament of other
guns, machine cannon, and almost every appliance of naval warfare, with a small army of officers
and men on board, was left in charge of Crab K, of which only a few square yards of armoured
roof could be seen above the water. This little vessel now proceeded to tow southward her vast
prize, uninjured, except that her rudder and propeller-blades were broken and useless.

Although the engines of the crab were of enormous power, the progress made was slow, for the
Adamant was being towed stern foremost.  It would have been easier to tow the great vessel
had the crab been attached to her bow, but a ram which extended many feet under water rendered
it dangerous for a submerged vessel to attach itself in its vicinity.

During the night the repeller kept company, although at a considerable distance, with the captured
vessel; and early the next morning her director prepared to send to the Adamant a boat with
a flag-of-truce, and a letter demanding the surrender and subsequent evacuation of the British
ship.  It was supposed that now, when the officers of the Adamant had had time to appreciate
the fact that they had no control over the movements of their vessel; that their armament was
powerless against their enemies; that the Adamant could be towed wherever the Syndicate chose
to order, or left helpless in midocean,--they would be obliged to admit that there was nothing
for them to do but to surrender.

But events proved that no such ideas had entered the minds of the Adamant's officers, and their
action totally prevented sending a flag-of-truce boat.  As soon as it was light enough to see
the repeller the Adamant began firing great guns at her.  She was too far away for the shot
to strike her, but to launch and send a boat of any kind into a storm of shot and shell was
of course impossible.

The cannon suspended over the stern of the Adamant was also again brought into play, and shot
after shot was driven down upon the towing crab.  Every ball rebounded from the spring armour,
but the officer in charge of the crab became convinced that after a time this constant pounding,
almost in the same place, would injure his vessel, and he signalled the repeller to that effect.

The director of Repeller No. 7 had been considering the situation. There was only one gun on
the Adamant which could be brought to bear upon Crab K, and it would be the part of wisdom
to interfere with the persistent use of this gun.  Accordingly the bow of the repeller was
brought to bear upon the Adamant, and her motor gun was aimed at the boom from which the cannon
was suspended.

The projectile with which the cannon was loaded was not an instantaneous motor-bomb.  It was
simply a heavy solid shot, driven by an instantaneous motor attachment, and was thus impelled
by the same power and in the same manner as the motor-bombs.  The instantaneous motor-power
had not yet been used at so great a distance as that between the repeller and the Adamant,
and the occasion was one of intense interest to the small body of scientific men having charge
of the aiming and firing.

The calculations of the distance, of the necessary elevation and direction, and of the degree
of motor-power required, were made with careful exactness, and when the proper instant arrived
the button was touched, and the shot with which the cannon was charged was instantaneously
removed to a point in the ocean about a mile beyond the Adamant, accompanied by a large portion
of the heavy boom at which the gun had been aimed.

The cannon which had been suspended from the end of this boom fell into the sea, and would
have crashed down upon the roof of Crab K, had not that vessel, in obedience to a signal from
the repeller, loosened its hold upon the Adamant and retired a short distance astern.  Material
injury might not have resulted from the fall of this great mass of metal upon the crab, but
it was considered prudent not to take useless risks.

The officers of the Adamant were greatly surprised and chagrined by the fall of their gun,
with which they had expected ultimately to pound in the roof of the crab.  No damage had been
done to the vessel except the removal of a portion of the boom, with some of the chains and
blocks attached, and no one on board the British ship imagined for a moment that this injury
had been occasioned by the distant repeller.  It was supposed that the constant firing of the
cannon had cracked the boom, and that it had suddenly snapped.

Even if there had been on board the Adamant the means for rigging up another arrangement of
the kind for perpendicular artillery practice, it would have required a long time to get it
into working order, and the director of Repeller No. 7 hoped that now the British captain would
see the uselessness of continued resistance.

