That was an offer worth listening to. Sunday was a wretched day for Blasi, for when he had
turned his two shirts and worn them both on both sides, he had never a clean one for Sunday.
He had no one to wash for him. His mother was dead, and his father had enough else to spend
for, without the washing for a grown-up son. Blasi's money went for other things than washing,
and he was not fond of doing it for himself.

The proposition was therefore very apropos. "Come a little nearer to the well; no one knows
who may be behind those trees. Now listen; Can you tell me what is going wrong with Dietrich?
He never whistles now, he never laughs, and his mother looks so sad, and she rarely speaks
even to answer when spoken to. Something has happened to Dietrich."

"Yes, and keeps on happening; all sorts of things, too. But Jost can tell you more than I can.
They sit together in the Rehbock half the night and more, too; long after everybody else has
gone, there they sit in the little back room. At first they do just as other people do, they
drink a little and then a little more, and Dietrich pays. But that's nothing to what it costs
him afterwards. They do something with paper, he and Jost. Sometimes it is a lottery and then
again something that they call speculating. I don't understand anything about it. Somebody
comes over from Fohrensee and explains it to them. He does not belong there; but I guess you
have seen him; he has fiery red hair, and red beard and red face. He has business in Fohrensee
once a week, and lives the rest of the time down in the city; and he arranges everything down
there, and then brings the account of gains and losses up to them; but it's a good deal more
loss than gain. Dietrich puts in more money every time. Jost has nothing to put in but promises.
He tells Dietrich all the time that presently the winnings will begin to flow in, and says
that at first a fellow must expect to lose, so as to win all the more in the end, and that
bye-and-bye it will all come back; with interest, of course. The red-haired man says yes to
it all. Whenever I want to put something in, and ask Dietrich to lend me a little to try with,
Jost acts as if he were the lord and master of the whole concern, and 'donkey' is the mildest
name he calls me. I am just waiting though, till I can trip him up, and I'll do it with a vengeance
too, so that he won't forget it all his life long."

"Now that is a good idea," said Judith. "You'd better tell him then, that you do it to pay
your debts, and that it would be well for him to follow your example. Now you have told me
enough. Bring me your shirt on Saturday, and I'll wash it for you."

Judith lifted her water-jug and was turning away, but Blasi detained her.

"Just wait one moment, I want to ask you a question. Do you think she will have him?"

The question seemed to interest Judith, for she stood stock still.

"Who? whom? what do you mean?"

"I mean Veronica and Jost. Do you think she will take him?" As Blasi spoke he came slowly nearer
to Judith. "He has been saying some things lately, that made me think so."

"If you know anything more stupid than that, I should like to hear it," cried Judith very angry
indeed; but she did not move away, for she wanted to hear all that Blasi had to say.

"I know what you mean," he went on, "but I am not so very stupid as you think. It certainly
means something, when she is so changed. Jost says that she knows all that Dietrich has been
about, and she is hot with anger against him because he has not told her about it himself.
Jost says that if he only mentions Dietrich's name before her she looks like a wild-cat in
a moment, and he says too that he has noticed for some time, that she has no objection to letting
Dietrich see that she can get along very well without his help, and you know that she is capable
of anything when she's angry."

"Well, this was the one drop wanting!" said Judith, and shouldering her jug she went off, snorting
with anger, in such a rage that Blasi stood looking after her in stupid amazement, and muttered,

"I wonder if she wants to get him, too!"

Judith walked along, talking aloud to herself,

"Yes, she is! she is! she is capable of anything when she is angry!"

Now Judith had looked upon her neighbor's boy from his childhood up, as if he belonged to her.
He was her prime, favorite and she meant to do well by him. She liked Veronica because she
was such a steady girl at her needle, and because she would have nothing to say to any one
but Dietrich. This very reserve however, was rather distasteful to Judith as regarded herself,
but she liked it towards others. She had planned it all out that Dietrich should marry Veronica
soon after the confirmation, that they should set up a pretty little establishment, and be
her beloved neighbors. She meant to be their intimate friend and helper, to go freely in and
out of their house, and to stand god-mother now and then. She would leave her property to the
little ones. Now all this fine air-castle was overthrown and all her plans spoiled. Judith
bounced violently into the kitchen and set her jug down with such a bang that the water spurted
up into the air.

"And no one can get a word out of her, either; it is exactly as if all the oil had been burned
out." This last remark referred to Gertrude, who had greatly altered during the last few months.
She had no longer the cheerful expression that she had always been noted for. She had grown
very quiet and silent. She even avoided her old and well-tried friend Judith, and if the latter
showed a disposition to talk about her household matters or her children's future, Gertrude
would give her to understand that she had no time to stop to talk.

Gertrude knew where Dietrich spent his evenings. She had expostulated with him about it more
than once. He had answered that he must keep on there for awhile, till a certain undertaking
which he had started with Jost was fairly under way. He assured her that this affair was certain
to turn out all right, and that she herself would be surprised and satisfied at the result.
He knew from some one who understood it, that it could not fail. He had to draw large sums
several times for himself and also for Jost, but he was sanguine that in a short time it would
all be paid back, with interest. Gertrude did not pretend to understand the business, but she
saw that Dietrich believed it to be safe and profitable, and she knew that her son would not
deceive her. As best I could, I explained the circumstances of the purchase of those ill-omened
boots. But his face and voice made so deep impression that during
the next few minutes I ordered many pairs.

Nemesis fell! They lasted more terribly than ever. And I was not able conscientiously to go
to him for nearly two years.

When at last I went I was surprised to find that outside one of the two little windows of his
shop another name was painted, also that of a bootmaker-making, of
course, for the Royal Family.

The old familiar boots, no longer in dignified isolation, were huddled in the single window.
Inside, the now contracted well of the one little shop was more scented
and darker than ever. And it was longer than usual, too, before a
face peered down, and the tip-tap of the bast slippers began. She had often said to herself, "Ah! how much longer will
this go on?" but she tried hard to believe that it would soon come to an end, and her son would
resume his former orderly and happy mode of life. But this evening she was so anxious that
she could not stay in her bedroom. She went down into the garden.

The moon peeped out from between the flying clouds, and shone peacefully down upon the trees
and the neat flower-beds. Gertrude seated herself upon a small bench under the apple tree,
and gazed about the garden, all illuminated by the moonbeams. She had planted it all and cared
for it with her own hands. She had done this as she did everything, carefully and with great
painstaking, and it was all for her son's sake. His should be the pleasure and the profit of
all. Why could he not be happy in it now? Why was she so worried about him? Dietrich was walking
in steep and dangerous paths; that she was sure of, but he knew the straight road and would
not his steps turn back to it again? Her thoughts went back to the days when her little Dieterli
loved good and orderly conduct; it could not be that he had lost his love for it, that he did
not still feel that in the right conduct of life lies inward and outward blessing. She recalled
the evening of the day when her husband was borne from the house to his burial. She had taken
the children by the hand and, stupefied with pain, was about to put them to bed, but Dieterli
objected, saying,

"No, mother, no; it is not good to go to bed before you say your prayers."

Did her boy ever pray now? "Oh, Dieterli, my son, you are wandering away, but you know the
way home," she said to herself, and she folded her hands in prayer, for her habit was to lay
all her troubles before God, her Supporter and Comforter.

At this moment, she heard through the stillness loud shouts and cries, first at a distance,
then nearer and nearer, until they grew into a wild tumult. Then many of the voices seemed
to scatter in different directions while some sounded as if approaching the garden. A vague
fear seized Gertrude. Three fellows shouting and calling, passed on the other side of the hedge;
she recognized one of the voices.

"Jost," she cried feebly, "Jost, what is it? where is Dietrich?"

There was no answer; Jost did not or would not, hear. He ran faster than before, and the second
fellow ran too. The last one paused a little; it was Blasi. He said hastily:

"He isn't coming yet awhile. You can go to bed;" and was making off.

"Oh do tell me what has happened," said Gertrude, white with terror. "Don't leave me so, but
tell me, Blasi, why Dietrich hasn't come home with the rest of you?"

Blasi had too much respect for Dietrich's mother to run away from her when she put a direct
question to him, although he would fain have escaped. He came close to the hedge, and replied,

"There has been a row at the Rehbock. Two men were killed. Some one stole the cattle dealer's
money bag--"

"Is Dietrich killed? Speak out!" broke in Gertrude, trembling.

"No; he struck about him bravely, till one of the fellows got enough of it, and lay dead on
the ground; and then he made off."

With this Blasi ran on.

Gertrude mounted wearily to her room as if her last day was come. She sat down upon her bed,
and when the morning light filled the room, still she sat there listening in trembling anxiety,
as she had listened through all the long night; in vain. Dietrich had not come home in the
night; he did not come in the morning.

CHAPTER VIII.

EACH ONE ACCORDING TO HIS KIND.

In all Tannenegg and Fohrensee, nothing was talked of but the affair of the night before. Never
was such excitement known. In every house, at every corner, in all the roads, groups of people
stood talking it over; each telling what he knew.

Everyone asked questions, and no one listened to the answers. Such a fight at the Rehbock!
It began over the card-table. The cattle-dealer from Fohrensee was on his way home with his
bag full of money, when he stopped in at the Rehbock, and joined the game. When the dispute
broke out, his big fists took their share in the fray. Not until two of the party lay for dead
on the ground, did the brawling cease and the combatants begin to cool. Then the cattle-dealer
discovered that his bag full of gold was gone, and raised a fearful alarm.

Then the red-haired man from Fohrensee shouted into the midst of the excited crowd,

"Don't let any one get away. Run after them! That's the only way to find out the thief!"

This man had not taken part in the fight, but had mixed with the crowd, trying to pacify them,
and to restore quiet.

His advice was useless. A good many had already gone. First of all, Dietrich had disappeared;
then several fellows ran after him, and then all the rest went together.

On the way home, Jost had told his companions that Dietrich had made off with himself, and
that he, Jost, had told him when he saw him going that there was doubtless good reason for
his wishing to be out of the way. But in truth Jost had not said any such thing to Dietrich!

One of the men had run at once for the doctor, and the doctor had come in the night to the
Rehbock, and had found that the two men were not dead after all. So he had given orders that
they should be let alone till they had slept off the effect of their carouse.

In the morning, all those who had been at the Rehbock the night before, were called together;
and every one denied stoutly having any knowledge of the cattle-dealer's money, and all were
ready to be searched in proof of their innocence. Dietrich alone was not there; he had vanished,
no one knew whither. Some one whispered, and then it was softly repeated, then louder and louder,
that Dietrich would not have taken himself off if he had had a clear conscience; and although
nobody seriously believed Dietrich capable of a disgraceful act, yet after awhile it seemed
to grow more likely, especially when it became known that he had lost a great deal of money
in betting and gambling, and was unable to pay back what he had lost. And many shook their
heads and said, "How easy it is for a man to be drawn into evil ways if he once begins to go
down hill!"

Where Dietrich had gone, was now the important question. No trace of him had been discovered
from the moment of his disappearance. The cattle-dealer left no stone unturned to find him,
but he could get no clue to his whereabouts. He had entered complaints against Dietrich, and
hoped that the hands of the law would succeed in getting track of him. But it was all in vain.
Gradually, no one knew how, a report got about that Dietrich had fled to Australia, and would
never come back. Little by little every one came to believe it.

Except one. One single person in all Tannenegg was bold enough to swim against this stream
of suspicion. This was Judith. Not timidly and in secret, but aloud, at all times and in all
places, she declared decidedly,

"There's not one word of truth in what you all say. It's a lie from beginning to end. Dietrich
has no more stolen than I have, and I needn't say more than that. I'll ferret this thing out,
till I find the true culprit, or my name's not Judith."

The first thing to do was to get a clear account of the whole affair; for although she had
already heard it told a dozen times, it had always been among other people, who were continually
interrupting and asking questions, and were too anxious to hear the end, to wait for the full
account of the beginning. So she decided to apply to Blasi, who, as he had been on the spot,
must know all about it. But she had to hunt him up; for since that unlucky evening he had kept
himself out of sight. She placed her bucket under the spout at the well, and then took a turn
about the kitchen garden behind the sexton's cottage. Blasi stood in the back doorway, just
as he was in the habit of standing in the front doorway, only instead of holding his face up
as if to catch any agreeable odors that might be floating about, he stood to-day with drooping
head, gazing sadly at the uncared-for garden.

"What's amiss, Blasi?" asked Judith, sharply, coming upon him before he was aware of her approach.

"Nothing; if you know of anything we will share it," said Blasi sullenly.

"Well, perhaps I know something that it would not be a bad thing for you to share with me.
Perhaps it's worth while for some one who has learned it by the sweat of her brow, to tell
you that vegetables can be made to grow in a garden, instead of nettles, which you seem to
cultivate."

"I don't care what grows anywhere; one thing is as good as another to me, now that Dietrich
has gone. There's nothing to do in the evening now. I've half a mind to go after him."

"Go where? do you know where he is?"

"I don't, myself, but Jost does, and I know that Jost is expecting to hear from him. Though
he does call me stupid, I have my eye on him," said Blasi, with angry emphasis. "And I know
it was Jost who advised Dietrich to run away and hide, though he didn't mean to let me know.
Oh, I'm no fool!"

Judith nodded assentingly, as if Blasi's information confirmed her own suspicions.

"Here, Blasi, here's a little something for you. Now I want you to tell me exactly how this
thing happened, from the very beginning; and don't leave out a single thing. I want to hear
the whole story, connectedly."

"You may be sure I will," said Blasi, weighing the silver piece which Judith had given him
affectionately in his hand. "You see they were all together in the little back room at first;
the red-haired man and Jost and Dietrich, and when I went in I noticed at once that something
had happened that our two didn't like; for Dietrich sat with his elbows on the table and his
head in his hands, and Jost was swearing roundly. Presently Jost said, 'We will double our
bets, Dietrich, and perhaps the luck will turn.' Dietrich, only groaned. Then the red-haired
fellow said, 'Come, let's go down and play cards with the cattle-dealer, and take a glass of
something that will raise your spirits.'"

"Dietrich never used to gamble; nor to drink when he was not thirsty;" cried Judith angrily.

"Pooh! When every one is playing cards, a fellow can't hold off and say he won't join, and
as for the drink, Dietrich has washed down a good deal of vexation with it lately, and he took
it powerfully too, I can tell you. Well, the play began, and it went on fast. I noticed that
the red man looked mightily pleased, and urged them all on, and the louder the cattle-dealer
scolded, the more the red man filled up his glass. When the quarrel came to blows, I heard
the red-head call out to the cattle-dealer, 'Come over here, you'll soon silence them,' So
he kept exciting him, and he struck out well with his great fists. The red-head mixed in the
crowd, and stuck close to the cattle-dealer, but he never struck a blow himself; of course
not, such a gentleman as he is! I did not see Dietrich knock the Fohrensee fellow down, but
just when the storm was most furious, I saw Dietrich run out, and Jost after him, and I thought
I saw Jost give Dietrich something. I ran out after them, and I heard Jost advising Dietrich
to make off as fast as he could, and send him word where he hid himself. When I came up to
them, Jost pushed me back; I couldn't get a word with Dietrich, who ran right off, and Jost
pulled me into the house. There the noise was increasing every minute, for the cattle-dealer
had discovered that his money-bag was gone, and red-head screamed out like a mad-man, that
nobody must get away, and everybody must be searched. When they found that Dietrich had gone,
the cattle-man started off after him, and some others too, and then they all broke up. Now
you know all that I know. Nothing else happened; except that I went for the doctor, who said
the two men were not dead. When Jost tells Dietrich that, why, there's nothing to prevent his
coming back. That is, unless there's something else."

"What do you mean by 'something else'?" said Judith sharply. "But there--you're all alike.
One repeats what another has said, till you all get to saying the same thing and then of course
you believe it. A nice set of friends you are--the whole of you. I mean to stir up the ground
under you all until I find out where the truth is. Then you can begin to stare with the others,
you blind mole!" and Judith suddenly walked off as if the earth were burning beneath her angry
feet.

Blasi understood neither her words nor her anger. He looked after her, shook his head rather
sadly, and said to himself,

    "Women folk are a very foolish folk."

Home sped the "foolish" Judith; put on her Sunday garments and started on her journey. If ever
she had a project in her head, she did not wait till to-morrow to put it into execution. And
to-day she was bent on giving the cattle dealer a piece of her mind. She paused a moment when
she came to Gertrude's house, then went on her way, saying half aloud,

"No, I'll say nothing to her, since she says nothing to me. If 'mum's' the word I can use it
as well as she."

Judith was pained that Gertrude had not from the beginning talked with her of her troubles,
for Judith was one who liked to give and receive sympathy. Veronica too was much too reticent
to please her kind-hearted neighbor who could never get a word with her about what was going
on. Veronica and Gertrude were both very silent by nature, about anything that touched them
deeply, especially in sorrow. On the first day after the terrible blow that had befallen them,
they talked it all over, and wept together, to ease their hearts of the first misery. Then
Gertrude said,

"Dietrich has sinned and he must make atonement, but he has not stolen; I am sure that my son
is not a thief." And Veronica had responded promptly,

"If every one in the whole world said that he had stolen that money, I should not listen; for
I know he is no thief."

As soon as it became known that Dietrich was gone, letters and bills came pouring in upon the
poor widow. Her son had borrowed large sums of money and had lost even more at play. She soon
found that not only all her husband's savings, but also the house and the business were deeply
encumbered. She talked things over with the workman who had been so many years in her employ
and asked if he would help her carry on the business as he had done after her husband's death
while Dietrich was still a child. The man was very angry with Dietrich for having thrown away
the result of all those years of labor, and at first refused to have anything more to do with
the business. He yielded at last, however, to Gertrude's urgent request, and consented to remain
with her at least till the future prospects of the business could be decided upon; and Gertrude
agreed that if it should prosper she would hand it over to him, in case Dietrich should not
return within a certain time.

And so the mother set herself again to her task. She worked early and late; she seemed to have
gained new strength and courage instead of being crushed down by this new burden.

