From his monastic life onwards Gregory seems to have suffered from bad health, due in part,
probably, to his extreme asceticism while living in his monastery. During the last few years
of his life he was in continual pain from gout, which makes his activity and his achievements
still more astonishing. For long he was confined to his bed altogether. He died on March 12th,
604. In contrast to the enthusiasm with which his accession to the Papacy was greeted, he was
now accused by the fickle population of having caused the famine, which was then raging, by
his lavish expenditure, though the latter was largely due to the charitable relief which he
habitually gave to alleviate the distress which prevailed all the time that he filled the Papal
chair. But he was canonized after his death by universal consent in the West, and the Council
of Cloveshoo, in 747, fixed the 12th of March for his veneration: "That the birthday of the
blessed Pope Gregory, and also the day of the burial of St. Augustine the Archbishop and Confessor
(who being sent to the English by the said Pope, our father Gregory, first brought the knowledge
of the Faith, the sacrament of Baptism, and the notice of the Heavenly Country), which is the
26th of May, be honourably observed by all: so that each day be kept with a cessation from
labour, by ecclesiastics and monastics; and that the name of our blessed father and doctor
Augustine be always mentioned in singing the Litany after the invocation of St. Gregory."

                                   THE
                          GREGORIAN TRADITION. 

The Bishop of Durham, 3. The Bishop of Winchester, he observes:

"But the other bishops have place above all the barons of the realm, because they hold their
bishopricks of the king per baroniam; but they give place to viscounts, earls, marquesses,
and dukes."

ARUN.

Elizabeth and Isabel (Vol. i., pp. 439. 488.).--The title of Ælius
Antonius Nebressengis's history is, Rerum a Fernando et Elisabe Hispaniaram
fælicissimis regibus gestarum Decades duæ.

J.B.

Dr. Thomas Bever's
Legal Polity of Great Britain (Vol. i., p. 483.).--Is J.R. aware that
the principal part of the parish of Mortimer, near Reading, as well
as the manorial rights, belongs to a Richard Benyon de Beauvoir, Esq.,
residing not very far from that spot, at Englefield House, about five
miles on the Newbury Road from Reading.

This did not attract much attention at the time, and the question was again reopened in 1890
by M. Gevaert in a lecture given in the presence of the Académie and of the King of the Belgians.
The earlier "doubters" had argued the question from a purely historical standpoint: M. Gevaert
lays stress especially on the musical side of the question. Theirs was chiefly negative; he
proposes a theory of his own. He wishes to substitute Gregory II. or III. for Gregory I. The
traditional view has been upheld against him by Dom Morin, Dr. Peter Wagner, and Rev. W. H. Frere.

The Historical Evidence may be summarized as follows, working backwards from a time when the
Gregorian tradition was in existence beyond all question:--

  I.--John the Deacon (c. 872), Vita St. Gregorii, lib. II., cap.
  vi., Antiphonarium Centonizans, Cantorum Constituit Scholam. "In the
  house of the Lord, like a most wise Solomon, knowing the compunction
  which the sweetness of music inspires, he compiled for the sake of the
  singers the collection called 'Antiphoner,' which is of so great
  usefulness. He founded also the School of Singers who to this day
  perform the sacred chant in the Holy Roman Church according to
  instructions received from him. He assigned to it several estates, and
  had two houses built for it, one situated at the foot of the steps of
  the Church of the Apostle St. Peter, the other in the neighbourhood of
  the buildings of the patriarchal palace of the Lateran. There to-day
  are still shown the couch on which he reposed while giving his singing
  lessons; and the whip with which he threatened the boys is still
  preserved and venerated as a relic, as well as his authentic
  Antiphoner. By a clause inserted in his deed of gift, he laid down
  under pain of anathema that these estates should be divided between the
  two portions of the School in payment for the daily service."--(Patr. Eikon
  Basilike (Vol. ii., p. 134.).--I would suggest to A.C. that the circumstance
of his copy of this work bearing on its cover "C.R.," surmounted by
a crown, may not be indicative of its having been in the possession
of royalty.

It may have been, perhaps, not unusual to occasionally so distinguish
words of this description published in or about that year (1660).

  I have a small volume entitled--
  

  "The History of His Sacred Majesty Charles II.
  

It is certainly an important point that the Schola itself attributed its foundation to Gregory
I. Such a tradition would be carefully preserved in an important corporation like this.

A further witness to the existence of St. Gregory's couch is to be found in Notitia Ecclesiarum
Urbis Romæ, an itinerary assigned by de Rossi to the seventh century, (de Rossi, Rom. Sot.,
vol. i., pp. 138-143.)

  II.--Pope Leo IV. (847-855) to the Abbot Honoratus, Ex registro Leonis
  IIII. "There is something quite incredible, the sound of which has
  reached our ears: a thing which, if true, tends rather to diminish our
  consideration than to give it honour, to obscure it rather than to give
  it lustre. It appears in short that you feel nothing but aversion for
  the beautiful chant of St. Gregory, and for the manner of singing and
  reading laid down and taught by him in the Church, so that you are in
  disagreement on this point not only with the Holy See, which is near to
  you, but also with almost the whole Western Church, with all who use
  Latin to offer their praises to the Eternal King and pay Him the
  tribute of harmonious sounds.

  "All these Churches have received with so much eagerness and ardent
  affection this tradition of Gregory, and after having received it
  unreservedly they find so much pleasure in it, that even now they apply
  to us for more of it, thinking that perhaps something more which they
  do not know of, may have been preserved among us. It would never do
  to have France command such a strategic point on the way to the East.
  England was alert. She lost not a moment. The impecunious Khedive was
  offered by telegraph $20,000,000 for his interest in the Suez Canal,
  nearly one-half of the whole capital stock. He wished by
  this means to act more powerfully upon men's hearts in order to arouse
  and touch them; and in fact the sound of his sweet melodies has
  gathered in the Churches not merely spiritual men, but also those who
  are less cultivated and sensitive.

