In the space of about five minutes, Gerald and Lionel appeared, and the former came up to them
alone, with a look which had more of shyness than of pleasure, and his greeting, while more
courteous, was less open and cordial than Lionel's had been. They all went together to the
house of the boys' tutor, who had also been Edmund's; there was a great maze of talking and
introductions: Lady Marchmont made herself very charming to the mistress of the house: Edmund
and the tutor disappeared together, and did not come back till the others had nearly finished
a most hospitable luncheon; after which the visitors set out to see all that there was time
to see, and Marian caused Gerald to fetch Lionel to accompany them.

Lionel walked with Edmund and Marian, but Gerald on the other hand attached himself to Lord
and Lady Marchmont, talking to them freely and pleasantly, answering Selina's questions, much
to her amusement and satisfaction, and Lord Marchmont comparing notes with him, as old Etonians
delight to do with "the sprightly race, disporting" for the time being, on the "margen green"
of Father Thames. A particularly lively, pleasant, entertaining, well-mannered boy was Gerald,
but, all the time, Marian was feeling that he was holding aloof both from her and Edmund, never
allowing either of them the opportunity of speaking to him alone, for even a minute; and his
manner, whenever Edmund either spoke to him or looked at him, was such as to betray to her
that he was ill at ease.

Thus it was while they viewed the chapel, the court, with what Selina was pleased to call "Henry's
holy shade," the upper school, the hundred steps, the terrace, and beautiful S. George's, with
its gorgeous banners and carved stalls, and blazoned shields, that glimpse into the Gothic
world of chivalry and romance; and in the midst of it that simple flat stone, which thrills
the heart with a deep feeling at once of love, sorrow and reverence; that stone which recalls
the desolate night which, in darkness and ruin, amid torn banners, and scutcheons riven, saw
the Martyr king go white to his grave. Marian entered into all these things, in spite of her
anxiety, for her mind was free enough to be open to external objects, now that her brother
was in Edmund's hands, and she was relieved of that burthen of responsibility which had so
pressed on her.

Such was their Eton day, and with no more satisfaction from Gerald did they part at the Slough
station. The Marchmonts were loud in his praise, Marian sought the real opinion in Edmund's
eyes, but he was leaning back, looking meditative, and when first he roused himself to enter
into conversation, it was of Lionel and not of Gerald that he spoke.

"Do you say that any one has looked at that boy's eyes?"

"Yes, Mr. Wells, the Oakworthy apothecary."

"Do you know what is thought of him?"

"I don't know," said Marian considering. "He attends a good many people, I believe he is thought
well of; but no one ever is ill at home, so I have no experience of him. Yes, he was called
in once when we all had the measles, and last winter about Lionel's eyes. I am sure I don't
know whether he is what you would call a good doctor or not; all I know is, that he is not
at all like Dr. Oldham."

Edmund smiled. "Has Mrs. Lyddell not been uneasy?"

"O no!" said Marian. "No one ever troubles their head about Lionel, besides it was always so."

"Always how?"

"His eyes were always weak, and easily tired and dazzled, from the very first when I knew him.
They don't look as if there was anything amiss with them, and so people don't suspect it."

"I think they do look very much amiss," said Edmund. "Do not you observe an indistinctness
about the pupil, between it and the iris? Can you tell whether that was always the case?"

"I don't know, I see what you mean. I should say it had begun of late. Do you think it so bad
a sign?" she asked anxiously.

"I am not sure; I only know if he belonged to me, I should not like it at all."

Marian pondered and feared, and considered if it would be possible to stir up Mrs. Lyddell;
she herself was much startled, and rather indignant; but she doubted greatly whether poor Lionel
was of sufficient importance in the family for any one to be very anxious on his account. In
the meantime, she was extremely desirous of hearing what account Edmund had received from the
tutor respecting her brother, but she had no opportunity till late in the evening, when he
came and sat by her on the sofa, saying, "Now, Marian, I will answer your anxious eyes, though
I am afraid I have nothing very satisfactory to tell you. I don't know that there is any positive
harm--it is only the old story of a clever boy with too much money, and too much left to himself.
Idleness and thoughtlessness."

"And what shall you do?"

"I don't know--I must think."

Whereupon they both sat silent.

"I shall see you again in the summer," said he.

"O yes--perhaps you will come in Gerald's holidays."

Another silence, then she said, "Do you think very badly of poor Lionel's eyes?"

"No, I don't say that, for I know nothing, only I wonder his family are not more anxious."

"I shall see if Mrs. Lyddell will believe there is cause for alarm."

The carriage was announced, she wished him good-bye again, thanked her cousins for her pleasant
day, and departed, wondering to herself how it could have been a pleasant day, as after all
it had been, in spite of doubt and anxiety and care.

She told Mrs. Lyddell when she came in, that she had seen Lionel.

"How were his eyes?" asked Caroline.

"I am afraid they were more dazzled than usual."

No one said anything, and after a pause she went on. "Edmund remarked a sort of indistinctness
about the pupil, which he said was not a good sign."

"What was that?" said Mr. Lyddell looking up, and Marian, startled, yet glad to have attracted
his notice, repeated what she had said. "Did not Wells look at his eyes last winter?" he said,
turning to his wife.

"Yes, he said he could not see anything the matter with them--they must be spared--and he sent
a mixture to bathe them. Lionel has been using it continually."

"How would it be to have him up here to see some one?" said Mr. Lyddell.

"Better wait for the holidays," answered his wife. "It would be the worst thing possible to
set him thinking, about his eyes in the middle of the half-year. Little as he does now, it
would soon be less, and his eyes have kept him back so much already that he really cannot afford
to lose any more time."

There it ended, Mrs. Lyddell was not to be alarmed; she had been too long used to prosperity
even to contemplate the possibility that harm should come nigh to her or to her dwelling. Mr.
Lyddell, who left all family matters to her, forgot all about it, and though Marian talked
Caroline into some fears on the subject, Caroline could do no more than she could herself.

CHAPTER XIII.

  "Benedict. What, my dear Lady Disdain, are you yet living?"

  "Beatrice. Is it possible Disdain should die while she has such
  meet food to feed her?"

  Much Ado about Nothing.

The Lyddell family did not continue in London much longer; it had been a short season, and
though the session of Parliament was not over, most of the ladies were taking flight into the
country, before the end of June,--Mrs. Lyddell among the rest,--and her husband went backwards
and forwards to London, as occasion called him.

The girls were glad to get into the country, but Marian soon found that she had not escaped
either from gaieties, or from the objects of her aversion; for Mr. Faulkner brought his mother
and sisters to High Down House, gave numerous parties there, and made a constant interchange
of civilities with the family at Oakworthy. Archery was pretty much the fashion with the young
ladies that year; it was a sport which Marian liked particularly, having often practised it
with Edmund and Agnes, and her bow and arrows were always the first to be ready.

One day when Marian, Caroline, and Clara were shooting on the lawn at Oakworthy, Mr. and Miss
Faulkner rode from High Down, came out on the lawn, and joined them. From that moment, any
one could see the change that came over Marian. Instead of laughing and talking, teaching Clara,
and paying only half attention to her own shooting, she now went on as if it was her sole object,
and as if she had no other purpose in life. She fixed her arrows and twanged her string with
a rigidity as if the target had been a deadly enemy, or her whole fate was concentrated in
hitting the bull's eye; and when her arrows went straight to the mark, or at least much straighter
than those of any one else, she never turned her head, or vouchsafed more than the briefest
answer to the exclamations around.

The others were talking of archery in general and in particular,--just what, if it had not
been Mr. Faulkner, would have delighted her; but she would not hear him. He might speak of
the English long-bow, and the cloth yard-shaft, and the butts at which Elizabeth shot, and
the dexterity required for hitting a deer, and of the long arrow of the Indian, and the Wourali
reed of South America,--as long as he spoke it was nothing to her, let Caroline smile and answer,
and appeal to her as much she would. Then came a talk about archery meetings and parties, in
which at last they all grew so eager, that they stood still round the return target, and Marian
could not shoot back again without perilling them; so she unstrung her bow, and stood apart
with a stern face, which made her look a great deal more like Diana, than she by any means
suspected or desired.

Two days after, there came a note from Miss Faulkner,--Julia, as she had requested to be called,--saying
that her brother was so delighted with the archery schemes that had been discussed, that he
could not give them up, and intended to give a grand fete at High Down,--archery in the morning,
a ball in the evening, and all the ladies who liked, to be in costume. She ended by begging
Caroline to come to luncheon that day, or the next, to enter into council on the subject. There
was great delight; such an entertainment was quite a novelty in the neighbourhood, and the
costume seemed to make it all the more charming in the eyes of Caroline, Clara, and their mother;
all were talking at once, and wondering what it could or should be, while Marian went on reading
imperturbably without one remark.

"It ought to be in Robin Hood's time, if only for the sake of Maid Marian," said Caroline.
"She will be quite sure to win the prize."

"O yes, that she will," said Clara; "she shoots so much better than any one else."

"I shall not shoot in public," said Marian, looking up for a moment, and then going on with
her book.

"You will do nothing to make yourself particular," said Mrs. Lyddell: "it will be very silly
to set your face against this fete, when every one knows how fond you are of archery."

"We don't know anything yet about what is to be," said Caroline, quickly; and at that moment
Elliot, coming in, offered to ride with her to High Down, whereupon she hastened to get ready.
Such an obliging offer from her brother was certainly too uncommon a thing to be neglected,
in spite of the unwonted graciousness and amiability which Elliot had for the last few weeks
assumed towards her.

When she was gone, Marian and Clara resumed their ordinary occupations, and one of them at
least troubled herself no more about the fete, until, shortly before dinner time, Elliot, Caroline,
and Mr. Faulkner all rode up to the front door. Mr. Faulkner, it appeared, was come to dinner,
and to carry on the consultation, since he was extremely eager about the scheme, and no time
was to be lost in sending out the invitations. The Sherwood Forest plan had been talked over,
and abandoned as too common-place. It was to be a Kenilworth fete; eight young ladies of Lady
Julia's especial party were to appear in the morning in a pretty uniform dress, a little subdued
from the days of the ruff and farthingale; and in the evening there was to be a regular Kenilworth
quadrille, in which each lady or gentleman was to assume the dress of some character of Queen
Elizabeth's court. In fact, as Mr. Faulkner said;--

  "Gorgeous dames and statesmen bold
  In bearded majesty appear."

Amy Robsart, Katherine Seymour, Anne Clifford, Frances Walsingham, Mildred Cecil, and other
ladies of the time were mentioned, and then came the counting up of their eight living representatives,--the
two Misses Faulkner, Caroline, yes, and Clara herself, who started and danced with ecstasy,
then glanced entreatingly at her mother, who looked doubtful; Marian, two cousins of the Faulkners,
who were always ready for anything, and a Miss Mordaunt, were reckoned up, and their dresses
quickly discussed; but all the time Marian said not a word. She was thinking of the waste of
time and consideration, the folly, levity and vanity, the throwing away of money, all this
would occasion, and enjoying in her own mind the pleasure of resisting it in toto. She supposed
she must go to the archery meeting, though why people could not be contented to shoot on their
own lawns, instead of spoiling their pleasure by all this fuss, she could not guess; but make
a show of herself and her shooting, be stared at by all the world,--that she would never do.
Nor would she make a figure of herself at the ball, and spend the money which she wanted very
much for her poor people and her books, now that her court dress and London finery had eaten
up such an unconscionable share of her allowance. Increased as it was, she had never felt so
poor as at present; she wanted Mrs. Jameson's "Sacred and Legendary Art" for herself, and there
were all the presents to be sent to the old people at Fern Torr; and should these be given
up for the sake of appearing as the fair Anne Clifford, or some such person, for one evening,
during which she would be feeling most especially unnatural and uncomfortable? No indeed! and
she trusted that she had a very good and sufficient defence against all such foolery, in the
slight mourning which she was wearing for one of the Marchmont connection. True, she had thought
of leaving it off next Sunday, but no matter; it would be such armour as was not to be lightly
parted with; and if she went to the ball at all, it should never, never be as the heiress of
the Cliffords, but as the faithful mourning relation of old Mr. Thomas Marchmont, her second
cousin once removed, whom she had never beheld in her life, and who would have been dead at
least nine weeks by the time it took place.

She said nothing about it in the drawing-room; but when they went up stairs, she told Caroline
not to reckon upon her, for she should be in mourning, and could not wear a fancy dress. Caroline
looked much vexed. "It was a great pity," she said, "and Julia Faulkner wished it to be all
their own set. Besides, would not Marian shoot,--she who did it so well?"

"O, no, no, I could do no such thing with all those people staring."

"Not even for a silver arrow? You would be sure to win it."

"I should be ashamed of the very sight of it ever after. O no! I should like--at least I should
not mind seeing it all as a spectator, but as to making a part of the show, never, never, Caroline!"

"Well, I know it is of no use to try to persuade you!" said Caroline, with a little annoyance
in her tone. "Good night."

Lady Julia, with her son and daughter, came to call the next day. Marian thought herself fortunate
in not being in the drawing-room. She put on her bonnet, slipped out at the garden door, and
walked away with a book in her hand, to the remotest regions of the park, where she sat down
under a thorn-tree, and read Schiller's Thirty Years' War with a sort of exemplary diligence
and philosophy, till it was so late that she thought herself perfectly secure of the Faulkners'
being gone. Yet she only just missed them, for their carriage was driving off at one door,
as she reached the other.

"Where have you been, Marian?" was the first greeting.

"I have been walking to the old thorn."

"O, have you? We hunted for you everywhere in the house: we would hardly believe Fanny when
she said you were gone out, for I knew you meant to walk with us."

"I thought you would be engaged so long that it was not worth while to wait for you."

"Well, but did you know you had missed the Faulkners?" said Clara.

"I knew they were here."

Every one understood this except Clara, and very little did it please Mrs. Lyddell or Caroline.

"Marian," said Mrs. Lyddell, "you really must not be so absurd about this matter. Your mourning
is nothing. You need not be wearing it even now; and it will annoy Lady Julia, and put her
to serious inconvenience, if you continue to refuse."

"I am sure I do not wish to inconvenience her," said Marian; "but there must be many young
ladies who would be only too happy to take the part."

"Of course," said Mrs. Lyddell, "any one else would rejoice to be asked; but the point is,
that it is so unpleasant to admit any thing of a stranger into the intimacy these things occasion."

"I am almost a stranger to them."

"Yes, but not to us, Marian," said Clara. "You have known them as long, or longer than we have;
and you would look so very well. Lady Julia said herself that such a distinguished face and
figure as yours would set the whole thing off to advantage."

Caroline well knew this was but the way to make Marian still more determined against it. She
held her tongue through all the persuasions of her mother and Clara; and trusting a little,
but not much, to the superior influence which she knew herself to possess, she followed Marian
to her room, and began,--"Marian, are you still resolute against this unfortunate archery?
because, if you do not really think it a matter of right and wrong, I should be very much obliged
to you if you would only yield."

It was not so easy to withstand Caroline speaking in this way, as Mrs. Lyddell almost scolding
and Clara talking nonsense; but Marian had made up her mind, and would not let herself be shaken.
"I don't think I can," was her answer.

"Will you say whether you really think it wrong?"

"I don't know." Not her considering "I don't know," but the dry, provoking end-of-the-matter
answer of half sullen days gone by.

"If you really thought it positively wrong," proceeded Caroline, "not another word would I
say: but I don't see how you can without condemning all gaeties, and that I know you do not."

"I only think it a--a waste of time--a great deal of nonsense," said Marian, faltering for
an answer; "and really I have spent so much money; I do not like to throw away any more."

"O, you do not know how we have settled that," said Caroline, beginning to be hopeful now that
she had something tangible to attack. "The dresses for the morning will be nothing,--only a
white skirt and green polka, which will do to wear for ever after, and a little ruff, very
pretty, and no expense at all; and a little alteration will make our court dresses perfectly
suitable for Queen Elizabeth's ladies. You need not be at all afraid of being ruined."

Marian saw that, though there would be many a little expense to make a mickle one, yet it would
still only cost her Mrs. Jameson, instead of the gifts to the poor people; but as this was
what chiefly justified her in her own eyes, she would not admit the conviction, and answered,
"Those things that are altered and adapted really are as costly in the end as if they were
new altogether. Besides, I could not, I really could not shoot before such an assembly."

"I should so like to see you get the arrow."

"O Caroline, that would be worse than anything!"

"Well, then, don't get it; shoot as badly as you please: only do be kind and make one of us,
or you will spoil the whole concern."

"How can that be? What difference can my dressing up or shooting make to any one?"

"Why, for one thing, if you are not one, as you must be, living with us and all, Julia will
be obliged to ask that Miss Grimley; don't you know her?"

"What, that old young lady who has been figuring in the newspaper so long as getting all the
archery prizes?"

"Yes, the veteran archer, as Elliot calls her; and Mr. Faulkner says, if she appears in character
at all, it must be as Queen Elizabeth herself dancing a stately pavise to the sound of the
little fiddle. She is some connection of theirs, and must be asked, if you will not take it;
and she is almost as bad as Queen Elizabeth herself, and will give none of us any peace about
the dresses, O Marian! Julia said she should esteem it as a real kindness from you if you would
be Lady Anne, if only for the sake of keeping her out!"

"I think it would be very absurd for a person who hates the whole concern to be dragged in,
for the sake of keeping out one who likes it!"

"Then you are still resolved? Well, I had not much expectation, but still I was half inclined
to hope you would relent, if you did not think it a point of principle, when you knew that
it would be a real favor to me."

"To you, Caroline! you do not care for such trumpery."

"I do care about seeing my friends mortified and vexed," said Caroline, mournfully.

"Your friends!" exclaimed Marian, in a voice of contempt.

"Yes, as much as kindness can make them."

"And esteem? O Caroline!"

"Kindness--readiness to oblige," repeated Caroline.

"They are my friends, and I am very fond of them."

Caroline went away without another word, and Marian felt that her words implied that she preferred
readiness to oblige, to rigid, unbending superiority in goodness. Marian felt it, and was disappointed
in Caroline, and pleased to have kept her determination, without asking herself how far it
was satisfied pride in obstinacy.

This was the last time for many weeks that Caroline lingered talking in Marian's room. The
old chill had come on again. Both knew, though neither said so, that it was not so much because
it was a display and expense that Marian refused, as because it was the Faulkners' party. If
it had been Lady Marchmont's, it would have been very different. Now Caroline liked the Faulkners;
they were all good natured, and much more agreeable than any others in the neighbourhood--than
any, indeed, with whom she had yet been brought into close intercourse. She thought Marian
was unjust and ungracious, both to them and to her; that she had been prejudiced from the first,
and now was very decidedly making herself disagreeable by a rigidity in trifles, which was
almost positive unkindness. Caroline's home, as has been shown, was neither a very happy, nor
a very satisfactory one; so that of late she had learnt to look upon her brother Walter and
Marian as her chief comforts, and was now much more hurt and disappointed at Marian's conduct
than she was willing to show. It was particularly unfortunate just at this time, when there
was so much to invite and gratify her at High Down, when she was in especial need of a true
and affectionate friend and counsellor, and when Walter was absent, being engaged in preparing
for his ordination, which was to take place in the course of the autumn.

Mrs. Lyddell was much displeased with Marian, and showed it by her coldness and formality;
and Marian began to live more alone with herself, and at war with the outer world, than she
had done even before Edmund's first visit five years ago. Caroline and Clara were a great deal
with the Faulkners, either at High Down or at home. Clara was in a perfect transport at being
admitted into the number of the archeresses, and had struck up one of her eternal friendships
with Louisa, the second Miss Faulkner; and Marian might very fairly be provoked at seeing how
entirely her mind was diverted from all the rationality which she and Caroline had been endeavouring--and
as they had hoped, not without success--to infuse into her during the past year. To get Clara
to settle quietly down to anything was an utter impossibility; her wisest employment was the
study of Elizabethan costumes, her most earnest, the practice of archery. Now Marian always
maintained that archery, on their own lawn, and among themselves, was a very pretty sport;
and for the sake of consistency with her own principles, she very diligently shot whenever
the Faulkners were not there, and did her very best, by precept and example, to make Clara
fit her arrows to the string in her own direct and purpose-like way, draw the bow-string to
her ear with a steady effort and aim, instead of a fitful jerk or twitch; and in fact shoot,
if she was to shoot, like a sensible woman, who really intended damage to the target. Clara
was very much obliged, and made some progress; but Marian thus did herself little good with
any one else, for her love of the sport, and her excellence at it, made her spirit of disdain
all the more marked. Clara, was again, as in former times, her chief friend in the family;
for Marian, after the first vexation, held her sense too cheap to blame her for her folly.
It was the fault of the others that she had been put in the way of what could not fail to turn
her head; so she listened, without showing many tokens of contempt, to her endless histories
of dear Louisa, and all the plans at High Down,--of the witticisms that were perpetrated, the
anticipations of amusement and admiration, and of the tracasseries which Miss Grimley had not
failed to occasion. Marian was often entertained, and Clara more than once hoped she was on
the point of regretting that she was not one of the favoured eight; but nothing could be further
from Marian's mind. She did not intend to absent herself either from the archery or from the
ball, but she must wear her own character, and no other; and people were allowed to assume
fancy dresses or not, just as suited their inclination, so that she was in no fear of rendering
herself remarkable.

Caroline and Clara were to go to High Down two days before the great occasion, and stay till
the day after; Marian to remain at Oakworthy. Just before they went, Clara danced into her
room, saying, "Marian, do you know some of the officers at Portsmouth have been asked to the
ball? You know there is a railroad all the way. I wonder if Mr. Arundel will be there?"

"Decidedly not," replied Marian.

"What, not when he knows what an attraction there will be?"

"Don't talk such nonsense, Clara; the idea of thinking a man would take such a journey for
a ball! Well, I hope you will be very happy."

"O do come and see my dress, Marian, before it is packed up; it is on mamma's bed, and it is
so beautiful!"

