"But I can see all the same that something troubles you. Is it because you think after all
that Fraulein Rottenmeier may come?" asked Heidi, beginning to feel anxious herself.

"No, no! it is nothing, child," said the grandmother, wishing to reassure her. "Just give me
your hand that I may feel sure you are there. No doubt it would be the best thing for you,
although I feel I could scarcely survive it."

"I do not want anything of the best if you could scarcely survive it," said Heidi, in such
a determined tone of voice that the grandmother's fears increased as she felt sure the people
from Frankfurt were coming to take Heidi back with them, since now she was well again they
naturally wished to have her with them once more. But she was anxious to hide her trouble from
Heidi if possible, as the latter was so sympathetic that she might refuse perhaps to go away,
and that would not be right. She sought for help, but not for long, for she knew of only one.

"Heidi," she said, "there is something that would comfort me and calm my thoughts; read me
the hymn beginning: 'All things will work for good.'"

Heidi found the place at once and read out in her clear young voice:--

          All things will work for good 
          To those who trust in Me;
          I come with healing on my wings, 
          To save and set thee free.

"Yes, yes, that is just what I wanted to hear," said the grandmother, and the deep expression
of trouble passed from her face. Heidi looked at her thoughtfully for a minute or two and then
said, "Healing means that which cures everything and makes everybody well, doesn't it, grandmother?"

"Yes, that is it," replied the old woman with a nod of assent, "and we may be sure everything
will come to pass according to God's good purpose. Read the verse again, that we may remember
it well and not forget it again."

And Heidi read the words over two or three times, for she also found pleasure in this assurance
of all things being arranged for the best.

When the evening came, Heidi returned home up the mountain. The stars came out overhead one
by one, so bright and sparkling that each seemed to send a fresh ray of joy into her heart;
she was obliged to pause continually to look up, and as the whole sky at last grew spangled
with them she spoke aloud, "Yes, I understand now why we feel so happy, and are not afraid
about anything, because God knows what is good and beautiful for us." And the stars with their
glistening eyes continued to nod to her till she reached home, where she found her grandfather
also standing and looking up at them, for they had seldom been more glorious than they were
this night.

Not only were the nights of this month of May so clear and bright, but the days as well; the
sun rose every morning into the cloudless sky, as undimmed in its splendor as when it sank
the evening before, and the grandfather would look out early and exclaim with astonishment,
"This is indeed a wonderful year of sun; it will make all the shrubs and plants grow apace;
you will have to see, general, that your army does not get out of hand from overfeeding." And
Peter would swing his stick with an air of assurance and an expression on his face as much
as to say, "see to that."

So May passed, everything growing greener and greener, and then came the month of June, with
a hotter sun and long light days, that brought the flowers out all over the mountain, so that
every spot was bright with them and the air full of their sweet scents. This month too was
drawing to its close when one day Heidi, having finished her domestic duties, ran out with
the intention of paying first a visit to the fir trees, and then going up higher to see if
the bush of rock roses was yet in bloom, for its flowers were so lovely when standing open
in the sun. But just as she was turning the corner of the hut, she gave such a loud cry that
her grandfather came running out of the shed to see what had happened.

"Grandfather, grandfather!" she cried, beside herself with excitement. "Come here! look! look!"

The old man was by her side by this time and looked in the direction of her outstretched hand.

A strange looking procession was making its way up the mountain; in front were two men carrying
a sedan chair, in which sat a girl well wrapped up in shawls; then followed a horse, mounted
by a stately-looking lady who was looking about her with great interest and talking to the
guide who walked beside her; then a reclining chair, which was being pushed up by another man,
it having evidently been thought safer to send the invalid to whom it belonged up the steep
path in a sedan chair. The procession wound up with a porter, with such a bundle of cloaks,
shawls, and furs on his back that it rose well above his head.

"Here they come! here they come!" shouted Heidi, jumping with joy. And sure enough it was the
party from Frankfurt; the figures came nearer and nearer, and at last they had actually arrived.
The men in front put down their burden, Heidi rushed forward and the two children embraced
each other with mutual delight. Grandmamma having also reached the top, dismounted, and gave
Heidi an affectionate greeting, before turning to the grandfather, who had meanwhile come up
to welcome his guests. There was no constraint about the meeting, for they both knew each other
perfectly well from hearsay and felt like old acquaintances.

After the first words of greeting had been exchanged grandmamma broke out into lively expressions
of admiration. "What a magnificent residence you have, Uncle! I could hardly have believed
it was so beautiful! A king might well envy you! And how well my little Heidi looks--like a
wild rose!" she continued, drawing the child towards her and stroking her fresh pink cheeks.
"I don't know which way to look first, it is all so lovely! What do you say to it, Clara, what
do you say?"

Clara was gazing round entranced; she had never imagined, much less seen, anything so beautiful.
She gave vent to her delight in cries of joy. "O grandmamma," she said, "I should like to remain
here for ever."

The grandfather had meanwhile drawn up the invalid chair and spread some of the wraps over
it; he now went up to Clara.

"Supposing we carry the little daughter now to her accustomed chair; I think she will be more
comfortable, the travelling sedan is rather hard," he said, and without waiting for any one
to help him he lifted the child in his strong arms and laid her gently down on her own couch.
He then covered her over carefully and arranged her feet on the soft cushion, as if he had
never done anything all his life but attend on cripples. The grandmamma looked on with surprise.

"My dear Uncle," she exclaimed, "if I knew where you had learned to nurse I would at once send
all the nurses I know to the same place that they might handle their patients in like manner.
How do you come to know so much?"

Uncle smiled. "I know more from experience than training," he answered, but as he spoke the
smile died away and a look of sadness passed over his face. The vision rose before him of a
face of suffering that he had known long years before, the face of a man lying crippled on
his couch of pain, and unable to move a limb. The man had been his Captain during the fierce
fighting in Sicily; he had found him lying wounded and had carried him away, and after that
the captain would suffer no one else near him, and Uncle had stayed and nursed him till his
sufferings ended in death. It all came back to Uncle now, and it seemed natural to him to attend
on the sick Clara and to show her all those kindly attentions with which he had been once so
familiar.

The sky spread blue and cloudless over the hut and the fir trees and far above over the high
rocks, the grey summits of which glistened in the sun. Clara could not feast her eyes enough
on all the beauty around her.

"O Heidi, if only I could walk about with you," she said longingly, "if I could but go and
look at the fir trees and at everything I know so well from your description, although I have
never been here before."

Heidi in response put out all her strength, and after a slight effort, managed to wheel Clara's
chair quite easily round the hut to the fir trees. There they paused. Clara had never seen
such trees before, with their tall, straight stems, and long thick branches growing thicker
and thicker till they touched the ground. Even the grandmamma, who had followed the children,
was astonished at the sight of them. She hardly knew what to admire most in these ancient trees:
the lofty tops rising in their full green splendor towards the sky, or the pillar-like stems,
with their straight and gigantic boughs, that spoke of such antiquity of age, of such long
years during which they had looked down upon the valley below, where men came and went, and
all things were continually changing, while they stood undisturbed and changeless.

Heidi had now wheeled Clara on to the goat shed, and had flung open the door, so that Clara
might have a full view of all that was inside. There was not much to see just now as its indwellers
were absent. Clara lamented to her grandmother that they would have to leave early before the
goats came home. "I should so like to have seen Peter and his whole flock."

"Dear child, let us enjoy all the beautiful things that we can see, and not think about those
that we cannot," grandmamma replied as she followed the chair which Heidi was pushing further on.

"Oh, the flowers!" exclaimed Clara. "Look at the bushes of red flowers, and all the nodding
blue bells! Oh, if I could but get up and pick some!"

Heidi ran off at once and picked her a large nosegay of them.

"But these are nothing, Clara," she said, laying the flowers on her lap. "If you could come
up higher to where the goats are feeding, then you would indeed see something! Bushes on bushes
of the red centaury, and ever so many more of the blue bell- flowers; and then the bright yellow
rock roses, that gleam like pure gold, and all crowding together in the one spot. And then
there are others with the large leaves that grandfather calls Bright Eyes, and the brown ones
with little round heads that smell so delicious. Oh, it is beautiful up there, and if you sit
down among them you never want to get up again, everything looks and smells so lovely!"

Heidi's eyes sparkled with the remembrance of what she was describing; she was longing herself
to see it all again, and Clara caught her enthusiasm and looked back at her with equal longing
in her soft blue eyes.

"Grandmamma, do you think I could get up there? Is it possible for me to go?" she asked eagerly.
"If only I could walk, climb about everywhere with you, Heidi!"

"I am sure I could push you up, the chair goes so easily," said Heidi, and in proof of her
words, she sent the chair at such a pace round the corner that it nearly went flying down the
mountain-side. Grandmamma being at hand, however, stopped it in time.

The grandfather, meantime, had not been idle. He had by this time put the table and extra chairs
in front of the seat, so that they might all sit out here and eat the dinner that was preparing
inside. The milk and the cheese were soon ready, and then the company sat down in high spirits
to their mid-day meal.

Grandmamma was enchanted, as the doctor had been, with their dining-room, whence one could
see far along the valley, and far over the mountains to the farthest stretch of blue sky. A
light wind blew refreshingly over them as they sat at table, and the rustling of the fir trees
made a festive accompaniment to the repast.

"I never enjoyed anything as much as this. It is really superb!" cried grandmamma two or three
times over; and then suddenly in a tone of surprise,

"Do I really see you taking a second piece of toasted cheese, Clara!"

There, sure enough, was a second golden-colored slice of cheese on Clara's plate.

"Oh, it does taste so nice, grandmamma--better than all the dishes we have at Ragatz," replied
Clara, as she continued eating with appetite.

"That's right, eat what you can!" exclaimed Uncle. "It's the mountain air which makes up for
the deficiencies of the kitchen."

And so the meal went on. Grandmamma and Alm-Uncle got on very well together, and their conversation
became more and more lively. They were so thoroughly agreed in their opinions of men and things
and the world in general that they might have been taken for old cronies. The time passed merrily,
and then grandmamma looked towards the west and said,--

"We must soon get ready to go, Clara, the sun is a good way down; the men will be here directly
with the horse and sedan."

Clara's face fell and she said beseechingly, "Oh, just another hour, grandmamma, or two hours. Barre
chose the Carmelite prior, and the bailiff Charles Chauvet, assessor of the bailiwick, Ismael
Boulieau a priest, and Pierre Thibaut, an articled clerk, who all
set out at once to execute their commission, while the rest of those
present were to await their return.

Meanwhile the superior, who had not spoken a word since the bailiff's declaration, remained,
in spite of repeated exorcisms, dumb, so Barre sent for Sister Claire,
saying that one devil would encourage the other.

The bailiff entered a formal protest against this step, insisting that the only result of a
double exorcism would be to cause confusion, during which suggestions might be conveyed to the superior,
and that the proper thing to do was, before beginning new conjurations, to await the return
of the messengers. Although the bailiff's suggestion was most reasonable, Barre knew better than
to adopt it, for he felt that no matter what it cost he must either get rid of the bailiff
and all the other officials who shared his doubts, or find means with the help of Sister Claire
to delude them into belief. The lay sister was therefore brought in, in spite of the opposition
of the bailiff and the other magistrates, and as they did not wish
to seem to countenance a fraud, they all withdrew, declaring that
they could no longer look on at such a disgusting comedy.

In the courtyard they met their messengers returning, who told them they had gone first to
the castle and had searched the great hall and all the other rooms without seeing anything of
Grandier; they had then gone to the house mentioned by the bailiff,
where they found him for whom they were looking, in the company of
Pere Veret, the confessor of the nuns, Mathurin Rousseau, and Nicolas
Benoit, canons, and Conte, a doctor, from whom they learned that Grandier
had not been an instant out of their sight for the last two hours.

This being all the magistrates wanted to know, they went home, while their envoys went upstairs
and told their story, which produced the effect which might be expected. Thereupon a Carmelite
brother wishing to weaken the impression, and thinking that the devil might be more lucky in
his, second guess than the first, asked the superior where Grandier was just then. She answered
without the slightest hesitation that he was walking with the bailiff in the church of Sainte-Croix.
A new deputation was at once sent off, which finding the church empty,
went on to the palace, and saw the bailiff presiding at a court.



Uncle immediately set to work to get things ready. He carried Clara back to her chair outside,
Heidi following, not knowing how to jump high enough into the air to express her contentment.
Then he gathered up a whole pile of shawls and furs and said, smiling, "It is a good thing
that grandmamma came up well provided for a winter's campaign; we shall be able to make good
use of these."

"Foresight is a virtue," responded the lady, amused, "and prevents many misfortunes. If we
have made the journey over your mountains without meeting with storms, winds and cloud-bursts,
we can only be thankful, which we are, and my provision against these disasters now comes in
usefully, as you say."

The two had meanwhile ascended to the hay-loft and begun to prepare a bed; there were so many
articles piled one over the other that when finished it looked like a regular little fortress.
Grandmamma passed her hand carefully over it to make sure there were no bits of hay sticking
out. "If there's a bit that can come through it will," she said. The soft mattress, however,
was so smooth and thick that nothing could penetrate it. Then they went down again, well satisfied,
and found the children laughing and talking together and arranging all they were going to do
from morning till evening as long as Clara stayed. The next question was how long she was to
remain, and first grandmamma was asked, but she referred them to the grandfather, who gave
it as his opinion that she ought to make the trial of the mountain air for at least a month.
The children clapped their hands for joy, for they had not expected to be together for so long
a time.

The bearers and the horse and guide were now seen approaching; the former were sent back at
once, and grandmamma prepared to mount for her return journey.

"It's not saying good-bye, grandmamma," Clara called out, "for you will come up now and then
and see how we are getting on, and we shall so look forward to your visits, shan't we, Heidi?"

Heidi, who felt that life this day had been crowded with pleasures, could only respond to Clara
with another jump of joy.

Grandmamma being now seated on her sturdy animal, Uncle took the bridle to lead her down the
steep mountain path; she begged him not to come far with her, but he insisted on seeing her
safely as far as Dorfli, for the way was precipitous and not without danger for the rider, he said.

Grandmamma did not care to stay alone in Dorfli, and therefore decided to return to Ragatz,
and thence to make excursions up the mountain from time to time.

Peter came down with his goats before Uncle had returned. As soon as the animals caught sight
of Heidi they all came flocking towards her, and she, as well as Clara on her couch, were soon
surrounded by the goats, pushing and poking their heads one over the other, while Heidi introduced
each in turn by its name to her friend Clara.

It was not long before the latter had made the long-wished-for acquaintance of little Snowflake,
the lively Greenfinch, and the well-behaved goats belonging to grandfather, as well as of the
many others, including the Grand Turk. Peter meanwhile stood apart looking on, and casting
somewhat unfriendly glances towards Clara.

When the two children called out, "Good-evening, Peter," he made no answer, but swung up his
stick angrily, as if wanting to cut the air in two, and then ran off with his goats after him.

The climax to all the beautiful things that Clara had already seen upon the mountain came at
the close of the day.

As she lay on the large soft bed in the hay loft, with Heidi near her, she looked out through
the round open window right into the middle of the shining clusters of stars, and she exclaimed
in delight,--

"Heidi, it's just as if we were in a high carriage and were going to drive straight into heaven."

"Yes, and do you know why the stars are so happy and look down and nod to us like that?" asked
Heidi.

"No, why is it?" Clara asked in return.

"Because they live up in heaven, and know how well God arranges everything for us, so that
we need have no more fear or trouble and may be quite sure that all things will come right
in the end. That's why they are so happy, and they nod to us because they want us to be happy
too. But then we must never forget to pray, and to ask God to remember us when He is arranging
things, so that we too may feel safe and have no anxiety about what is going to happen."

The two children now sat up and said their prayers, and then Heidi put her head down on her
little round arm and fell off to sleep at once, but Clara lay awake some time, for she could
not get over the wonder of this new experience of being in bed up here among the stars. She
had indeed seldom seen a star, for she never went outside the house at night, and the curtains
at home were always drawn before the stars came out. Each time she closed her eyes she felt
she must open them again to see if the two very large stars were still looking in, and nodding
to her as Heidi said they did. There they were, always in the same place, and Clara felt she
could not look long enough into their bright sparkling faces, until at last her eyes closed
of their own accord, and it was only in her dreams that she still saw the two large friendly
stars shining down upon her.

CHAPTER XXI. HOW LIFE WENT ON AT GRANDFATHER'S

The sun had just risen above the mountains and was shedding its first golden rays over the
hut and the valley below. The bailiff received this remonstrance with marked coldness, and replied
that he hoped always to take justice for his guide, as his duty commanded. Upon this, Barre
pursued the subject no farther, but led the way to the superior's
apartment.

The light morning clouds overhead grew brighter and brighter, till at last the sun shone out
in its full glory, and rock and wood and hill lay bathed in golden light.

Uncle now stepped back into the hut and went softly up the ladder. Clara had just opened her
eyes and was looking with wonder at the bright sunlight that shone through the round window
and danced and sparkled about her bed. She could not at first think what she was looking at
or where she was. Then she caught sight of Heidi sleeping beside her, and now she heard the
grandfather's cheery voice asking her if she had slept well and was feeling rested. A general supervision
was undertaken by Memin's sister, the wife of Moussant, who was thus closely connected with
two of the greatest enemies of the accused, and to her Bontems' wife told all that the superior
needed to know about Grandier.


Heidi now awoke and was surprised to see Clara dressed, and already in the grandfather's arms
ready to be carried down. She must be up too, and she went through her toilette with lightning-
like speed. She ran down the ladder and out of the hut, and there further astonishment awaited
her, for grandfather had been busy the night before after they were in bed. Seeing that it
was impossible to get Clara's chair through the hut-door, he had taken down two of the boards
at the side of the shed and made an opening large enough to admit the chair; these he left
loose so that they could be taken away and put up at pleasure. He was at this moment wheeling
Clara out into the sun; he left her in front of the hut while he went to look after the goats,
and Heidi ran up to her friend.

The fresh morning breeze blew round the children's faces, and every fresh puff brought a waft
of fragrance from the fir trees. Clara drew it in with delight and lay back in her chair with
an unaccustomed feeling of health and comfort.

It was the first time in her life that she had been out in the open country at this early hour
and felt the fresh morning breeze, and the pure mountain air was so cool and refreshing that
every breath she drew was a pleasure. And then the bright sweet sun, which was not hot and
sultry up here, but lay soft and warm on her hands and on the grass at her feet. Clara had
not imagined that it would be like this on the mountain.

"O Heidi, if only I could stay up here for ever with you," she exclaimed happily, turning in
her chair from side to side that she might drink in the air and sun from all quarters.

"Now you see that it is just what I told you," replied Heidi delighted; "that it is the most
beautiful thing in the world to be up here with grandfather."

The latter at that moment appeared coming from the goat shed and bringing two small foaming
bowls of snow-white milk--one for Clara and one for Heidi.

"That will do the little daughter good," he said, nodding to Clara; "it is from Little Swan
and will make her strong. To your health, child! drink it up."

Clara had never tasted goat's milk before; she hesitated and smelt it before putting it to
her lips, but seeing how Heidi drank hers up without hesitating, and how much she seemed to
like it, Clara did the same, and drank till there was not a drop left, for she too found it
delicious, tasting just as if sugar and cinnamon had been mixed with it.

"To-morrow we will drink two," said the grandfather, who had looked on with satisfaction at
seeing her follow Heidi's example.

Peter now arrived with the goats, and while Heidi was receiving her usual crowded morning greetings,
Uncle drew Peter aside to speak to him, for the goats, bleated so loudly and continuously in
their wish to express their joy and affection that no one could be heard near them.

"Attend to what I have to say," he said. "From to-day be sure you let Little Swan go where
she likes. She has an instinct where to find the best food for herself, and so if she wants
to climb higher, you follow her, and it will do the others no harm if they go too; on no account
bring her back. A little more climbing won't hurt you, and in this matter she probably knows
better than you what is good for her; I want her to give as fine milk as possible. Why are
you looking over there as if you wanted to eat somebody? Nobody will interfere with you. So
now be off and remember what I say."

Peter was accustomed to give immediate obedience to Uncle, and he marched off with his goats,
but with a turn of the head and roll of the eye that showed he had some thought in reserve.
The goats carried Heidi along with them a little way, which was what Peter wanted. "You will
have to come with them," he called to her, "for I shall be obliged to follow Little Swan."

"I cannot," Heidi called back from the midst of her friends, "and I shall not be able to come
for a long, long time--not as long as Clara is with me. Grandfather, however, has promised
to go up the mountain with both of us one day."

Heidi had now extricated herself from the goats and she ran back to Clara. Peter doubled his
fists and made threatening gestures towards the invalid on her couch, and then climbed up some
distance without pause until he was out of sight, for he was afraid Uncle might have seen him,
and he did not care to know what Uncle might have thought of the fists.

Clara and Heidi had made so many plans for themselves that they hardly knew where to begin.
Heidi suggested that they should first write to grandmamma, to whom they had promised to send
word every day, for grandmamma had not felt sure whether it would in the long run suit Clara's
health to remain up the mountain, or if she would continue to enjoy herself there. With daily
news of her granddaughter she could stay on without anxiety at Ragatz, and be ready to go to
Clara at a moment's notice.

"Must we go indoors to write?" asked Clara, who agreed to Heidi's proposal but did not want
to move from where she was, as it was so much nicer outside. Heidi was prepared to arrange
everything. She ran in and brought out her school-book and writing things and her own little
stool. She put her reading book and copy book on Clara's knees, to make a desk for her to write
upon, and she herself took her seat on the stool and sat to the bench, and then they both began
writing to grandmamma. But Clara paused after every sentence to look about her; it was too
beautiful for much letter writing. The breeze had sunk a little, and now only gently fanned
her face and whispered lightly through the fir trees. Little winged insects hummed and danced
around her in the clear air, and a great stillness lay over the far, wide, sunny pasture lands.
Lofty and silent rose the high mountain peaks above her, and below lay the whole broad valley
full of quiet peace. Only now and again the call of some shepherd-boy rang out through the
air, and echo answered softly from the rocks. R. Sancti Petri. Saint-Pierre. D. Quae persona
attulit flores? Who brought the flowers? R. Diabolica. Someone sent by the devil.

As the patient pronounced the last word she recovered her senses, and having repeated a prayer,
attempted to swallow a morsel of bread which was offered her; she was, however, obliged to
spit it out, saying it was so dry she could not get it down.

Something more liquid was then brought, but even of that she could
swallow very little, as she fell into convulsions every few minutes.

Upon this the two officials, seeing there was nothing more to be got out of the superior, withdrew
to one of the window recesses and began to converse in a low tone;
whereupon Mignon, who feared that they had not been sufficiently impressed,
followed them, and drew their attention to the fact that there was
much in what they had just seen to recall the case of Gaufredi, who
had been put to death a few years before in consequence of a decree
of the Parliament of Aix, in Provence.

This ill-judged remark of Mignon showed so clearly what his aim was
that the magistrates made no reply.

The civil lieutenant remarked that he had been surprised that Mignon had not made any attempt to
find out the cause of the enmity of which the superior had spoken,
and which it was so important to find out; but Mignon excused himself
by saying that he had no right to put questions merely to gratify
curiosity.



"Isn't it curious, Heidi," she said, astonished at herself, "as long as I can remember I have
only eaten because I was obliged to, and everything used to seem to taste of cod liver oil,
and I was always wishing there was no need to eat or drink; and now I am longing for grandfather
to bring me the milk."

"Yes, I know what it feels like," replied Heidi, who remembered the many days in Frankfurt
when all her food used to seem to stick in her throat. Clara, however, could not understand
it; the fact was that she had never in her life before spent a whole day in the open air, much
less in such high, life-giving mountain air. When grandfather at last brought her the evening
milk, she drank it up so quickly that she had emptied her bowl before Heidi, and then she asked
for a little more. The grandfather went inside with both the children's bowls, and when he
brought them out again full he had something else to add to their supper. He had walked over
that afternoon to a herdsman's house where the sweetly-tasting butter was made, and had brought
home a large pat, some of which he had now spread thickly on two good slices of bread. He stood
and watched with pleasure while Clara and Heidi ate their appetising meal with childish hunger
and enjoyment.

That night, when Clara lay down in her bed and prepared to watch the stars, her eyes would
not keep open, and she fell asleep as soon as Heidi and slept soundly all night--a thing she
never remembered having done before. The following day and the day after passed in the same
pleasant fashion, and the third day there came a surprise for the children. Two stout porters
came up the mountain, each carrying a bed on his shoulders with bedding of all kinds and two
beautiful new white coverlids. The men also had a letter with them from grandmamma, in which
she said that these were for Clara and Heidi, and that Heidi in future was always to sleep
in a proper bed, and when she went down to Dorfli in the winter she was to take one with her
and leave the other at the hut, so that Clara might always know there was a bed ready for her
when she paid a visit to the mountain. She went on to thank the children for their long letters
and encouraged them to continue writing daily, so that she might be able to picture all they
were doing.

So the grandfather went up and threw back the hay from Heidi's bed on to the great heap, and
then with his help the beds were transported to the loft. He put them close to one another
so that the children might still be able to see out of the window, for he knew what pleasure
they had in the light from the sun and stars.

Meanwhile grandmamma down at Ragatz was rejoicing at the excellent news of the invalid which
reached her daily from the mountain. Clara found the life more charming each day and could
not say enough of the kindness and care which the grandfather lavished upon her, nor of Heidi's
lively and amusing companionship, for the latter was more entertaining even than when in Frankfurt
with her, and Clara's first thought when she woke each morning was, "Oh, how glad I am to be
here still."

Having such fresh assurances each day that all was going well with Clara, grandmamma thought
she might put off her visit to the children a little longer, for the steep ride up and down
was somewhat of a fatigue to her.

The grandfather seemed to feel an especial sympathy for this little invalid charge, for he
tried to think of something fresh every day to help forward her recovery. He climbed up the
mountain every afternoon, higher and higher each day, and came home in the evening with a large
bunch of leaves which scented the air with a mingled fragrance as of carnations and thyme,
even from afar. He hung it up in the goat shed, and the goats on their return were wild to
get at it, for they recognised the smell. But Uncle did not go climbing after rare plants to
give the goats the pleasure of eating them without any trouble of finding them; what he gathered
was for Little Swan alone, that she might give extra fine milk, and the effect of the extra
feeding was shown in the way she flung her head in the air with ever-increasing frolicsomeness,
and in the bright glow of her eye.

Clara had now been on the mountain for three weeks. For some days past the grandfather, each
morning after carrying her down, had said, "Won't the little daughter try if she can stand
for a minute or two?" And Clara had made the effort in order to please him, but had clung to
him as soon as her feet touched the ground, exclaiming that it hurt her so. He let her try
a little longer, however, each day.

It was many years since they had had such a splendid summer among the mountains. Day after
day there were the same cloudless sky and brilliant sun; the flowers opened wide their fragrant
blossoms, and everywhere the eye was greeted with a glow of color; and when the evening came
the crimson light fell on mountain peaks and on the great snow-field, till at last the sun
sank in a sea of golden flame.

And Heidi never tired of telling Clara of all this, for only higher up could the full glory
of the colors be rightly seen; and more particularly did she dwell on the beauty of the spot
on the higher slope of the mountain, where the bright golden rock- roses grew in masses, and
the blue flowers were in such numbers that the very grass seemed to have turned blue, while
near these were whole bushes of the brown blossoms, with their delicious scent, so that you
never wanted to move again when you once sat down among them.

