Transcriber's note:

   In 1834, at age 19, Anthony Trollope became a junior clerk
   in the British postal service. He did not get on well with
   his superiors, and his career looked like a dead end. In
   1841 he accepted an assignment in Ireland as an inspector,
   remaining there for ten years. It was there that his civil
   service career began to flourish. It was there, also, that
   he began writing novels.

   Several of Trollope's early novels were set in Ireland,
   including The Macdermots of Ballycloran, his first
   published novel, and Castle Richmond. Readers of those
   early Irish novels can easily perceive Trollope's great
   affection for and sympathy with the Irish people,
   especially the poor.

   In 1882 Ireland was in the midst of great troubles,
   including boycotts and the near breakdown of law and
   order. In May of that year Lord Frederick Cavendish, the
   newly-appointed Chief Secretary for Ireland, and Thomas
   Burke, a prominent civil servant, were assassinated in
   Dublin. The news stirred Trollope, despite his poor
   health, to travel to Ireland to see for himself the state
   of things. Upon his return to England he began writing
   The Landleaguers. He made a second journey to Ireland
   in August, 1882, to seek more material for his book. He
   returned to England exhausted, but he continued writing.
   He had almost completed the book when he suffered a stroke
   on November 3, 1882. He never recovered, and he died on
   December 6.

   Trollope's second son, Henry, arranged for publication of
   the almost finished novel. The reader should note Henry
   Trollope's preface to Volume I and Postscript at the end
   of the book.

   Readers familiar with Trollope's early Irish novels
   will be struck, as they read The Landleaguers, by his
   bitterness at what was happening in Ireland in 1881 and
   1882.

THE LANDLEAGUERS

by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

In Three Volumes--VOL.
     II. THE MAN IN THE MASK.
    III. FATHER BROSNAN.
     IV. MR. BLAKE OF CARNLOUGH.
      V. MR. O'MAHONY AND HIS DAUGHTER.
     VI. RACHEL AND HER LOVERS.
    VII. BROWN'S.
   VIII. CHRISTMAS-DAY, 1880.
     IX. BLACK DALY.
      X. BALLYTOWNGAL.
     XI. MOYTUBBER.
    XII. "DON'T HATE HIM, ADA."
   XIII. EDITH'S ELOQUENCE.
    XIV. RACHEL'S CORRESPONDENCE.
     XV. CAPTAIN YORKE CLAYTON.
    XVI. CAPTAIN CLAYTON COMES TO THE CASTLE.

NOTE.

This novel was to have contained sixty chapters. My father had written as much as is now published
before his last illness. It will be seen that he had not finished the forty-ninth chapter;
and the fragmentary portion of that chapter stands now just as he left it. He left no materials
from which the tale could be completed, and no attempt at completion will be made. At the end
of the third volume I have stated what were his intentions with regard to certain people in
the story; but beyond what is there said I know nothing.

HENRY M. TROLLOPE.

THE LANDLEAGUERS.

CHAPTER I.

MR. JONES OF CASTLE MORONY.

In the year 1850 the two estates of Ballintubber and Morony were sold to Mr. Philip Jones,
under the Estates Court, which had then been established. They had been the property of two
different owners, but lay conveniently so as to make one possession for one proprietor. They
were in the County Galway, and lay to the right and left of the road which runs down from the
little town of Headford to Lough Corrib. At the time when the purchase was made there was no
quieter spot in all Ireland, or one in which the lawful requirements of a landlord were more
readily performed by a poor and obedient tenantry. The people were all Roman Catholics, were
for the most part uneducated, and it may be said of them that not only were their souls not
their own, but that they were not ambitious even of possessing their own bodies. Circumstances
have changed much with them since that date. Not only have they in part repudiated the power
of the priest as to their souls, but, in compliance with teaching which has come to them from
America, they claim to be masters also of their bodies. Never were a people less fitted to
exercise such dominion without control. Generous, kindly, impulsive, and docile, they have
been willing to follow any recognised leader. When Philip Jones bought the property that had
belonged to the widow O'Dwyer--for Ballintubber had for the last hundred years been the property
of the O'Dwyers--and Morony, which, had been an outlying town-land belonging to the Hacketts
for the last two centuries, he had at first been looked down upon as a new comer. But all that
had passed by, and Mr. Jones was as much respected as though he had been an O'Jones from the
time of Queen Elizabeth. But now the American teaching had come up, and things were different.

Mr. Jones had expended over £30,000 in purchasing the property, and was congratulated by all
men on having done well with his money. There were some among his friends in England--and his
friends were all English--who had told him that he was incurring a great risk in going into
so distant and wild a country. But it was acknowledged that he could not in England have obtained
so good a return in the way of rent. And it was soon found that the opportunities for improving
the property were many and close at hand. At the end of ten years all men who knew Mr. Jones
personally, or had seen the increasing comforts of Morony Castle, declared that, as he liked
the kind of life, he had done uncommonly well for himself.

Nor had he done badly for his three married sisters, each of whom had left £4,000 in his hands.
All the circumstances of the Miss Jones's as they had been, it will be here unnecessary to
explain. Since Philip had become owner of Morony Castle, each of them had married, and the
three brothers-in-law were equally well satisfied with the investment of their money. It will,
however, thus be understood that the property did not belong entirely to Mr. Jones, and that
the brothers-in-law and their wives were part owners. Mr. Jones, however, had been in possession
of some other means, and had been able to use capital in improving the estate. But he was an
aspiring man, and in addition to his money had borrowed something beyond. The sum borrowed,
however, had been so small and so well expended, as to have created no sense of embarrassment
in his mind.

When our story commences he was the father of four children. The elder and the younger were
boys, and two girls came between them. In 1880, Frank, the elder, was two-and-twenty. The two
girls who followed close after were twenty and nineteen, and the youngest boy, who was born
after an interval of nearly ten years, was but ten years old. Some years after the mother had
died, and Mr. Jones had since lived as a widower. It may be as well to state here that in 1880
he was fifty-five years old.

When his wife had died, the nature of the man had apparently been changed. Of all men he had
been the most cheerful, the most eager, and the most easily pleased. He had worked hard at
his property, and had loved his work. He knew every man and woman about the place, and always
had a word to say to them. He had had a sailing boat on the lake, in which he had spent much
of his time, but his wife had always been with him. Since her death he had hardly put his foot
within the boat. He had lately become quick and short-tempered, but always with a visible attempt
to be kind to those around him. But people said of him that since his wife had died he had
shown an indifference to the affairs of the world. He was anxious--so it was said--to leave
matters as much as possible to his son; but, as has been already stated, his son was only twenty-two.
He had formerly taken a great pleasure in attending the assizes at Galway. He had been named
as a grand juror for the county, which he had indeed regarded as a great compliment; but since
his wife's death he had not once attended.

People said of him that he had become indifferent to the work of his life, but in this they
hardly spoke the truth. He had become indifferent rather to what had been its pleasures. To
that which his conscience told him was its work, he applied himself with assiduity enough.
There were two cares which sat near his heart: first, that no one should rob him; and secondly,
that he should rob no one. It will often be the case that the first will look after itself,
whereas the second will require careful watching. It was certainly the case with Philip Jones
that he was most anxious to rob no one. He was, perhaps, a little too anxious that no one should
rob him.

A few words must be said of his children. Frank, the eldest, was a good-looking, clever boy,
who had been educated at the Queen's College, at Galway, and would have been better trained
to meet the world had circumstances enabled him to be sent to a public school in England. As
it was he thought himself, as heir to Morony Castle, to be a little god upon earth; and he
thought also that it behoved his sisters and his brother, and the various dependents about
the place, to treat him as though he were a god. To his father he was respectful, and fairly
obedient in all matters, save one. As to that one matter, from which arose some trouble, much
will have to be said as the story goes on.

The two girls were named Ada and Edith, and were, in form and figure, very unlike each other.
Ada, the eldest, was tall, fair-haired, and very lovely. It was admitted in County Galway that
among the Galway lasses no girl exceeded Ada Jones in brightness of beauty. She was sweet-tempered
also, and gracious as she was lovely. But Edith did not share the gifts, which the fairy had
bestowed upon her sister, in equal parts. She was, however, clever, and kind, and affectionate.
In all matters, within the house, she was ready to accept a situation below her sister's; but
this was not by her sister's doing. The demigod of the family seemed to assume this position,
but on Ada's part there was no assumption. Edith, however, felt her infirmity. Among girls
this is made to depend more on physical beauty than on other gifts, and there was no doubt
that in this respect Edith was the inferior. She was dark, and small of stature, not ungraceful
in her movements, or awkward in her person. She was black-haired, as had been her mother's,
and almost swarthy in her complexion, and there was a squareness about her chin which robbed
her face of much of its feminine softness. But her eyes were very bright, and when she would
laugh, or say something intended to make another laugh, her face would be brightened up with
fun, good-humour, or wit, in a manner which enabled no one to call her plain.

Of the younger boy, Florian, much will be said as the story goes on; but what can be said of
a boy who is only ten which shall be descriptive and also interesting? He was small of his
age, but clever and sharp, and, since his mother's death, had been his father's darling. He
was beautiful to look at, as were all the children, except poor Edith, but the neighbours declared
that his education had been much neglected. His father intended to send him to college at Galway.
A bright vision had for a short time flitted before the father's eyes, and he had thought that
he would have the boy prepared for Winchester; but lately things had not gone quite so well
at Morony Castle, and that idea had passed by. So that it was now understood that Florian Jones
would follow his brother to Galway College. Those who used to watch his ways would declare
that the professors of Galway College would have some trouble with him.

While the mother had lived no family had been more easily ruled than that of the Jones's, but
since her death some irregularities had gone on. The father had made a favourite of the younger
boy, and thereby had done mischief. The eldest son, too, had become proud of his position,
and an attempt had been made to check him with a hard hand; and yet much in the absolute working
of the farm had been left to him. Then troubles had come, in which Mr. Jones would be sometimes
too severe, and sometimes too lenient. Of the girls it must be acknowledged that they were
to be blamed for no fault after the first blow had come. Everyone at Morony had felt that the
great blow had been the death of the mistress. But it must be confessed that other things had
happened shortly afterwards which had tended to create disturbance. One of the family had declared
that he intended to become a Roman Catholic. The Jones's had been Protestants, the father and
mother having both come from England as Protestants. They were not, therefore, Ultra-Protestants,
as those will know who best know Ireland. There had been no horror of a Catholic. According
to Mrs. Jones the way to heaven had been open to both Catholic and Protestant, only it had
suited her to say her prayers after the Protestant fashion. The girls had been filled with
no pious fury; and as to Mr. Jones himself, some of the Protestant devotees in the neighbourhood
of Tuam had declared that he was only half-hearted in the matter. An old clergyman, attached
to the cathedral, and who had been chaplain to Bishop Plunket, had been heard to declare that
he would rather have to deal with an avowed Papist.

But the one who had now declared himself as a convert,--I will say pervert if my readers wish
it,--was no other than our young friend Florian. He came in one day and assured his sisters
that he meant to be a Roman Catholic. They only laughed at him, and told him that he did not
know what he was talking about. "Don't I though?" said Florian. "I've had no end of an argument
with Father Malachi, and he's got the best o' me. I'm not going to church any more." When his
brother Frank was told, he threatened to "lick the young sinner." "That's about the best can
be said for you Protestants," said the young imp. "You lick us when you're strong enough."
But the father, when he heard the tidings, declared that he would not have his son molested.
No doubt he would live to see his mistake. It was to be hoped that he would do so. But there
should be no compulsion. So Master Florian remained for the present attached to his Catholic
propensities, and duly went to mass at Ballintubber. This had taken place in the autumn of
the year.

There had occurred a circumstance which may be called the beginning of our story. It must first
be told that Mr. Jones kept about four hundred acres of the estate in his own hands, and had
been held to have done very well with it. A tract of this land lay down on Lough Corrib, and
had in former days produced almost nothing but rushes. By means of drains and sluices, which
had not been brought into use without the expenditure of much capital, he had thoroughly fertilised
some eighty acres, where he grew large crops of hay, which he sent across the lake to Galway,
and fed his sheep on the after-grass with great profit. But the care of the sluices had been
a great labour, and, latterly, a great trouble to Mr. Jones. He had looked for no evil at the
hands of his workmen, or tenants, or neighbours. But he had been taught by experience to expect
great carelessness. It was when the rain had fallen in heavy quantities, and when the Lough
was full that the evil was chiefly expected. Late in the autumn there came news up to the Castle,
that the flood gates on the Ballintubber marshes had now been opened, and that the entire eighty
acres were under water. Mr. Jones and his eldest son rushed down, and found that it was impossible
to do anything. They could only wait till the waters had retreated, which would not take place
for six months. The entire crop for the next year had been destroyed. Then Mr. Jones returned
to the Castle stricken by a great blow, and was speechless for the rest of the day.

When the news had been brought, the family had been together at the breakfast table. The father
and son had gone out together with the teller of the story. But Ada and Edith and Florian were
left at the table. They all sat looking at each other till Edith was the first to speak.

"Flory, what do you know of all this?"

"What should I know?" said Flory. The two sisters looked at him, and each was aware that he
did know something. Ada was not so quick as Edith, but even she was aroused. And from this
moment Edith began to take the lead in managing her brother.

"You do," said Ada. "How was it done? Who did it--and why?"

"Sorrow a know, I know," said the boy.

"Flory, that is a lie," said Edith very solemnly, looking at him with all her eyes.

"You've no right to say that," said Florian. "It's just because I've turned Catholic, and it's
all your spite." But the boy blushed ruby red, and the colour told its own story.

As soon as the news had been announced, Edith had seen the boy's countenance and had instantly
watched him. His colour had not risen at once; but his lower jaw had fallen, and his eyes had
glanced furtively round, and his whole frame had quivered. Then the rush of blood had flown
to his face, and the story had been told so that Edith could read it. His first emotion had
made it plain even to Ada. "Flory, you know all about it," said Ada.

Edith got up and went across the room and knelt down at the boy's side, leaning against his
chair and looking up into his face. "Flory, you may lie with your voice, but you cannot stifle
your heart within you. You have confessed the truth."

"I have not," said Flory; "I wasn't in it at all."

"Who says that you were in it? But you know."

"'Deed and I know nothin'." Now the boy began to cry. "You have no right to say I did it. Why
should I do the likes of that?"

"Where were you at four o'clock yesterday afternoon?" asked Edith.

"I was just out, up at the lodge yonder."

"Flory, I know that you have seen this thing done. I am as certain of it as though I had been
there myself."

"I haven't seen anything done--and I won't stay here to be questioned this way," said the boy,
feeling that his blushes would betray him, and his incapacity to "lie square," as the Americans
say.

Then the two sisters were left to talk over the matter together. "Did you not see it in his
face?" said Edith.

"Yes, I saw something. But you don't mean to say that he knew it was to be done? That would
make him a fiend."

"No; I don't think he knew it was to be done. But when Frank was teasing him the other day
about his Catholic nonsense, and saying that he would not trust a Papist, Florian took the
part of Pat Carroll. If there be a man about the place who would do a base turn to father,
it's Pat Carroll. Now I know that Flory was down near the lough yesterday afternoon. Biddy
Ryan saw him. If he went on he must have seen the water coming in."

"What shall we do?" asked Ada.

"Ah!--that's just it. What shall we do? If he could be made to tell the truth, that would be
best. But as he denies it, father will believe him. Florian will say that we are spiting him
because of his religion."

"But, Edith, we must tell father." At last it was decided that Edith should take the boy and
talk to him. He was more prone to listen to Edith than to Ada. Edith did find her brother,
and talked to him for an hour,--but in vain. He had managed to collect himself after his past
breakdown, and was better able to bear the examination to which his sister put him, than at
the first moment. He still blushed when he was questioned; till he became dogged and surly.
The interview ended with repeated asseverations on Flory's part, that he knew nothing of the
meadows.

Mr. Jones and his eldest son returned to the house, having been absent the entire day. "As
sure as I am a living man, Pat Carroll has been at the doing of it," said Frank.

"He cannot have done it alone," said Ada.

"There have been others in it."

"That has been the worst of it," said the father. "Of course I have known since the beginning
of the year, that that man would do any devil's turn of work against me. But one man cannot
do much."

"Too much! too much!" said Edith.

"One man can murder me, of course. But we haven't yet come to such a state of things as that.
Twelve months ago I thought there was not a man about the place who would raise his hand to
do me an ill turn. I have done them many good turns in my time."

"You have, father," said Ada.

"Then this man came to me and said that because the tenants away in County Mayo were not paying
their rents, he could not pay his. And he can sell his interest on his holding now for £150.
When I endeavoured to explain this to him, and that it was at my cost his interest in the farm
has been created, he became my enemy. I don't mind that; one has to look for that. But that
others should be joined in it, and that there should be no one to say that they had seen it!
There must have been five pairs of hands at work, and twenty pairs of eyes must have seen what
the others were doing."

The two sisters looked at each other, but they said nothing. "I suppose we shall work it out
of them some day," said Frank.

"I suppose nothing of the kind," said the father. "There are eighty acres of meadow lying under
Lough Corrib this moment which will not give a ton of hay next summer, or food for a sheep
next autumn. The pastures will be saturated, and sheep would perish with foot-rot and fluke.
Then money must be laid out again upon it, just that Mr. Carroll may again wreak his vengeance."
After that there was silence, for the children felt that not a word could be spoken which would
comfort their father.

When they sat down to dinner, Mr. Jones asked after Florian. "He's not well," said Edith.

"Florian not well! So there's another misfortune."

"His ill-health is rather ill-humour. Biddy will take care of him, father."

"I do not choose that he should be looked after by Biddy in solitude. I suppose that somebody
has been teasing him."

"No, father," said Edith, positively.

"Has anyone been speaking to him about his religion?"

"Not a word," said Edith. Then she told herself that to hold her tongue at the present moment
would be cowardly. "Florian, father, has misbehaved himself, and has gone away cross. I would
leave him, if I were you, till to-morrow."

"I know there is ill-will against him," said the father. All this was ill-judged on behalf
of Mr. Jones. Peter, the old butler, who had lived in the family, was in the room. Peter, of
course, was a Roman Catholic, and, though he was as true as steel, it could not but be felt
that in this absurd contest he was on the side of the "young masther."

Down in the kitchen the conversion of the "young masther" to the true religion was a great
affair, and Mr. Frank and the young ladies were looked upon as hard-hearted and cruel, because
they stood in the way of this act of grace. Nothing more was said about Florian that night.

CHAPTER II.

THE MAN IN THE MASK.

Edith, before she went to bed that night, crept up to her brother's bedroom and seated herself
on the bedside. It was a little room which Florian occupied alone, and lay at the back of the
house, next to that in which Peter slept. Here, as she sat on the bed, she could see by a glance
that young Florian feigned to be asleep.

"Flory, you are pretending to be asleep." Flory uttered a short snore,--or rather snort, for
he was not a good actor. "You may as well wake up, because otherwise I shall shake you."

"Why am I to be shaked up in bed?"

"Because I want to speak to you."

"Why am I to be made to speak when I want to sleep?"

"Papa has been talking about you downstairs. He has come home from Ballintubber, very tired
and very unhappy, and he thinks you have been made to go to bed without your supper because
we have been attacking you about religion. I have told him that nobody has said a word to you."

"But you did."

"Not a word."

"You didn't tell him all that you told me--about letting in the water?" This was asked in a
tone of great anxiety.

"Not a word,--not as yet."

"And you won't? Mind, I tell you it's all untrue. What do I know about letting in the water?"

"Who did it?"

"I'm not going to tell."

"You know, then?"

"No, I don't. But I'm not going to tell as though I knew it. You don't care about it in your
religion, but we Catholics don't like telling lies."

"You saw nothing?"

"Whatever I saw I'm not to tell a lie about it."

"You've promised not, you mean?"

"Now, Edy, you're not going to trap me. You've got your own religion and I've got mine. It's
a great thing in our religion to be able to hold your tongue. Father Malachi says it's one
of the greatest trials which a man has to go through."

"Then, Flory, am I to gather that you will say nothing further to me?" Here the boy shook his
head. "Because in that case I must tell father. At any rate, he must be told, and if you do
not tell him, I shall."

"What is there to be told?"

"I shall tell him exactly what I saw,--and Ada. I saw,--we saw,--that when the news came about
the flood, you were conscious of it all. If you will go to father and tell him the truth he
will be but very little angry with you. I don't suppose you had a hand in it yourself."

"No!" shouted the boy.

"But I think you saw it, and that they made you swear an oath. Was that not so?"

"No!" whispered the boy.

"I am sure it was so." Then the boy again plucked up his courage, and declared with a loud
voice, that it was not so.

That night before she retired to rest, Edith went to her father and told him all that she had
to say. She took Ada with her, and together they used all their eloquence to make their father
believe as they believed.

"No," said Edith, "he has not confessed. But words drop from him which make us sure that he
knows who did it. I am certain that he saw it done. I don't mean to say that he saw the whole
thing. The water, I suppose, was coming in all night."

"The whole night! While we were sleeping in our beds, the waters of the lough were ruining
me," said the father.

"But he saw enough to be able to tell you who did it."

"I know who did it. It was that ruffian Carroll."

"But father, you will want evidence."

"Am I to bring up my own boy to swear that he was there, witnessing what was done, as the friend
of my enemies? I do not believe that he was there at all."

"If you question him, he will probably own to it. It will be better to get at the truth and
face it. He is only ten years old. You must tell me the story of his pretended conversion."

"Why should it be pretended?" asked the father.

"Well; of his conversion," said Edith.

"I don't see what it has to do with it? Am I to put myself forward as a bigoted Protestant?
Florian has been foolish, but am I to say that I am angry, where I am not angry--not specially
angry."

"It will show the influence under which he has taken up Carroll's side," said Edith.

"Or the influence under which he has been made to hold his tongue," said Ada.

"Just so," said Edith. "We do not think that he has made one with your enemies in the matter.
But he has seen them at work and has been made to promise that he will hold his tongue. I don't
suppose you mean to let the affair slip by without punishing any one."

When the girls left him, Mr. Jones was by no means persuaded. As far as he could ascertain
from examination of the persons about the locality, there was no one willing to state in evidence
that he had seen anything. The injury had been done in November, on a wet, dreary, dull afternoon.
He did learn that at half-past three the meadows were in their usual condition. As to the sluices,
the gates of which had been pulled out and thrown away in twenty different places, he could
learn nothing; no one had seen a sluice gate touched. As to Florian, and what Florian had been
seen to do, he had asked no question, because Florian's name had not then been mentioned. But
he had been struck by the awful silence of the people. There were women there, living on the
spot, with whose families his family had been on the most kindly terms. When rheumatism was
rife,--and rheumatism down on the lough side had often been rife--they had all come up to the
Castle for port wine and solace. He had refused them nothing,--he, or his dear wife, who had
gone, or his daughters; and, to give them their due, they had always been willing to work for
him at a moment's notice. He would have declared that no man in Ireland was on better terms
with his tenantry than he; and now, because there had been a quarrel between him and that pestilent
fellow Carroll,--whom he had been willing to buy out from his bit of land and let him go to
America, so that they might all be at peace,--could they all have turned against him and taken
Carroll's part? As far as he had been able to gather the feelings of the people, from conversations
with them, they had all acknowledged Carroll to be wrong. He would have said that there was
not one among them who was not his friend rather than Carroll's. He was aware that there had
been ill-feeling about in other parts of the country. There had been,--so he was told,--a few
demagogues in Galway town, American chiefly, who had come thither to do what harm they could;
and he had heard that there was discontent in parts of Mayo, about Ballyhaunis and Lough Glinn;
but where he lived, round Lough Corrib, there had been no evil symptoms of such a nature. Now
suddenly he found himself as though surrounded by a nest of hornets. There were eighty acres
of his land under water, and no one would tell him how it was done, or by whom.

And now, to make the matter worse, there had come upon him this trouble with reference to his
own boy. He would not believe the story which his daughters had told him; and yet he knew within
his heart that they were infinitely the better worthy of credit. He believed in them. He knew
them to be good and honest and zealous on his behalf; but how much better did he love poor
Florian! And in this matter of the child's change of religion, in which he had foolishly taken
the child's part, he could not but think that Father Malachi had been most unkind to him; not
that he knew what Father Malachi had done in the matter, but Florian talked as though he had
been supported all through by the priest. Father Malachi had, in truth, done very little. He
had told the boy to go to his father. The boy had said that he had done so, and that his father
had assented. "But Frank and the girls are totally against it. They have no sense of religion
at all." Then Father Malachi had told him to say his prayers, and come regularly to mass.

Mr. Jones agreed with his daughters that it behoved him to punish the culprit in this matter,
but, nevertheless, he thought that it would be better for him to let it go unpunished than
to bring his boy into collision with such a one as Pat Carroll. He twice talked the matter
over with Florian, and twice did so to no effect. At first he threatened the young sinner,
and frowned at him. But his frowns did no good. Florian, if he could stand firm against his
sister Edith, was sure that he could do so against his father. Then Mr. Jones spoke him fair,
and endeavoured to explain to him how sad a thing it would be if his boy were to turn against
his own father and the interests of the family generally.

"But I haven't," said Florian confidently.

"You should tell me what you saw on that afternoon."

"I didn't see anything," said Florian sulkily.

"I don't believe he knew anything about it," said Mr. Jones to Edith afterwards. Edith could
only receive this in silence, and keep her own opinion to herself. Ada was altogether of her
mind, but Frank at last came round to his father's view. "It isn't probable," he said to his
sisters, "that a boy of his age should be able to keep such a secret against four of us; and
then it is most improbable that he should have seen anything of the occurrence and not have
come at once to his father." But the girls held to their own opinion, till at last they were
told by Frank that they were two pig-headed nincompoops.

Things were going on in this way, and Mr. Jones was still striving to find out evidence by
which a case might be substantiated against Pat Carroll, when that gentleman, one winter afternoon,
was using his eloquence upon Master Florian Jones. It was four o'clock, and the darkness of
the night was now coming on very quickly. The scene was a cottage, almost in the town of Headford,
and about two miles from the nearest part of the Morony estate. In this cottage Carroll was
sitting at one side of a turf fire, while an old woman was standing by the doorway making a
stocking. And in this cottage also was another man, whose face was concealed by an old crape
mask, which covered his eyes and nose and mouth. He was standing on the other side of the fireplace,
and Florian was seated on a stool in front of the fire. Ever and anon he turned his gaze round
on the mysterious man in the mask, whom he did not at all know; and, in truth, he was frightened
awfully through the whole interview by the man in the mask, who stood there by the fireside,
almost close to Florian's elbow, without speaking a word; nor did the old woman say much, though
it must be presumed that she heard all that was said.

"Faix, Mr. Flory, an' it's well for you you've come," said Carroll. "Jist you sit steady there,
'cause it won't do the laist good in life you're moving about where all the world'd see you."
It was thus that the boy was addressed by him, whom we may now call his co-conspirator, and
Carroll showed plainly, by his movements and by the glances which he cast around him, that
he understood perfectly the dreadful nature of the business in which he was engaged. "You see
that jintl'man there?" And Carroll pointed to the man in the mask.

"I see him," said poor Florian, almost in tears.

"You'd better mark him, that's all. If he cotches a hould o'ye he'd tear ye to tatthers, that's
all. Not that he'd do ye the laist harum in life if ye'd just hould yer pace, and say nothin'
to nobody."

"Not a word I'll say, Pat."

"Don't! That's all about it. Don't! We knows,--he knows,--what they're driving at down at the
Castle. Sorra a word comes out of the mouth o' one on 'em, but that he knows it." Here the
man in the mask shook his head and looked as horrible as a man in a mask can look. "They'll
tell ye that the father who owns ye ought to know all about it. It's just him as shouldn't know."

"He don't," said Florian.

"Not a know;--an' if you main to keep yourself from being holed as they holed Muster Bingham
the other day away at Hollymount." The boy understood perfectly well what was meant by the
process of "holing." The Mr. Bingham, a small landlord, who had been acting as his own agent
some twenty miles off, in the County of Mayo, had been frightfully murdered three months since.
It was the first murder that had stained the quarrel which had now commenced in that part of
the country. Mr. Bingham had been unpopular, but he had had to deal with such a small property,
that no one had imagined that an attack would be made on him. But he had been shot down as
he was driving home from Hollymount, whither he had gone to receive rent. He had been shot
down during daylight, and no one had as yet been brought to justice for the murder. "You mind's
Muster Bingham, Muster Flory; eh? He's gone, and sorra a soul knows anything about it. It's
I'd be sorry to think you'd be polished off that way." Again the man in the mask made signs
that he was wide awake.

To tell the truth of Florian, he felt rather complimented in the midst of all his horrors in
being thus threatened with the fate of Mr. Bingham. He had heard much about Mr. Bingham, and
regarded him as a person of much importance since his death. He was raised to a level now with
Mr. Bingham. And then his immediate position was very much better than Bingham's. He was alive,
and up to the present moment,--as long as he held his tongue and told nothing,--he would be
regarded with friendly eyes by that terrible man in the mask. But, through it all, there was
the agonising feeling that he was betraying them all at home. His father and Edith and Frank
would not murder him when they found him out, but they would despise him. And the boy knew
something,--he knew much of what was due by him to his father. At this moment he was much in
dread of Pat Carroll. He was in greater dread of the man in the mask. But as he sat there,
terrified by them as they intended to terrify him, he was aware of all that courage would demand
from him. If he could once escape from that horrid cabin, he thought that he might be able
to make a clean breast and tell everything. "It's I that'd be awful sorry that anything like
what happened Bingham, should happen to you, Muster Flory."

"Why wouldn't you; and I'd have done nothing against you?" said Florian. He did feel that his
conduct up to the present moment deserved more of gratitude than of threats from Pat Carroll.

"You're to remimber your oath, Muster Flory. You're become one of us, as Father Brosnan was
telling you. You're not to be one of us, and then go over among them schaming Prothestants."

"I haven't gone over among them,--only my father is one of them."

"What's yer father to do with it now you're a Catholic? Av you is ever false to a Catholic
on behalf of them Prothestants, though he's twice yer own father, you'd go t' hell for it;
that's where you'd be going. And it's not only that, but the jintl'man as is there will be
sending you on the journey." Then Pat signified that he alluded to the man in the mask, and
the gentleman in the mask clenched his fist and shook it,--and shook his head also. "You ask
Father Brosnan also, whether you ain't to be thrue to us Catholics now you're one of us? It's
a great favour as has been done you. You're mindful o' that--ain't you?" Poor Flory said that
he was mindful.

Here they were joined by another conspirator, a man whom Florian had seen down by the sluices
with Pat Carroll, and whom he thought he remembered to have noticed among the tenants from
the other side of Ballintubber. "What's the chap up to now?" asked the stranger.

"He ain't up to nothin'," said Carroll. "We're only a cautioning of him."

"Not to be splitting on yourself?"

"Nor yet on you," said Carroll.

"Sorra a word he can say agin me," said the stranger. "I wasn't in it at all."

"But you was," said Florian. "I saw you pick the latch up and throw it away."

"You've sharp eyes, ain't you, to be seeing what warn't there to be seen at all? If you say
you saw me in it, I'll have the tongue out of your mouth, you young liar."

"What's the good of frightening the boy, Michael. He's a good boy, and isn't a going to peach
upon any of us."

"But I ain't a liar. He's a liar." This Florian said, plucking up renewed courage from the
kind words Pat Carroll had said in his favour.

"Never mind," said Pat, throwing oil on the troubled waters. "We're all frinds at present,
and shall be as long as we don't split on nobody."

"It's the meanest thing out,--that splitting on a pal," said the man who had been called Michael.
"It's twice worse when one does it to one's father. I wouldn't show a ha'porth of mercy to
such a chap as that."

"And to a Catholic as peached to a Prothestant," said Carroll, intending to signify his hatred
of such a wretch by spitting on the ground.

"Or to a son as split because his father was in question." Then Michael spat twice upon the
floor, showing the extremity of the disgust which in such a case would overpower him.

"I suppose I may go now," said Florian. He was told by Pat Carroll that he might go. But just
at that moment the man in the mask, who had not spoken a word, extemporised a cross out of
two bits of burned wood from the hearth, and put it right before Florian's nose; one hand held
one stick, and the other, the other. "Swear," said the man in the mask.

"Bedad! he's in the right of it. Another oath will make it all the stronger. 'That ye'll never
say a word of this to mortial ears, whether father or sister or brother, let 'em say what they
will to yer, s'help yer the Blessed Virgin.'"

"I won't then," said Florian, struggling to get at the cross to kiss it.

"Stop a moment, me fine fellow," said Michael. "Nor yet to no one else--and you'll give yourself
up to hell flames av you don't keep the blessed oath to the last day of your life. Now let
him kiss it, Pat. I wouldn't be in his shoes for a ten-pun note if he breaks that oath."

"Nor I neither," said Pat. "Oh laws, no." Then Florian was allowed to escape from the cabin.
This he did, and going out into the dark, and looking about him to see that he was not watched,
made his way in at the back door of a fairly large house which stood near, still in the outskirts
of the town of Headford. It was a fairly large house in Headford; but Headford does not contain
many large houses. It was that in which lived Father Giles, the old parish priest of Tuam;--and
with Father Giles lived his curate, that Father Brosnan of whom mention has above been made.

CHAPTER III.

FATHER BROSNAN.

There has come a change among the priests in Ireland during the last fifty years, as has been
natural. Among whom has there not come a change in half a century? In England, statesmen are
different, and parsons, and judges, and peers. When an entire country has been left unmoved
by the outside world, so as to seem to have been left asleep while others have been awake,
the different classes will seem to be the same at the end of every half century. A village
lawyer in Spain will be as was a village lawyer fifty years ago. But a parish priest in Ireland
will be an altered personage, because the country generally has not been sleeping.

There used to be two distinct sorts of priests; of whom the elder, who had probably been abroad,
was the better educated; whereas the younger, who was home-nurtured, had less to say for himself
on general topics. He was generally the more zealous in his religious duties, but the elder
was the better read in doctrinal theology. As to the political question of the day, they were
both apt to be on the list against the Government, though not so with such violence as to make
themselves often obnoxious to the laws. It was natural that they should be opposed to the Government,
as long as the Protestant Church claimed an ascendency over them. But their feelings and aspirations
were based then on their religious opinions. Now a set of men has risen up, with whom opposition
to the rulers of the country is connected chiefly with political ideas. A dream of Home Rule
has made them what they are, and thus they have been roused into waking life, by the American
spirit, which has been imported into the country. There is still the old difference between
the elder and the younger priests. The parish priest is not so frequently opposed to the law,
as is his curate. The parish priest is willing that the landlord shall receive his rents, is
not at least anxious, that he shall be dispossessed of his land. But the curate has ideas of
peasant proprietors; is very hot for Home Rule, is less obedient to the authority of the bishops
than he was of yore, and thinks more of the political, and less of the religious state of his
country.

This variance of feeling might be seen in the three priests who have been already mentioned
in our story. Father Giles was the parish pastor of Headford, in which position he had been
for nearly forty years. He was a man seventy years of age, in full possession of all his faculties,
very zealous in the well-being of his people, prone to teach them that if they would say their
prayers, and do as they were bid by their betters, they would, in the long run, and after various
phases of Catholic well or ill-being, go to heaven. But they would also have enough to eat
in this world; which seemed to be almost more prominent in Father Giles's teaching than the
happy bliss of heaven. But the older Father Giles became the more he thought of the good things
of this world, on behalf of his people, and the less he liked being troubled with the political
desires of his curate. He had gone so far as to forbid Father Brosnan to do this, or to do
that on various occasions, to make a political speech here, or to attend a demonstration there;--in
doing which, or in not doing it, the curate sometimes obeyed, but sometimes disobeyed the priest,
thereby bringing Father Giles in his old age into infinite trouble.

But Father Malachi, in the neighbouring parish of Ballintubber, ran a course somewhat intermediate
between these two. He, at the present moment, had no curate who interfered with his happiness.
There was, indeed, a curate of Ballintubber--so named; but he lived away, not inhabiting the
same house with Father Malachi, as is usual in Ireland; having a chapel to himself, and seldom
making his way into our part of the country. Father Malachi was a strong-minded man, who knew
the world. He, too, had an inclination for Home Rule, and still entertained a jealousy against
the quasi-ascendency of a Protestant bishop; but he had no sympathy whatever with Father Brosnan.
Ireland for the Irish might be very well, but he did not at all want to have Ireland for the
Americans. Father Giles and Father Malachi certainly agreed on one thing--that Brosnan was
a great trouble.

If the conversion of Florian Jones was to be attributed to any clerical influence, Father Brosnan
was entitled to claim the good or the evil done; but in truth very few polemical arguments
had been used on the occasion. The boy's head had been filled with the idea of doing something
remarkable, and he had himself gone to the priest. When a Protestant child does go to a priest
on such a mission, what can the priest do but accept him? He is bound to look upon the suppliant
as a brand to be saved from the burning. "You stupid young ass!" the priest may say to himself,
apostrophising the boy; "why don't you remain as you are for the present? Why do you come to
trouble me with a matter you can know nothing about?" But the priest must do as his Church
directs him, and the brands have to be saved from the burning. Father Brosnan sent the boy
to Father Malachi, and Father Malachi told the lad to go to his terrestrial father. It was
this that Mr. Jones had expected, and there the boy was received as a Catholic.

But to Father Brosnan the matter was much more important in its political view. Father Brosnan
knew the application as to his rent which had been made by Pat Carroll to his landlord. He
was of opinion that no rent ought to be paid by any Irish tenant to any landlord--no rent,
at least, to a Protestant landlord. Wrath boiled within his bosom when he heard of the answer
which was given, as though Mr. Jones had robbed the man by his refusal. Mr. Brosnan thought
that for the present a tenant was, as a matter of course, entitled to abatement in his rent,
as in a short time he must be entitled to his land without paying any. He considered not at
all the circumstances, whether, as had been the case on certain properties in Mayo, all money
expended had been so expended by the tenant, or by the landlord, as had been the case with
Pat Carroll's land. That was an injustice, according to Mr. Brosnan's theory; as is all property
in accordance with the teaching of some political doctors who are not burdened with any.

It would have been unfair to Mr. Brosnan to say that he sympathised with murderers, or that
he agreed with those who considered that midnight outrages were fair atonements; he demanded
rights. He himself would have been hot with righteous indignation, had such a charge been made
against him. But in the quarrel which was now beginning all his sympathies were with the Carrolls
at large, and not with the Jones's at large. At every victory won by the British Parliament
his heart again boiled with indignation. At every triumphant note that came over the water
from America--which was generally raised by the record of the dollars sent--he boiled, on the
other hand, with joy. He had gleams in his mind of a Republic. He thought of a Saxon as an
evil being. The Queen, he would say, was very well, but she was better at a distance. The Lord-Lieutenant
was a British vanity, and English pomp, but the Chief Secretary was a minister of the evil
one himself. He believed that England was enriched by many millions a year robbed from Ireland,
and that Ireland was impoverished to the same extent. He was a man thoroughly disloyal, and
at the same time thoroughly ignorant, altogether in the dark as to the truth of things, a man
who, whatever might be his fitness for the duties of the priesthood, to which he had been educated,
had no capability of perceiving political facts, and no honesty in teaching them. But it would
have been unjust to him to say that he was a murderer, or that he countenanced murder. To him
it was that young Florian now betook himself, and found him seated alone in the back parlour
in Father Giles's house. The old priest was out, and Father Brosnan was engaged on some portion
of clerical duties. To give him his due, he performed those duties rigidly, and the more rigidly
when, in doing them, he obeyed the letter of the law rather than the spirit. As Father Giles,
in his idea of his duties, took altogether the other side of the question, and, in thinking
of the spirit, had nearly altogether ignored the letter, it may be imagined that the two men
did not agree together very well. In truth, Father Giles looked upon Father Brosnan as an ignorant,
impertinent puppy, whereas Father Brosnan returned the compliment by regarding Father Giles
as half an infidel, and almost as bad as a Protestant.

"Well, Master Florian," said the priest, "and how are things going with you?"

"Oh! Father Brosnan, I'm in terrible throuble."

"What throuble's up now?"

"They're all agin me at home, and father's nearly as bad as any of them. It's all along of
my religion."

"I thought your father had given his consent?"

"So he has; but still he's agin me. And my two sisters are dead agin me. What am I to do about
Pat Carroll?"

"Just hould your tongue."

"They do be saying that because what Pat and the other boys did was agin father's interest,
I am bound to tell."

"You've given a promise?"

"I did give a promise."

"And you swore an oath," said the priest solemnly.

"I did swear an oath certainly."

"Then you must hould your tongue. In such a case as this I cannot absolve you from your word.
I don't know what it is that Pat Carroll did." Here it must be admitted Father Brosnan did
not stick to the absolute truth. He did know what Pat Carroll had done. All Headford knew that
Mr. Jones's meadows had been flooded, and the priest must have known that the present cause
of trouble at Castle Morony, was the injury thus done. Father Brosnan knew and approved of
Pat Carroll's enmity to the Jones family. But he was able to justify the falsehood of his own
heart, by stumbling over the degree of knowledge necessary. There was a sense in which he did
not know it. He need not have sworn to it in a Court of Law. So he told himself, and so justified
his conscience. "You need not tell me," he went on to say when the boy was proceeding to whisper
the story, "I am not bound to know what it is that Pat Carroll does, and what it is that your
father suffers. Do you go home, and keep your toe in your pump, as they say, and come to me
for confession a day or two before Christmas. And if any of them say anything to you about
your religion, just sit quiet and bear it."

The boy was then dismissed, and went home to his father's home, indifferent as to who might
see him now, because he had come from the priest's house. But the terror of that man in the
mask still clung to him; and mingled with that was the righteous fear, which still struck cold
to his heart, of the wicked injury which he was doing his father. Boy though he was, he knew
well what truth and loyalty, and the bonds which should bind a family together, demanded from
him. He was miserable with a woe which he had not known how to explain to the priest, as he
thought of his terrible condition. At first Pat Carroll and his friends had recommended themselves
to him. He had, in truth, only come on the scene of devastation down by the lough, by mere
accident. But he had before heard that Pat was an aggrieved man in reference to his rent, and
had taken it into his boyish heart to sympathise with such sorrows. When Pat had got hold of
him on the spot, and had first exacted the promise of secrecy, Florian had given it willingly.
He had not expected to be questioned on the subject, and had not attributed the importance
to it which it had afterwards assumed. He had since denied all knowledge of it, and was of
course burdened with a boy's fear of having to acknowledge the falsehood. And now there had
been added to it that awful scene in the cabin at Headford, and on the top of that had come
the priest's injunction. "In such a case as this I cannot absolve you from your word." It was
so that the priest had addressed him, and there was something in it that struck his young mind
with awe. There was the man in the mask tendering to him the oath upon the cross; and there
had been Pat Carroll assuring him of that man's wrath. Then there had come the other stranger,
speaking out angrily, and promising to him all evil, were he to divulge a word.

Nevertheless, his conscience was so strong within him, that when he reached the Castle he had
almost made up his mind to tell his father everything. But just as he was about to enter the
Lodge gate, he was touched on the arm by a female. "Master Florian," said the female, "we is
all in your hands." It was now dark night, and he could not even see the woman's face. She
seemed indeed to keep her face covered, and yet he could see the gleam of her eyes. "You're
one of us now, Master Florian."

"I'm a Catholic, if you mean that."

"What else should I main? Would ye be unthrue to your own people? Do ye know what would happen
you if ye commit such a sin as that? I tould them up there that you'd never bring down hell
fire upon yer head, by such a deed as that. It isn't what ye can do to him he'll mind, I said,
but the anger o' the Blessed Virgin. Worn't it thrue for me what I said, Master Florian?" She
held him in the dark, and he could see the glimmer of her eyes, and hear the whisper of her
voice, and she frightened him with the fear of the world to come. As he made his way up to
the hall door, it was not the dread of the man in the mask, so much as the fear inspired by
this woman which made him resolve that, come what come might, he must stick to the lie which
he had told.

After breakfast the next morning, his father summoned him into his room. "Now," said Flory
to himself, as he followed his father trembling,--"now must I be true." By this he meant that
he must be true to his co-conspirators. If he were false to them, he would have to incur the
anger of the Blessed Virgin. How this should be made to fall upon him, he did not in the least
understand; but he did understand that the Virgin as he had thought her, should be kind, and
mild, and gracious. He had never stopped to think whether the curse as uttered by the woman,
might or might not be true. Of loyalty to his father he had thought much; but now he believed
that it behoved him to think more of loyalty to the Virgin, as defined by the woman in the dark.

He followed his father into the magistrates' room, leaving his brother and two sisters in the
parlour. He was glad that none of them were invited to accompany him, for he felt that his
father was more prone to believe him, than were either his sisters or even his brother. "Florian,"
said his father, "you know, do you not, the trouble to which I have been put about this man,
Pat Carroll?"

"Yes, father; I know you have."

"And the terrible loss which I have incurred! Eighty acres are under water. I suppose the miscreant
will have cost me between £400 and £500."

"As much as that?" said Florian, frightened by the magnitude of the sum named.

"Indeed he will. It is hard to calculate the extent of the malignity of a wicked man. Whether
the barony will share the loss with me I cannot yet say; but in either case the wickedness
will be the same. There is no word bad enough for it. It is altogether damnable; and this is
done by a man who calls me in question because of my religion." Here the father paused, but
Florian stood by without an answer. If Pat Carroll was right in his religion, his father must
be wrong; and Florian thought that Pat Carroll was right. But he did not see how the two things
were joined together,--the opening of the sluices, and the truth of Pat Carroll's religious
convictions. "But bad as the matter is as regards Pat Carroll, it is all as nothing in reference
to the accusation made against you." Here the father came up, and laying his two hands on the
boy's shoulders looked sadly into his face. "I cannot believe that my own boy, my darling boy,
has joined in this evil deed against me!" Here the father ceased and waited for his son to speak.

The son remembered the determination to which he had come, and resolved to adhere to it. "I
didn't," he said after a pause.

"I cannot believe it of you; and yet, your sisters who are as true as steel, who are so good
that I bless God morning and night that He in His mercy has left me such treasures,--they believe
it."

"They are against me because of my religion."

"No, Florian, not so; they disapprove of your change in religion, but they are not brought
to accuse you by such a feeling. They say that they see it in your face."

"How can they see all that in my face?"

"That though you are lying persistently, you cannot hide from them that you are lying. They
are not only good girls, but they have very sharp wits. A cleverer girl than Edith, or one
better able to read the truth of a boy's head, or even a man's, I have never known. I hardly
dare to put my own judgment against hers."

"In this case she knows nothing about it."

"But to me it is of such vital importance! It is not simply that your evidence is needed to
punish the man; I would let the man go and all the evil that he has done me. But not for any
money that I could name would I entertain such an opinion of my son. Were I convinced at this
moment that you are innocent, I should be a happy man."

"Then you may, father."

"But your manner is against you. You do not answer me with that appearance of frankness which
I should have expected."

"Of course it all makes me very miserable. How can a fellow be frank when he's suspected like
this?"

"Florian, do you give me your most solemn assurance that you saw nothing of this evil work
while it was being perpetrated?"

"Yes, father."

"You saw nothing, and you knew nothing?"

"No, father."

"You have no reason to accuse Pat Carroll, except by what you have heard?"

"No, father."

"Nor anyone else?"

"No, father." Then Mr. Jones stood silent, looking at his son. And the more he looked the more
he doubted him. When the boy had uttered "No, father," for the last time, Mr. Jones felt almost
convinced--almost convinced that Edith was right. "You may go now, Florian," he said. And the
boy departed, fully convinced that his father had disbelieved him.

CHAPTER IV.

MR. BLAKE OF CARNLOUGH.

Three or four days after the occurrences narrated in the last chapter, Mr. Jones got on to
his car and had himself driven down to Carnlough, the seat of Mr. Thomas Blake, a gentleman
living about two miles the other side of Tuam. To reach Carnlough he had a journey to make
of about ten miles, and as he seldom went, in these days, so far away from home, the fact of
his going was known to all the household.

"Father is going to Carnlough," Florian said to Peter, the butler. "What is he going for?"

"'Deed, then, Master Flory, who can tell that? Mr. Blake is a very old friend of master's."

"But why is he going now? It isn't often he goes to Carnlough; and when he does go, he is sure
to say why."

"I shouldn't wonder af he's going to ax him as to how he shall get rid of the waters."

"He knows that better than Mr. Blake can tell him."

"Or maybe he's going to inquire how he shall cotch a hould of Pat Carroll."

It was evident, from the butler's answers, that all the world at Morony Castle felt that at
present Mr. Jones could engage himself on no other subject than that of the flood.

"I wish father wouldn't think so much about the flood. After all, what's £500? It won't ruin
a man like my father."

But the butler showed by his visage that he regarded £500 as a very serious matter, and that
he was not at all astonished by the occupation which it gave to his master's thoughts.

Mr. Blake, of Carnlough, was the first Irishman with whom Mr. Jones had become acquainted in
the County Galway. It was through his instance, indeed, that the Morony and Ballintubber properties
had been bought, so that the acquaintance must have been well established before the purchase
had been made. Mr. Blake was a man of good property, who, in former years, had always been
regarded as popular in the county. He was a Protestant, but had not made himself odious to
the Roman Catholics around him as an Orangeman, nor had he ever been considered to be hard
as a landlord. He thought, perhaps, a little too much of popularity, and had prided himself
a little perhaps, on managing "his boys"--as he called the tenants--with peculiar skill. Even
still he could boast of his success, though there had arisen some little difficulties as to
rent over at Carnlough; and, indeed, he was frightened lest some of the evil ways which had
begun to prevail in the neighbouring parts of County Mayo, should make their way into County
Galway.

Mr. Blake and Mr. Jones had been very intimate. It had been at Mr. Blake's instance that Mr.
Jones had been brought on to the Grand Jury. But latterly they had not seen very much of each
other. Mr. Jones, since the death of his wife, did not go frequently to Galway, and Carnlough
was a long distance for a morning's drive. But on this occasion Mr. Jones drove himself over
simply with the view of making a morning call. "Well, Jones, how are you;--and how are the
girls, and how is Frank, and how is that young pickle, Master Florian?" These questions were
answered by others of a similar nature. "How are the girls, and how is Mrs. Blake, and what
is going on here at Carnlough?" There was no inquiry after the eldest son, for it was Mr. Blake's
misfortune that he had no male child to inherit his property.

"Faith, then, things ain't going on a bit too well," said Mr. Blake. "Abatement, abatement,
nothing but abatement! Nobody abates me anything. I have to pay all family charges just the
same as ever. What would they say if I was to take away my wife and girls, shut up Carnlough,
and go and live in France? I could give them some abatement then and be a richer man. But how
would they like to have Carnlough empty?"

"There's no danger of that, I think."

"Upon my word, I don't know. The girls are talking of it, and when they begin to talk of a
thing, I am very likely to do it. And Mrs. Blake is quite ready."

"You wouldn't leave the country?"

"That's just it. I'll stay if they'll let me. If they'll pay me rent enough to enable me to
live here comfortably, I'll not desert them. But if they think that I'm to keep up the place
on borrowed money, they'll find their mistake. I didn't mind ten per cent. for the last two
years, though I have taken to drinking whisky punch in my old age, instead of claret and sherry.
And I don't mind ten per cent. for this year, though I am sorely in want of a young horse to
carry me. But if the ten per cent. is to go on, or to become twenty per cent. as one blackguard
hinted, I shall say good-bye to Carnlough. They may fight it out then with Terry Daly as they
can." Now, Terry Daly was the well-known agent for the lands of Carnlough. "What has brought
you over here to-day?" asked Mr. Blake. "I can see with half an eye that there is some fresh
trouble."

"Indeed there is."

"I have heard what they did with your sluices. That's another trick they've learnt out of County
Mayo. When a landlord is not rich enough to give them all that they want, they make the matter
easier by doing the best they can to ruin him. I don't think anything of that kind has been
done at Carnlough."

"There is worse than that," said Mr. Jones sorrowfully.

"The devil there is! They have not mutilated any of your cattle?"

"No, there is nothing of that kind. The only enemy I've got about the place, as far as I know,
is one Pat Carroll. It was he and others, whom he paid to serve him, that have let the waters
in upon the meadows. Eighty acres are under water at this moment. But I can bear that like
a man. The worst of that is, that all the neighbours should have seen him do it, and not one
of them have come forward to tell me."

"That is the worst," said Mr. Blake. "There must be some terrible understanding among them,
some compact for evil, when twenty men are afraid to tell what one man has been seen to do.
It's fearful to think that the priests should not put a stop to it. How is Master Florian getting
on with his priest?"

"It's about him that I have come to speak to you," said Mr. Jones.

"About Florian?"

"Yes; indeed. When I tell you my story, I think you will understand that I would tell it to
no one but yourself in County Galway. I fear that Florian saw the men at work upon the flood
gates."

"And will he not tell the truth?"

"You must remember that I cannot say that I know anything. The boy declares that he saw nothing;
that he knows nothing. I have no evidence; but his sisters are sure that it is so. Edith says
that he certainly was present when the gates were removed. She only judges from his manner
and his countenance."

"What made her suspect him?" asked Mr. Blake.

"Only that she saw him when the news was brought to us. Edith is not ill-natured. She would
not be prone to make a story against her brother."

"If Edith says so, it is so," said Mr. Blake, who among all Edith's admirers was one of the
most ardent.

"I don't quite say that. I only mean to express my conviction that she intends to get at the
truth."

"I'll wager my life upon her," said Mr. Blake. "As to the other;--well, you know, Jones, that
he has turned Roman Catholic."

"That means nothing," said the distressed father. "He is only ten years old. Of course he's
a fool for his pains; but he would not on that account do such a deed as this."

"I don't know. You must remember that he will be telling everything to the priests."

"We have two priests about us," said Mr. Jones, "and I would trust them in anything. There
is Father Giles at Headford, and he is as fair a man as any clergyman of our own could be.
You cannot imagine that he would give such advice to my boy?"

"Not Father Giles certainly," said the other man.

"Then down with us at Ballintubber there is Father Malachi."

"I know him too," said Mr. Blake. "He would not interfere with a boy like Florian. Is there
no one else? What curate lives with Father Malachi?"

"There is none with him at Ballintubber. One Brosnan lives with Father Giles."

"That man is a firebrand," said Mr. Blake. "He is a wretched politician, always preaching up
Home Rule."

"But I do not think that even he would teach a boy to deceive his own father in such a matter
as this."

"I am not sure," said Blake. "It is very difficult to get at the vagaries of mind in such a
man as Mr. Brosnan. But what do you intend to do?"

"I have come to you for advice. But remember this:--in my present frame of mind, the suspicion
that I feel as to poor Florian is ten times worse to me than the loss of all my meadows. If
I could find out Edith to have been wrong, I should be at once relieved of the great trouble
which sits heaviest at my heart."

"I fear that Edith is right," said Mr. Blake.

"You are prejudiced a little in her favour. Whatever she says you will think right."

"You must weigh that, and take it for what it's worth," said Mr. Blake. "We know that the boy
has got himself into bad hands. You do not suspect him of a desire to injure you?"

"Oh, no!" said the father.

"But he has seen these men do it, and now refuses to tell you. They have terrified him."

"He is not a cowardly boy," said Mr. Jones, still standing up for his son.

"But they have made him swear an oath that he will not tell. There has been something of that
sort. What does he say himself?"

"Simply that he knows nothing about it."

"But how does he say it? Does he look you in the face? A boy of that kind may lie. Boys do--and
girls also. When people say they don't, they know nothing about it; but if it's worth one's
while to look at them one can generally tell when they're lying. I'm not a bit afraid of a
boy when he is lying,--but only of one who can lie as though he didn't lie."

"I think that Florian is lying," said Mr. Jones slowly; "he does not look me in the face, and
he does not lie straightforward."

"Then Edith is right; and I am right when I swear by her."

"But what am I to do with him? If, as I suppose, he saw Pat Carroll do the mischief, he must
have seen others with him. If we knew who were the lot, we could certainly get the truth out
of some of them, so as to get evidence for a conviction."

"Can't he be made to speak?" asked Mr. Blake.

"How can I make him? It will be understood all about Morony that he has been lying. And I feel
that it is thought that he has made himself a hero by sticking to his lie. If they should turn
upon him?" Mr. Blake sat silent but made no immediate reply. "It would be better for me to
let the whole thing slide. If they were to kill him!"

"They would not do that. Here in County Galway they have not come to that as yet. There is
not a county in all Ireland in which such a deed could be done," said Mr. Blake, standing up
for his country. "Are you to let this ruffian pass unpunished while you have the power of convicting
him? I think that you are bound to punish him. For the sake of your country you are bound to
do so."

"And the boy?" said Mr. Jones hoarsely.

"He is but ten years old, and will soon live it down. And the disgrace of the lie will be drowned
in the triumph of telling the truth at last. We should all feel,--I should feel,--that he would
in such case deserve well, rather than ill, of his father and of me, and of all of us. Besides
you had some idea of sending him to school in England." Here Mr. Jones shook his head, intending
to indicate that no such expensive step as that would be possible after the loss incurred by
the flooding of the eighty acres. "At any rate my advice to you is to make him declare the
truth. I think little harm of a boy for lying, but I do think harm of those who allow a lie
to pass unnoticed." So saying Mr. Blake ended the meeting, and took Mr. Jones away to see Mrs.
Blake and the girls.

"I do suppose that father has gone to Carnlough, to consult with Mr. Blake about this affair
of the flood." It was thus that Ada spoke to her brother Florian, when he came to her discussing
the matter of their father's absence.

"What can Mr. Blake know about it?" said Florian.

"I suppose he means to ask about you. It is quite clear, Florian, that no one in the house
believes you."

"Peter does."

"You mean that Peter thinks you are right to stand to the lie now you have told it. More shame
for Peter if he does."

"You wouldn't have a fellow go and put himself out of favour with all the boys through the
country? There is a horrible man that wears a mask--" Then he remembered, and stopped himself.
He was on closer terms with Ada than with Edith, but not on terms so close as to justify his
whispering a word about the man in the mask.

"Where did you see the man in the mask?" asked Ada. "Who is the man in the mask?"

"I don't know."

"But you know where you saw him. You must know that. What did the man in the mask say to you?"

"I am not going to tell you anything about him," said the boy. "I am not going to have my secrets
got out of me in that way. It isn't honest. Nobody but a Protestant would do it." So saying
Florian left his sister, with the tale of the man in the mask only half told.

CHAPTER V.

MR. O'MAHONY AND HIS DAUGHTER.

We must now turn to another personage in our story, and tell our readers something of the adventures
and conditions of this gentleman;--something also of his daughter. The adventures of her early
life will occupy much of our time and many of our pages; and though her father may not be so
interesting as it is hoped that she will become, still he was so peculiar in his modes of thought,
and so honest, though by no means wise, in his manner of thinking, as to make his story also
perhaps worth the telling.

Gerald O'Mahony was at the time of the flooding of Mr. Jones's meadows not much more than forty
years old. But he was already the father of a daughter nearly twenty. Where he was born, from
what parents, or to what portion of Ireland his family belonged, no one knew. He himself had
been heard to declare a suspicion that his father had come from County Kerry. But as he himself
had been, according to his own statement, probably born in the United States, the county to
which his father had belonged is not important. He had been bred up as a Roman Catholic, but
had long since thrown over all the prejudices of his religion. He had married when he was quite
young, and had soon lost his wife. But in talking of her now he always described her as an
angel. But though he looked to be so young as to be his daughter's brother, rather than her
father, he had never thought of marrying again. His daughter he declared was everything to
him. But those who knew him well said that politics were dearer to him even than his daughter.
Since he had been known in County Galway, he had passed and repassed nearly a dozen times between
New York and Ireland; and his daughter had twice come with him. He had no declared means, but
he had never been known to borrow a shilling, or to leave a bill unpaid. But he had frequently
said aloud that he had no money left, and that unless he returned to his own country he and
his daughter must be taken in by some poor-house. For Mr. O'Mahony, fond as he was of Ireland,
allowed no one to say that he was an Irishman.

But his troubles were apparently no troubles to him. He was always good-humoured, and seemed
always to be happy--except when in public, when he was engaged upon politics. Then he would
work himself up to such a state of indignant anger as seemed to be altogether antagonistic
to good-humour. The position he filled,--or had filled,--was that of lecturer on behalf of
the United States. He had lectured at Manchester, at Glasgow, at Liverpool, and lately all
over Ireland. But he had risen to such a height of wrath in advocating the doctrine of Republicanism
that he had been stopped by the police. He had been held to have said things disrespectful
of the Queen. This he loudly denied. He had always, he said, spoken of the Queen's virtues,
her graces, and general fitness for her high office. He had declared,--and this was true,--that
of all kings and queens of whom he had read in history she was the best. But, he had gone on
to say there should be no king or queen. The practice was an absurdity. The reverence paid
even to the high office was such as, in his idea, degraded a man. Even in America, the Kotooing
which took place before the President's toe was to him an abomination. No man in accordance
with his theory should worship another man. Titles should only be used as indicative of a man's
trade or occupation. As one man was Mr. General Grant, another man should be Mr. Bricklayer
Green. He could not do away with the Queen. But for the woman, he was quite disposed to worship
her. All women were to be worshipped, and it was a privilege of a man to worship a woman. When
a woman possessed so many virtues as did the Queen of England, it became a man's duty to worship
them. But it was a woman whom he would worship, and not the Queen. This was carried to such
a length, and he was so eloquent on the subject that the police were desired to interfere,
and he was made to hold his tongue,--at any rate as far as England and Ireland were concerned.

He had made Galway a kind of centre home, attracted thither by the friendship which his daughter
had made with Ada and Edith Jones. For though Ada and Edith were by no means Republican in
their thoughts and feelings, it had come to pass that they dearly loved the American girl who
was so. Rachel O'Mahony had frequently been at Morony Castle, as had also her father; and Mr.
Jones had taken delight in controverting the arguments of the American, because, as he had
said, the American had been unselfish and true. But since his lecturing had been stopped, it
had become necessary that he should go elsewhere to look for means of livelihood, and he had
now betaken himself to London for that purpose,--a circumstance which will be explained at
greater length as the story progresses.

Republicanism was not the only matter in his political creed to which Gerald O'Mahony was devoted.
Though he was no Irishman, as he delighted to intimate, his heart was Irish; and during his
various visits to the country, he had filled his bosom with thoughts of Irish wrongs. No educated
man was ever born and bred in more utter ignorance of all political truths than this amiable
and philanthropic gentleman. In regard to Ireland his theory was that the land should be taken
from the present proprietors, and divided among the peasants who tilled it. When asked what
should be done with the present owners, he was quite ready with his answer: "Let them be paid
for the property by the State!" He would have no man injured to the extent of a shilling. When
asked where the State was to get the money, he declared that that was a mere detail. States
did get money. As for the landlords themselves, with the money in their pockets, let them emigrate
to the United States, if they were in want of something to do. As to the division of the land,--that
he said would settle itself. One man would have ten acres, and another fifty; but that would
be fair, because one man had been used to pay for ten, and another to pay for fifty. As for
the men who got no land in the scramble he could see no injustice. The man who chanced to have
been a tenant for the last twelve months, must take the benefit of his position. No doubt such
man could sell his land immediately after he got it, because Freedom of Sale was one of the
points of his charter. He could see the injustice of giving the land at a rent fixed by the
State, because the State has no right to interfere in ordinary contracts between man and man.
But if the land was to be given up without any rent, then he could see no injustice. Thus,
and thus only, could Ireland be made to return to the beauty and the grace of her original
simplicity.

But on the wrongs arising from the want of Home Rule he was warmer even than on those which
the land question had produced. "Why should Ireland be governed by a British Parliament, a
British Lord-Lieutenant, a British Chief-Secretary, a British Commander-in-Chief, and trodden
under foot by a British soldiery? Why should Scotland be so governed, why should Wales, why
should Yorkshire?" Mr. Jones would reply, "Repeal the Unions; restore the Heptarchy!" Mr. O'Mahony
had but a confused idea of what the Heptarchy had been. But he was sure that it would be for
the benefit of Ireland, that Irish knives should be made of Irish steel. "As undoubtedly would
have been the case if the question of protection were to be left to an Irish Parliament to
settle," said Mr. Jones. "Heaven help the man who would want to cut his mutton. His best chance
would be that he would soon have no mutton to cut."

So the dispute was carried on with much warmth on one side, and with many arguments on the
other, but without any quarrelling. It was impossible to quarrel with O'Mahony, who was thoroughly
unselfish, and desirous of no violence. When he had heard what had been done in reference to
Mr. Jones's meadows, and had been told of the suspected conduct of Pat Carroll, he was as indignant
as though he had himself been a landed proprietor, or even an Orangeman. And on Mr. Jones's
part there was a desire to do justice to all around him, which came within the capacity of
O'Mahony's vision. He knew that Mr. Jones himself was a fair-dealing, honest gentleman, and
he could not, therefore, quarrel with him.

There is a steamer running from the town of Galway, across Lough Corrib, to the little village
of Cong, on the Mayo side of the lake, which stops and picks up passengers within a mile of
Morony Castle. From this, passengers are landed, so that the means of transit between Galway
and Mr. Jones's house are peculiarly easy. Up and down by this steamer Ada and Edith Jones
had frequently gone to visit their friend, and as frequently that friend had come to visit
them. But unfortunately the steamer had been open to others besides the young ladies, and Rachel
O'Mahony had found a dearer friend than either of the girls at Morony Castle. It had come to
pass that Frank Jones and Rachel O'Mahony had declared themselves to be engaged. On no such
ground as want of wealth, or want of family, or want of education, had Mr. Jones based his
objection to the match; but there had been a peculiarity in the position of Rachel which had
made him hesitate. It was not that she was an American, but such an American! It was not that
he was a Republican, but such a Republican! And she was more anxious to carry Frank away with
her to the United States, and to join him in a political partnership with her father, than
to come and settle herself down at the Castle. Thus there had arisen an understanding on the
part of the young people, that, though they were engaged, they were engaged without the consent
of the young man's father. Rachel therefore was not to be brought to the Castle while Frank
was there. To all this Rachel's father had assented, in a smiling indifferent manner, half
intended to ridicule all who were concerned. As it was not a question of politics, Mr. O'Mahony
could not work himself up to any anger, or apparently even to anxiety in the matter. "Your
young people,"--here he meant English and Irish generally,--"are taught to think they should
begin the world where we leave it off."

"Your young people are just as fond of what money will buy as are ours," said Mr. Jones.

"But they are fonder of one another, even, than of money. When they love one another they become
engaged. Then they marry. And as a rule they don't starve. As a rule people with us seldom
do starve. As for making out an income for a young man to start with, that with us is quite
out of the question. Frank some day will have this property."

"That won't give him much of an income," said Mr. Jones, who since the affair of the flood
had become very despondent in reference to the estate.

"Then he's as well off now as ever he will be, and might as well marry the girl." But all this
was said with no eagerness.

"They are merely boy and girl as yet," said Mr. Jones.

"I was married, and Rachel was born before I was Frank's age." So saying, Mr. O'Mahony consented
to come to Morony Castle, and bid them adieu, without bringing his girl with him. This was
hard upon Ada and Edith, as Mr. Frank, of course, went into Galway as often as he pleased,
and made his adieu after his own fashion.

And there had come up another cause which had created further objections to the marriage in
Mr. Jones's mind. Mr. O'Mahony had declared that as his lecturing was brought to an end by
the police, he must throw himself upon Rachel's capabilities for earning some money. Rachel's
capabilities had been often discussed at the Castle, but with various feelings on the three
sides into which the party had formed themselves. All the Jones's were on one side, and declared
that the capability had better not be exercised. In this they were probably wrong;--but it
was their opinion. They had lived for many years away from London. The children had so lived
all their lives; and they conceived that prejudices still existed which had now been banished
or nearly banished from the world. Mr. O'Mahony, who formed another party, thought that the
matter was one of supreme indifference. As long as he could earn money by lecturing it was
well that he should earn it. It was always better that the men of a family should work than
the women; but, if the man's talent was of no use, then it might be well to fall back upon
the woman. He only laughed at the existence of a prejudice in the matter. He himself had no
prejudices. He regarded all prejudices as the triumph of folly over education.

But Rachel, who was the third party in the discussion, had a very strong feeling of her own.
She was of opinion that if the capability in question existed, it ought to be exercised. On
that subject,--her possession of the capability,--she entertained, she said, strong doubts.
But if the capability existed it certainly ought to be used. That was Rachel's opinion, expressed
with all the vigour which she knew how to throw into the subject.

This capability had already been exercised in New York, where it had been efficacious, though
the effect had not been great. She had been brought up to sing, and great things had been promised
of her voice. An American manager had thought much of her performance, though she had hitherto,
he said, been young, and had not come to the strength of her throat. But he had himself seen
to her education, almost as a child, and had been sure that sooner or later she would do great
things in the musical world. Mr. Mahomet M. Moss was the gentleman in question, and he at present
was in London. That such a voice as Rachel O'Mahony's should be lost to the world, was to his
thinking a profanity, an indecency, an iniquity, a wasting of God's choicest gifts, and an
abomination not to be thought of; for Mr. Mahomet M. Moss was in the affairs of his own profession
a most energetic gentleman. Rachel rather turned up her nose at Mr. Mahomet M. Moss; but she
was very anxious to go to London and to take her chance, and to do something, as she said,
laughing, just to keep her father's pot a little on the boil;--but for Mr. Mahomet M. Moss
she did not care one straw. Mr. O'Mahony was therefore ready to start on the journey, and had
now come to Morony Castle to say farewell to his friend Mr. Jones. "Are you sure about that
fellow Moss?" said Mr. Jones.

"What do you call sure about him? He's as big a swindler, I guess, as you shall find from here
to himself."

"And are you going to put Rachel into his hands?"

"Well, I think so;--after a sort of fashion. He'll swindle her out of three parts of what she
earns;--but she'll get the fourth part. It's always the way with a young girl when she's first
brought out."

"I don't mean about money. Will you leave her conduct in his hands?"

"He'll be a clever chap who'll undertake to look after Rachel's conduct. I guess she'll conduct
herself mostly."

"You'll be there to be sure," said Mr. Jones.

"Yes, I shall be there; and she'll conduct me too. Very likely."

"But, Mr. O'Mahony,--as a father!"

"I know pretty well what you would be saying. Our young folk grow old quicker a long sight
than yours do. Now your girls here are as sweet as primroses out of the wood. But Rachel is
like a rose that has been brought up to stand firm on its own bush. I'm not a bit afraid of
her. Nor yet is your son. She looks as though you might blow her away with the breath from
your mouth. You try her, and you'll find that she'll want a deal of blowing."

"Does not a young girl lose something of the aroma of her youth by seeing too much of the world
too soon?"

"How old do you expect her to be when she's to die?"

"Rachel! How can I tell? She is only as yet entering upon life, and her health seems to be
quite confirmed."

"The best confirmed I ever knew in my life. She never has a day's illness. Taking all the chances
one way and another, shall we say sixty?"

"More than that, I should think," said Mr. Jones.

"Say sixty. She may fall down a trap in the theatre, or be drowned in one of your Cunarders."

"The Cunard steamers never drown anybody," said Mr. Jones.

"Well, then, a White Star--or any cockle-shell you may please to name. We'll put her down for
sixty as an average."

"I don't know what you are driving at," said Mr. Jones.

"She has lived a third of her life already, and you expect her to know nothing, so that the
aroma may still cling to her. Aroma does very well for earls' daughters and young marchionesses,
though as far as I can learn, it's going out of fashion with them. What has an American girl
to do with aroma, who's got her bread to earn? She's got to look to her conduct, and to be
sharp at the same time. Mr. Mahomet M. Moss will rob her of seventy-five cents out of every
dollar for the next twelve months. In three years' time he'll rob her of nothing. Only that
she knows what conduct means, he'd have to look very sharp to keep his own."

"It is not natural," said Mr. Jones.

"But it's American. Marvels are not natural, and we are marvellous people. I don't know much
about aroma, but I think you'll find Rachel will come out of the washing without losing much
colour in the process."

Then the two friends parted, and Mr. O'Mahony went back to Galway, preparatory to his journey
to London.

CHAPTER VI.

RACHEL AND HER LOVERS.

On the day following that of O'Mahony's return to Galway, he, and his daughter, and Frank Jones
were together at the Galway Station preparatory to the departure of the O'Mahonys for Dublin
and London. "I guess you two have got something to say to each other, so I'll leave you to
yourselves," said the father.

"I guess we have," said Rachel, "so if you'll wait here we'll come to you when the cars are
fixed." So saying, Rachel put her hand on her lover's arm and walked off with him along the
platform. Rachel O'Mahony had not been badly described when her father said of her that she
looked as though she might be blown away. She was very fair, and small and frail to look at.
Her father had also said of her that her health was remarkably good,--"the best confirmed that
he had ever known in his life." But though this too, was true, she hardly looked it. No one
could have pointed out any sign of malady about her; only one would have said that there was
nothing of her. And the colour on her face was so evanescent that he who watched her was inclined
to think that she herself was like her colour. And she moved as though she was always on the
vanishing point. "I'm very fond of eating," she had been heard to say. "I know it's vulgar;
but it's true." No doubt she was fond of eating, but so is a sparrow. There was nothing she
would not attempt to do in the way of taking exercise. She would undertake very long walks,
and would then fail, and declare that she must be carried home; but she would finally get through
the day's work better than another woman who appeared to have double her strength. Her feet
and hands were the tiniest little adjuncts to a grown human body that could be seen anywhere.
They looked at least to be so. But they were in perfect symmetry with her legs and arms. "I
wish I were bigger," she had once been heard to say, "because I could hit a man." The man to
whom she alluded was Mr. Mahomet M. Moss. "I sometimes want to hit a woman, but that would
be such a small triumph." And yet she had a pride in her little female fineries. "Now, Frank,"
she had once said, "I guess you won't get another woman in all Galway to put her foot into
that boot; nor yet in New York either."

"I don't think I could," said the enraptured Frank.

"You'd better take it to New York and try, and if you find the lady you can bring her back
with you."

Frank refused the commission, saying something of course very pretty as to his mistress's foot.
"Ten buttons! These only have eight," she said, objecting to a present which her lover had
just brought her. "If I had ten buttons, and the gloves to fit me, I'd cut my arm off and put
it under a glass case. Lovers are sent out to do all possible and impossible things in order
to deserve their lady-loves. You shall go and wander about till you find a glove with ten buttons
to fit me, then I'll consent to be Mrs.----Jones." By all of which little manoeuvres Frank
was charmed and oppressed to the last degree. When she would call herself the "future Mrs.----Jones,"
he would almost feel inclined to abandon both the name and the property. "Why not be Mrs. Morony,"
Rachel would say, "or Mrs. Ballintubber? The Ballintubber, of Ballintubber, would sound exquisitely,
and then I should always be called 'Madam.'"

Her beauty was all but perfect, as far as symmetry was concerned, only that there was not enough
of it; and for the perfection of female beauty a tone of colour is, methinks, needed somewhat
darker than that which prevailed with Rachel O'Mahony. Her hair was so light that one felt
it rather than saw it, as one feels the sunlight. It was soft and feathery, as is the under
plumage on the wings of some small tropical birds. "A lock of my hair!" she had once said to
Frank; "but it will all go into nothing. You should have paid your vows to some girl who could
give you a good lump of hair fit to stuff a pillow with. If you have mine you will think in
a few weeks that the spiders have been there and have left their dust behind." But she gave
him the lock of hair, and laid it on his lips with her own little hands.

There was not enough of her beauty. Even in touching her a lover could not but feel that he
had to deal with a little child. In looking at her he could only look down upon her. It was
not till she spoke, and that her words came to his assistance, that he found that he had to
deal with one who was not altogether a child. "Mr. Mahomet M. Moss declares his opinion that
I shall be seen above the gaslights. It was very civil and complimentary of Mahomet M. M. But
I mean to make myself heard. Mahomet M. M. did not seem to think of this." Since Frank had
known her she had taken every opportunity in her power of belittling Mahomet M. M., as she
was wont to call Mr. Moss.

Frank Jones was, in truth, a handsome stalwart young man, clever enough for the world, who
thought a good deal of himself, and who thought very much more of the girl whom he loved. It
was chiefly because he was absolutely unlike an American that Rachel O'Mahony had come to love
him. Who does not know the "got up" look of the gentleman from the other side of the water,
who seems to know himself to be much better than his father, and infinitely superior to his
grandfather; who is always ready to make a speech on every occasion, and who feels himself
to be fit company for a Prime Minister as soon as he has left school. Probably he is. Young
Jones was not so; and it was on account of this deficiency that Rachel prized him. "I'm not
like a young girl myself," she had said to her father, "but I do love a jolly nice boy. With
us at sixteen, they are all but decrepit old men, and yet they are such little monkeys."

"For a little monkey, what do you think of yourself?" her father had replied. But the conversation
then had not gone any further.

"I know you'll be after me before long," Rachel said to Frank, as they walked up and down the
platform together.

"If I do, I shall ask you to marry me at once," he replied.

"I shall never do that without your father's leave."

"Is that the way they manage things in America?"

"It's the way I shall manage them here," said Rachel. "I'm in the unfortunate position of having
three papas to whom I must attend. There is papa O'Mahony--"

"You will never be incommoded much by him," he replied.

"He is the least potent of the three, no doubt. Then there is papa Jones. He is absolutely
omnipotent in this matter. He would not let me come down to Castle Morony for fear I should
contaminate you all. I obeyed without even daring to feel the slightest snub, and if I were
married to-morrow, I should kiss his toe in token of respect, and with a great deal more affection
than I should kiss your half-bearded lips, sir." Here Frank got a hold of her hand beneath
his arm, and gave it a squeeze. "He is the real old-fashioned father in the play, who is expected
to come out at last with a hundred thousand dollars and his blessing."

"And who is the third papa?"

"Don't you know? Mahomet M. Moss. He is the third papa--if only he would consent to remain
in that comparatively humble position." Here Frank listened to her words with sharp ears, but
he said nothing at the moment. "Mahomet M. Moss is at any rate my lord and master for the present."

"Not whilst I am alive," said Frank.

"But he is. There is no use in rebelling. You are not my lord and master until you have gone
through a certain ceremony. I wish you were. Will that satisfy you?"

"There is something in the name of lord and master which a girl shouldn't apply to anyone but
to him who is to be her husband."

"Fiddlestick! Mr. Lord and Master that is to be, but is not as yet. But he is, in many respects.
I don't think, Frank, you can imagine the horror I feel in reference to that vilest of human
beings. I shall carry a dagger with me, in order to have it ready for any occasion."

"What does he do? You shall not go to be subjected to such danger and such annoyance."

She turned round, and looked up into his face as with derision. "The annoyance no doubt will
be mine, Frank, and must be endured; the danger will be his, I think. Nor shall I use the dagger
that I spoke of. I can look at him, and I can make him hear my voice, in spite of the smallness
of my stature. But there is no one in this world whom I detest as I do that greasy Jew. It
is not for what he does, but that I simply detest him. He makes love to me."

"What!"

"Oh! he does. You needn't look like that. You needn't be a bit jealous."

"I shall come over at once."

"And knock him on the head! You had better not do that, because we want to make some money
by his means. As a lover I can keep him at a distance. I wish I could do so to you, Mr. Jones."

"Why do you wish to keep me at a distance?"

"Because you know how to be troublesome. It is much harder to keep a lover at a distance when
you really love him with all your heart"--here she looked up into his face and squeezed his
arm, and nearly made him mad for the moment--"than a beast like that, who is no better than
a toad to you. There, do you see that ugly old man there?" She pointed to a cross-looking old
gentleman of sixty, who was scolding a porter violently. "Why aren't you jealous of that man?"

"You never saw him before."

"That's just the reason. He may be worth my affection, but I know that that Mahomet M. M. is
not. You begin with the most bitter hatred on my part. I don't hate that old gentleman. I rather
like him on the whole, though he was so cross. At any rate he's not a greasy Jew. Papa says
that hating Jews is a prejudice. Loving you is a prejudice, I suppose."

"My darling!"

"You can't suppose you are the best man I ever saw, can you?"

"It's a sort of thing we are not to reason about."

"Then it's a prejudice. I'm prejudiced against Mahomet M. M. I'm equally prejudiced in favour
of Mr. Jones, junior, of Ballintubber. It's horrible to be troubled by the one."

"Well!"

"Well! There's nothing more coming, Mr. Jones. Only don't you come over in any of your fits
of jealousy, or you'll have to be sent back again. You're not my lord and master--yet."

"I wish I were."

"So do I. What more do you want than that? I don't believe there's another girl in New York
would say as much to you,--nor yet in County Galway."

"But what does he say to you?"

"Well; just the kind of things that you never say. And he certainly never does the kind of
things which you do; and that, Mr. Jones, is an improvement. But papa is in a hurry, and I
shouldn't wonder if the train didn't go on in a quarter of an hour. I'll write to you about
Mahomet M. M.; and if I behave very badly, such as prodding him with the dagger, or something
of that sort, then I will let you know the details. You can't do it here, so you may as well
go." So saying, she jumped into the carriage, and the train had started before Frank Jones
had begun to think whether he could do it there or no.

"He's a good fellow, take him all round," said Mr. O'Mahony, when the carriages had left the
station.

"As good as the rest of them."

"I think he is better."

"Of course we all think so of our own. Why should he be better than any other young lady's
Mr. Jones? I don't suppose he is better; but we'll endeavour to believe that he is up to the
average."

"Is that all that you've got to say for him, Rachel?"

"What! To you? Not exactly--if I am to speak the solid truth; which I don't see why I should
have to do, even to my own father. I do think him above the average. I think him so much above
the average as to be the best of all. But why? Simply because I believe him when he says he
wants to marry me, and make me his companion for life. And then there's an affinity between
us which God certainly manages. Why should I trust him in every detail of life with a perfect
faith, and not trust Mr. Mahomet M. Moss to the extent of half-a-crown? If he were to ask me
for everything I have in the world, I should give it to him, without a thought except of his
goodness in taking care of it for me. I wouldn't let Mahomet M. Moss have a dollar of mine
without giving me his bond. Papa, there will be a row between me and Mr. Mahomet M. Moss, and
so it's well to put you on your guard."

"What sort of a row, my dear?"

"A very rowy row. I don't mean about dollars, for you'll have to manage that just at first.
When we have got into the running, I think I shall have something to say on that subject too."

"What row do you mean?"

"He'll misbehave himself. He always does, more or less."

"The poor fellow can't open his mouth without your saying that he misbehaves himself."

"That's quite true; he can't. He can't brush his hair, or tie his cravat, or settle his pantaloons,
without misbehaving himself. He certainly can't look out of his eye without gross misbehaviour."

"What is he to do then?" said Mr. O'Mahony. "Nature has imbued him with all these peculiarities,
and you are fantastic to find fault with him."

"Perhaps so--but then I am fantastic. When you've got a dirty coat on, or Frank, I don't find
fault with it; but when he's got a clean coat, I writhe at him in my disgust. Yet, upon the
whole, I like men to have clean coats."

"But you haven't said how the row is to come."

"Because I don't know; but it will come. It won't be about his coat, nor yet his hat, unless
he puts it close down under my nose. My time, as I understand, is to be at his disposal."

"There will be an agreement made as to all that."

"An agreement as to my performances. I quite understand that I must be present at fixed times
at the theatre, and that he must fix them. That will not worry me; particularly if you will
go to the theatre with me."

"Of course I will do that when you want it."

"But he is to come to me with his beastly lessons. Am I to have no relief from that?"

"The hours can be fixed."

"But they won't be fixed. There's no doubt that he understands his trade. He can make me open
my mouth and keep it open. And he can tell me when I sing false or flat. Providence when she
gave him that horrid head of hair, did give him also the peculiarity of a fine ear. I think
it is the meanest thing out for a man to be proud of that. If you can run a straight furrow
with a plough it is quite as great a gift."

"That is nonsense, my dear. Such an ear as Mr. Moss's is very rare."

"A man who can see exactly across an entire field is just as rare. I don't see the difference.
Nor when a woman sings do I respect her especially because of her voice. When a man can write
a poem like Homer, or rule a country like Washington, there is something to say for him. I
shall tell him that I will devote one hour a day to practising, and no more."

"That will settle the difficulty; if it be enough."

"But during that hour, there is to be no word spoken except what has to do with the lessons.
You'll bear me out in that?"

"There must be some give and take in regard to ordinary conversation."

"You don't know what a beast he is, papa. What am I to do if he tells me to my face that I'm
a beautiful young woman?"

"Tell him that you are quite aware of the fact, but that it is a matter you do not care to
talk about."

"And then he'll simper. You do not know what a vile creature he can be. I can take care of
myself. You needn't be a bit afraid about that. I fancy I could give him a slap on the face
which would startle him a little. And if we came to blows, I do believe that he would not have
a leg to stand upon. He is nearly fifty."

"My dear!"

"Say forty. But I do believe a good shove would knock him off his nasty little legs. I used
to think he wore a wig; but no hairdresser could be such a disgrace to his profession to let
such a wig as that go out of his shop."

"I always regarded him as a good-looking young man," said Mr. O'Mahony. Here Rachel shook her
head, and made a terrible grimace. "It's all fancy you know," continued he.

"I suppose it is. But if you hear that I have told him that I regard him as a disgusting monkey,
you must not be surprised." This was the last conversation which Mr. O'Mahony and his daughter
had respecting Mahomet M. Moss, till they reached London.

CHAPTER VII.

BROWN'S.

When Mr. O'Mahony and his daughter stepped out of the train on the platform at Euston Square,
they were at once encountered by Mr. Mahomet M. Moss. "Oh, dear!" ejaculated Miss O'Mahony,
turning back upon her father. "Cannot you get rid of him?" Mr. O'Mahony, without a word of
reply to his daughter, at once greeted Mr. Moss most affectionately. "Yes, my bird is here--as
you see. You have taken a great deal of trouble in coming to meet us." Mr. Moss begged that
the trouble might be taken as being the greatest pleasure he had ever had in his life. "Nothing
could be too much to do for Miss O'Mahony." He had had, he said, the wires at work, and had
been taught to expect them by this train. Would Miss O'Mahony condescend to take a seat in
the carriage which was waiting for her? She had not spoken a word, but had laid fast hold of
her father's arm. "I had better look after the luggage," said the father, shaking the daughter
off. "Perhaps Mr. Moss will go with you," said she;--and at the moment she looked anything
but pleasant. Mr. Moss expressed his sense of the high honour which was done him by her command,
but suggested that she should seat herself in the carriage. "I will stand here under this pillar,"
she said. And as she took her stand it would have required a man with more effrontery than
Mr. Moss possessed, to attempt to move her. We have seen Miss O'Mahony taking a few liberties
with her lover, but still very affectionate. And we have seen her enjoying the badinage of
perfect equality with her papa. There was nothing then of the ferocious young lady about her.
Young ladies,--some young ladies,--can be very ferocious. Miss O'Mahony appeared to be one
of them. As she stood under the iron post waiting till her father and Mr. Moss returned, with
two porters carrying the luggage, the pretty little fair, fly-away Rachel looked as though
she had in her hand the dagger of which she had once spoken, and was waiting for an opportunity
to use it.

"Is your maid here, Miss O'Mahony?" asked Mr. Moss.

"I haven't got a maid," said Rachel, looking at him as though she intended to annihilate him.

They all seated themselves in the carriage with their small parcels, leaving their luggage
to come after them in a cab which Mr. Moss had had allowed to him. But they, the O'Mahonys,
knew nothing of their immediate destination. It had been clearly the father's business to ask;
but he was a man possessed of no presence of mind. Suddenly the idea struck Rachel, and she
called out with a loud voice, "Father, where on earth are we going?"

"I suppose Mr. Moss can tell us."

"You are going to apartments which I have secured for Miss O'Mahony at considerable trouble,"
said Mr. Moss. "The theatres are all stirring."

"But we are not going to live in a theatre."

"The ladies of the theatres find only one situation convenient. They must live somewhere in
the neighbourhood of the Strand. I have secured two sitting-rooms and two bedrooms on the first
floor, overlooking the views at Brown's."

"Won't they cost money?" asked the father.

"Of course they will," said Rachel. "What fools we have been! We intended to go to some inn
for one night till we could find a fitting place,--somewhere about Gower Street."

"Gower Street wouldn't do at all," said Mr. Moss. "The distance from everything would be very
great." Two ideas passed at that moment through Rachel's mind. The first was that the distance
might serve to keep Mr. Moss out of her sitting-room, and the second was that were she to succeed
in doing this, she might be forced to go to his sitting-room. "I think Gower Street would be
found to be inconvenient, Miss O'Mahony."

"Bloomsbury Square is very near. Here we are at the hotel. Now, father, before you have anything
taken off the carriages, ask the prices."

Then Mr. Moss, still keeping his seat, made a little speech. "I think if Miss O'Mahony would
allow me, I would counsel her against too rigid an economy. She will have heard of the old
proverb,--'A penny wise and a pound foolish.'"

"'Cut your coat according to your cloth,' I have heard of that too; and I have heard of 'Burning
a candle at both ends.'"

"'You shouldn't spoil your ship for a ha'porth of tar,'" said Mr. Moss with a smile, which
showed his idea, that he had the best of the argument.

"It won't matter for one night," said Mr. O'Mahony, getting out of the carriage. Half the packages
had been already taken off the cab.

Rachel followed her father, and without attending to Mr. Moss got hold of her father in the
street. "I don't like the look of the house at all, father, you don't know what the people
would be up to. I shall never go to sleep in this house." Mr. Moss, with his hat off, was standing
in the doorway, suffused, as to his face, with a bland smile.

It may be as well to say at once that the house was all that an hotel ought to be, excepting,
perhaps, that the prices were a little high. The two sitting-rooms and the two bedrooms--with
the maid's room, which had also been taken--did seem to be very heavy to Rachel, who knew down
to a shilling--or rather, to a dollar, as she would have said--how much her father had in his
pocket. Indefinite promises of great wealth had been also made to herself; but according to
a scale suggested by Mr. Moss, a pound a night, out of which she would have to keep herself,
was the remuneration immediately promised. Then a sudden thought struck Miss O'Mahony. They
were still standing discussing the price in one of the sitting-rooms, and Mr. Moss was also
there. "Father," she said, "I'm sure that Frank would not approve."

"I don't think that he would feel himself bound to interfere," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"When a young woman is engaged to a young man it does make a difference," she replied, looking
Mr. Moss full in the face.

"The happy man," said Mr. Moss, still bowing and smiling, "would not be so unreasonable as
to interfere with the career of his fair fiancée."

"If we stay here very long," said Rachel, still addressing her father, "I guess we should have
to pawn our watches. But here we are for the present, and here we must remain. I am awfully
tired now, and should so like to have a cup of tea--by ourselves." Then Mr. Moss took his leave,
promising to appear again upon the scene at eleven o'clock on the following day. "Thank you,"
said Rachel, "you are very kind, but I rather think I shall be out at eleven o'clock."

"What is the use of your carrying on like that with the man?" said her father.

"Because he's a beast."

"My dear, he's not a beast. He's not a beast that you ought to treat in that way. You'll be
a beast too if you come to rise high in your profession. It is a kind of work which sharpens
the intellect, but is apt to make men and women beasts. Did you ever hear of a prima donna
who thought that another prima donna sang better than she did?"

"I guess that all the prima donnas sing better than I do."

"But you have not got to the position yet. Mr. Moss, I take it, was doing very well in New
York, so as to have become a beast, as you call him. But he's very good-natured."

"He's a nasty, stuck-up, greasy Jew. A decent young woman is insulted by being spoken to by him."

"What made you tell him that you were engaged to Frank Jones?"

"I thought it might protect me--but it won't. I shall tell him next time that I am Frank's
wife. But even that will not protect me."

"You will have to see him very often."

"And very often I shall have to be insulted. I guess he does the same kind of thing with all
the singing girls who come into his hands."

"Give it up, Rachel."

"I don't mind being insulted so much as some girls do, you know. I can't fancy an English girl
putting up with him--unless she liked to do as he pleased. I hate him;--but I think I can endure
him. The only thing is, whether he would turn against me and rend me. Then we shall come utterly
to the ground, here in London."

"Give it up."

"No! You can lecture and I can sing, and it's odd if we can't make one profession or the other
pay. I think I shall have to fight with him, but I won't give it up. What I am afraid is that
Frank should appear on the scene. And then, oh law! if Mr. Moss should get one blow in the eye!"

There she sat, sipping her tea and eating her toast, with her feet upon the fender, while Mr.
O'Mahony ate his mutton-chop and drank his whisky and water.

"Father, now I'm coming back to my temper, I want something better than this buttered toast.
Could they get me a veal cutlet, or a bit of cold chicken?"

A waiter was summoned.

"And you must give me a little bit of ham with the cold chicken. No, father; I won't have any
wine because it would get into my head, and then I should kill Mr. Mahomet M. Moss."

"My dear," said her father when the man had left the room, "do you wish to declare all your
animosities before the waiter?"

"Well, yes, I think I do. If we are to remain here it will be better that they should all know
that I regard this man as my schoolmaster. I know what I'm about; I don't let a word go without
thinking of it."

Then again they remained silent, and Mr. O'Mahony pretended to go to sleep--and eventually
did do so. He devoted himself for the time to Home Rule, and got himself into a frame of mind
in which he really thought of Ireland.

"The first flower of the earth, and first gem of the sea."

Why should she not be so? She had all the sentiment necessary, all the poetry, all the eloquence,
all the wit. And then when he was beginning to think whether something more than sentiment
and eloquence were not necessary, he went to sleep.

But Rachel was not sleeping. Her thoughts were less stationary than her father's, and her ideas
more realistic. She had been told that she could sing, and she had sung at New York with great
applause. And she had gone on studying, or rather practising, the art with great diligence.
She had already become aware that practice was more needed than study. All, nearly all, this
man could teach her was to open her mouth. Nature had given her an ear, and a voice, if she
would work hard so as to use it. It was there before her. But it had seemed to her that her
career was clogged with the necessary burden of Mr. Moss. Mr. Moss had got hold of her, and
how should she get rid of him? He was the Old Man of the Sea, and how should she shake him
off? And then there was present to her alone a vision of Frank Jones. To live at Morony Castle
and be Frank Jones's wife, would not that be sweeter than to sing at a theatre under the care
of Mr. Mahomet M. Moss? All the sweetness of a country life in a pleasant house by the lake
side, and a husband with her who would endure all the little petulancy, and vagaries, and excesses
of her wayward but affectionate temper, all these things were present to her mind. And to be
Mistress Jones, who could look all the world in the face, this--as compared with the gaslight
of a theatre, which might mean failure, and could only mean gaslight--this, on the present
occasion, did tempt her sorely. Her moods were very various. There were moments of her life
when the gaslight had its charm, and in which she declared to herself that she was willing
to run all the chances of failure for the hope of success. There were moments in which Mr.
Moss loomed less odious before her eyes. Should she be afraid of Mr. Moss, and fly from her
destiny because a man was greasy? And to this view of her circumstances she always came at
last when her father's condition pressed itself upon her. The house beside the lake was not
her own as yet, nor would it be her husband's when she was married.

Nor could there be a home for her father there as long as old Mr. Jones was alive, nor possibly
when his son should come to the throne. For a time he must go to America, and she must go with
him. She had declared to herself that she could not go back to the United States unless she
could go back as a successful singer. For these reasons she resolved that she would face Mr.
Moss bravely and all his horrors.

"If that gentleman comes here to-morrow at eleven, show him up here," she said to the waiter.

"Mr. Moss, ma'am?" the waiter asked.

"Yes, Mr. Moss," she answered in a loud voice, which told the man much of her story. "Where
did that piano come from?" she asked brusquely.

"Mr. Moss had it sent in," said the man.

"And my father is paying separate rent for it?" she asked.

"What's that, my dear? What's that about rent?"

"We have got this piano to pay for. It's one of Erard's. Mr. Moss has sent it, and of course
we must pay till we have sent it back again. That'll do." Then the man went.

"It's my belief that he intends to get us into pecuniary difficulties. You have only got £62 left."

"But you are to have twenty shillings a day till Christmas."

"What's that?"

"According to what he says it will be increased after Christmas. He spoke of £2 a day."

"Yes; if my singing be approved of. But who is to be the judge? If the musical world choose
to say that they must have Rachel O'Mahony, that will be all very well. Am I to sing at twenty
shillings a day for just as long as Mr. Moss may want me? And are we to remain here, and run
up a bill which we shall never be able to pay, till they put us out of the door and call us
swindlers?"

"Frank Jones would help us at a pinch if we came to that difficulty," said the father.

"I wouldn't take a shilling from Frank Jones. Frank Jones is all the world to me, but he cannot
help me till he has made me his wife. We must go out of this at the end of the first week,
and send the piano back. As far as I can make it out, our expenses here will be about £17 10s.
a week. What the piano will cost, I don't know; but we'll learn that from Mr. Moss. I'll make
him understand that we can't stay here, having no more than twenty shillings a day. If he won't
undertake to give me £2 a day immediately after Christmas, we must go back to New York while
we've got money left to take us."

"Have it your own way," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"I don't mean to remain here and wake up some morning and find that I can't stir a step without
asking Mahomet M. M. for some money favour. I know I can sing; I can sing, at any rate, to
the extent of forty shillings a day. For forty shillings a day I'll stay; but if I can't earn
that at once let us go back to New York. It is not the poverty I mind so much, nor yet the
debt, nor yet even your distress, you dear old father. You and I could weather it out together
on a twopenny roll. Things would never be altogether bad with us as long as we are together;
and as long as we have not put ourselves in the power of Mahomet M. M. Fancy owing Mr. Moss
a sum of money which we couldn't pay! Mahomet's 'little bill!' I would say to a Christian:
'All right, Mr. Christian, you shall have your money in good time, and if you don't it won't
hurt you.' He wouldn't be any more than an ordinary Christian, and would pull a long face;
but he would have no little scheme ready, cut and dry, for getting my body and soul under his
thumb."

"You are very unchristian yourself, my dear."

"I certainly have my own opinion of Mahomet M. M., and I shall tell him to-morrow morning that
I don't mean to run the danger."

Then they went to bed, and slept the sleep of the just. They ordered breakfast at nine, so
that, as Rachel said, the heavy mutton-chop might not be sticking in her throat as she attempted
to show off before Mr. Moss on his arrival. But from eight till nine she passed her time in
the double employment of brushing her hair and preparing the conversation as it was to take
place between herself and Mr. Moss. When a young lady boasts that she doesn't "let a word go
without thinking of it," she has to be careful in preparing her words. And she prepared them now.

"There will be two of them against me," she said to herself as she made the preparation. "There'll
be the dear old governor, and the governor that isn't dear. If I were left quite to myself,
I think I could do it easier. But then it might come to sticking a knife into him."

"Father," she said, during breakfast, "I'm going to practise for half an hour before this man
comes."

"That means that I'm to go away."

"Not in the least. I shall go into the next room where the piano lives, and you can come or
not just as you please. I shall be squalling all the time, and as we do have the grandeur of
two rooms for the present, you might as well use them. But when he comes we must take care
and see that matters go right. You had better leave us alone at first, that I may sing to him.
Then, when that's over, do you be in waiting to be called in. I mean to have a little bit of
business with my trusted agent, manager, and parent in music, 'Mahomet M. M.'"

She went to the instrument, and practised there till half-past eleven, at which hour Mr. Moss
presented himself. "You'll want to hear me sing of course," she said without getting up from
the music-stool.

"Just a bar or two to know how you have improved. But it is hardly necessary. I see from the
motion of your lips that you have been keeping your mouth open. And I hear from the tone of
your voice, that it is all there. There is no doubt about you, if you have practised opening
your mouth."

"At any rate you shall hear, and if you will stand there you shall see."

Then the music lesson began, and Mr. Moss proved himself to be an adept in his art. Rachel
did not in the least doubt his skill, and obeyed him in everything as faithfully as she would
have done, had he been personally a favourite with her. "Allow me to express my great delight
and my strong admiration for the young débutante. As far as Miss O'Mahony is concerned the
word failure may be struck out of the language. And no epithet should be used to qualify success,
but one in the most superlative degree. Allow me to--" And he attempted to raise her hand to
his lips, and to express his homage in a manner certainly not unusual with gentlemen of his
profession.

"Mr. Moss," said the young lady starting up, "there need be nothing of that kind. There had
better not. When a young woman is going to be married to a young man, she can't be too careful.
You don't know, perhaps, but I'm going to be Mrs. Jones. Mr. Jones is apt to dislike such things.
If you'll wait half a moment, I'll bring papa in." So saying she ran out of the room, and in
two minutes returned, followed by her father. The two men shook hands, and each of them looked
as though he did not know what he was expected to say to the other. "Now then, father, you
must arrange things with Mr. Moss."

Mr. Moss bowed. "I don't exactly know what I have got to arrange," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"We've got to arrange so that we shan't get into debt with Mr. Moss."

"There need not be the least fear in the world as to that," said Mr. Moss.

"Ah; but that's just what we do fear, and what we must fear."

"So unnecessary,--so altogether unnecessary," said Mr. Moss, expecting to be allowed to be
the banker for the occasion. "If you will just draw on me for what you want."

"But that is just what we won't do." Then there was a pause, and Mr. Moss shrugged his shoulders.
"It's as well to understand that at the beginning. Of course this place is too expensive for
us and we must get out of it as soon as possible."

"Why in such a hurry?" said Mr. Moss raising his two hands.

"And we must send back the piano. It was so good of you to think of it! But it must go back."

"No, no, no!" shouted Mr. Moss. "The piano is my affair. A piano more or less for a few months
is nothing between me and Erard's people. They are only too happy."

"I do not in the least doubt it. Messrs. Erard's people are always glad to secure a lady who
is about to come out as a singer. But they send the bill in at last."

"Not to you;--not to you."

"But to you. That would be a great deal worse, would it not, father? We might as well understand
each other."

"Mr. O'Mahony and I will understand each other very well."

"But it is necessary that Miss O'Mahony and you should understand each other also. My father
trusts me, and I cannot tell you how absolutely I obey him."

"Or he you," said Mr. Moss laughing.

"At any rate we two know what we are about, sir. You will not find us differing. Now Mr. Moss,
you are to pay me twenty shillings a day."

"Till Christmas;--twenty shillings a night till Christmas."

"Of course we cannot live here on twenty shillings a day. The rooms nearly take it all. We
can't live on twenty shillings a day, anyhow."

"Then make it forty shillings immediately after the Christmas holidays."

"I must have an agreement to that effect," said Rachel, "or we must go back to Ireland. I must
have the agreement before Christmas, or we shall go back. We have a few pounds which will take
us away."

"You must not speak of going away, really, Miss O'Mahony."

"Then I must have an agreement signed. You understand that. And we shall look for cheaper rooms
to-day. There is a little street close by where we can manage it. But on the one thing we are
determined;--we will not get into debt."

CHAPTER VIII.

CHRISTMAS-DAY, 1880.

On Christmas-day Rachel O'Mahony wrote a letter to her lover at Morony Castle:

   Cecil Street, Christmas-day, 1880.

   DEAREST FRANK,

   You do love me, don't you? What's the use of my loving
   you, and thinking that you are everything, only that you
   are to love me? I am quite content that it should be so.
   Only let it be so. You'll ask me what reason I have to be
   jealous. I am not jealous. I do think in my heart that you
   think that I'm--just perfect. And when I tell myself that
   it is so, I lay myself back in my chair and kiss at you
   with my lips till I am tired of kissing the space where
   you ain't. But if I am wrong, and if you are having a good
   time of it with Miss Considine at Mrs. McKeon's ball, and
   are not thinking a bit of me and my kisses, what's the
   use? It's a very unfair bargain that a woman makes with a
   man. "Yes; I do love you," I say,--"but--" Then there's a
   sigh. "Yes; I'll love you," you say--"if--" Then there's
   a laugh. If I tell a fib, and am not worth having, you
   can always recuperate. But we can't recuperate. I'm to go
   about the world and be laughed at, as the girl that Frank
   Jones made a fool of. Oh! Mr. Jones, if you treat me in
   that way, won't I punish you? I'll jump into the lough
   with a label round my neck telling the whole story. But I
   am not a bit jealous, because I know you are good.

   And now I must tell you a bit more of my history. We got
   rid of that lovely hotel, paying £6 10s., when that just
   earned £1. And I have brought the piano with me. The man
   at Erard's told me that I should have it for £2 10s. a
   month, frankly owning that he hoped to get my custom. "But
   Mr. Moss is to pay nothing?" I asked. He swore that Mr.
   Moss would have to pay nothing, and leave what occurred
   between him and me. I don't think he will. £30 a year
   ought to be enough for the hire of a piano. So here we
   are established, at £10 a month--the first-floor, with
   father's bedroom behind the sitting-room. I have the room
   upstairs over the sitting-room. They are small stumpy
   little rooms,--"but mine own." Who says--"But mine own?"
   Somebody does, and I repeat it. They are mine own, at any
   rate till next Saturday.

   And we have settled this terrible engagement and signed
   it. I'm to sing for Moss at "The Embankment" for four
   months, at the rate of £600 a year. It was a Jew's
   bargain, for I really had filled the house for a
   fortnight. Fancy a theatre called "The Embankment"! There
   is a nasty muddy rheumatic sound about it; but it's very
   prettily got up, and the exits and entrances are also
   good. Father goes with me every night, but I mean to let
   him off the terrible task soon. He smiles, and says he
   likes it. I only tell him he would be a child if he did.
   They want to change the piece, but I shall make them
   pay me for my dresses; I am not going to wear any other
   woman's old clothes. It's not the proper way to begin,
   you have to begin as a slave or as an empress. Of course,
   anybody prefers to do the empress. They try, and then they
   fail, and tumble down. I shall tumble down, no doubt; but
   I may as well have my chance.

   And now I'm going to make you say that I'm a beast. And
   so I am. I make a little use of Mahomet M. M.'s passion
   to achieve my throne instead of taking up at once with
   serfdom. But I do it without vouchsafing him even the
   first corner of a smile. The harshest treatment is all
   that he gets. Men such as Mahomet M. will live on harsh
   treatment for a while, looking forward to revenge when
   their time comes. But I shall soon have made sure of my
   throne, or shall have failed; and in either case shall
   cease to care for Mahomet M. By bullying him and by
   treating him as dust beneath my feet, I can do something
   to show how proud I am, and how sure I am of success. He
   offers me money--not paid money down, which would have
   certain allurements. I shouldn't take it. I needn't
   tell you that. I should like to have plenty of loose
   sovereigns, so as to hire broughams from the yard, instead
   of walking, or going in a 'bus about London, which is very
   upsetting to my pride. Father and I go down to the theatre
   in a hansom, when we feel ourselves quite smart. But it
   isn't money like that which he offers. He wants to pay me
   a month in advance, and suggests that I shall get into
   debt, and come to him to get me out of it. There was some
   talk of papa going to New York for a few weeks, and he
   said he would come and look after me in his absence.
   "Thank you, Mr. Moss," I said, "but I'm not sure I should
   want any looking after, only for such as you." Those are
   the very words I spoke, and I looked him full in the face.
   "Why, what do you expect from me?" he said. "Insult," I
   replied, as bold as brass. And then we are playing the
   two lovers at "The Embankment." Isn't it a pretty family
   history? He said nothing at the moment, but came back in
   half an hour to make some unnecessary remarks about the
   part. "Why did you say just now that I insulted you?"
   he asked. "Because you do," I replied. "Never, never!"
   he exclaimed, with most grotesque energy. "I have never
   insulted you." You know, my dear, he has twenty times
   endeavoured to kiss my hand, and once he saw fit to stroke
   my hair. Beast! If you knew the sort of feeling I have for
   him--such as you would have if you found a cockroach in
   your dressing-case. Of course in our life young women have
   to put up with this kind of thing, and some of them like
   it. But he knows that I am going to be married, or at any
   rate am engaged, Mr. Frank. I make constant use of your
   name, telling everybody that I am the future Mrs. Jones,
   putting such weight upon the Jones. With me he knows that
   it is an insult; but I don't want to quarrel with him if
   I can help it, and therefore I softened it down. "You hear
   me say, Mr. Moss, that I'm an engaged young woman. Knowing
   that, you oughtn't to speak to me as you do." "Why, what
   do I say?" You should have seen his grin as he asked me;
   such a leer of triumph, as though he knew that he were
   getting the better of me. "Mr. Jones wouldn't approve
   if he were to see it." "But luckily he don't," said my
   admirer. Oh, if you knew how willingly I'd stand at a
   tub and wash your shirts, while the very touch of his
   gloves makes me creep all over with horror. "Let us have
   peace for the future," I said. "I dislike all those
   familiarities. If you will only give them up we shall
   go on like a house on fire." Then the beast made an
   attempt to squeeze my hand as he went out of the room.
   I retreated, however, behind the table, and escaped
   untouched on that occasion.

   You are not to come over, whatever happens, until I tell
   you. You ought to know very well by this time that I can
   fight my battles by myself; and if you did come, there
   would be an end altogether to the £200 which I am earning.
   To give him his due, he's very punctual with his money,
   only that he wants to pay me in advance, which I will
   never have. He has been liberal about my dresses, telling
   me to order just what I want, and have the bill sent in
   to the costume manager. When I have worn them they become
   the property of the theatre. God help any poor young woman
   that will ever be expected to get into them. So now you
   know exactly how I am standing with Mahomet M. M.

   Poor father goes about to public meetings, but never is
   allowed to open his mouth for fear he should say something
   about the Queen. I don't mean that he is really watched,
   but he promised in Ireland not to lecture any more if they
   would let him go, and he wishes to keep his word. But I
   fear it makes him very unhappy. He has, at any rate, the
   comfort of coming home and giving me the lecture, which
   he ought to have delivered to more sympathetic ears. Not
   but what I do care about the people; only how am I to
   know whether they ought to be allowed to make their own
   petticoats, or why it is that they don't do so? He says
   it's the London Parliament; and that if they had members
   in College Green, the young women would go to work at
   once, and make petticoats for all the world. I don't
   understand it, and wish that he had someone else to
   lecture to.

   How are you getting on with all your own pet troubles? Is
   the little subsiding lake at Ballintubber still a lake?
   And what about poor Florian and his religion? Has he told
   up as yet? I fear, I fear, that poor Florian has been
   fibbing, and that there will be no peace for him or for
   your father till the truth has been told.

   Now, sir, I have told you everything, just as a young
   woman ought to tell her future lord and master. You
   say you ought to know what Moss is doing. You do know,
   exactly, as far as I can tell you. Of course you wouldn't
   like to see him, but then you have the comfort of knowing
   that I don't like it either. I suppose it is a comfort,
   eh, my bold young man? Of course you want me to hate the
   pig, and I do hate him. You may be sure that I will get
   rid of him as soon as I conveniently can. But for the
   present he is a necessary evil. If you had a home to give
   me, I would come to it--oh, so readily! There is something
   in the glitter of a theatre--what people call the boards,
   the gaslights, the music, the mock love-making, the
   pretence of being somebody, the feeling of mystery which
   is attached to you, and the feeling you have that you are
   generally unlike the world at large--which has its charms.
   Even your name, blazoned in a dirty playbill, without any
   Mister or Mistress to guard you, so unlike the ways of
   ordinary life, does gratify one's vanity. I can't say why
   it should be so, but it is. I always feel a little prouder
   of myself when father is not with me. I am Miss O'Mahony,
   looking after myself, whereas other young ladies have to
   be watched. It has its attractions.

   But--but to be the wife of Frank Jones, and to look after
   Frank's little house, and to cook for him his chicken and
   his bacon, and to feel that I am all the world to him, and
   to think--! But, oh, Frank, I cannot tell you what things
   I think. I do feel, as I think them, that I have not been
   made to stand long before the glare of the gas, and that
   the time will certainly come when I shall walk about
   Ballintubber leaning on your arm, and hearing all your
   future troubles about rents not paid, and waters that have
   come in.

   Your own, own girl,

   RACHEL O'MAHONY.

CHAPTER IX.

BLACK DALY.

Frank Jones received his letter just as he was about to leave Castle Morony for the meet at
Ballytowngal, the seat, as everybody knows, of Sir Nicholas Bodkin. Ballytowngal is about two
miles from Claregalway, on the road to Oranmore. Sir Nicholas is known all through the West
of Ireland, as a sporting man, and is held in high esteem. But there is, I think, something
different in the estimation which he now enjoys from that which he possessed twenty years ago.
He was then, as now, a Roman Catholic,--as were also his wife and children; and, as a Roman
Catholic, he was more popular with the lower classes, and with the priests, who are their natural
friends, than with his brother grand-jurors of the country, who were, for the most part, Protestants.

Sir Nicholas is now sixty years old, and when he came to the title at thirty, he was regarded
certainly as a poor man's friend. He always lived on the estate. He rarely went up to Dublin,
except for a fortnight, when the hunting was over, and when he paid his respects to the Lord
Lieutenant. The house at Ballytowngal was said, in those days, to be as well kept up as any
mansion in County Galway. But the saying came probably from those who were not intimate in
the more gloriously maintained mansions. Sir Nicholas had £5000 a year, and though he did manage
to pay his bills annually, spent every shilling of it. He preserved his foxes loyally, and
was quite as keen about the fishing of a little river that he owned, and which ran down from
his demesne into Lough Corrib. He was particular also about his snipe, and would boast that
in a little spinney at Ballytowngal were to be met the earliest woodcock found in the West
of Ireland. He was a thorough sportsman;--but a Roman Catholic--and as a Roman Catholic he
was hardly equal in standing to some of his Protestant neighbours. He voted for Major Stackpoole,
when Major Stackpoole stood for the county on the Liberal interest, and was once requested
to come forward himself, and stand for the City as a Roman Catholic. This he did not do, being
a prudent man; but at that period, from twenty to thirty years ago, he was certainly regarded
as inferior to a Protestant by many of the Protestant gentlemen of the country.

But things are changed now. Sir Nicholas's neighbours, such of them at least that are Protestants,
regard Sir Nicholas as equal to themselves. They do not care much for his religion, but they
know that he is not a Home-Ruler, or latterly, since the Land League sprang into existence,
a Land Leaguer. He is, in fact, one of themselves as a county gentleman, and the question of
religion has gone altogether into abeyance. Had you known the county thirty years ago, and
had now heard Sir Nicholas talking of county matters, you would think that he was one of the
old Protestants. It was so that the rich people regarded him,--and so also the poor. But Sir
Nicholas had not varied at all. He liked to get his rents paid, and as long as his tenants
would pay them, he was at one with them. They had begun now to have opinions of their own upon
the subject, and he was at one with them no longer.

Frank Jones had heard in Galway, that there was to be a difficulty about drawing the Ballytowngal
coverts. The hounds were to be allowed to draw the demesne coverts, but beyond that they were
to be interrupted. Foxes seldom broke from Ballytowngal, or if they did they ran to Moytubber.
At Moytubber the hounds would probably change,--or would do so if allowed to continue their
sport in peace. But at Moytubber the row would begin. Knowing this, Frank Jones was anxious
to leave his home in time, as he was aware that the hounds would be carried on to Moytubber
as quickly as possible. Black Daly had sworn a solemn oath that he would draw Moytubber in
the teeth of every Home-Ruler and Land Leaguer in County Galway.

A word or two must be said descriptive of Black Daly, as he was called, the master of the Galway
hounds. They used to be called the Galway blazers, but the name had nearly dropped out of fashion
since Black Daly had become their master, a quarter of a century since. Who Black Daly was
or whence he had come, many men, even in County Galway, did not know. It was not that he had
no property, but that his property was so small, as to make it seem improbable that the owner
of it should be the master of the county hounds. But in truth Black Daly lived at Daly's Bridge,
in the neighbourhood of Castle Blakeney, when he was supposed to be at home. And the house
in which he lived he had undoubtedly inherited from his father. But he was not often there,
and kept his kennels at Ahaseragh, five miles away from Daly's Bridge. Much was not therefore
known of Mr. Daly, in his own house.

But in the field no man was better known, or more popular, if thorough obedience is an element
of popularity. The old gentry of the county could tell why Mr. Daly had been put into his present
situation five-and-twenty years ago; but the manner of his election was not often talked about.
He had no money, and very few acres of his own on which to preserve foxes. He had never done
anything to earn a shilling since he had been born, unless he may have been said to have earned
shillings by his present occupation. As he got his living out of it, he certainly may have
been said to have done so. He never borrowed a shilling from any man, and certainly paid his
way. But if he told a young man that he ought to buy a horse the young man certainly bought
it. And if he told a young man that he must pay a certain price, the young man generally paid
it. But if the young man were not ready with his money by the day fixed, that young man generally
had a bad time of it. Young men have been known to be driven not only out of County Galway,
but out of Ireland itself, by the tone of Mr. Daly's voice, and by the blackness of his frown.
And yet it was said generally that neither young men nor old men were injured in their dealings
with Mr. Daly. "That horse won't be much the worse for his splint, and he's worth £70 to you,
because you can ride him ten stone. You had better give me £70 for him." Then the young man
would promise the £70 in three months' time, and if he kept his word, would swear by Black
Daly ever afterwards. In this way Mr. Daly sold a great many horses.

But he had been put into his present position because he hunted the hounds, during the illness
of a distant cousin, who was the then master. The master had died, but the county had the best
sport that winter that it had ever enjoyed. "I don't see why I should not do it, as well as
another," Tom Daly had said. He was then known as Tom Daly. "You've got no money," his cousin
had said, the son of the old gentleman who was just dead. It was well understood that the cousin
wished to have the hounds, but that he was thought not to have all the necessary attributes.
"I suppose the county means to pay for all sport," said Tom. Then the hat went round, and an
annual sum of £900 a year was voted. Since that the hounds have gone on, and the bills have
been paid; and Tom has raised the number of days' hunting to four a week, or has lowered it
to two, according to the amount of money given. He makes no proposition now, but declares what
he means to do. "Things are dearer," he said last year, "and you won't have above five days
a fortnight, unless you can make the money up to £1,200. I want £400 a day, and £400 I must
have." The county had then voted him the money in the plenitude of its power, and Daly had
hunted seven days a fortnight. But all the Galway world felt that there was about to be a fall.

Black Daly was a man quite as dark as his sobriquet described him. He was tall, but very thin
and bony, and seemed not to have an ounce of flesh about his face or body. He had large, black
whiskers,--coarse and jet black,--which did not quite meet beneath his chin. And he wore no
other beard, no tuft, no imperial, no moustachios; but when he was seen before shaving on a
morning, he would seem to be black all over, and his hair was black, short, and harsh; and
though black, round about his ears it was beginning to be tinged with grey. He was now over
fifty years of age; but the hair on his head was as thick as it had been when he first undertook
the hounds. He had great dark eyes in his head, deep down, so that they seemed to glitter at
you out of caverns. And above them were great, bushy eyebrows, every hair of which seemed to
be black, and harsh, and hard. His nose was well-formed and prominent; but of cheeks he had
apparently none. Between his whiskers and his nose, and the corners of his mouth, there was
nothing but two hollow cavities. He was somewhat over six feet high, but from his extraordinary
thinness gave the appearance of much greater height. His arms were long, and the waistcoat
which he wore was always long; his breeches were very long; and his boots seemed the longest
thing about him--unless his spurs seemed longer. He had no flesh about him, and it was boasted
of him that, in spite of his length, and in spite of his height, he could ride under twelve
stone. Of himself, and of his doings, he never talked. They were secrets of his own, of which
he might have to make money. And no one had a right to ask him questions. He did not conceive
that it would be necessary for a gentleman to declare his weight unless he were about to ride
a race. Now it was understood that for the last ten years Black Daly had ridden no races.

He was a man of whom it might be said that he never joked. Though his life was devoted in a
peculiar manner to sport, and there may be thought to be something akin between the amusements
and the lightness of life, it was all serious to him. Though he was bitter over it, or happy;
triumphant, or occasionally in despair--as when the money was not forthcoming--he never laughed.
It was all serious to him, and apparently sad, from the first note of a hound in the early
covert, down to the tidings that a poor fox had been found poisoned near his earth. He had
much to do to find sport for the county on such limited means, and he was always doing it.

He not only knew every hound in his pack, but he knew their ages, their sires, and their dams;
and the sires and the dams of most of their sires and dams. He knew the constitution of each,
and to what extent their noses were to be trusted. "It's a very heavy scent to-day," he would
say, "because Gaylap carries it over the plough. It's only a catching scent because the drops
don't hang on the bushes." His lore on all such matters was incredible, but he would never
listen to any argument. A man had a right to his own opinion; but then the man who differed
from him knew nothing. He gave out his little laws to favoured individuals; not by way of conversation,
for which he cared nothing, but because it might be well that the favoured individual should
know the truth on that occasion.

As a man to ride he was a complete master of his art. There was nothing which a horse could
do with a man on his back, which Daly could not make him do; and when he had ridden a horse
he would know exactly what was within his power. But there was no desire with him for the showing
off of a horse. He often rode to sell a horse, but he never seemed to do so. He never rode
at difficult places unless driven to do so by the exigencies of the moment. He was always quiet
in the field, unless when driven to express himself as to the faults of some young man. Then
he could blaze forth in his anger with great power. He was constantly to be seen trotting along
a road when hounds were running, because he had no desire to achieve for himself a character
for hard riding. But he was always with his hounds when he was wanted, and it was boasted of
him that he had ridden four days a week through the season on three horses, and had never lamed
one of them. He was rarely known to have a second horse out, and when he did so, it was for
some purpose peculiar to the day's work. On such days he had generally a horse to sell.

It is hardly necessary to say that Black Daly was an unmarried man. No one who knew him could
conceive that he should have had a wife. His hounds were his children, and he could have taught
no wife to assist him in looking after them, with the constant attention and tender care which
was given to them by Barney Smith, his huntsman. A wife, had she seen to the feeding of the
numerous babies, would have given them too much to eat, and had she not undertaken this care,
she would have been useless at Daly's Bridge. But Barney Smith was invaluable; double the amount
of work got usually from a huntsman was done by him. There was no kennel man, no second horseman,
no stud-groom at the Ahaseragh kennels. It may be said that Black Daly filled all these positions
himself, and that in each Barney Smith was his first lieutenant. Circumstances had given him
the use of the Ahaseragh kennels, which had been the property of his cousin, and circumstances
had not enabled him to build others at Daly's Bridge. Gradually he had found it easier to move
himself than the hounds. And so it had come to pass that two rooms had been prepared for him
close to the kennels, and that Mr. Barney Smith gave him such attendance as was necessary.
Of strictly personal attendance Black Daly wanted very little; but the discomforts of that
home, while one pair of breeches were supposed to be at Daly's Bridge, and the others at Ahaseragh,
were presumed by the world at large to be very grievous.

But the personal appearance of Mr. Daly on hunting mornings, was not a matter of indifference.
It was not that he wore beautiful pink tops, or came out guarded from the dust by little aprons,
or had his cravat just out of the bandbox, or his scarlet coat always new, and in the latest
fashion, nor had his hat just come from the shop in Piccadilly with the newest twist to its
rim. But there was something manly, and even powerful about his whole apparel. He was always
the same, so that by men even in his own county, he would hardly have been known in other garments.
The strong, broad brimmed high hat, with the cord passing down his back beneath his coat, that
had known the weather of various winters; the dark, red coat, with long swallow tails, which
had grown nearly black under many storms; the dark, buff striped waistcoat, with the stripes
running downwards, long, so as to come well down over his breeches; the breeches themselves,
which were always of leather, but which had become nearly brown under the hands of Barney Smith
or his wife, and the mahogany top-boots, of which the tops seemed to be a foot in length, could
none of them have been worn by any but Black Daly. His very spurs must have surely been made
for him, they were in length and weight; and general strength of leather, so peculiarly his
own. He was unlike other masters of hounds in this, that he never carried a horn; but he spoke
to his hounds in a loud, indistinct chirruping voice, which all County Galway believed to be
understood to every hound in the park.

One other fact must be told respecting Mr. Daly. He was a Protestant--as opposed to a Roman
Catholic. No one had ever known him go to church, or speak a word in reference to religion.
He was equally civil or uncivil to priest and parson when priest or parson appeared in the
field. But on no account would he speak to either of them if he could avoid it. But he had
in his heart a thorough conviction that all Roman Catholics ought to be regarded as enemies
by all Protestants, and that the feeling was one entirely independent of faith and prayerbooks,
or crosses and masses. For him fox-hunting--fox-hunting for others--was the work of his life,
and he did not care to meddle with what he did not understand. But he was a Protestant, and
Sir Nicholas Bodkin was a Roman Catholic, and therefore an enemy--as a dog may be supposed
to declare himself a dog, and a cat a cat, if called upon to explain the cause for the old
family quarrel.

Now there had come a cloud over his spirit in reference to the state of his country. He could
see that the quarrel was not entirely one between Protestant and Catholic as it used to be,
but still he could not get it out of his mind, but that the old causes were producing in a
different way their old effects. Whiteboys, Terryalts, Ribbonmen, Repeaters, Physical-Forcemen,
Fenians, Home-Rulers, Professors of Dynamite, and American-Irish, were, to his thinking, all
the same. He never talked much about it, because he did not like to expose his ignorance; but
his convictions were not the less formed. It was the business of a Protestant to take rent,
and of a Roman Catholic to pay rent. There were certain deviations in this ordained rule of
life, but they were only exceptions. The Roman Catholics had the worst of this position, and
the Protestants the best. Therefore the Roman Catholics were of course quarrelling with it,
and therefore the Roman Catholics must be kept down. Such had been Mr. Daly's general outlook
into life. But now the advancing evil of the time was about to fall even upon himself, and
upon his beneficent labours, done for the world at large. It was whispered in County Galway
that the people were about to rise and interfere with fox-hunting! It may be imagined that
on this special day Mr. Daly's heart was low beneath his black-striped waistcoat, as he rode
on his way to draw the coverts at Ballytowngal.

At the cross-roads of Monivea he met Peter Bodkin, the eldest son of Sir Nicholas. Now Peter
Bodkin had quarrelled long and very bitterly with his father. Every acre of the property at
Ballytowngal was entailed upon him, and Peter had thought that under such circumstances his
father was not doing enough for him. The quarrel had been made up, but still the evil rankled
in Peter's bosom, who was driven to live with his wife and family on £500 a year; and had found
himself hardly driven to keep himself out of the hands of the Jews. His father had wished him
to follow some profession, but this had been contrary to Peter's idea of what was becoming.
But though he had only £500 a year, and five children, he did manage to keep two horses, and
saw a good deal of hunting.

And among all the hunting men in County Galway he was the one who lived on the closest terms
of intimacy with Black Daly. For, though he was a Roman Catholic, his religion did not trouble
him much; and he was undoubtedly on the same side with Daly in the feuds that were coming on
the country. Indeed, he and Daly had entertained the same feelings for some years; for, in
the quarrels which had been rife between the father and son, Mr. Daly had taken the son's part,
as far as so silent a man can be said to have taken any part at all.

"Well, Peter." "Well, Daly," were the greetings, as the two men met; and then they rode on
together in silence for a mile. "Have you heard what the boys are going to do?" asked the master.
Peter shook his head. "I suppose there's nothing in it?"

"I fear there is."

"What will they do?" asked Mr. Daly.

"Just prevent your hunting."

"If they touch me, or either of the men, by God! I'll shoot some of them." Then he put his
hand into his pocket, as much as to explain a pistol was there. After that the two men rode
on in silence till they came to the gates of Ballytowngal.

CHAPTER X.

BALLYTOWNGAL.

Daly, among other virtues, or vices, was famed for punctuality. He wore a large silver watch
in his pocket which was as true as the sun, or at any rate was believed by its owner to be
so. From Daly's watch on hunting mornings there was no appeal. He always reached the appointed
meet at five minutes before eleven, by his watch, and by his watch the hounds were always moved
from their haunches at five minutes past eleven. Though the Lord Lieutenant and the Chief Secretary
and the Lord Chancellor had been there, there would have been no deviation. The interval of
ten minutes he generally spent in whispered confabulations with the earth-warners, secrets
into which no attendant horseman ever dived; for Black Daly was a mysterious man, who did not
choose to be inquired into as to his movements. On this occasion he said not a word to any
earth-warner, though two were in attendance; but he sat silent and more gloomy than ever on
his big black horse, waiting for the minutes to pass by till he should be able to run his hounds
through the Ballytowngal coverts, and then hurry on to Moytubber.

Mr. Daly's mind was, in truth, fixed upon Moytubber, and what would there be done this morning.
He was a simple-minded man, who kept his thoughts fixed for the most part on one object. He
knew that it was his privilege to draw the coverts of Moytubber, and to hunt the country around;
and he felt also, after some gallant fashion, that it was his business to protect the rights
of others in the pursuit of their favourite amusement. No man could touch him or either of
his servants in the way of violence without committing an offence which he would be bound to
oppose by violence. He was no lawyer, and understood not at all the statutes as fixed upon
the subject. If a man laid a hand upon him violently, and would not take his hand off again
when desired, he would be entitled to shoot that man. Such was the law, as in his simplicity
and manliness he believed it to exist. He was a man not given to pistols; but when he heard
that he was to be stopped in his hunting on this morning, and stopped by dastardly, pernicious
curs who called themselves Landleaguers, he went into Ballinasloe, and bought himself a pistol.
Black Daly was a sad, serious man, who could not put up with the frivolities of life; to whom
the necessity of providing for that large family of children was very serious; but he was not
of his nature a quarrelsome man. But now he was threatened on the tenderest point; and with
much simpler thought had resolved that it would be his duty to quarrel.

But just when he had spoken the word on which Barney and the hounds were prepared to move,
Sir Nicholas trotted up to him. Sir Nicholas and all the sporting gentlemen of County Galway
were there, whispering with each other, having collected themselves in crowds much bigger than
usual. There was much whispering, and many opinions had been given as to the steps which it
would be well that the hunt should take if interrupted in their sport. But at last Peter Bodkin
had singled out his father, and had communicated to him the fact of Black Daly's pistol. "He'll
use it, as sure as eggs are eggs," said Peter whispering to his father.

"Then there'll be murder," said Sir Nicholas, who though a good hunting neighbour had never
been on very friendly terms with Mr. Daly.

"When Tom Daly says he'll do a thing, he means to do it," said Peter. "He won't be stopped
by my calling it murder." Then Sir Nicholas had quickly discussed the matter with sundry other
sportsmen of the neighbourhood. There were Mr. Persse of Doneraile, and Mr. Blake of Letterkenny,
and Lord Ardrahan, and Sir Jasper Lynch, of Bohernane. During the ten minutes that were allowed
to them, they put their heads together, and with much forethought made Mr. Persse their spokesman.
Lord Ardrahan and Sir Jasper might have seemed to take upon themselves an authority which Daly
would not endure. And Blake, of Letterkenny, would have been too young to carry with him sufficient
weight. Sir Nicholas himself was a Roman Catholic, and was Peter's father, and Peter would
have been in a scrape for having told the story of the pistol. So Mr. Persse put himself forward.
"Daly," he said, trotting up to the master, "I'm afraid we're going to encounter a lot of these
Landleaguers at Moytubber."

"What do they want at Moytubber? Nobody is doing anything to them."

"Of course not; they are a set of miserable ruffians. I'm sorry to say that there are a lot
of my tenants among them. But it's no use discussing that now."

"I can only go on," said Daly, "as though they were in bed." Then he put his hand in his pocket,
and felt that the pistol was there.

Mr. Persse saw what he did, and knew that his hand was on the pistol. "We have only a minute
now to decide," he said.

"To decide what?" asked Daly.

"There must be no violence on our side." Daly turned round his face upon him, and looked at
him from the bottom of those two dark caverns. "Believe me when I say it; there must be no
violence on our side."

"If they attempt to stop my horse?"

"There must be no violence on our side to bring us, or rather you, to further grief."

"By God! I'd shoot the man who did it," said Daly.

"No, no; let there be no shooting. Were you to do so, there can be no doubt that you would
be tried by a jury and--"

"Hanged," said Daly. "May be so; I have got to look that in the face. It is an accursed country
in which we are living."

"But you would not encounter the danger in carrying out a trifling amusement such as this?"

Daly again turned round and looked at him. Was this work of his life, this employment on which
he was so conscientiously eager, to be called trifling? Did they know the thoughts which it
cost him, the hard work by which it was achieved, the days and nights which were devoted to
it? Trifling amusement! To him it was the work of his life. To those around him it was the
best part of theirs.

"I will not interfere with them," Daly said.

He alluded here to the enemies of hunting generally. He had not hunted the country so long
without having had many rows with many men. Farmers, angry with him for the moment, had endeavoured
to stop him as he rode upon their land; and they had poisoned his foxes from revenge, or stolen
them from cupidity. He had borne with such men, expressing the severity of his judgment chiefly
by the look of his eyes; but he had never quarrelled with them violently. They had been contemptible
people whom it would be better to look at than to shoot. But here were men coming, or were
there now, prepared to fight with him for his rights. And he would fight with them, even though
hanging should be the end of it.

"I will not interfere with them, unless they interfere with me."

"Have you a pistol with you, Daly?" said Persse.

"I have."

"Then give it me."

"Not so. If I want to use a pistol it will be better to have it in my own pocket than in yours.
If I do not want to use it I can keep it myself, and no one will be the wiser."

"Listen to me, Daly."

"Well, Mr. Persse?"

"Do not call me 'Mr. Persse,' as though you were determined to quarrel with me. It will be
well that you should take advice in this matter from those whom you have known all your life.
There is Sir Nicholas Bodkin--"

"He may be one of them for all that I can tell," said Daly.

"Lord Ardrahan is not one of them. And Sir Jasper Lynch, and Blake of Letterkenny, they are
all there, if you will speak to them. In such a matter as this it is not worth your while to
get into serious trouble. To you and me hunting is a matter of much importance; but the world
at large will not regard it as one in which blood should be shed. They will come prepared to
make themselves disagreeable, but if there be bloodshed it will simply be by your hands. And
think what an injury you would do to your side of the question, and what a benefit to theirs!"

"How so?"

"We are regarded as the dominant party, as gentlemen who ought to do what is right, and support
the laws."

"If I am attacked may I not defend myself?"

"No; not by a pistol carried loaded into a hunting-field. You would have all the world against
you."

Then the two men rode on silently together. The hounds were drawing the woods of Ballytowngal,
but had not found, and were prepared to go on to Moytubber. But, according to the Galway custom,
Barney Smith was waiting for orders from his master. Daly now sat stock still upon his horse
for awhile, looking at the dark fringe of trees by which the park was surrounded. He was thinking,
as well as he knew how to think, of the position in which he was placed. To be driven to go
contrary to his fixed purpose by fear was a course intolerable to him. But to have done that
which was clearly injurious to his party was as bad. And this Persse to whom he had shown his
momentary anger by calling him Mr., was a man whom he greatly regarded. There was no one in
the field whose word would go further with him in hunting matters. He had clearly been rightly
chosen as a deputation. But Daly knew that as he had gone to bed the previous night, and as
he had got up in the morning, and as he had trotted along by Monivea cross-roads, and had met
Peter Bodkin, every thought of his mind had been intent on the pistol within his pocket. To
shoot a man who should lay hold of him or his horse, or endeavour to stop his horse, had seemed
to him to be bare justice. But he had resolved that he would first give some spoken warning
to the sinner. After that, God help the man; for he would find no help in Black Tom Daly.

But now his mind was shaken by the admonitions of Mr. Persse. He could not say of Mr. Persse
as he had said, most unjustly, of Sir Nicholas, that he was one of them. Mr. Persse was well-known
as a Tory and a Protestant, and an indefatigable opponent of Home-Rulers. To Sir Nicholas,
in the minds of some men, there attached a slight stain of his religion. "I will keep the pistol
in my pocket," said Tom Daly, without turning his eyes away from the belt of trees.

"Had you not better trust it with me?" said Mr. Persse.

"No, I am not such an idiot as to shoot a man when I do not intend it."

"Seeing how moved you are, I thought that perhaps the pistol might be safer in my hands."

"No, the pistol shall remain with me." Then he turned round to join Barney Smith, who was waiting
for him up by the gate out of the covert. But he turned again to say a word to Mr. Persse.
"Thank you, Persse, I am obliged to you. It might be inconvenient being locked up before the
season is over." Then a weird grin covered his face; which was the nearest approach to laughter
ever seen with Black Tom Daly.

From Ballytowngal to Moytubber was about a mile and a half. Some few, during the conversation
between Mr. Persse and the master, had gone on, so that they might be the first to see what
was in store for them. But the crowd of horsemen had remained with their eyes fixed upon Daly.
He rode up to them and passed on without speaking a word, except that he gave the necessary
orders to Barney Smith. Then two or three clustered round Mr. Persse, asking him whispered
questions. "It'll be all right," said Persse, nodding his head; and so the cortège passed on.
But not a word was spoken by Daly himself, either then or afterwards, except a whispered order
or two given to Barney Smith. Moytubber is a gorse covert lying about three hundred yards from
the road, and through it the horsemen always passed; on other occasions it was locked. Now
the gate had been taken off its hinges and thrown back upon the bank; and Daly, as he passed
into the field, perceived that the covert was surrounded by a crowd.

CHAPTER XI.

MOYTUBBER.

"What's all this about?" said Tom as he rode up the covert side, and addressing a man whose
face he happened to know. He was one Kit Mooney, a baker from Claregalway, who in these latter
days had turned Landleaguer. But he was one who simply thought that his bread might be better
buttered for him on that side of the question. He was not an ardent politician; but few local
Irishmen were so. Had no stirring spirits been wafted across the waters from America to teach
Irishmen that one man is as good as another, or generally better, Kit Mooney would never have
found it out. Had not his zeal been awakened by the eloquence of Mr. O'Meagher, the member
for Athlone, who had just made a grand speech to the people at Athenry, Kit Mooney would have
gone on in his old ways, and would at this moment have been touching his hat to Tom Daly, and
whispering to him of the fox that had lately been seen "staling away jist there, Mr. Daly,
'fore a'most yer very eyes." But Mr. O'Meagher had spent three glorious weeks in New York,
and, having practised the art of speaking on board the steamer as he returned, had come to
Athenry and filled the mind of Kit Mooney and sundry others with political truth of the deepest
dye. But the gist of the truths so taught had been chiefly this:--that if a man did not pay
his rent, but kept his money in his pocket, he manifestly did two good things; he enriched
himself, and he so far pauperised the landlord, who was naturally his enemy. What other teaching
could be necessary to make Kit understand,--Kit Mooney who held twenty acres of meadow land
convenient to the town of Claregalway,--that this was the way to thrive in the world? "Rent
is not known in America, that great and glorious country. Every man owns the fields which he
cultivates. Why should you here allow yourself to be degraded by the unmanly name of tenants?
The earth which supports you should be as free to you as the air you breathe." Such had been
the eloquence of Mr. O'Meagher; and it had stirred the mind of Kit Mooney and made him feel
that life should be recommenced by him under new principles. Things had not quite gone swimmingly
with him since, because Nicholas Bodkin's agent had caused a sheriff's bailiff to appear upon
the scene, and the notion of keeping the landlord's rent in the pocket had been found to be
surrounded with difficulties. But the great principle was there, and there had come another
eloquent man, who had also been in America; and Kit Mooney was now a confirmed Landleaguer.

"Faix thin, yer honour, it isn't much hunting the quality will see this day out of Moytubber;
nor yet nowhere round, av the boys are as good as their word."

"Why should they not hunt at Moytubber?" said Mr. Daly, who, as he looked around saw indeed
ample cause why there should be no hunting. He had thought as he trotted along the road that
some individual Landleaguer would hold his horse by the rein and cause him to stop him in the
performance of his duty; but there were two hundred footmen there roaming at will through the
sacred precincts of the gorse, and Daly knew well that no fox could have remained there with
such a crowd around him.

"The boys are just taking their pleasure themselves this fine Christmas morning," said Kit,
who had not moved from the bank on which he had been found sitting. "Begorra, you'll find 'em
all out about the counthry, intirely, Mr. Daly. They're out to make your honour welcome. There
is lashings of 'em across in Phil French's woods and all down to Peter Brown's, away at Oranmore.
There is not a boy in the barony but what is out to bid yer honour welcome this morning."

Kit Mooney could not have given a more exact account of what was being done by "the boys" on
that morning had he owned all those rich gifts of eloquence which Mr. O'Meagher possessed.
Tom Daly at once saw that there was no need for shooting any culprit, and was thankful. The
interruption to the sport of the county had become much more general than he had expected,
and it was apparently so organised as to have spread itself over all that portion of County
Galway, in which his hounds ran. "Bedad, Mr. Daly, what Kit says is thrue," said another man
whom he did not know. "You'll find 'em out everywhere. Why ain't the boys to be having their fun?"

It was useless to allow a hound to go into the covert of Moytubber. The crowd around was waiting
anxiously to see the attempt made, so that they might enjoy their triumph. To watch Black Tom
drawing Moytubber without a fox would be nuts to them; and then to follow the hounds on to
the next covert, and to the next, with the same result, would afford them an ample day's amusement.
But the Bodkins, and the Blakes, and the Persses were quite alive to this, and so also was
Tom Daly. A council of war was therefore held, in order that the line of conduct might be adopted
which might be held to be most conducive to the general dignity of the hunt.

"I should send the hounds home," said Lord Ardrahan. "If Mr. Daly would call at my place and
lunch, as he goes by, I should be most happy."

Tom Daly, on hearing this, only shook his head. The shake was intended to signify that he did
not like the advice tendered, nor the accompanying hospitable offer. To go home would be to
throw down their arms at once, and acknowledge themselves beaten. If beaten to-day, why should
they not be beaten on another day, and then what would become of Tom Daly's employment? A sad
idea came across his mind, as he shook his head, warning him that in this terrible affair of
to-day, he might see the end of all his life's work. Such a thought had never occurred to him
before. If a crowd of disloyal Roman Catholics chose to prevent the gentry in their hunting,
undoubtedly they had the power. Daly was slow at thinking, but an idea when it had once come
home to him, struck him forcibly. As he shook his head at that moment he bethought himself,
what would become of Black Daly if the people of the county refused to allow his hounds to
run? And a second idea struck him,--that he certainly would not lunch with Lord Ardrahan. Lord
Ardrahan was, to his thinking, somewhat pompous, and had been felt by Tom to expect that he,
Tom, should acknowledge the inferiority of his position by his demeanour. Now such an idea
as this was altogether in opposition to Tom's mode of living. Even though the hounds were to
be taken away from him, and he were left at Daly's Bridge with the £200 a year which had come
to him from his father, he would make no such acknowledgment as that to any gentleman in County
Galway. So he shook his head, and said not a word in answer to Lord Ardrahan.

"What do you propose to do, Daly?" demanded Mr. Persse.

"Go on and draw till night. There's a moon, and if we can find a fox before ten, Barney and
I will manage to kill him. Those blackguards can't keep on with us." This was Daly's plan,
spoken out within hearing of many of the blackguards.

"You had better take my offer, and come to Ardrahan Castle," said his lordship.

"No, my lord," said Daly, with the tone of authority which a master of hounds always knows
how to assume.

"I shall draw on. Barney, get the hounds together." Then he whispered to Barney Smith that
the hounds should go on to Kilcornan. Now Kilcornan was a place much beloved by foxes, about
ten miles distant from Moytubber. It was not among the coverts appointed to be drawn on that
day, which all lay back towards Ahaseragh. At Kilcornan the earths would be found to open.
But it would be better to trot off rapidly to some distant home for foxes, even though the
day's sport might be lost. Daly was very anxious that it should not be said through the country
that he had been driven home by a set of roughs from any one covert or another. The day's draw
would be known--the line of the country, that is, which, in the ordinary course of things,
he would follow on that day. But by going to Kilcornan he might throw them off his scent. So
he started for Kilcornan, having whispered his orders to Barney Smith, but communicating his
intentions to no one else.

"What will you do, Daly?" said Sir Jasper Lynch.

"Go on."

"But where will you go?" inquired the baronet. He was a man about Daly's age, with whom Daly
was on comfortable terms. He had no cause for being crabbed with Sir Jasper as with Lord Ardrahan.
But he did not want to declare his purpose to any man. There is no one in the ordinary work
of his life so mysterious as a master of hounds. And among masters no one was more mysterious
than Tom Daly. And this, too, was no ordinary day. Tom only shook his head and trotted on in
advance. His secret had been told only to Barney Smith, and with Barney Smith he knew that
it would be safe.

So they all trotted off at a pace much faster than usual. "What's up with Black Tom now?" asked
Sir Nicholas of Sir Jasper. "What's Daly up to now?" asked Mr. Blake of Mr. Persse. They all
shook their heads, and declared themselves willing to follow their leader without further inquiry.
"I suppose he knows what he's about," said Mr. Persse; "but we, at any rate, must go and see."
So they followed him; and in half an hour's time it became apparent that they were going to
Kilcornan.

But at Kilcornan they found a crowd almost equal to that which had stopped them at Moytubber.
Kilcornan is a large demesne, into which they would, in the ordinary course, have made their
entrance through the lodge gate. At present they went at once to an outlying covert, which
was supposed to be especially the abode of foxes; but even here, as Barney trotted up with
his hounds, at a pace much quicker than usual, they found that the ground before them had been
occupied by Landleaguers. "You'll not do much in the hunting way to-day, Muster Daly," said
one of the intruders. "When we heard you were a-coming we had a little hunt of our own. There
ain't a fox anywhere about the place now, Muster Daly." Tom Daly turned round and sat on his
big black horse, frowning at the world before him; a sorrowful man. What shall we do next?
It does not behove a master of hounds to seek counsel in difficulty from anyone. A man, if
he is master, should be sufficient to himself in all emergencies. No man felt this more clearly
than did Black Tom Daly. He had been ashamed of himself once this morning, because he had taken
advice from Mr. Persse. But now he must think the matter out for himself and follow his own
devices.

It was as yet only two o'clock, but he had come on at a great pace, taking much more out of
his horse than was usual to him on such occasions. But, sitting there, he did make up his mind.
He would go on to Mr. Lambert's place at Clare, and would draw the coverts, going there as
fast as the horse's legs would carry him. There he would borrow two horses if it were possible,
but one, at least, for Barney Smith. Then he would draw back by impossible routes, to the kennels
at Ahaseragh. Men might come with him or might go; but to none would he tell his mind. If Providence
would only send him a fox on the route, all things, he thought, might still be well with him.
It would be odd if he and Barney Smith, between them, were not able to give an account of that
fox when they had done with him. But if he should find no such fox--if he, the master of the
Galway hounds, should have ridden backwards and forwards across County Galway, and have been
impeded altogether in his efforts by wretched Landleaguers, then--as he thought--a final day
would have to come for him.

He spoke no word to anyone, but he did go on just as he proposed to himself. He drew Clare,
but drew it blank; and then, leaving his own horses, he borrowed two others for himself and
Barney, and went on upon his route. Before the day was over--or rather, before the night was
far advanced--he had borrowed three others, in his course about the country, for himself and
his servants. Quick as lightning he went from covert to covert; but the conspiracy had been
well arranged, and a holiday for the foxes in County Galway was established for that day. Some
men were very stanch to him, going with him whither they knew not, so that "poor dear Tom"
might not be left alone; but alone he was during the long evening of that day, as far as all
conversation went. He spoke to no one, except to Barney, and to him only a few words; giving
him a direction as to where he should go next, and into what covert he should put the hounds.
They, too, must have been much surprised and very weary, as they dragged their tired limbs
to their kennel, at about eight o'clock. And Tom Daly's ride across the country will long be
remembered, and the exertions which he made to find a fox on that day.

But it was all in vain. As Tom ate his solitary mutton-chop, and drank his cold whisky and
water, and then took himself to bed, he was a melancholy man. The occupation of his life, he
thought, was gone. These reprobates, whom he now hated worse than ever, having learned their
powers to disturb the amusements of their betters, would never allow another day's hunting
in the county. He was aware now, though he never had thought of it before, by how weak a hold
his right of hunting the country was held. He and his hounds could go into any covert; but
so also could any other man, with or without hounds. To disturb a fox, three or four men would
suffice; one would suffice according to Tom's idea of a fox. The occupation of his life was over.

Tom Daly was by nature a melancholy man. All County Galway knew that. He was a man not given
to many words, by no means devoted to sport in the ordinary sense. It was a hard business that
he had undertaken. The work was in every sense hard, and the payment made was very small. In
fact no payment was made, other than that of his being lifted into a position in which he was
able to hold his head high among gentlemen of property. What should he do with himself during
the remainder of his life, if hunting in County Galway was brought to an end? He was an intent,
eager man, whom it was hard to teach that the occupations of his life were less worthy than
those of other men. But there had come moments of doubt as he had sat alone in his little room
at Ahaseragh and had meditated, whether the pursuit of vermin was worthy all the energy which
he had given to it.

"You may sell those brutes of yours now, and then perhaps you'll be able to educate your children."
So Sir Nicholas Bodkin had addressed his eldest son, as they rode home together on that occasion.

"Why so?" Peter had asked, thinking more of the "brutes" alluded to than of the children. He
was accustomed to the tone of his father's remarks, and cared for them not more than the ordinary
son cares for the expression of the ordinary father's ill humour. But now he knew that some
reference was intended to the interruption that had been made in their day's sport, and was
anxious to learn what his father thought about it. "Why so?" he asked.

"Because you won't want them for this game any longer. Hunting is done with in these parts.
When a blackguard like Kit Mooney is able to address such a one as Tom Daly after that fashion,
anything that requires respect may be said to be over. Hunting has existed solely on respect.
I had intended to buy that mare of French's, but I shan't now."

"What does all that mean, Lynch?" said Mr. Persse to Sir Jasper, as they rode home together.

"It means quarrelling to the knife."

"In a quarrel to the knife," said Mr. Persse, "all lighter things must be thrown away. Daly
had brought a pistol in his pocket as you heard this morning. I have been thinking of it ever
since; and, putting two and two together, it seems to me to be almost impossible that hunting
should go on in County Galway."

CHAPTER XII.

"DON'T HATE HIM, ADA."

Among those who had gone as far as Mr. Lambert's, but had not proceeded further, had been Frank
Jones. He had heard and seen what has been narrated, and was as much impressed as others with
the condition of the country. The populace generally--for so it had seemed to be--had risen
en masse to put down the amusement of the gentry, and there had been a secret conspiracy, so
that they had been able to do the same thing in different parts of the county. Frank, as he
rode back to Morony Castle, a long way from Mr. Lambert's covert, was very melancholy in his
mind. The persecution of Mahomet M. Moss and of the Landleaguers together was almost too much
for him.

When he got home his father also was melancholy, and the girls were melancholy. "What sport
have you had, Frank?" said the father. But he asked the question in a melancholy tone, simply
as being one which the son expects on returning from hunting. In this expectation Mr. Jones
gave way. Frank shook his head, but did not utter a word.

"What do you mean by that?" asked the father.

"The whole country is in arms." This, no doubt, was an exaggeration, as the only arms that
had been brought to Moytubber on the occasion had been the pistol in Tom Daly's pocket.

"In arms?" said Philip Jones.

"Well, yes! I call it so. I call men in arms, when they are prepared to carry out any illegal
purpose by violence, and these men have done that all through the County Galway."

"What have they done?"

"You know where the meet was; well, they drew Ballytowngal, and found no fox there. It was
not expected, and nothing happened there. The people did not come into old Nick Bodkin's demesne,
but we had heard by the time that we were there that we should come across a lot of Landleaguers
at Moytubber. There they were as thick as bees round the covert, and there was one man who
had the impudence to tell Tom Daly that draw where he might, he would draw in vain for a fox
to-day in County Galway."

"Do you mean that there was a crowd?" asked Mr. Jones.

"A crowd! Yes, all Claregalway seemed to have turned out. Claregalway is not much of a place,
but everyone was there from Oranmore and from Athenry, and half the town from Galway city."
This certainly was an exaggeration on the part of Frank, but was excused by his desire to impress
his father with the real truth in the matter. "I never saw half such a number of people by
a covert side. But the truth was soon known. They had beat Moytubber, and kicked up such a
row as the foxes in that gorse had never heard before. And they were not slow in obtaining
their object."

"Their object was clear enough."

"They didn't intend that the hounds should hunt that day either at Moytubber or elsewhere.
Daly did not put his hounds into the covert at all; but rode away as fast as his horse's legs
could carry him to Kilcornan."

"That must be ten miles at least," said his father.

"Twenty, I should think. But we rode away at a hand-gallop, leaving the crowd behind us." This
again was an exaggeration. "But when we got to the covert at Kilcornan there was just the same
sort of crowd, and just the same work had been on foot. The men there all told us that we need
not expect to find a fox. A rumour had got about the field by this time that Tom Daly had a
loaded pistol in his pocket. What he meant to do with it I don't know. He could have done no
good without a regular massacre."

"Did he show his pistol?"

"I didn't see it; but I do believe it was there. Some of the old fogies were awfully solemn
about it."

"What was the end of it all?" asked Edith, who together with her sister was now listening to
Frank's narrative.

"You know Mr. Lambert's place on the road towards Gort. It's a long way off, and I'm a little
out of my latitude there. But I went as far as that, and found a bigger crowd than ever. They
said that all Gort was there; but Tom having drawn the covert, went on, and swore that he wouldn't
leave a place in all County Galway untried. He borrowed fresh horses, and went on with Barney
Smith as grim as death. He is still drawing his covert somewhere."

It was thus that Frank Jones told the story of that day's hunting. To his father's ears it
sounded as being very ominous. He did not care much for hunting himself, nor would it much
perplex him if the Landleaguers would confine themselves to this mode of operations. But as
he heard of the crowds surrounding the coverts through the county, he thought also of his many
acres still under water, by the operation of a man who had taken upon himself to be his enemy.
And the whole morning had been spent in fruitless endeavours to make Florian tell the truth.
The boy had remained surly, sullen, and silent. "He will tell me at last," Edith had said to
her father. But her father had said, that unless the truth were now told, he must allow the
affair to go by. "The time for dealing with the matter will be gone," he had said. "Pat Carroll
is going about the country as bold as brass, and says that he will fix his own rent; whereas
I know, and all the tenants know, that he ought to be in Galway jail. There isn't a man on
the estate who isn't certain that it was he, with five or six others, who let the waters in
upon the meadows."

"Then why on earth cannot you make them tell?"

"They say that they only think it," said Edith.

"The very best of them only think it," said Ada.

"And there is not one of them," said Mr. Jones, "whom you could trust to put into a witness-box.
To tell the truth, I do not see what right I have to ask them to go there. If I was to select
a man,--or two, how can I say to them, 'forget yourself, forget your wife and children, encounter
possible murder, and probable ruin, in order that I may get my revenge on this man'?"

"It is not revenge but justice," said Frank.

"It would be revenge to their minds. And if it came to pass that there was a man who would
thus sacrifice himself to me, what must I do with him afterwards? Were I to send him to America
with money, and take his land into my own hand, see what horrible things would be said of me.
The sort of witness I want to back up others, who would then be made to come, is Florian."

"What would they do to him?" asked Edith.

"I could send him to an English school for a couple of years, till all this should have passed
by. I have thought of that."

"That, too, would cost money," said Ada.

"Of course it would cost money, but it would be forthcoming, rather than that the boy should
be in danger. But the feeling, to me, as to the boy himself, comes uppermost. It is that he
himself should have such a secret in his bosom, and keep it there, locked fast, in opposition
to his own father. I want to get it out of him while he is yet a boy, so that his name shall
not go abroad as one who, by such manifest falsehood, took part against his own father. It
is the injury done to him, rather than the injury done to me."

"He has promised his priest that he will not tell," said Edith, making what excuse she could
for her brother.

"He has not promised his priest," said Mr. Jones. "He has made no promise to Father Malachi,
of Ballintubber. If he has promised at all it is to that pestilent fellow at Headford. The
curate at Headford is not his priest, and why should a promise made to any priest be more sacred
than one made to another, unless it were made in confession? I cannot understand Florian. It
seems as though he were anxious to take part with these wretches against his country, against
his religion, and against his father. It is unintelligible to me that a boy of his age should,
at the same time, be so precocious and so stupid. I have told him that I know him to be a liar,
and that until he will tell the truth he shall not come into my presence." Having so spoken
the father sat silent, while Frank went off to dress.

It was felt by them all that a terrible decision had been come to in the family. A verdict
had gone out and had pronounced Florian guilty. They had all gradually come to think that it
was so. But now the judge had pronounced the doom. The lad was not to be allowed into his presence
during the continuance of the present state of things. In the first place, how was he to be
kept out of his father's presence? And the boy was one who would turn mutinous in spirit under
such a command. The meaning of it was that he should not sit at table with his father. But,
in accordance with the ways of the family, he had always done so. A separate breakfast must
be provided for him, and a separate dinner. Then would there not be danger that he should be
driven to look for his friends elsewhere? Would he not associate with Father Brosnan, or, worse
again, with Pat Carroll? "Ada," said Edith that night as they sat together, "Florian must be
made to confess."

"How make him?"

"You and I must do it."

"That's all very well," said Ada, "but how? You have been at him now for nine months, and have
not moved him. He's the most obstinate boy, I think, that ever lived."

"Do you know, there is something in it all that makes me love him the better?" said Edith.

"Is there? There is something in it that almost makes me hate him."

"Don't hate him, Ada--if you can help it. He has got some religious idea into his head. It
is all stupid."

"It is beastly," said Ada.

"You may call it as you please," said the other, "it is stupid and beastly. He is travelling
altogether in a wrong direction, and is putting everybody concerned with him in immense trouble.
It may be quite right that a person should be a Roman Catholic--or that he should be a Protestant;
but before one turns from one to the other, one should be old enough to know something about
it. It is very vexatious; but with Flory there is, I think, some idea of an idea. He has got
it into his head that the Catholics are a downtrodden people, and therefore he will be one
of them."

"That is such bosh," said Ada.

"It is so, to your thinking, but not to his. In loving him or hating him you've got to love
him or hate him as a boy. Of course it's wicked that a boy should lie,--or a man, or a woman,
or a girl; but they do. I don't see why we are to turn against a boy of our own, when we know
that other boys lie. He has got a notion into his head that he is doing quite right, because
the priest has told him."

"He is doing quite wrong," said Ada.

"And now what are we to do about his breakfast? Papa says that he is not to be allowed to come
into the room, and papa means it. You and I will have to breakfast with him and dine with him,
first one and then the other."

"But papa will miss us."

"We must go through the ceremony of a second breakfast and a second dinner." This was the beginning
of Edith's scheme. "Of course it's a bore; all things are bores. This about the flood is the
most terrible bore I ever knew. But I'm not going to let Flory go to the devil without making
an effort to save him. It would be going to the devil, if he were left alone in his present
position."

"Papa will see that we don't eat anything."

"Of course he must be told. There never ought to be any secrets in anything. Of course he'll
grow used to it, and won't expect us to sit there always and eat nothing. He thinks he's right,
and perhaps he is. Flory will feel the weight of his displeasure; and if we talk to him we
may persuade him."

This state of things at Morony Castle was allowed to go on with few other words said upon the
subject. The father became more and more gloomy, as the floods held their own upon the broad
meadows. Pat Carroll had been before the magistrates at Headford, and had been discharged,
as all evidence was lacking to connect him with the occurrence. Further effort none was made,
and Pat Carroll went on in his course, swearing that not a shilling of rent should be paid
by him in next March. "The floods had done him a great injury," he said laughingly among his
companions, "so that it was unreasonable to expect that he should pay." It was true he had
owed a half-year's rent last November; but then it had become customary with Mr. Jones's tenants
to be allowed the indulgence of six months. No more at any rate would be said about rent till
March should come.

And now, superinduced upon this cause of misery, had come the tidings which had been spread
everywhere through the county in regard to the Galway hunt. Tom Daly had gone on regularly
with his meets, and had not indeed been stopped everywhere. His heart had been gladdened by
a wonderful run which he had had from Carnlough. The people had not interfered there, and the
day had been altogether propitious. Tom had for the moment been in high good humour; but the
interruption had come again, and had been so repeated as to make him feel that his occupation
was in truth gone. The gentry of the county had then held a meeting at Ballinasloe, and had
decided that the hounds should be withdrawn for the remainder of the season. No one who has
not ridden with the hounds regularly can understand the effect of such an order. There was
no old woman with a turkey in her possession who did not feel herself thereby entitled to destroy
the fox who came lurking about her poultry-yard. Nor was there a gentleman who owned a pheasant
who did not feel himself animated in some degree by the same feeling. "As there's to be an
end of fox-hunting in County Galway, we can do what we like with our own coverts." "I shall
go in for shooting," Sir Nicholas Bodkin had been heard to say.

But Black Tom Daly sat alone gloomily in his room at Ahaseragh, where it suited him still to
be present and look after the hounds, and told himself that the occupation of his life was
gone. Who would want to buy a horse even, now that the chief object for horses was at an end?

CHAPTER XIII.

EDITH'S ELOQUENCE.

Thus they lived through the months of January and February, 1881, at Morony Castle, and Florian
had not as yet told his secret. As a boy his nature had seemed to be entirely altered during
the last six months. He was thoughtful, morose, and obstinate to a degree, which his father
was unable to fathom. But during these last two months there had been no intercourse between
them. It may almost be said that no word had been addressed by either to the other. No further
kind of punishment had been inflicted. Indeed, the boy enjoyed a much wider liberty than had
been given to him before, or than was good for him. For his father not only gave no orders
to him, but seldom spoke concerning him. It was, however, a terrible trouble to his mind, the
fact that his own son should be thus possessed of his own peculiar secret, and should continue
from month to month hiding it within his own bosom. With Father Malachi Mr. Jones was on good
terms, but to him he could say nothing on the subject. The absurdity of the conversion, or
perversion, of the boy, in reference to his religion, made Mr. Jones unwilling to speak of
him to any Roman Catholic priest. Father Malachi would no doubt have owned that the boy had
been altogether unable to see, by his own light, the difference between the two religions.
But he would have attributed the change to the direct interposition of God. He would not have
declared in so many words that a miracle had been performed in the boy's favour, but this would
have been the meaning of the argument he would have used. In fact, the gaining of a proselyte
under any circumstances would have been an advantage too great to jeopardise by any arguments
in the matter. The Protestant clergyman at Headford, in whose parish Morony Castle was supposed
to have been situated, was a thin, bigoted Protestant, of that kind which used to be common
in Ireland. Mr. Armstrong was a gentleman, who held it to be an established fact that a Roman
Catholic must necessarily go to the devil. In all the moralities he was perfect. He was a married
man, with a wife and six children, all of whom he brought up and educated on £250 a year. He
never was in debt; he performed all his duties--such as they were--and passed his time in making
rude and unavailing attempts to convert his poorer neighbours. There was a union,--or poor-house--in
the neighbourhood, to which he would carry morsels of meat in his pocket on Friday, thinking
that the poor wretches who had flown in the face of their priest by eating the unhallowed morsels,
would then have made a first step towards Protestantism. He was charitable, with so little
means for charity; he was very eager in his discourses, in the course of which he would preach
to a dozen Protestants for three-quarters of an hour, and would confine himself to one subject,
the iniquities of the Roman Catholic religion. He had heard of Florian's perversion, and had
made it the topic on which he had declaimed for two Sundays. He had attempted to argue with
Father Brosnan, but had been like a babe in his hands. He ate and drank of the poorest, and
clothed himself so as just to maintain his clerical aspect. All his aspirations were of such
a nature as to entitle him to a crown of martyrdom. But they were certainly not of a nature
to justify him in expecting any promotion on this earth. Such was Mr. Joseph Armstrong, of
Headford, and from him no aid, or counsel, or pleasant friendship could be expected in this matter.

The trouble of Florian's education fell for the nonce into Edith's hands. He had hitherto worked
under various preceptors; his father, his sister, and his brother; also a private school at
Galway for a time had had the charge of him. But now Edith alone undertook the duty. Gradually
the boy began to have a way of his own, and to tell himself that he was only bound to be obedient
during certain hours of the morning. In this way the whole day after twelve o'clock was at
his own disposal, and he never told any of the family what he then did. Peter, the butler,
perhaps knew where he went, but even to Peter the butler, the knowledge was a trouble; for
Peter, though a stanch Roman Catholic, was not inclined to side with anyone against his own
master. Florian, in truth, did see more of Pat Carroll than he should have done; and, though
it would be wrong to suppose that he took a part against his father, he no doubt discussed
the questions which were of interest to Pat Carroll, in a manner that would have been very
displeasing to his father. "Faix, Mr. Flory," Pat would say to him, "'av you're one of us,
you've got to be one of us; you've had a glimmer of light, as Father Brosnan says, to see the
errors of your way; but you've got to see the errors of your way on 'arth as well as above.
Dragging the rint out o' the body and bones o' the people, like hair from a woman's head, isn't
the way, and so you'll have to larn." Then Florian would endeavour to argue with his friend,
and struggle to make him understand that in the present complicated state of things it was
necessary that a certain amount of rent should go to Morony Castle to keep up the expenses there.

"We couldn't do, you know, without Peter; nor yet very well without the carriage and horses.
It's all nonsense saying that there should be no rent; where are we to get our clothes from?"
But these arguments, though very good of their kind, had no weight with Pat Carroll, whose
great doctrine it was that rent was an evil per se; and that his world would certainly go on
a great deal better if there were no rent.

"Haven't you got half the land of Ballintubber in your hands?" said Carroll. Here Florian in
a whisper reminded Pat that the lands of Ballintubber were at this moment under water, and
had been put so by his operation. "Why wouldn't he make me a statement when I asked for it?"
said Carroll, with a coarse grin, which almost frightened the boy.

"Flory," said Edith to the boy that afternoon, "you did see the men at work upon the sluices
that afternoon?"

"I didn't," said Florian.

"We all believe that you did."

"But I didn't."

"You may as well listen to me this once. We all believe that you did--papa and I, and Frank
and Ada; Peter believes it; there's not a servant about the place but what believes it. Everybody
believes it at Headford. Mr. Blake at Carnlough, and all the Blakes believe it."

"I don't care a bit about Mr. Blake," said the boy.

"But you do care about your own father. If you were to go up and down to Galway by the boat,
you would find that everybody on board believes it. The country people would say that you had
turned against your father because of your religion. Mr. Morris, from beyond Cong, was here
the other day, and from what he said about the floods it was easy to see that he believed it."

"If you believe Mr. Morris better than you do me, you may go your own ways by yourself."

"I don't see that, Flory. I may believe Mr. Morris in this matter better than I do you, and
yet not intend to go my own ways by myself. I don't believe you at all on this subject."

"Very well, then, don't."

"But I want to find out, if I can, what may be the cause of so terrible a falsehood on your
part. It has come to that, that though you tell the lie, you almost admit that it is a lie."

"I don't admit it."

"It is as good as admitted. The position you assume is this: 'I saw the gates destroyed, but
I am not going to say so in evidence, because it suits me to take part with Pat Carroll, and
to go against my own father.'"

"You've no business to put words like that into my mouth."

"I'm telling you what everybody thinks. Would your father treat you as he does now without
a cause? And are you to remain here, and to go down and down in the world till you become such
a one as Pat Carroll? And you will have to live like Pat Carroll, with the knowledge in everyone's
heart that you have been untrue to your father. They are becoming dishonest, false knaves,
untrue to their promises, the very scum of the earth, because of their credulity and broken
vows; but what am I to say of you? You will have been as false and perfidious and credulous
as they. You will have thrown away everything good to gratify the ambition of some empty traitor.
And you will have done it all against your own father." Here she paused and looked at him.
They were roaming at the time round the demesne, and he walked on, but said nothing. "I know
what you are thinking of, Flory."

"What am I thinking of?"

"You're thinking of your duty; you are thinking whether you can bring yourself to make a clean
breast of it, and break the promises which you have made."

"Nobody should break a promise," said he.

"And nobody should tell a lie. When one finds oneself in the difficulty one has to go back
and find out where the evil thing first began."

"I gave the promise first," said Florian.

"No such promise should ever have been given. Your first duty in the matter was to your father."

"I don't see that at all," said Florian. "My first duty is to my religion."

"Even to do evil for its sake? Go to Father Malachi, and ask him."

"Father Malachi isn't the man to whom I should like to tell everything. Father Brosnan is a
much better sort of clergyman. He is my confessor, and I choose to go by what he tells me."

"Then you will be a traitor to your father."

"I am not a traitor," said Florian.

"And yet you admit that some promise has been given--some promise which you dare not own. You
cannot but know in your own heart that I know the truth. You have seen that man Carroll doing
the mischief, and have promised him to hold your tongue about it. You have not, then, understood
at all the nature or extent of the evil done. You have not, then, known that it would be your
father's duty to put down this turbulent ruffian. You have promised, and having promised, Father
Brosnan has frightened you. He and Pat Carroll together have cowed the very heart within you.
The consequence is that you are becoming one of them, and instead of moving as a gentleman
on the face of the earth, you will be such as they are. Tell the truth, and your father will
at once send you to some school in England, where you will be educated as becomes my brother."

The boy now was sobbing in tears. He lacked the resolution to continue his lie, but did not
dare to tell the truth.

"I will," he whispered.

"What will you do?"

"I will tell all that I know about it."

"Tell me, then, now."

"No, Edith, not now," he said.

"Will you tell papa, then?" said Edith.

"Papa is so hard to me."

"Whom will you tell, and when?"

"I will tell you, but not now. I will first tell Father Brosnan that I am going to do it; I
shall not then have told the lie absolutely to my priest."

On this occasion Edith could do nothing further with him; and, indeed, the nature of the confession
which she expected him to make was such that it should be made to some person beyond herself.
She could understand that it must be taken down in some form that would be presentable to a
magistrate, and that evidence of the guilt of Pat Carroll and evidence as to the possible guilt
of others must not be whispered simply into her own ears. But she had now brought him to such
a condition that she did think that his story would be told.

CHAPTER XIV.

RACHEL'S CORRESPONDENCE.

There was another cause of trouble at Morony Castle, which at the present moment annoyed them
much. Frank had received three or four letters from Rachel O'Mahony, the purport of them all
being to explain her troubles with Mahomet M. M., as she called the man; but still so as to
prevent Frank from attempting to interfere personally.

"No doubt the man is a brute," she had said, "if a young lady, without ceasing to be ladylike,
may so describe so elegant a gentleman. If not so, still he is a brute, because I can't declare
otherwise, even for the sake of being ladylike. But what you say about coming is out of the
question. You can't meddle with my affairs till you've a title to meddle. Now, you know the
truth. I'm going to stick to you, and I expect you to stick to me. For certain paternal reasons
you want to put the marriage off. Very well. I'm agreeable, as the folks say. If you would
say that you would be ready to marry me on the first of April, again I should be agreeable.
You can nowhere find a more agreeable young woman than I am. But I must be one thing or the other."

Then he wrote to her the sort of love-letter which the reader can understand. It was full of
kisses and vows and ecstatic hopes but did not name a day. In fact Mr. Jones, in the middle
of his troubles, was unable to promise an immediate union, and did not choose that his son
should marry in order that he might be supported by a singing girl. But to this letter Frank
added a request--or rather a command--that he should be allowed to come over at once and see
Mr. Mahomet. It was no doubt true that his father was, for the minute, a little backward in
the matter of his income; but still he wanted to look after Mahomet, and he wanted to be kissed.

   You must not come at all, and I won't even see you if you
   do. You men are always so weak, and want such a lot of
   petting. Mahomet tried to kiss me last night when I was
   singing to him before going to dress. I have to practise
   with him. I gave him such a blow in the face that I don't
   think he'll repeat the experiment, and I had my eyes about
   me. You needn't be at all afraid of me but what I am
   quick enough. He was startled at the moment, and I merely
   laughed. I'm not going to give up £100 a month because
   he makes a beast of himself; and I'm not going to call
   in father as long as I can help it; nor do I mean to call
   in your royal highness at all. I tell everybody that I'm
   going to marry your royal highness, king Jones; there
   isn't a bit of a secret about it. I talk of my Mr. Jones
   just as if we were married, because it all comes easier to
   me in that way. You will see that I absolutely believe in
   you and I expect that you shall absolutely believe in me.
   Send you a kiss! Of course I do; I am not at all coy of my
   favours. You ask Mahomet also as to what he thinks of the
   strength of my right arm. I examined his face so minutely
   when I had to fall into his arms on the stage, and there I
   saw the round mark of my fist, and the swelling all round
   it. And I thought to myself as I was singing my devotion
   that he should have it next time in his eye. But, Frank,
   mark my words: I won't have you here till you can come to
   marry me.

Frank did not go over, even on this occasion, as he was detained, not only by his mistress's
danger, but by his father's troubles. Florian had almost, but had not quite, told the entire
truth. He had said that he had seen the sluices broken, but had not quite owned who had broken
them. He had declared that Pat Carroll had done "mischief," but had not quite said of what
nature was the mischief which Carroll had done. It was now March, and the hunting troubles
were still going on. The whole gentry in County Galway had determined to take Black Tom Daly's
part, and to carry him on through the contest. But the effect of taking Black Tom Daly's part
was to take the part against which the Land Leaguers were determined to enrol themselves. For
of all men in the county, Black Tom was the most unpopular. And of all men he was the most
determined; with him it was literally a question between God and Mammon. A man could not serve
both. In the simplicity of his heart, he thought that the Landleaguers were children of Satan,
and that to have any dealings with them, or the passage of any kindness, was in itself Satanic.
He said very little, but he spent whole hours in thinking of the evil that they were doing.
And among the evils was the unparalleled insolence which they displayed in entering coverts
in County Galway. Now Frank Jones, who had not hitherto been very intimate with Tom, had taken
up his part, and was fighting for him at this moment. Nevertheless the provocation to him to
go to London was very great, and he had only put it off till the last coverts should be drawn
on Saturday the 2nd of April. The hunt had determined to stop their proceedings earlier than
usual; but still there was to be one day in April, for the sake of honour and glory.

But in the latter days of March there came a third letter from Rachel O'Mahony. Like the other
letter it was cheerful, and high-spirited; but still it seemed to speak of impending dangers,
which Frank, though he could not understand them, thought that he could perceive.

   My present engagement is to go on till the end of July,
   with an understanding that I am to have twenty guineas
   a night, for any evening that I may be required to sing
   in August. This your highness will perceive is a very
   considerable increase, and at three nights a week might
   afford an income on which your highness would perhaps
   condescend to come and eat a potato, in the honour of
   "ould" Ireland, till better times should come. That would
   be the happy potato which would be the first bought for
   such a purpose! But you must see that I cannot expect
   a continuance of my present engagement as the head of
   your royal highness' seraglio. I should have to look for
   another Chancellor of the Exchequer, and should probably
   find him. Mr. Mahomet M. Moss would hardly endure me
   as being part of the properties belonging to your royal
   highness.

   And now I must tell you my own little news. Beelzebub has
   taken a worse devil to himself, so that I am likely to be
   trodden down into the very middle of the pit. I choose to
   tell you because I won't have you think that I have ever
   kept anything secret from you. If I describe the roars of
   Mrs. Beelzebub to you, and her red claws, and her forky
   tongue, and her fiery tail, it is not because I like her
   as a subject of poetry, but because this special subject
   comes uppermost; and you shall never say to me, why didn't
   you tell me when you were introduced to Beelzebub's wife?
   and assert, as men are apt to do, that you would not
   have allowed me to make her acquaintance. Mrs. Beelzebub
   appears on the stage as belonging to Mahomet but how they
   have mixed it all up together among themselves, I do not
   quite know. I do not think that they're in love with one
   another, because she is not jealous of me. She is Madame
   Socani in the plot, and a genuine American from New York;
   but she can sing; she has a delicious soprano voice, soft
   and powerful; but she has also a temper and temperament
   such as no woman, nor yet no devil, ought to possess. Of
   Monsieur Socani, or Signor Socani, or Herr Socani, I never
   yet heard. But such men do not always make themselves
   troublesome. I have to sing with her, and a woman you may
   say would not be troublesome, but she and Mahomet between
   them consider themselves competent to get me under their
   thumb. I don't intend to be under their thumb. I intend
   to be under nobody's thumb but yours; and the sooner the
   better. Now you know all about it; but as you shall value
   the first squeeze which you shall get when you do come,
   don't come till your coming has been properly settled.

Then there was a fourth letter in which she described her troubles, still humorously, and with
some attempt at absolute comedy. But she certainly wrote with a purpose of making him understand
that she was subjected to very considerable annoyance. She was still determined not to call
upon him for assistance; and she warned him that any assistance whatever would be out of his
power. A lover on the scene, who could not declare his purpose of speedy marriage, would be
worse than useless. All that she saw plainly,--or at any rate declared that she saw plainly,
though she was altogether unable to explain it to Frank Jones.

   Mrs. Beelzebub is certainly the queen of the devils. I
   remember when you read "Paradise Lost" to us at Morony
   Castle, which I thought very dull. Milton arranged the
   ranks in Pandemonium differently; but there has been a
   revolution since that, and Mrs. Beelzebub has everything
   just as she pleases. I am beginning to pity Mahomet, and
   pity, they say, is akin to love. She urges him,--well,
   just to make love to me. What reason there is between
   them I don't know, but I am sure she wants him to get me
   altogether into his hands. I'm not sure but what she is
   Mahomet's own wife. This is a horrid kettle of fish, as
   you will see. But I think I'll turn out to be head cook
   yet. If God does not walk atop of the devils what's the
   use of running straight? But I am sure he will, and the
   more so because there is in truth no temptation.

   She told me the other day to my face, that I was a fool.
   "I know I am," said I demurely, "but why?" Then she came
   out with her demand. It was very simple, and did not in
   truth amount to much. I was to become just--mistress to
   Mr. Moss.

Frank Jones, when he read this, crushed the paper up in his hand and went upstairs to his bedroom,
determined to pack up immediately. But before he had progressed far, he got out the letter
and read the remainder.

   "You," I said, "are an intimate acquaintance of Mr. Moss."

   "I am his particular friend," she said, with that peculiar
   New York aping of a foreign accent, which is the language
   that was, I am sure, generally used by the devils.

   "Ask him, with my best compliments," I said, "whether he
   remembers the blow I hit him in the face. Tell him I can
   hit much harder than that; tell him that he will never
   find me unprepared, for a moment."

   Now I have got another little bit of news for you.
   Somebody has found out in New York that I am making
   money. It is true, in a limited way. £100 a month is
   something, and so they've asked papa to subscribe as
   largely as he can to a grand Home-Rule, anti-Protestant,
   hate-the-English, stars-and-stripes society. It is the
   most loyal and beneficent thing out, and dear papa thinks
   I can do nothing better with my wealth than bestow it
   upon these birds of freedom. I have no doubt they are
   all right, because I am an American-Irish, and have not
   the pleasure of knowing Black Tom Daly. I have given
   them £200, and am, therefore, at this moment, nearly
   impecunious. On this account I do not choose to give up my
   engagement--£100 a month, with an additional possibility
   of twenty guineas a night when August shall be here. You
   will tell me that after the mild suggestion made by Mrs.
   Beelzebub, I ought to walk out of the house, and go back
   to County Galway immediately. I don't think so. I am
   learning every day how best to stand fast on my own feet.
   I am earning my money honestly, and men and women here
   in London are saying that in truth I can sing. A very
   nice old gentleman called on me the other day from Covent
   Garden, and, making me two low bows, asked whether I was
   my own mistress some time in October next. I thought at
   the moment that I was at any rate free from the further
   engagement proposed by Mrs. Beelzebub, and told him that I
   was free. Then he made me two lower bows, touched the tip
   of my fingers, and said that he would be proud to wait
   upon me in a few days with a definite proposal. This old
   gentleman may mean twenty guineas a night for the whole
   of next winter, or something like £250 a month. Think
   of that, Mr. Jones. But how am I to go on in my present
   impecunious position if I quarrel altogether with my bread
   and butter? So now you know all about it.

   Remember that I have told my father nothing as to Mrs.
   Beelzebub's proposition. It is better not; he would disown
   it, and would declare that I had invented it from vanity.
   I do think that a woman in this country can look after
   herself if she be minded so to do. I know that I am
   stronger than Mr. Moss and Mrs. Beelzebub together. I do
   believe that he will pay me his money, as he has always
   done, and I want to earn my money. I have some little
   precautions--just for a rainy day. I have told you
   everything--everything, because you are to be my husband.
   But you can do me no good by coming here, but may cause me
   a peck of troubles. Now, good-bye, and God bless you. A
   thousand kisses.

   Ever your own,

   R.

   Tell everybody that I'm to be Mrs. Jones some day.

Frank finished packing up, and then told his father that he was going off to Athenry at once,
there to meet the night mail train up to Dublin.

"Why are you going at once, in this sudden manner?" asked his father.

Frank then remembered that he could not tell openly the story of Mrs. Beelzebub. Rachel had
told him in pure simple-minded confidence, and though he was prepared to disobey her, he would
not betray her. "She is on the stage," he said.

"I am aware of it," replied his father, intending to signify that his son's betrothed was not
employed as he would have wished.

"At the Charing Cross Opera," said the son, endeavouring to make the best of it.

"Yes; at the Charing Cross Opera, if that makes a difference."

"She is earning her bread honestly."

"I believe so," said Mr. Jones, "I do believe so, I do think that Rachel O'Mahony is a thoroughly
good girl."

"I am sure of it," said Ada and Edith almost in the same breath.

"But not less on that account is the profession distasteful to me. You do not wish to see your
sisters on the stage?"

"I have thought of all that, sir," said Frank, "I have quite made up my mind to make Rachel
my wife, if it be possible."

"Do you mean to live on what she may earn as an actress?" Here Frank remained silent for a
moment. "Because if you do, I must tell you that it will not become you as a gentleman to accept
her income."

"You cannot give us an income on which we may live."

"Certainly not at this moment. With things as they are in Ireland now, I do not know how long
I may have a shilling with which to bless myself. It seems to me that for the present it is
your duty to stay at home, and not to trouble Rachel by going to her in London."

"At this moment I must go to her."

"You have given no reason for your going." Frank thought of it, and told himself that there
was in truth no reason. His going would be a trouble to Rachel, and yet there were reasons
which made it imperative for him to go. "Have you asked yourself what will be the expense?"
said his father.

"It may cost I suppose twelve pounds, going and coming."

"And have you asked yourself how many twelve pounds will be likely to fall into your hands
just at present? Is she in any trouble?"

"I had rather not talk about her affairs," said Frank.

"Is not her father with her?"

"I do not think he is the best man in the world to help a girl in such an emergency." But he
had not described what was the emergency.

"You think that a young man, who certainly will be looked on as the young lady's lover, but
by no means so certainly as the young lady's future husband, will be more successful?"

"I do," said Frank, getting up and walking out of the room. He was determined at any rate that
nothing which his father could say should stop him, as he had resolved to disobey all the orders
which Rachel had given him. At any rate, during that night and the following day he made his
way up to London.

CHAPTER XV.

CAPTAIN YORKE CLAYTON.

At this period of our story much had already been said in the outside world as to flooding
the meadows of Ballintubber. Like other outrages of the same kind, it had not at first been
noticed otherwise than in the immediate neighbourhood; and though a terrible injury had been
inflicted, equal in value to the loss of five or six hundred pounds, it had seemed as though
it would pass away unnoticed, simply because Mr. Jones had lacked evidence to bring it home
to any guilty party. But gradually it had become known that Pat Carroll had been the sinner,
and the causes also which had brought about the crime were known. It was known that Pat Carroll
had joined the Landleaguers in the neighbouring county of Mayo with great violence, and that
he had made a threat that he would pay no further rent to his landlord. The days of the no-rent
manifestation had not yet come, as the obnoxious Members of Parliament were not yet in prison;
but no-rent was already firmly fixed in the minds of many men, about to lead in the process
of time to "Arrears Bills," and other abominations of injustice. And among those conspicuous
in the West, who were ready to seize fortune by the forelock, was Mr. Pat Carroll. In this
way his name had come forward, and inquiries were made of Mr. Jones which distressed him much.
For though he was ready to sacrifice his meadows, and his tenant, and his rent, he was most
unwilling to do it if he should be called upon at the same time to sacrifice his boy's character
for loyalty.

There had been a man stationed at Castlerea for some months past, who in celebrity had almost
beaten the notorious Pat Carroll. This was one Captain Yorke Clayton, who for nearly twelve
months had been in the County Mayo. It was supposed that he had first shown himself there as
a constabulary officer, and had then very suddenly been appointed resident magistrate. Why
he was Captain nobody knew. It was the fact, indeed, that he had been employed as adjutant
in a volunteer regiment in England, having gone over there from the police force in the north
of Ireland. His title had gone with him by no fault or no virtue of his own, and he had blossomed
forth to the world of Connaught as Captain Clayton before he knew why he was about to become
famous. Famous, however, he did become.

He had two attributes which, if Fortune helps, may serve to make any man famous. They were
recklessness of life and devotion to an idea. If Fortune do not help, recklessness of life
amidst such dangers as those which surrounded Captain Clayton will soon bring a man to his
end, so that there will be no question of fame. But we see men occasionally who seem to find
it impossible to encounter death. It is not at all probable that this man wished to die. Life
seemed to him to be pleasant enough: he was no forlorn lover; he had fairly good health and
strength; people said of him that he had small but comfortable private means; he was remarkable
among all men for his good looks; and he lacked nothing necessary to make life happy. But he
appeared to be always in a hurry to leave it. A hundred men in Mayo had sworn that he should
die. This was told to him very freely; but he had only laughed at it, and was generally called
"the woodcock," as he rode about among his daily employments. The ordinary life of a woodcock
calls upon him to be shot at; but yet a woodcock is not an easy bird to hit.

Then there was his devotion to an idea! I will not call it loyalty, lest I should seem to praise
the man too vehemently for that which probably was simply an instinct in his own heart. He
lived upon his hatred of a Landleaguer. It was probably some conviction on his own part that
the original Landleaguer had come from New York, which produced this feeling. And it must be
acknowledged of him with reference to the lower order of Landleaguers that he did admit in
his mind a possibility that they were curable. There were to him Landleaguers and Landleaguers;
but the Landleaguer whom Captain Yorke Clayton hated with the bitterest prejudice was the Landleaguing
Member of Parliament. Some of his worst enemies believed that he might be detected in breaking
out into illegal expressions of hatred, or, more unfortunately still, into illegal acts, and
that so the Government might be compelled to dismiss him with disgrace. Others, his warmest
friends, hoped that by such a process his life might be eventually saved. But for the present
Captain Yorke Clayton had saved both his character and his neck, to the great surprise both
of those who loved him and the reverse. He had lately been appointed Joint Resident Magistrate
for Galway, Mayo, and Roscommon, and had removed his residence to Galway. To him also had Pat
Carroll become intimately known, and to him the floods of Ballintubber were a peculiar case.
It was one great desire of his heart to have Pat Carroll incarcerated as a penal felon. He
did not very often express himself on this subject, but Pat Carroll knew well the nature of
his wishes. "A thundering bloody rapparee" was the name by which Carroll delighted to call
him. But Carroll was one who exercised none of that control over his own tongue for which Captain
Clayton was said to be so conspicuous. During the last month Mr. Jones had seen Captain Clayton
more than once at Galway, and on one occasion he had come down to Morony Castle attended by
a man who was supposed to travel as his servant, but who was known by all the world to be a
policeman in disguise. For Captain Clayton had been strictly forbidden by the authorities of
the Castle to travel without such a companion; and an attempt had already been made to have
him dismissed for disobedience to these orders.

Captain Clayton, when he had been at Morony Castle, had treated Flory with great kindness,
declining to cross-question him at all. "I would endeavour to save him from these gentlemen,"
he had said to his father. "I don't quite think that we understand what is going on within
his mind;" but this had been before the conversation last mentioned which had taken place between
Flory and his sisters. Now he was to come again, and make further inquiry, and meet half-a-dozen
policemen from the neighbourhood. But Florian had as yet but half confessed, and almost hoped
that Captain Clayton would appear among them as his friend.

The girls, to tell the truth, had been much taken with the appearance of the gallant Captain.
It seems to be almost a shame to tell the truth of what modest girls may think of any man whom
they may chance to meet. They would never tell it to themselves. Even two sisters can hardly
do so. And when the man comes before them, just for once or twice, to be judged and thought
of at a single interview, the girl,--such as were these girls,--can hardly tell it to herself.
"He is manly and brave, and has so much to say for himself, and is so good-looking, that what
can any girl who has her heart at her own disposal wish for better than such a lover?" It would
have been quite impossible that either of Mr. Jones's daughters could ever have so whispered
to herself. But was it not natural that such an unwhispered thought should have passed through
the mind of Ada--Ada the beautiful, Ada the sentimental, Ada the young lady who certainly was
in want of a lover? "He is very nice, certainly," said Ada, allowing herself not another word,
to her sister.

"But what is the good of a man being nice when he is a 'woodcock'?" said Edith. "Everybody
says that his destiny is before him. I daresay he is nice, but what's the use?"

"You don't mean to say that you think he'll be killed?" said Ada.

"I do, and I mean to say that if I were a man, it might be that I should have to be killed
too. A man has to run his chance, and if he falls into such a position as this, of course he
must put up with it. I don't mean to say that I don't like him the better for it."

"Why does he not go away and leave the horrid country?" said Ada.

"Because the more brave men that go away the more horrid the country will become. And then
I think a man is always the happier if he has something really to think of. Such a one as Captain
Clayton does not want to go to balls."

"I suppose not," said Ada plaintively, as though she thought it a thousand pities that Captain
Clayton should not want to go to balls.

"Such a man," said Edith with an air of firmness, "finds a woman when he wants to marry, who
will suit him,--and then he marries her. There is no necessity for any balls there."

"Then he ought not to dance at all. Such a man ought not to want to get married."

"Not if he means to be killed out of hand," said Edith. "The possible young woman must be left
to judge of that. I shouldn't like to marry a 'woodcock,' however much I might admire him.
I do think it well that there should be such men as Captain Clayton. I feel that if I were
a man I ought to wish to be one myself. But I am sure I should feel that I oughtn't to ask
a girl to share the world with me. Fancy marrying a man merely to be left a sorrowing widow!
It is part of the horror of his business that he shouldn't even venture to dance, lest some
poor female should be captivated."

"A girl might be captivated without dancing," said Ada.

"I don't mean to say that such a man should absolutely tie himself up in a bag so that no poor
female should run any possible danger, but he oughtn't to encourage such risks. To tell the
truth, I don't think that Captain Clayton does."

Ada that afternoon thought a great deal of the position,--not, of course, in reference to herself.
Was it proper that such a man as Captain Yorke Clayton should abstain from falling in love
with a girl, or even from allowing a girl to fall in love with him because he was in danger
of being shot? It was certainly a difficult question. Was any man to be debarred from the pleasures,
and incidents, and natural excitements of a man's life because of the possible dangers which
might possibly happen to a possible young woman? Looking at the matter all round, Ada did not
see that the man could help himself unless he were to be shut up in a bag, as Edith had said,
so as to prevent a young woman from falling in love with him. Although he were a "woodcock,"
the thing must go on in its own natural course. If misfortunes did come, why misfortunes must
come. It was the same thing with any soldier or any sailor. If she were to fall in love with
some officer,--for the supposition in its vague, undefined form was admissible even to poor
Ada's imagination,--she would not be debarred from marrying him merely by the fact that he
would have to go to the wars. Of course, as regarded Captain Yorke Clayton, this was merely
a speculation. He might be engaged to some other girl already for anything she knew;--"or cared,"
as she told herself with more or less of truth.

Captain Yorke Clayton came down by the boat that afternoon to Morony Castle, Frank Jones having
started for London two or three days before. He reached the pier at about four o'clock, accompanied
by his faithful follower, and was there met by Mr. Jones himself, who walked up with him to
the Castle. There was a short cut across the fields to Mr. Jones's house; and as they left
the road about a furlong up from the pier, they were surrounded by the waters which Mr. Carroll
had let in upon the Ballintubber meadows.

"You won't mind my fellow coming with us?" said Captain Clayton.

"'Your fellow,' as you call him, is more than welcome. I came across this way because some
of Pat Carroll's friends may be out on the high road. If they fire half-a-dozen rifles from
behind a wall at your luggage, they won't do so much harm as if they shot at yourself."

"There won't be any shooting here," said Clayton, shaking his head, "he's not had time to get
a stranger down and pay him. They always require two or three days' notice for that work; and
there isn't a wall about the place. You're not giving Mr. Pat Carroll a fair chance for his
friends. I could dodge them always with perfect security by myself, only the beaks up in Dublin
have given a strict order. As they pay for the pistols, I am bound to carry them." Then he
lifted up the lappets of his coat and waistcoat, and showed half-a-dozen pistols stuck into
his girdle. "Our friend there has got as many more."

"I have a couple myself," said Mr. Jones, indicating their whereabouts, and showing that he
was not as yet so used to carry them, as to have provided himself with a belt for the purpose.

Then they walked on, chatting indifferently about the Landleaguers till they reached the Castle.
"The people are not cowards," Captain Clayton had said. "I believe that men do become cowards
when they are tempted to become liars by getting into Parliament. An Irishman of a certain
class does at any rate. But those fellows, if they were put into a regiment, would fight like
grim death. That man there," and he pointed back over his shoulder, "is as brave a fellow as
I ever came across in my life. I don't think that he would hesitate a moment in attacking three
or four men armed with revolvers. And gold wouldn't induce him to be false to me. But if Mr.
Pat Carroll had by chance got hold of him before he had come my way, he might have been the
very man to shoot you or me from behind a wall, with a bit of black crape on his face. What's
the reason of it? I love that man as my brother, but I might have hated him as the very devil."

"The force of example, sir," said Mr. Jones, as he led the way into the quiet, modern residence
which rejoiced to call itself Morony Castle.

"What are we to do about this boy?" said Mr. Jones, when they had seated themselves in his study.

"Are you friends with him yet?"

"No; I declared to his sisters that I would not sit down to table with him till he had told
the truth, and I have kept my word."

"How does he bear it?"

"But badly," said the father. "It has told upon him very much. He complains to his sister that
I have utterly cast him off."

"It is the oddest case I ever heard of in my life," said the Captain. "I suppose his change
of religion has been at the bottom of it--that and the machinations of the priest down at Headford.
When we recollect that there must have been quite a crowd of people looking on all the while,
it does seem odd that we should be unable to get a single witness to tell the truth, knowing,
as we do, that this lad was there. If he would only name two who were certainly there, and
who certainly saw the deed done, that would be enough; for the people are not, in themselves,
hostile to you."

"You know he has owned that he did see it," said the father. "And he has acknowledged that
Pat Carroll was there, though he has never mentioned the man's name. His sisters have told
him that I will not be satisfied unless I hear him declare that Pat Carroll was one of the
offenders."

"Let us have him in, sir, if you don't mind."

"Just as he is?"

"I should say so. Or let the young ladies come with him, if you do not object. Which of them
has been most with him since your edict went forth?"

Mr. Jones declared that Edith had been most with her brother, and the order went forth that
Edith and Florian should be summoned into the apartment.

Ada and Edith were together when the order came. Edith was to go down and present herself before
Captain Yorke Clayton.

"Mercy me!" said Edith jumping up, "I hope they won't shoot at him through the window whilst
I am there."

"Oh! Edith, how can you think of such a thing?"

"It would be very unpleasant if some assassin were to take my back hair for Captain Clayton's
brown head. They're very nearly the same colour."

And Edith prepared to leave the room, hearing her brother's slow, heavy step as he passed before
the door.

"Won't you go first and brush your hair?" said Ada; "and do put a ribbon on your neck."

"I'll do nothing of the kind. It would be a sheer manoeuvring to entrap a man who ought to
be safeguarded against all such female wiles. Besides, I don't believe a bit that Captain Clayton
would know the difference between a young lady with or without a ribbon. What evidence I can
give;--that's the question."

So saying, Edith descended to her father's room.

She found Florian with his hand upon the door, and they both entered the room. I have said
that Captain Clayton was a remarkably good-looking man, and I ought, perhaps, to give some
explanation of the term when first introducing him to the reader in the presence of a lady
who is intended to become the heroine of this story; but it must suffice that I have declared
him to be good-looking, and that I add to that the fact that though he was thirty-five years
old, he did not look to be more than five-and-twenty. The two peculiarities of his face were
very light blue eyes, and very long moustachios. "Florian and I have come to see the latter-day
hero," said Edith laughing as she entered the room; "though I know that you are so done up
with pistols that no peaceable young woman ought to come near you." To this he made some sportive
reply, and then before a minute had passed over their heads he had taken Florian by the hand.

CHAPTER XVI.

CAPTAIN CLAYTON COMES TO THE CASTLE.

"Well, my boy, how are you?" asked the Captain.

"There's nothing particularly the matter with me," said Florian.

"I suppose all this is troubling you?"

"All what? You mean about Pat Carroll. Of course it's troubling me. Nobody will believe a word
that I say."

"But they do believe you now that you are telling the truth," said Edith.

"Do you hold your tongue, miss," said the boy, "I don't see why you should have so much to
say about it."

"She has been your best friend from first to last," said the father. "If it had not been for
Edith I would have turned you out of the house. It is terrible to me to think that a boy of
mine should refuse to say what he saw in such a matter as this. You are putting yourself on
a par with the enemies of your own family. You do not know it, but you are nearly sending me
to the grave." Then there was a long pause, during which the Captain kept his eyes fixed on
the boy's face. And Edith had moved round so as to seat herself close to her brother, and had
taken his hand in hers.

"Don't, Edith," said the boy. "Leave me alone, I don't want to be meddled with," and he withdrew
his hand.

"Oh, Florian!" said the girl, "try to tell the truth and be a gentleman, whether it be for
you or against you, tell the truth."

"I'm not to mind a bit about my religion then?"

"Does your religion bid you tell a lie?" asked the Captain.

"I'm not telling a lie, I am just holding my tongue. A Catholic has a right to hold his tongue
when he is among Protestants."

"Even to the ruin of his father," suggested the Captain.

"I don't want to ruin papa. He said he was going to turn--to turn me out of the house. I would
go and drown myself in the lake if he did, or in one of those big dykes which divide the meadows.
I am miserable among them--quite miserable. Edith never gives me any peace, day or night. She
comes and sits in my bedroom, begging me to tell the truth. It ought to be enough when I say
that I will hold my tongue. Papa can turn me out to drown myself if he pleases. Edith goes
on cheating the words out of me till I don't know what I'm saying. If I am to be brought up
to tell it all before the judge I shan't know what I have said before, or what I have not said."

"Nil conscire tibi," said the father, who had already taught his son so much Latin as that.

"But you did see the sluice gates torn down, and thrown back into the water?" said the Captain.
Here Florian shook his head mournfully. "I understood you to acknowledge that you had seen
the gates destroyed."

"I never said as much to you," said the boy.

"But you did to me," said Edith.

"If a fellow says a word to you, it is repeated to all the world. I never would have you joined
with me in a secret. You are a great deal worse than--, well, those fellows that you abuse
me about. They never tell anything that they have heard among themselves, to people outside."

"Pat Carroll, you mean?" asked the Captain.

"He isn't the only one. There's more in it than him."

"Oh yes; we know that. There were many others in it besides Pat Carroll, when they let the
waters in through the dyke gates. There must have been twenty there."

"No, there weren't--not that I saw."

"A dozen, perhaps?"

"You are laying traps for me, but I am not going to be caught. I was there, and I did see it.
You may make the most of that. Though you have me up before the judge, I needn't say a word
more than I please."

"He is more obstinate," said his father, "than any rebel that you can meet."

"But so mistaken," said the Captain, "because he can refuse to answer us who are treating him
with such tenderness and affection, who did not even want to wound his feelings more than we
can help, he thinks that he can hold his peace in the same fashion, before the entire court;
and that he can do so, although he has owned that he knows the men."

"I have never owned that," said the boy.

"Not to your sister?"

"I only owned to one."

"Pat Carroll?" said the Captain; but giving the name merely as a hint to help the boy's memory.

But the boy was too sharp for him. "That's another of your traps, Captain Clayton. If she says
Pat Carroll, I can say it was Tim Brady. A boy's word will be as good as a girl's, I suppose."

"A lie can never be as good as the truth, whether from a boy or a girl," said the Captain,
endeavouring to look him through and through. The boy quavered beneath his gaze, and the Captain
went on with his questioning. "I suppose we may take it for granted that Pat Carroll was there,
and that you did see him?"

"You may take anything for granted."

"You would have to swear before a jury that Pat Carroll was there."

Then there was another pause, but at last, with a long sigh, the boy spoke out. "He was there,
and I did see him." Then he burst into tears and threw himself down on the ground, and hid
his face in his sister's lap.

"Dear Flory," said she. "My own brother! I knew that you would struggle to be a gentleman at last."

"It will all come right with him now," said the Captain. But the father frowned and shook his
head. "How many were there with him?" asked the Captain, intent on the main business.

But Florian feeling that it would be as good to be hung for a sheep as a lamb, and feeling
also that he had at last cast aside all the bonds which bound him to Pat Carroll and Father
Brosnan,--feeling that there was nothing left for him but the internecine enmity of his old
friends,--got up from the floor, and wiping away the tears from his face, spoke out boldly
the whole truth as he knew it. "It was dark, and I didn't see them all. There were only six
whom I could see, though I know that there were many others round about among the meadows whose
names I had heard, though I do not remember them."

"We will confine ourselves to the six whom you did see," said the Captain, preparing to listen
quietly to the boy's story. The father took out a pen and ink, but soon pushed it on one side.
Edith again got hold of the boy's hand, and held it within her own till his story was finished.

"I didn't see the six all at once. The first whom I did see was Pat Carroll, and his brother
Terry, and Tim Brady. They were up there just where the lane has turned down from the steamboat
road. I had gone down to the big sluice gates before anyone had noticed me, and there were
Tim and Terry smashing away at the gate hinges, up to their middles in mud; and Pat Carroll
was handing them down a big crowbar. Terry, when he saw me, fell flat forward into the water,
and had to be picked out again."

"Did they say anything to threaten you?" said the Captain.

"Tim Brady said that I was all right, and was a great friend of Father Brosnan's. Then they
whispered together, and I heard Terry say that he wouldn't go against anything that Father
Brosnan might say. Then Pat Carroll came and stood over me with the crowbar."

"Did he threaten you?"

"He didn't do it in a threatening way; but only asked me to be hand and glove with them."

"Had you been intimate with this man before? asked the Captain.

"He had been very intimate with him," said the father. "All this calamity has come of his intimacy.
He has changed his religion and ceased to be a gentleman." Here the boy again sobbed, but Edith
still squeezed his hand.

"What did you say?" asked the Captain, "when he bade you be hand and glove with him?"

"I said that I would. Then they made the sign of a cross, and swore me on it. And they swore
me specially to say nothing up here. And they swore me again when they met down at Tim Rafferty's
house in Headford. I intended to keep my word, and I think that you ought to have let me keep it."

"But there were three others whom you saw," urged the Captain.

"There was Con Heffernan, and a man they call Lax, who had come from Lough Conn beyond Castlebar."

"He's not a man of this county."

"I think not, though I had seen him here before. He has had something to do with the Landleaguers
up about Foxford."

"I think I have a speaking acquaintance with that Mr. Lax," said the Captain; and everybody
could perceive that the tone of his voice was altered as he spoke about Mr. Lax. "And who was
the sixth?"

"There was that old man, papa, whom they call Terry. But he wasn't doing anything in particular."

"He is the greatest blackguard on the estate," said the father.

"But we will confine ourselves to the five," said the Captain, "not forgetting Mr. Lax. What
was Mr. Lax doing?"

"I can't remember what they were all doing. How is a fellow to remember them all? There were
those two at the hinges, and Pat Carroll was there pulling his brother out of the water."

"Terry was Pat's brother?"

"They are brothers," said the father.

"And then they went on, and took no notice of me for a time. Lax came up and scowled at me,
and told me that if a word was said I should never draw the breath of life again."

"But he didn't do anything?" asked the Captain.

"I don't remember. How is a fellow to remember after so many months?"

"Why didn't you tell the truth at the time?" said his father angrily. Another tear stood in
each of the poor boy's eyes, and Edith got closer to him, and threw her left arm round his
waist. "You are spoiling him by being so soft with him," said the father.

"He is doing the best he can, Mr. Jones," said the Captain. "Don't be harsh with him now. Well,
Florian, what came next?"

"They bade me go away, and again made me swear another oath. It was nearly dark then, and it
was quite dark night before I got up to the house. But before I went I saw that there were
many others standing idle about the place."

"Do you remember any particularly?"

"Well, there was another of the Carrolls, a nephew of Pat's; and there was Tony Brady, Tim's
brother. I can't at this moment say who else there were."

"It would be as well to have as many as we do know, not to prosecute them, but to ask them
for their evidence. Three or four men will often contradict each other, and then they will
break down. I think we have enough now. But you must remember that I have only questioned you
as your friend and as your father's friend. I have not taken down a word that you have said.
My object has been simply that we might all act together to punish a vindictive and infamous
outrage. Pat Carroll has had nothing to get by flooding your father's meadows. But because
your father has not chosen to forgive him his rent, he has thought fit to do him all the injury
in his power. I fear that there are others in it, who are more to blame even than Pat Carroll.
But if we can get hold of this gentleman, and also of his friend Mr. Lax, we shall have done much."

Then the meeting was over for that evening, and Captain Clayton retired to his own room. "You
needn't mind following me here, Hunter," he said to the policeman.

"I wouldn't be too sure, sir."

"You may be sure in Mr. Jones's house. And no one in the country has any idea of committing
murder on his own behalf. I am safe till they would have had time to send for someone out of
another county. But we shall be back in Galway to-morrow." So saying, Hunter left his master
alone, and the Captain sat down to write an account of the scene which had just taken place.
In this he gave every name as the boy had given it, with accuracy; but, nevertheless, he added
to his little story the fact that it had been related from memory.

Edith took her brother away into her own room, and there covered him with kisses. "Why is papa
so hard to me?" said the boy sobbing. Then she explained to him as gently as she could, the
grounds which had existed for hardness on his father's part. She bade him consider how terrible
a thing it must be to a father, to have to think that his own son should have turned against
him, while the country was in such a condition.

"It is not the flood, Flory, nor the loss of the meadows being under water. It is not the injury
that Pat Carroll has done him, or any of the men whom Pat Carroll has talked into enmity. That,
indeed, is very dreadful. To these very men he has been their best friend for many years. And
now they would help in his ruin, and turn us and him out as beggars upon the world, because
he has not chosen to obey the unjust bidding of one of them." Here the boy hung down his head,
and turned away his face. "But it is not that. All that has had no effect in nigh breaking
his heart. Money is but money. No one can bear its loss better than our papa. Though he might
have to starve, he would starve like a gallant man; and we could starve with him. You and I,
Frank and Ada, would bear all that he could bear. But--" The boy looked up into her face again,
as though imploring her to spare him, but she went on with her speech. "But that a son of his
should cease to feel as a gentleman should feel,--and a Christian! It is that which moves him
to be hard, as you call it. But he is not hard; he is a man, and he cannot kiss you as a woman
does;--as your sister does;" here she almost smothered the boy with kisses, "but, Florian,
it is not too late; it is never too late while you still see that truth is godlike, and that
a lie is of all things the most devilish. It is never too late while you feel what duty calls
you to do." And again she covered him with kisses, and then allowed him to go away to his own room.

When Edith was alone she sat back in an easy-chair, with her feet on the fender before the
turf fire, and began to consider how things might go with her poor brother. "If they should
get hold of him, and murder him!" she said to herself. The thought was very dreadful, but she
comforted herself with reflecting that he might be sent out of the country, before the knowledge
of what he had done should get abroad. And then by means of that current of thought, which
always runs where it listeth, independent of the will of the thinker, her ideas flew off to
Captain Yorke Clayton. In her imagination she had put down Captain Clayton as a possible lover
for her sister. She possessed a girlish intuition into her sister's mind which made her feel
that her sister would not dislike such an arrangement. Ada was the beauty of the family, and
was supposed, at any rate by Edith, to be the most susceptible of the two sisters. She had
always called herself a violent old maid, who was determined to have her own way. But no one
had ever heard Ada speak of herself as an old maid. And then as to that danger of which Ada
had spoken, Edith knew that such perils must be overlooked altogether among the incidents of
life. If it came to her would she refuse her hand to a man because his courage led him into
special perils? She knew that it would only be an additional ground for her love. And of Ada,
in that respect, she judged as she did of herself. She knew that Ada thought much of manly
beauty, and her eyes told her that Captain Yorke Clayton was very handsome. "If he were as
black as Beelzebub," she said to herself, "I should like him the better for it; but Ada would
prefer a man to be beautiful." She went to work to make a match in her own mind between Ada
and Captain Clayton; but the more she made it, the more she continued to think--on her own
behalf--that of all men she had ever seen, this man had pleased her fancy most. "But Captain
Yorke Clayton, you were never more mistaken in all your life if you think that Edith Jones
has taken a fancy to your handsome physiognomy." This she said in almost audible words. "But
nevertheless, I do think that you are a hero. For myself, I don't want a hero--and if I did,
I shouldn't get one." But the arrangements made in the house that night were those which are
customary for a favoured young man's reception when such matters are left to the favouring
young lady in the family.

When Mr. Jones found himself alone in his study, he began to think of the confession which
Florian had made. It had gradually come to pass that he had been sure of the truth for some
months, though he had never before heard it declared by his son's lips. Since the day on which
he had called on Mr. Blake at Carnlough, he had been quite sure that Edith was right. He was
almost sure before. Now the truth was declared exactly as she had surmised it. And what should
he do with the boy? He could not merely put him forward as a witness in this case. Some reason
must be given, why the truth had not been told during the last six months. As he thought of
this, he felt that the boy had disgraced himself for ever.

And he thought of the boy's danger. He had rashly promised that the boy should be sent to England
out of harm's way; but he now told himself that the means of doing so were further from him
than ever; and that he was daily becoming a poorer, if not a ruined man. Of the rents then
due to him, not a penny would, he feared, be paid.

      *      *      *      *      *

THE LANDLEAGUERS

by

ANTHONY TROLLOPE

In Three Volumes--VOL. II. RACHEL IS FREE.
    XVIII. FRANK JONES HAS CEASED TO EXIST.
      XIX. FIFTH AVENUE AND NEWPORT.
       XX. BOYCOTTING.
      XXI. LAX, THE MURDERER.
     XXII. MORONY CASTLE IS BOYCOTTED.
    XXIII. TOM DALY IS BOYCOTTED.
     XXIV. "FROM THE FULL HEART THE MOUTH SPEAKS."
      XXV. THE GALWAY BALL.
     XXVI. LORD CASTLEWELL.
    XXVII. HOW FUNDS WERE PROVIDED.
   XXVIII. WHAT WAS NOT DONE WITH THE FUNDS.
     XXIX. WHAT WAS DONE WITH THE FUNDS.
      XXX. THE ROAD TO BALLYGLUNIN.
     XXXI. THE GALWAY COURT HOUSE.
    XXXII. MR. O'MAHONY AS MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.

THE LANDLEAGUERS.

CHAPTER XVII.

RACHEL IS FREE.

Rachel O'Mahony found her position to be very embarrassing. She had thought it out to the best
of her ability, and had told herself that it would be better for her not to acquaint her father
with all the circumstances. Had he been told the nature of the offer made to her by Madame
Socani, he would at once, she thought, have taken her away from the theatre. She would have
to abandon the theatre, at which she was earning her money. This would have been very bad.
There would have been some lawsuit with Mahomet Moss, as to which she could not have defended
herself by putting Madame Socani into the witness-box. There had been no third person present,
and any possible amount of lying would have been very easy to Madame Socani. Rachel was quick
enough, and could see at a moment all that lying could do against her. "But he tried to kiss
me," she would have had to say. Then she could see how, with a shrug of his shoulders, her
enemy would have ruined her. From such a contest a man like Moss comes forth without even a
scratch that can injure him. But Rachel felt that she would have been utterly annihilated.
She must tell someone, but that someone must be he whom she intended to marry.

And she, too, had not been quite prudent in all respects since she had come to London. It had
been whispered to her that a singer of such pretensions should be brought to the theatre and
carried home in her private brougham. Therefore, she had spent more money than was compatible
with the assistance given to her father, and was something in debt. It was indispensable to
her that she should go on with her engagement.

But she told her father that it was absolutely necessary that he should go with her to the
theatre every night that she sang. It was but three nights a week, and the hours of her work
were only from eight till ten. He had, however, unfortunately made another engagement for himself.
There was a debating society, dramatic in its manner of carrying on its business, at which
three or four Irish Home-Rulers were accustomed to argue among themselves, before a mixed audience
of Englishmen and Irishmen, as to the futility of English government. Here Mr. O'Mahony was
popular among the debaters, and was paid for his services. Not many knew that the eloquent
Irishman was the father of the singer who, in truth, was achieving for herself a grand reputation.
But such was the case. A stop had been put upon his lecturings at Galway; but no policeman
in London seemed to be aware that the Galway incendiary and the London debater were one and
the same person. So there came to him an opening for picking up a few pounds towards their
joint expenses.

"But why should you want me now, more than for the last fortnight?" he said, contending for
the use of his own time.

"Mr. Moss is disagreeable."

"Has he done anything new?" he asked.

"He is always doing things new--that is more beastly--one day than the day before."

"He doesn't come and sing with you now at your own rooms."

"No; I have got through that, thank Heaven! To tell the truth, father, I am not in the least
afraid of Mr. Moss. Before he should touch me you may be sure that he would have the worst of it."

"Of course I will do what you want," said her father; "but only if it be not necessary--"

"It is necessary. Of course, I do not wish to be dragged up to the police-court for sticking
Mr. Moss in the abdomen. That's what it would come to if we were left together."

"Do you mean to say that you require my presence to prevent anything so disagreeable as that?"

"If they know, or if he knows that you're in the house, there will be nothing of the kind.
Can't you arrange your debates for the other nights?"

So it was, in fact, settled. Everybody about the theatre seemed to be aware that something
was wrong. Mr. O'Mahony had not come back to be constantly on the watch, like a Newfoundland
dog, without an object. To himself it was an intolerable nuisance. He suspected his daughter
not at all. He was so far from suspecting her that he imagined her to be safe, though half-a-dozen
Mosses should surround her. He could only stand idle behind the scenes, or sit in her dressing-room
and yawn. But still he did it, and asked no further questions.

Then while all this was going on, the polite old gentleman from Covent Garden had called at
her lodgings in Cecil Street, and had found both her and her father at home.

"Oh, M. Le Gros," she had said, "I am so glad that you should meet my father here."

Then there was a multiplicity of bowing, and M. Le Gros had declared that he had never had
so much honour done him as in being introduced to him who was about to become the father of
the undoubted prima donna of the day. At all which Mr. O'Mahony made many bows, and Rachel
laughed very heartily; but in the end an engagement was proposed and thankfully accepted, which
was to commence in the next October. It did not take two minutes in the making. It was an engagement
only for a couple of months; but, as M. Le Gros observed, such an engagement would undoubtedly
lead to one for all time. If Covent Garden could only secure the permanent aid of Mademoiselle
O'Mahony, Covent Garden's fortune would be as good as made. M. Le Gros had quite felt the dishonesty
of even suggesting a longer engagement to mademoiselle. The rate of payment would be very much
higher, ve-ry, ve-ry, ve-ry much higher when mademoiselle's voice should have once been heard
on the boards of a true operatic theatre. M. Le Gros had done himself the honour of being present
on one or two occasions at the Charing Cross little playhouse. He did believe himself to have
some small critical judgment in musical matters. He thought he might venture--he really did
think that he might venture--to bespeak a brilliant career for mademoiselle. Then, with a great
many more bowings and scrapings, M. Le Gros, having done his business, took his leave.

"I like him better than Mahomet M.," said Rachel to her father.

"They're both very civil," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"One has all the courtesy of hell! With the other it is--well, not quite the manners of heaven.
I can imagine something brighter even than M. Le Gros; but it does very well for earth. M.
Le Gros knows that a young woman should be treated as a human being; and even his blandishments
are pleasant enough, as they are to take the shape of golden guineas. As for me, M. Le Gros
is quite good enough for my idea of this world."

But on the next day, a misfortune took place which well-nigh obliterated all the joy which
M. Le Gros had produced. It was not singing night, and Mr. O'Mahony had just taken up his hat
to go away to his debating society, when Frank Jones was announced. "Frank, what on earth did
you come here for?" These were the words with which the lover was greeted. He had endeavoured
to take the girl in his arms, but she had receded from his embrace.

"Why, Rachel!" he exclaimed.

"I told you not to come. I told you especially that you were not to come."

"Why did you tell him so?" said Mr. O'Mahony; "and why has he come?"

"Not one kiss, Rachel?" said the lover.

"Oh, kisses, yes! If I didn't kiss you father would think that we had already quarrelled. But
it may be that we must do so. When I had told you everything, that you should rush up to London
to look after me--as though you suspected me!"

"What is there to suspect?" said the father.

"Nothing--I suspect nothing," said Frank. "But there were things which made it impossible that
I should not wish to be nearer. She was insulted."

"Who insulted her?"

"The devil in the shape of a woman," said Rachel. "He takes that shape as often as the other."

"Rachel should not be left in such hands," said Frank.

"My dear Mr. Jones, you have no right to say in what hands I shall be left. My father and I
have got to look after that between us. I have told you over and over again what are my intentions
in the matter. They have been made in utter disregard of myself, and with the most perfect
confidence in you. You tell me that you cannot marry me."

"Not quite at present."

"Very well; I have been satisfied to remain as engaged to you; but I am not satisfied to be
subject to your interference."

"Interference!" he said.

"Well now; I'm going." This came from Mr. O'Mahony. "I've got to see if I can earn a few shillings,
and tell a few truths. I will leave you to fight out your battles among you."

"There will be no battles," said Frank.

"I hope not, but I feel that I can do no good. I have such absolute trust in Rachel, that you
may be quite sure that I shall back her up in whatever she says. Now, good-night," and with
that he took his leave.

"I am glad he has gone, because he would do us no good," said Rachel. "You were angry with
me just now because I spoke of interference. I meant it. I will not admit of any interference
from you." Then she sat with her two hands on her knees, looking him full in the face. "I love
you with all my heart, and am ready to tell everyone that I am to become your wife. They have
a joke about it in the theatre calling me Mrs. Jones; and because nobody believes what anybody
says they think you're a myth. I suppose it is queer that a singing girl should marry Mr. Jones.
I'm to go in the autumn to Covent Garden, and get ever so much more money, and I shall still
talk about Mr. Jones,--unless you and I agree to break it off."

"Certainly not that," said he.

"But it is by no means certain. Will you go back to Ireland to-morrow morning, and undertake
not to see me again, until you come prepared to marry me? If not we must break it off."

"I can hardly do that"

"Then," said she, rising from her chair, "it is broken off, and I will not call myself Mrs.
Jones any more." He too rose from his chair, and frowned at her by way of an answer. "I have
one other suggestion to make," she said. "I shall receive next October what will be quite sufficient
for both of us, and for father too. Come and bear the rough and the smooth together with us."

"And live upon you?"

"I should live upon you without scruple if you had got it. And then I shall bear your interference
without a word of complaint. Nay, I shall thank you for it. I shall come to you for advice
in everything. What you say will be my law. You shall knock down all the Mosses for me;--or
lock them up, which would be so much better. But you must be my husband."

"Not yet. You should not ask me as yet. Think of my father's position. Let this one sad year
pass by."

"Two--three, if there are to be two or three sad years! I will wait for you till you are as
grey as old Peter, and I have not a note left in my throat. I will stick to you like beeswax.
But I will not have you here hanging about me. Do you think that it would not be pleasant for
me to have a lover to congratulate me every day on my little triumphs? Do you think that I
should not be proud to be seen leaning always on your arm, with the consciousness that Mr.
Moss would be annihilated at his very first word? But when a year had passed by, where should
I be? No, Frank, it will not do. If you were at Morony Castle things would go on very well.
As you choose to assume to yourself the right of interference, we must part."

"When you tell me of such a proposition as that made to you by the woman, am I to say nothing?"

"Not a word;--unless it be by letter from Morony Castle, and then only to me. I will not have
you here meddling with my affairs. I told you, though I didn't tell my father, because I would
tell you everything."

"And I am to leave you,--without another word?"

"Yes, without another word. And remember that from this moment I am free to marry any man that
may come the way."

"Rachel!"

"I am free to marry any man that may come the way. I don't say I shall do so. It may take me
some little time to forget you. But I am free. When that has been understood between us I am
sure you will interfere no longer; you will not be so unkind as to force upon me the necessity
of telling the truth to all the people about the theatre. Let us understand each other."

"I understand," said he, with the air of a much injured man.

"I quite know your position. Trusting to your own prospects, you cannot marry me at present,
and you do not choose to accept such income as I can give you. I respect and even approve your
motives. I am living a life before the public as a singer, in which it is necessary that I
should encounter certain dangers. I can do so without fear, if I be left alone. You won't leave
me alone. You won't marry me, and yet you won't leave me to my own devices;--therefore, we
had better part." He took her by the hand sorrowfully, as though preparing to embrace her.
"No, Mr. Jones," she said, "that is all done. I kissed you when my father was here, because
I was then engaged to be your wife. That is over now, and I can only say good-bye." So saying,
she retired, leaving him standing there in her sitting-room.

He remained for awhile meditating on his position, till he began to think that it would be
useless for him to remain there. She certainly would not come down; and he, though he were
to wait for her father's return, would get no more favourable reply from him. He, as he had
promised, would certainly "back up" his daughter in all that she had said. As he went down
out of the room with that feeling of insult which clings to a man when he has been forced to
quit a house without any farewell ceremony, he certainly did feel that he had been ill-used.
But he could not but acknowledge that she was justified. There was a certain imperiousness
about her which wounded his feelings as a man. He ought to have been allowed to be dominant.
But then he knew that he could not live upon her income. His father would not speak to him
had he gone back to Morony Castle expressing his intention of doing so.

CHAPTER XVIII.

FRANK JONES HAS CEASED TO EXIST.

To tell the truth, Rachel had a thorough good cry before she went to bed that night. Though
there was something hard, fixed, imperious, almost manlike about her manner, still she was
as soft-hearted as any other girl. We may best describe her by saying that she was an American
and an actress. It was impossible to doubt her. No one who had once known her could believe
her to be other than she had declared herself. She was loyal, affectionate, and dutiful. But
there was missing to her a feminine weakness, which of all her gifts is the most valuable to
an English woman, till she makes the mistake of bartering it away for women's rights. We can
imagine, however, that the stanchest woman's-right lady should cry for her lost lover. And
Rachel O'Mahony cried bitterly for hers. "It had to be done," she said, jumping up at last
in her bedroom, and clenching her fist as she walked about the chamber. "It had to be done.
A girl situated as I am cannot look too close after herself. Father is more like my son than
my father; he has no idea that I want anything done for me. Nor do I want much," she said,
as she went on rapidly taking the short course of the room. "No one could say a word about
me till I brought my lover forward and showed him to the theatre. I think they did believe
him to be a myth; but a myth in that direction does no harm till he appears in the flesh. They
think that I have made an empty boast about my Mr. Jones. The ugliest girl that ever came out
may do the same thing, and nobody ever thinks anything of it. A lover in the clouds never does
any harm, and now my lover is in the clouds. I know that he has gone, and will never come to
earth again. How much better I love him because he would not take my offer. Then there would
have been a little contempt. And how could I expect him to yield to me in everything, with
this brute Moss insulting me at every turn? I do not think he had the courage to send me that
message, but still! What could I do but tell Frank? And then what could Frank do but come?
I would have come, let any girl have bade me to stay away!" Here she had imagined herself to
be the lover, and not the girl who was loved. "But it only shows that we are better apart.
He cannot marry me, and I cannot marry him. The Squire is at his wits' end with grief." By
"the Squire" Mr. Jones had been signified. "It is better as it is. Father and the Squire ought
never to have been brought together,--nor ought I and Frank. I suppose I must tell them all
at the theatre that Mr. Jones belongs to me no longer. Only if I did so, they would think that
I was holding out a lure to Mahomet M. There's papa. I'll go down and tell him all that need
be told about it." So saying she ascended to their sitting-room.

"Well, my dear, what did you do with Frank?"

"He has gone back to Ireland under the name of Mr. Jones."

"Then there was a quarrel?"

"Oh dear yes! there was safe to be a quarrel."

"Does it suit your book upon the whole?"

"Not in the least. You see before you the most wretched heroine that ever appeared on the boards
of any theatre. You may laugh, but it's true. I don't know what I've got to say to Mr. Moss
now. If he comes forward in a proper manner, and can prove to me that Madame Socani is not
Madame Mahomet M. Moss, I don't know what I can do but accept him. The Adriatic is free to
wed another." Then she walked about the room, laughing to prevent her tears.

"Did you hear anything about Castle Morony?"

"Not a word."

"Or the boy Florian?"

"Not a syllable;--though I was most anxious to ask the question. When you are intent upon any
matter, it does not do to go away to other things. I should have never made him believe that
he was to leave me in earnest, had I allowed him to talk about Florian and the girls. He has
gone now. Well;--good-night, father. You and I, father, are all in all to each other now. Not
but what somebody else will come, I suppose."

"Do you wish that somebody else should come, as you say?"

"I suppose so. Do not look so surprised, father. Girls very seldom have to say what they really
wish. I have done with him now. I had him because I really loved him,--like a fool as I was.
I have got to go in for being a singing girl. A singing woman is better than a singing girl.
If they don't have husbands, they are supposed to have lovers. I hope to have one or the other,
and I prefer the husband. Mr. Jones has gone. Who knows but what the Marquis de Carabas may
come next."

"Could you change so soon?"

"Yes;--immediately. I don't say I should love the Marquis, but I should treat him well. Don't
look so shocked, dear father. I never shall treat a man badly,--unless I stick a knife into
Mahomet M. Moss. It would be best perhaps to get a singing marquis, so that the two of us might
go walking about the world together, till we had got money enough to buy a castle. I am beginning
to believe M. Le Gros. I think I can sing. Don't you think, father, that I can sing?"

"They all say so."

"It is very good to have one about me, like you, who are not enthusiastic. But I can sing,
and I am pretty too;--pretty enough along with my singing to get some fool to care for me.
Yes; you may look astonished. Over there in Galway I was fool enough to fall in love. What
has come of it? The man tells me that he cannot marry me. And it is true. If he were to marry
me what would become of you?"

"Never mind me," said her father.

"And what would become of him; and what would become of me? And what would become of the dreadful
little impediments which might follow? Of course to me Frank Jones is the best of men. I can't
have him; and that is just all about it. I am not going to give up the world because Frank
Jones is lost. Love is not to be lord of all with me. I shall steer my little boat among the
shiny waters of the London theatres, and may perhaps venture among the waves of Paris and New
York; but I shall do so always with my eyes open. Gas is the atmosphere in which I am destined
to glitter; and if a Marquis comes in the way,--why, I shall do the best I can with the Marquis.
I won't bring you to trouble if I can help it, or anyone else with whom I have to do. So good-night,
father." Then she kissed his forehead, and went up to bed leaving him to wonder at the intricacies
of his position.

He had that night been specially eloquent and awfully indignant as to the wrongs done to Ireland
by England. He had dealt with millions of which Great Britain was supposed by him to have robbed
her poor sister. He was not a good financier, but he did in truth believe in the millions.
He had not much capacity for looking into questions of political economy, but he had great
capacity for arguing about them and for believing his own arguments. The British Parliament
was to him an abomination. He read the papers daily, and he saw that the number of votes on
his side fell from sixty to forty, and thirty, and twenty; and he found also that the twenty
were men despised by their own countrymen as well as Englishmen; that they were men trained
to play a false game in order to achieve their objects;--and yet he believed in the twenty
against all the world, and threw in his lot without a scruple and without a doubt. Nor did
he understand at all the strength of his own words. He had been silenced in Ireland and had
rigorously obeyed the pledge that he had given. For he was a man to whom personally his word
was a bond. Now he had come over to London, and being under no promise, had begun again to
use the words which came to him without an effort. As he would sweep back his long hair from
his brows, and send sparks of fire out of his eyes, he would look to be the spirit of patriotic
indignation; but he did not know that he was thus powerful. To tell the truth,--and as he had
said,--to earn a few shillings was the object of his ambition. But now, on this evening, three
London policemen in their full police uniform, with their fearful police helmets on, had appeared
in the room in which his dramatic associates had on this evening given way to Gerald O'Mahony's
eloquence. Nothing had been said to him; but as he came home he was aware that two policemen
had watched him. And he was aware also that his words had been taken down in shorthand. Then
he had encountered his daughter, and all her love troubles. He had heard her expound her views
as to life, and had listened as she had expressed her desire to meet with some Marquis de Carabas.
She had said nothing with which he could find fault; but her whole views of life were absolutely
different from his. According to his ideas, there should be no Marquises, no singing girls
making huge fortunes--only singing girls in receipt of modest sums of money; and that when
dire necessity compelled them. There should be no gorgeous theatres flaring with gas, and certainly
no policemen to take down men's words. Everything in the world was wrong,--except those twenty
Members of Parliament.

Three or four days after this, Rachel found that a report was abroad at the theatre that she
had dissolved her engagement with Mr. Jones. At this time the three policemen had already expressed
their opinion about Mr. O'Mahony; but they, for the present, may be left in obscurity. "Est-il
vrai que M. Jones n'existe plus?" These words were whispered to her, as she was dressing, by
Madame Socani, while Mr. O'Mahony had gone out to say a word to a police detective, who had
called to see him at the theatre. As Madame Socani was an American woman, there was no reason
why she should not have asked the question in English--were it not that as it referred to an
affair of love it may be thought that French was the proper language.

"Mr. Jones isn't any more, as far as I am concerned," said Rachel, passing on.

"Oh, he has gone!" said Madame Socani, following her into the slips. They were both going on
to the stage, but two minutes were allowed to them, while Mahomet M. Moss declared, in piteous
accents, the woe which awaited him because Alberta,--who was personated by Rachel,--had preferred
the rustic Trullo to him who was by birth a Prince of the Empire.

"Yes, Mr. Jones has gone, Madame,--as you are so anxious to know."

"But why? Can it be that there was no Mr. Jones?" Then Rachel flashed round upon the woman.
"I suppose there was no Mr. Jones?"

"O, mio tesor." These last three words were sung in a delicious contralto voice by Elmira,--the
Madame Socani of the occasion,--and were addressed to the Prince of the Empire, who, for the
last six weeks, had been neglecting her charms. Rachel was furious at the attack made upon
her, but in the midst of her fury she rushed on to the stage, and kneeling at the feet of Elmira,
declared her purpose of surrendering the Prince altogether. The rustic Trullo was quite sufficient
for her. "Go, fond girl. Trullo is there, tying up the odoriferous rose." Then they all four
broke out into that grand quartette, in the performance of which M. Le Gros had formed that
opinion which had induced him to hold out such golden hopes to Rachel. Rachel looked up during
one of her grand shakes and saw Frank Jones seated far back among the boxes. "Oh, he hasn't
left London yet," she said to herself, as she prepared for another shake.

"Your papa desires me to say with his kindest love, that he has had to leave the theatre."
This came from Mr. Moss when the piece was ended.

He was dressed as princes of the empire generally do dress on the stage, and she as the daughter
of the keeper of the king's garden.

"So they tell me; very well. I will go home. I suppose he has had business."

"A policeman I fear. Some little pecuniary embarrassment." A rumour had got about the theatre
that Mr. O'Mahony was overwhelmed with money difficulties. Mr. Moss had probably overheard
the rumour.

"I don't believe that at all. It's something political, more likely."

"Very likely, I don't know, I will see you to your house." And Mahomet M. looked as though
he were going to jump into the brougham in the garments of the imperial prince.

"Mr. Moss, I can go very well alone;" and she turned round upon him and stood in the doorway
so as to oppose his coming out, and frowned upon him with that look of anger which she knew
so well how to assume.

"I have that to say to you which has to be said at once."

"You drive about London with me in that dress? It would be absurd. You are painted all round
your eyes. I wouldn't get into a carriage with you on any account."

"In five minutes I will have dressed myself."

"Whether dressed or undressed it does not signify. You know very well that I would on no account
get into a carriage with you. You are taking advantage of me because my father is not here.
If you accompany me I will call for a policeman directly we get into the street."

"Ah, you do not know," said Mr. Moss. And he looked at her exactly as he had looked about an
hour ago, when he was making love to her as Trullo's betrothed.

"Here is my father," she said; for at that moment Mr. O'Mahony appeared within the theatre,
having made his way up from the door in time to take his daughter home.

"Mr. O'Mahony," said Mr. Moss, "I shall do myself the honour of calling to-morrow and seeing
your daughter at her apartments in Gower Street."

"You will see father too," said Rachel.

"I shall be delighted," said Moss. "It will give me the greatest pleasure on earth to see Mr.
O'Mahony on this occasion." So saying the imperial prince made a low bow, paint and all, and
allowed the two to go down into the street, and get into the brougham.

Mr. O'Mahony at once began with his own story. The policeman who had called for him had led
him away round the corner into Scotland Yard, and had there treated him with the utmost deference.
Nothing could be more civil to him than had been the officer. But the officer had suggested
to him that he had been the man who had said some rough words about the Queen, in Galway, and
had promised to abstain in future from lecturing. "To this I replied," said he, "that I had
said nothing rough about the Queen. I had said that the Queen was as nearly an angel on earth
as a woman could be. I had merely doubted whether there should be Queens. Thereupon the policeman
shook his head and declared that he could not admit any doubt on that question. 'But you wouldn't
expect me to allow it in New York,' said I. 'You've got to allow it here,' said he. 'But my
pledge was made as to Ireland,' said I. 'It is all written down in some magistrate's book,
and you'll find it if you send over there.' Then I told him that I wouldn't break my word for
him or his Queen either. Upon that he thanked me very much for my civility, and told me that
if I would hurry back to the theatre I should be in time to take you home. If it was necessary
he would let me hear from him again. 'You will know where to find me,' said I, and I gave him
our address in Farringdon Street, and told him I should be there to-morrow at half-past eight.
He shook hands with me as though I had been his brother;--and so here I am."

Then she began to tell her story, but there did not seem to be much of interest in it. "I suppose
he'll come?" said Mr. O'Mahony.

"Oh, yes, he'll come."

"It's something about M. Le Gros," said he. "You'll find that he'll abuse that poor Frenchman."

"He may save himself the trouble," said Rachel. Then they reached Gower Street, and went to
bed, having eaten two mutton-chops apiece.

On the next morning at eleven o'clock tidings were brought up to Rachel in her bedroom that
Mr. Moss was in the sitting-room downstairs.

"Father is there?" exclaimed Rachel.

Then the girl, who had learned to understand that Mr. Moss was not regarded as a welcome visitor,
assured her that he was at the moment entertained by Mr. O'Mahony. "He's a-telling of what
the perlice said to him in the City, but I don't think as the Jew gentleman minds him much."
From which it may be gathered that Rachel had not been discreet in speaking of her admirer
before the lodging-house servant.

She dressed herself, not in a very great hurry. Her father, she knew, had no other occupation
at this hour in the morning, and she did not in the least regard how Mr. Moss might waste his
time. And she had to think of many things before she could go down to meet him. Meditating
upon it all, she was inclined to think that the interview was intended as hostile to M. Le
Gros. M. Le Gros would be represented, no doubt, as a Jew twice more Jewish than Mr. Moss himself.
But Rachel had a strong idea that M. Le Gros was a very nice old French gentleman. When he
had uttered all those "ve-rys," one after another with still increasing emphasis, Rachel had
no doubt believed them all. And she was taking great trouble with herself, practising every
day for two hours together, with a looking-glass before her on the pianoforte, as Mr. Moss
had made her quite understand that the opening of her mouth wide was the chief qualification
necessary to her, beyond that which nature had done for her. Rachel did think it possible that
she might become the undoubted prima donna of the day, as M. Le Gros had called her; and she
thought it much more probable that she should do so under the auspices of M. Le Gros, than
those of Mr. Moss. When, therefore, she went down at last to the sitting-room, she did so,
determined to oppose Mr. Moss, as bidding for her voice, rather than as a candidate for her
love. When she entered the room, she could not help beginning with something of an apology,
in that she had kept the man waiting; but Mr. Moss soon stopped her. "It does not signify the
least in the world," he said, laying his hand upon his waistcoat. "If only I can get this opportunity
of speaking to you while your father is present." Then, when she looked at the brilliance of
his garments, and heard the tones of his voice, she was sure that the attack on this occasion
was not to be made on M. Le Gros. She remained silent, and sat square on her chair, looking
at him. A man must be well-versed in feminine wiles, who could decipher under Rachel's manners
her determination to look as ugly as possible on the occasion. In a moment she had flattened
every jaunty twist and turn out of her habiliments, and had given to herself an air of absolute
dowdyism. Her father sat by without saying a word. "Miss O'Mahony, if I may venture to ask
a question, I trust you may not be offended."

"I suppose not as my father is present," she replied.

"Am I right in believing the engagement to be over which bound you to Mr.--Jones?"

"You are," said Rachel, quite out loud, giving another quite unnecessary twist to her gown.

"That obstacle is then removed?"

"Mr. Jones is removed, and has gone to Ireland." Then Mr. Moss sighed deeply. "I can manage
my singing very well without Mr.--Jones."

"Not a doubt. Not a doubt. And I have heard that you have made an engagement in all respects
beneficial with M. Le Gros, of Covent Garden. M. Le Gros is a gentleman for whom I have a most
profound respect."

"So have I."

"Had I been at your elbow, it is possible that something better might have been done; but two
months;--they run by--oh, so quickly!"

"Quite so. If I can do any good I shall quickly get another engagement."

"You will no doubt do a great deal of good. But Mr. Jones is now at an end."

"Mr. Jones is at an end," said Rachel, with another blow at her gown. "A singing girl like
me does better without a lover,--especially if she has got a father to look after her."

"That's as may be," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"That's as may be," said Mr. Moss, again laying his hand upon his heart. The tone in which
Mr. Moss repeated Mr. O'Mahony's words was indicative of the feeling and poetry within him.
"If you had a lover such as is your faithful Moss," the words seemed to say, "no father could
look after you half so well."

"I believe I could do very well with no one to look after me."

"Of course you and I have misunderstood each other hitherto."

"Not at all," said Rachel.

"I was unaware at first that Mr. Jones was an absolute reality. You must excuse me, but the
name misled me."

"Why shouldn't a girl be engaged to a man named Jones? Jones is as good a name as Moss, at
any rate; and a deal more--" She had been going to remark that Jones was the more Christian
of the two, but stopped herself.

"At any rate you are now free?" he said.

"No, I am not. Yes, I am. I am free, and I mean to remain so. Why don't you tell him, father?"

"I have got nothing to tell him, my dear. You are so much better able to tell him everything
yourself."

"If you would only listen to me, Miss O'Mahony."

"You had better listen to him, Rachel."

"Very well; I will listen. Now go on." Then she again thumped herself. And she had thumped
her hair, and thumped herself all round till she was as limp and dowdy as the elder sister
of a Low Church clergyman of forty.

"I wish you to believe, Miss O'Mahony, that my attachment to you is most devoted." She pursed
her lips together and looked straight out of her eyes at the wall opposite. "We belong to the
same class of life, and our careers lie in the same groove." Hereupon she crossed her hands
before her on her lap, while her father sat speculating whether she might not have done better
to come out on the comic stage. "I wish you to believe that I am quite sincere in the expression
which I make of a most ardent affection." Here again he slapped his waistcoat and threw himself
into an attitude. He was by no means an ill-looking man, and though he was forty years old,
he did not appear to be so much. He had been a public singer all his life, and was known by
Rachel to have been connected for many years with theatres both in London and New York. She
had heard many stories as to his amorous adventures, but knew nothing against his character
in money matters. He had, in truth, always behaved well to her in whatever pecuniary transactions
there had been between them. But he had ventured to make love to her, and had done so in a
manner which had altogether disgusted her. She now waited till he paused for a moment in his
eloquence, and then she spoke a word.

"What about Madame Socani?"

CHAPTER XIX.

FIFTH AVENUE AND NEWPORT.

"What about Madame Socani?" Rachel, as she said this, abandoned for the moment her look against
the wall, and shook herself instantly free of all her dowdiness. She flashed fire at him from
her eyes, and jumping up from her seat, took hold of her father by his shoulder. He encircled
her waist with his arm, but otherwise sat silent, looking Mr. Moss full in the face. It must
be acknowledged on the part of Rachel that she was prepared to make her accusation against
Mr. Moss on perhaps insufficient grounds. She had heard among the people at the theatre, who
did not pretend to know much of Mr. Moss and his antecedents, that there was a belief that
Madame Socani was his wife. There was something in this which offended her more grossly than
ever,--and a wickedness which horrified her. But she certainly knew nothing about it; and Madame
Socani's proposition to herself had come to her from Madame Socani, and not from Mr. Moss.
All she knew of Madame Socani was that she had been on the boards in New York, and had there
made for herself a reputation. Rachel had on one occasion sung with her, but it had been when
she was little more than a child.

"What is Madame Socani to me?" said Mr. Moss.

"I believe her to be your wife."

"Oh, heavens! My wife! I never had a wife, Miss O'Mahony;--not yet! Why do you say things so
cruel to me?"

He, at any rate, she was sure, had sent her that message. She thought that she was sure of
his villainous misconduct to her in that respect. She believed that she did know him to be
a devil, whether he was a married man or not.

"What message did you send to me by Madame Socani?"

"What message? None!" and again he laid his hand upon his waistcoat.

"He asked me to be--" But she could not tell her father of what nature was the message. "Father,
he is a reptile. If you knew all, you would be unable to keep your hands from his throat. And
now he dares to come here and talk to me of his affection. You had better bid him leave the
room and have done with him."

"You hear what my daughter says, Mr. Moss."

"Yes, I hear her," answered the poor innocent-looking tenor. "But what does she mean? Why is
she so fierce?"

"He knows, father," said Rachel. "Have nothing further to say to him."

"I don't think that I do quite know," said Mr. O'Mahony. "But you can see, at any rate, Mr.
Moss, that she does not return your feeling."

"I would make her my wife to-morrow," said Mr. Moss, slapping his waistcoat once more. "And
do you, as the young lady's papa, think of what we two might do together. I know myself, I
know my power. Madame Socani is a jealous woman. She would wish to be taken into partnership
with me,--not a partnership of hearts, but of theatres. She has come with some insolent message,
but not from me;--ah, not from me!"

"You never tried to kiss me? You did not make two attempts?"

"I would make two thousand if I were to consult my own heart."

"When you knew that I was engaged to Mr. Jones!"

"What was Mr. Jones to me? Now I ask your respectable parent, is Miss Rachel unreasonable?
When a gentleman has lost his heart in true love, is he to be reproached because he endeavours
to seize one little kiss? Did not Mr. Jones do the same?"

"Bother Mr. Jones!" said Rachel, overcome by the absurdity of the occasion. "As you observed
just now, Mr. Jones and I are two. Things have not turned out happily, though I am not obliged
to explain all that to you. But Mr. Jones is to me all that a man should be; you, Mr. Moss,
are not. Now, father, had he not better go?"

"I don't think any good is to be done, I really don't," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"Why am I to be treated in this way?"

"Because you come here persevering when you know it's no good."

"I think of what you and I might do together with Moss's theatre between us."

"Oh, heavens!"

"You should be called the O'Mahony. Your respectable papa should keep an eye to your pecuniary
interest."

"I could keep an eye myself for that."

"You would be my own wife, of course--my own wife."

"I wouldn't be anything of the kind."

"Ah, but listen!" continued Mr. Moss. "You do not know how the profits run away into the pockets
of impresarios and lessees and money-lenders. We should have it all ourselves. I have £30,000
of my own, and my respectable parent in New York has as much more. It would all be the same
as ours. Only think! Before long we would have a house on the Fifth Avenue so furnished that
all the world should wonder; and another at Newport, where the world should not be admitted
to wonder. Only think!"

"And Madame Socani to look after the furniture!" said Rachel.

"Madame Socani should be nowheres."

"And I also will be nowheres. Pray remember that in making all your little domestic plans.
If you live in the Fifth Avenue, I will live in 350 Street; or perhaps I should like it better
to have a little house here in Albert Place. Father, don't you think Mr. Moss might go away?"

"I think you have said all that there is to be said." Then Mr. O'Mahony got up from his chair
as though to show Mr. Moss out of the room.

"Not quite, Mr. O'Mahony. Allow me for one moment. As the young lady's papa you are bound to
look to these things. Though the theatre would be a joint affair, Miss O'Mahony would have
her fixed salary;--that is to say, Mrs. Moss would."

"I won't stand it," said Rachel getting up. "I won't allow any man to call me by so abominable
a name,--or any woman." Then she bounced out of the room.

"It's no good, you see," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"I by no means see that so certain. Of course a young lady like your daughter knows her own
value, and does not yield all at once."

"I tell you it's no good. I know my own daughter."

"Excuse me, Mr. O'Mahony, but I doubt whether you know the sex."

The two men were very nearly of an age; but O'Mahony assumed the manners of an old man, and
Mr. Moss of a young one.

"Perhaps not," said Mr. O'Mahony.

"They have been my study up from my cradle," said Mr. Moss.

"No doubt."

"And I think that I have carried on the battle not without some little éclat."

"I am quite sure of it."

"I still hope that I may succeed with your sweet daughter."

"Here the battle is of a different kind," not without a touch of satire in the tone of his
voice, whatever there might be in the words which he used. "In tournaments of love, you have,
I do not doubt, been very successful; but here, it seems to me that the struggle is for money."

"That is only an accident."

"But the accident rises above everything. It does not matter in the least which comes first.
Whether it be for love or money my daughter will certainly have a will of her own. You may
take my word that she is not to be talked out of her mind."

"But Mr. Jones is gone?" asked Moss.

"But she is not on that account ready to transfer her affections at a moment's notice. To her
view of the matter there seems to be something a little indelicate in the idea."

"Bah!" said Mr. Moss.

"You cannot make her change her mind by saying bah."

"Professional interests have to be considered," said Mr. Moss.

"No doubt; my daughter does consider her professional interests every day when she practises
for two hours."

"That is excellent,--and with such glorious effects! She has only now got the full use of her
voice. My G----! what could she not do if she had the full run of Moss's Theatre! She might
choose whatever operas would suit her best; and she would have me to guide her judgment! I
do know my profession, Mr. O'Mahony. A lady in her line should always marry a gentleman in
mine; that is if she cares about matrimony."

"Of course she did intend to be married to Mr. Jones."

"Oh! Mr. Jones, Mr. Jones! I am sick of Mr. Jones. What could Mr. Jones do? He is only a poor
ruined Irishman. You must feel that Mr. Jones was only in the way. I am offering her all that
professional experience and capital can do. What are her allurements?"

"I don't in the least know, Mr. Moss."

"Only her beauty."

"I thought, perhaps it was her singing."

"That joined," said Mr. Moss. "No doubt her voice and her beauty joined together. Madame Socani's
voice is as valuable,--almost as valuable."

"I would marry Madame Socani if I were you."

"No! Madame Socani is,--well a leetle past her prime. Madame Socani and I have known each other
for twenty years. Madame Socani is aware that I am attached to your daughter. Well; I do not
mind telling you the truth. Madame Socani and I have been on very intimate terms. I did offer
once to make Madame Socani my wife. She did not see her way in money matters. She was making
an income greater than mine. Things have changed since that. Madame Socani is very well, but
she is a jealous woman. Madame Socani hates your daughter. Oh, heavens, yes! But she was never
my wife. Oh, no! A woman at this profession grows old quicker than a man. And she has never
succeeded in getting a theatre of her own. She did try her hand at it at New York, but that
came to nothing. If Miss Rachel will venture along with me, we will have 500,000 dollars before
five years are gone. She shall have everything that the world can offer--jewels, furniture,
hangings! She shall keep the best table in New York, and shall have her own banker's account.
There's no such success to be found anywhere for a young woman. If you will only just turn
it in your mind, Mr. O'Mahony." Then Mr. Moss brushed his hat with the sleeve of his coat and
took his leave.

He had nearly told the entire truth to Mr. O'Mahony. He had never married Madame Socani. As
far as Madame Socani knew, her veritable husband, Socani, was still alive. And it was not true
that Mr. Moss had sent that abominable message to Rachel. The message, no doubt, had expressed
a former wish on his part; but that wish was now in abeyance. Miss O'Mahony's voice had proved
itself to him to be worth matrimony,--that and her beauty together. In former days, when he
had tried to kiss her, he had valued her less highly. Now, as he left the room, he was fully
content with the bargain he had suggested. Mr. Jones was out of the way, and her voice had
proved itself to his judgment to be worth the price he had offered.

When her father saw her again he began meekly to plead for Mr. Moss.

"Do you mean to say, father," she exclaimed, "that you have joined yourself to him?"

"I am only telling you what he says."

"Tell me nothing at all. You ought to know that he is an abomination. Though he had the whole
Fifth Avenue to offer to me I would not touch him with a pair of tongs."

But she, in the midst of her singing, had been much touched by seeing Frank Jones among the
listeners in the back of one of the boxes. When the piece was over there had come upon her
a desire to go to him and tell him that, in spite of all she had said, she would wait for him
if only he would profess himself ready to wait for her. There was not much in it,--that a man
should wait in town for two or three days, and should return to the theatre to see the girl
whom he professed to regard. It was only that, but it had again stirred her love. She had endeavoured
to send to him when the piece was over; but he was gone, and she saw him no more.

CHAPTER XX.

BOYCOTTING.

Frank Jones went back to County Galway, having caught a last glimpse of his lady-love. But
his lady-love could not very well make herself known to him from the stage as she was occupied
at the moment with Trullo. And as he had left the theatre before her message had been brought
round, he did so with a bitter conviction that everything between them was over. He felt very
angry with her,--no doubt unreasonably. The lady was about to make a pocketful of money; and
had offered to share it with him. He refused to take any part of it, and declined altogether
to incur any of the responsibilities of marriage for the present. His father's circumstances
too were of such a nature as to make him almost hopeless for the future. What would he have
had her do? Nevertheless he was very angry with her.

As he made his way westward through Ireland he heard more and more of the troubles of the country.
He had not in fact been gone much more than a week, but during that week sad things had happened.
Boycotting had commenced, and had already become very prevalent. To boycott a man, or a house,
or a firm, or a class of men, or a trade, or a flock of sheep, or a drove of oxen, or unfortunately
a county hunt, had become an exact science, and was exactly obeyed. It must be acknowledged
that throughout the south and west of Ireland the quickness and perfection with which this
science was understood and practised was very much to the credit of the intelligence of the
people. We can understand that boycotting should be studied in Yorkshire, and practised,--after
an experience of many years. Laying on one side for the moment all ideas as to the honesty
and expediency of the measure, we think that Yorkshire might in half a century learn how to
boycott its neighbours. A Yorkshire man might boycott a Lancashire man, or Lincoln might boycott
Nottingham. It would require much teaching;--many books would have to be written, and an infinite
amount of heavy slow imperfect practice would follow. But County Mayo and County Galway rose
to the requirements of the art almost in a night! Gradually we Englishmen learned to know in
a dull glimmering way what they were about; but at the first whisper of the word all Ireland
knew how to ruin itself. This was done readily by people of the poorer class,--without any
gifts of education, and certainly the immoderate practice of the science displays great national
intelligence.

As Frank Jones passed through Dublin he learned that Morony Castle had been boycotted; and
he was enough of an Irishman to know immediately what was meant. And he heard, too, while in
the train that the kennels at Ahaseragh had been boycotted. He knew that with the kennels would
be included Black Daly, and with Morony Castle his unfortunate father. According to the laws
on which the practice was carried on nothing was to be bought from the land of Morony Castle,
and nothing sold to the owners of it. No service was to be done for the inhabitants, as far
as the laws of boycotting might be made to prevail. He learned from a newspaper he bought in
Dublin that the farm servants had all left the place, and that the maids had been given to
understand that they would encounter the wrath of the new lords in the land if they made a
bed for any Jones to lie upon.

As he went on upon his journey his imagination went to work to picture to himself the state
of his father's life under these circumstances. But his imagination was soon outstripped by
the information which reached him from fellow-travellers. "Did ye hear what happened to old
Phil Jones down at Morony?" said a passenger, who got in at Moate, to another who had joined
them at Athlone.

"Divil a hear thin."

"Old Phil wanted to get across from Ballyglunin to his own place. He had been down to Athenry.
There was that chap who is always there with a car. Divil a foot would he stir for Phil. Phil
has had some row with the boys there about his meadows, and he's trying to prosecute. More
fool he. A quiet, aisy-going fellow he used to be. But it seems he has been stirred now. He
has got some man in Galway jail, and all the country is agin him. Anyways he had to foot it
from Ballyglunin to Headford, and then to send home to Morony for his own car." In this way
did Frank learn that his father had in truth incurred boycotting severity. He knew well the
old man who had attended the Ballyglunin station with almost a hopeless desire of getting a
fare, and was sure that nothing short of an imperious edict from the great Landleaguing authorities
in the district, would have driven him to the necessity of repudiating a passenger.

