As the 25th fell on Sunday, I tried to placate the agricultural poet by sowing half on the
24th and the other half on the 26th, but it was no use. Whether the turnip god was offended
by the fractured rule and refused his blessing, or whether the dry August and September prevented
full returns, is more than I can say. Certain it is that I had but a half crop of turnips and
a beggarly batch of beets to comfort me and the hogs.

Some little consolation, however, was found in Polly's joy over a small crop of currants which
her yearling bushes produced. I also heard rumors of a few cherries which turned their red
cheeks to the sun for one happy day, and then disappeared. Cock Robin's breast was red the
next morning, and on this circumstantial evidence Polly accused him. He pleaded "not guilty,"
and strutted on the lawn with his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat and his suspected
breast as much in evidence as a pouter pigeon's. A jury, mostly of blackbirds, found the charge
"not proven," and the case was dismissed. I was convinced by the result of this trial that
the only safe way would be to provide enough cherries for the birds and for the people too,
and ordered fifty more trees for fall planting. I found by experience, that if one would have
bird neighbors (and who would not?), he must provide liberally for their wants and also for
their luxuries. I have stolen a march as to the cherries by planting scores of mulberry trees,
both native and Russian. At around the chapel and Hospice
highlight many inns, some substantial and attractive appearance, inhabited by a whole population
of people nervous and sickly women who are going to be cured with sera exercise and fresh air.
There was less than two hundred people staying there when we pass, and judging by their warm
familiarity ought to be so pleasant residence. Forty minutes after we got to the eminence of
Staffel, a kind of introduction to the higher call Kulm. They bring together the three main
roads that lead opposite points to the top, and the traveler is suddenly in the presence of
a superb picture, leaving the Road closed basin to a small plateau that records the entire
view canton of Lucerne and part of Unterwalden. Half an hour later, walking on the back naked
from the mountain, we went to get down to the door of great Rigi-Kulm hotel that is the highest
point of the mountain and the end of the excursion.

Nothing is more curious than European Babel built on such a high summit, amid a swarm of lakes,
valleys and mountains in the center of the free and picturesque Switzerland. There meet in
one night all the European races and even some of the New World, they all speak languages,
and they come in contact not only faces the most diverse but all vanities extravagances, the childishness,
the candideces, notables in excursion and all genres Esplin nuisance and is easy to find in
a big reunion of travelers. More we were three hundred people gathered there, most of the Kulm
Hotel and was to see the contrast of faces and ways that offered the married couples in moon
honey (still novices, naive in his soft, sentimental demonstrations), the literati wanderers
and unemployed, to hunt for business to make stories and novels, women tired the world, the race of
the misunderstood, dragging their tails on taffeta or Linon carpet of grass, the men serious, qualified
by character and of itself, with be sure not challenged by their unknown partners, the English
Fancy or moody, or boring, always in the majority in number or very large, in short, traders
withdrawn, determined to put on airs of counts traveling incognito, and revealing their manners
that beneath his gloves while resisted in the streets against the years of plebeian work. Perhaps nowhere
are they more ridiculous and obvious vanities and nonsense of Skinny humanity in those places where
nature holds as sovereign nudity caste their thanks or the majesty of its magnificent forms.

The panorama view ranges from the sublime imponderably Kulm is varied and surprising. Switzerland
appears around with all its contrasts, its huge and horrible ways
some places, peaceful and picturesque in others, wherever beautiful
and seductive, or imposing.

 Gordon did not understand the reason of it, but
he expressed himself as being heartily glad, for financial reasons, that the men had gone out.
He had more than enough coal on the surface and in cars to supply the demand for the next three
months, and it would be money in his pocket to dispose of his coal without having to pay for
the labor of replacing it.

During the day the reason for the strike was announced. From the establishment of the mine
it had been the custom for the miners to have their tools sharpened at a shop built and run
by the property. This was done for the accommodation of the men, and the charge for keeping
the tools sharp was ten cents a week for each man, or $5 a year. For twenty years no fault
had been found with the arrangement; it had been looked upon as satisfactory, especially by
the men. A walking delegate, mousing around the mine, and finding no other cause for complaint,
had lighted upon this practice, and he told the men it was a shame that they should have to
pay ten cents a week out of their hard-earned wages for keeping their tools sharp. He said
that it was the business of the property to keep the tools sharp, and that the men should not
be called upon to pay for that service; that they ought, in justice to themselves and for the
dignity of associated labor, to demand that this onerous tax be removed; and, to insure its
removal, he declared a strike on. This was the reason, and the only reason, for the strike
at Gordon's mine. Three hundred men quit work, and three hundred families suffered, many of
them for the necessities of life, simply because a loud-mouthed delegate assured them that
they were being imposed upon.

Things went on quietly at the mine. There was no riot, no disturbance. Gordon did not go over,
but simply telephoned to the superintendent to close the shaft houses, shut down the engines,
put out the fires, and let things rest, at the same time saying that he would hold the superintendent
and the bosses responsible for the safety of the plant.

The men were disappointed, as the days went by, that the owner made no effort to induce them
to resume work. They had believed that he would at once accede to their demand, and that they
would go back to work with the tax removed. This, however, was not his plan. Weeks passed and
the men became restless. They frequented the saloons more generally, spent their remaining
money for liquor, and went into debt as much as they were permitted for more liquor. They became
noisy and quarrelsome. The few men who were opposed to the strike could make no headway against
public opinion. These men held aloof from the saloons, husbanded their money, and confined
themselves as much as possible to their own houses.

Things had gone on in this way for six weeks. The men grew more and more restless and more
dissipated. Again the walking delegate came to encourage them to hold out. Mounted on an empty
coal car, he made an inflammatory speech to the men, advising them not only to hold out against
the owner, but also to prevent the employment of any other help. If this should not prove sufficient,
he advised them to wreck the mining property and to fire the mine,--anything to bring the owner
to terms.

Jack and Jarvis went for a long walk one day, and their route took them near Gordonville. Seeing
the men collected in such numbers around a coal car, they approached, and heard the last half
of this inflammatory speech. As the walking delegate finished, Jack jumped up on the car, and
said:--

"McGinnis has had his say; now, men, let me have mine. There are always two sides to a question.
You have heard one, let me give you the other. I am a delegate, self-appointed, from the amalgamated
Order of Thinkers, and I want you to listen to our view of this strike,--and of all strikes.
I want you also to think a little as well as to listen.

"You have been led into this position by a man whose sole business is to foment discords between
working-men and their employers. The moment these discords cease, that moment this man loses
his job and must work or starve like the rest of you. He is, therefore, an interested party,
and he is more than likely to be biassed by what seems to be his interest. He has made no argument;
he has simply asserted things which are not true, and played upon your sympathies, emotions,
and passions, by the use of the stale war-cries--'oppression,' 'down-trodden working-man,'
'bloated bond-holders,' and, most foolish of all, 'the conflict between Capital and Labor.'
You have not thought this matter out for yourselves at all. That is why I ask you to join hands
for a little while with the Order of Thinkers and see if there is not some good way out of
this dilemma. McGinnis said that the Company has no right to charge you for keeping your tools
sharp. In one sense this is true. You have a perfect right to work with dull tools, if you
wish to; you have the right to sharpen your own tools; and you also have the right to hire
any one else to do it for you. You work 'by the ton,' you own your pickaxes and shovels from
handle to blade, and you have the right to do with them as you please.

"There are three hundred of you who use tools; you each pay ten cents a week to the Company
for keeping them sharp,--that is, in round numbers, $1500 a year. There are two smiths at work
at $50 a month (that is $1200), and a helper at $25 a month ($300 more), making just $1500
paid by the Company in wages. If you will think this matter out, you will see that there is
a dead loss to the Company of the coal used, the wear and tear of the instruments, and the
interest, taxes, insurance, and degeneration of the plant. The
image of the summit of Rigi is reflected in all objects that the crown wall vertical black clouds,
and human figures that appear in the phantasmagoria most extravagant forms and the most romantic
spot.

But sun, solar spectrum, sky, lakes, landscapes and mountains, visible for a moment, disappeared then
as if by magic in a few seconds. Alpnach the storm, spawned by the treacherous blow of Pilate,
rose, rose and rose, with a prodigious rate, climbing the mountain as a anger and wallowing
in the abyss its swirling gusts and rain with the violence of the
sea angrily shaking his mane of immense reefs.

"But, suppose the Company were in duty bound to do this thing for you, and suppose it should
refuse; would that be a good reason for quitting work? Not by any means! You are earning an
average of $2 a day,--nearly $16,000 a month. You've 'been out' six weeks. If you gain your
point, it will take you fifteen years to make up what you've already lost. If you have the
sense which God gives geese, you will see that you can't afford this sort of thing.

