Here you have, then, Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse to the life--certainly no more than an average
sample of his kind; but as he is to go through a considerable variety of situation and circumstance,
I thought you would like to have him as distinctly before your mind's eye as it was in my power
to present him.--Well--he put his hat on, as I have said; buttoned the lowest two buttons of
his surtout, and stuck his white pocket handkerchief into the outside pocket in front, as already
mentioned, anxiously disposing it so as to let a little appear above the edge of the pocket,
with a sort of careful carelessness--a graceful contrast to the blue; drew on his gloves; took
his cane in his hand; drained the last sad remnant of infusion of chiccory in his coffee-cup;
and, the sun shining in the full splendor of a July noon, and promising a glorious day, forth
sallied this poor fellow, an Oxford Street Adonis, going forth conquering and to conquer! Petty
finery without, a pinched and stinted stomach within; a case of Back versus Belly, (as the
lawyers would have it,) the plaintiff winning in a canter! Forth sallied, I say, Mr. Titmouse,
as also, doubtless, sallied forth that day some five or six thousand similar personages, down
the narrow, creaking, close staircase, which he had no sooner quitted than he heard exclaimed
from an opposite window, "My eyes! a'n't that a swell!" He felt how true the observation was,
and that at that moment he was somewhat out of his element; so he hurried on, and soon reached
that great broad disheartening street, apostrophized by the celebrated Opium-Eater,[1] with
bitter feeling, as--"Oxford Street!--stony-hearted stepmother! Thou that listenest to the sighs
of orphans, and drinkest the tears of children!" Here, though his spirits were not just then
very buoyant, our poor little dandy breathed more freely than when he was passing through the
wretched crowded court (Closet Court) which he had just quitted. He passed and met hundreds
who, like himself, seemed released for a precious day's interval from miserable confinement
and slavery during the week; but there were not very many of them who could vie with him in
elegance of appearance--and that was indeed a luxurious reflection! Who could do justice to
the air with which he strutted along! He felt as happy, poor soul, in his little ostentation,
as his Corinthian rival in tip-top turn-out, after twice as long, and as anxious, and fifty
times as expensive, preparations for effective public display! Nay, my poor swell was in some
respects greatly the superior of such an one as I have alluded to. Mr. Titmouse did, to a great
degree, bedizen his back--but at the expense of his belly; whereas, the Corinthian exquisite,
too often taking advantage of station and influence, recklessly both pampers his luxurious
appetite within, and decorates his person without, at the expense of innumerable heart-aching
creditors. I do not mean, however, to claim any real merit for Mr. Titmouse on this score,
because I am not sure how he would act if he were to become possessed of his magnificent rival's
means and opportunities for the perpetration of gentlemanly frauds on a splendid scale.--But
we shall perhaps see by and by.

Mr. Titmouse walked along with leisurely step; for haste and perspiration were vulgar, and
he had the day before him. Observe, now, the careless glance of self-satisfaction with which
he occasionally regards his bright boots, with their martial appendage, giving out a faint
clinking sound as he heavily treads the broad flags; his spotless trousers, his tight surtout,
and the tip of white handkerchief peeping accidentally out in front! A pleasant sight it was
to behold him in a chance rencontre with some one genteel enough to be recognized--as he stood,
resting on his left leg; his left arm stuck upon his hip; his right leg easily bent outwards;
his right hand lightly holding his ebon cane, with the gilt head of which he occasionally tapped
his teeth; and his eyes, half closed, scrutinizing the face and figure of each "pretty gal"
as she passed, and to whom he had a delicious consciousness that he appeared an object of interest!
This was indeed HAPPINESS, as far as his forlorn condition could admit of his enjoying happiness.--He
had no particular object in view. A tiff over-night with two of his shopmates, had broken off
a party which they had agreed the Sunday preceding in forming, to go that day to Greenwich;
and this trifling circumstance had a little soured his temper, depressed as had been his spirits
before. He resolved, on consideration, to walk straight on, and dine somewhere a little way
out of town, by way of passing the time till four o'clock, at which hour he intended to make
his appearance in Hyde Park, "to see the swells and the fashions," which was his favorite Sunday
occupation.

His condition was, indeed, forlorn in the extreme. To say nothing of his prospects in life--what
was his present condition? A shopman with thirty-five pounds a-year, out of which he had to
find his clothing, washing, lodging, and all other incidental expenses--the chief item of his
board--such as it was--being found him by his employers! He was five weeks in arrear to his
landlady--a corpulent old termagant, whom nothing could have induced him to risk offending,
but his overmastering love of finery; for I grieve to say, that this deficiency had been occasioned
by his purchase of the ring he then wore with so much pride! How he had contrived to pacify
her--lie upon lie he must have had recourse to--I know not. He was indebted also to his poor
washerwoman in five or six shillings for at least a quarter's washing; and owed five times
that amount to a little old tailor, who, with huge spectacles on his nose, turned up to him,
out of a little cupboard which he occupied in Closet Court, and which Titmouse had to pass
whenever he went to or from his lodgings, a lean, sallow, wrinkled face, imploring him to "settle
his small account." All the cash in hand which he had to meet contingencies between that day
and quarter-day, which was six weeks off, was about twenty-six shillings, of which he had taken
one for the present day's expenses!

Revolving these somewhat disheartening matters in his mind, he passed easily and leisurely
along the whole length of Oxford Street. No one could have judged from his dressy appearance,
the constant smirk on his face, and his confident air, how very miserable that poor little
dandy was; but three-fourths of his misery were really occasioned by the impossibility he felt
of his ever being able to indulge in his propensities for finery and display. Nothing better
had he to occupy his few thoughts. He had had only a plain mercantile education, as it is called,
i. e. reading, writing, and arithmetic; beyond an exceedingly moderate acquaintance with these,
he knew nothing whatever; not having read anything except a few inferior novels, and plays,
and sporting newspapers. Deplorable, however, as were his circumstances--

    "Hope springs eternal in the human breast."

And probably, in common with most who are miserable from straitened circumstances, he often
conceived, and secretly relied upon, the possibility of some unexpected and accidental change
for the better. He had heard and read of extraordinary cases of LUCK. Why might he not be one
of the LUCKY? A rich girl might fall in love with him--that was, poor fellow! in his consideration,
one of the least unlikely ways of luck's advent; or some one might leave him money; or he might
win a prize in the lottery;--all these, and other accidental modes of getting rich, frequently
occurred to the well-regulated mind of Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse; but he never once thought of
one thing, viz. of determined, unwearying industry, perseverance, and integrity in the way
of his business, conducing to such a result!

Is his case a solitary one?--Dear reader, you may be unlike poor Tittlebat Titmouse in every
respect except one!

On he walked towards Bayswater; and finding that it was yet early, and considering that the
farther he went from town the better prospect there would be of his being able, with little
sacrifice of appearances, to get a dinner consistent with the means he carried about with him,
viz. one shilling, he pursued his way a mile or two beyond Bayswater; and, sure enough, came
at length upon a nice little public-house on the roadside, called the Square-toes Arms. Very
tired, and very dusty, he first sat down in a small back room to rest himself; and took the
opportunity to call for a clothes-brush and shoe-brush, to relieve his clothes and boots from
the heavy dust upon them. Having thus attended to his outer man, as far as circumstances would
permit, he bethought himself of his inner man, whose cravings he presently satisfied with a
pretty substantial mutton-pie and a pint of porter. This fare, together with a penny (which
he felt forced to give) to the little girl who waited on him, cost him tenpence; and then,
having somewhat refreshed himself, he began to think of returning to town. Having lit one of
his two cigars, he sallied forth, puffing along with an air of quiet enjoyment. Dinner, however
humble, seldom fails, especially when accompanied by a fair draught of tolerable porter, in
some considerable degree to tranquillize the animal spirits; and that soothing effect began
soon to be experienced by Mr. Titmouse. The sedative cause he erroneously considered to be
the cigar he was smoking; whereas in fact the only tobacco he had imbibed was from the porter.
But, however that might be, he certainly returned towards town in a calmer and more cheerful
humor than that in which he had quitted it an hour or two before.

As he approached Cumberland Gate, it was about half-past five; and the Park might be said to
be at its acme of fashion, as far as that could be indicated by a sluggish stream of carriages,
three and four abreast--coroneted panels in abundance--noble and well-known equestrians of
both sexes, in troops--and some hundreds of pedestrians of the same description. So continuous
was the throng of carriages and horsemen, that Titmouse did not find it the easiest matter
in the world to dart across to the footpath in the inner circle. That, however, he presently
safely accomplished, encountering no more serious mischance than the muttered "D--n your eyes!"
of a haughty groom, between whom and his master Mr. Titmouse had presumed to intervene. What
a crowd of elegant women, many of them young and beautiful, (who but such, to be sure, would
have become, or been allowed to become, pedestrians in the Park?) he encountered, as he slowly
sauntered on, all of them obsequiously attended by brilliant beaux! Lords and ladies were here
manifestly as plentiful as plebeians in Oxford Street. What an enchanted ground!--How delicious
this soft crush and flutter of aristocracy! Poor Titmouse felt at once an intense pleasure,
and a withering consciousness of his utter insignificance. Many a sigh of dissatisfaction and
envy escaped him; yet he stepped along with a tolerably assured air, looking everybody he met
straight in the face, and occasionally twirling about his little cane with an air which seemed
to say--"Whatever opinion you may form of me, I have a very good opinion of myself." Indeed,
was he not as much a man--an Englishman--as the best of them? What was the real difference
between Count Do-'em-all and Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse? Only that the Count had dark hair and
whiskers, and owed more money than Mr. Titmouse's creditors could be persuaded to allow him
to owe! Would to Heaven--thought Titmouse--that any one tailor would patronize him as half
a dozen had patronized the Count! If pretty ladies of quality did not disdain a walking advertisement
of a few first-rate tailors, like the Count, why should they turn up their noses at an assistant
in an extensive wholesale and retail establishment in Oxford Street, conversant with the qualities
and prices of the most beautiful articles of female attire? Yet alas, they did so!---- He sighed
heavily. Leaning against the railing in a studied attitude, and eying wistfully each gay and
fashionable equipage, with its often lovely, and sometimes haughty enclosure, as it rolled
slowly past him, Mr. Titmouse became more and more convinced of a great practical truth, viz.
that the only real distinction between mankind was that effected by money. Want of money alone
had placed him in his present abject position. Abject indeed! By the great folk, who were passing
him on all sides, he felt, well-dressed as he believed himself to be, that he was no more noticed
than as if he had been an ant, a blue-bottle fly, or a black beetle! He looked, and sighed--sighed,
and looked--looked, and sighed again, in a kind of agony of vain longing. While his only day
in the week for breathing fresh air, and appearing like a gentleman in the world, was rapidly
drawing to a close, and he was beginning to think of returning to the dog-hole he had crawled
out of in the morning, and to the shop for the rest of the week; the great, and gay, and happy
folk he was looking at, were thinking of driving home to dress for their grand dinners, and
to lay out every kind of fine amusement for the ensuing week: and that, moreover, was the sort
of life they led every day in the week! He heaved a profound sigh. At that moment a superb
cab, with a gentleman in it dressed in great elegance, and with very keen dark eyes, and striking
nose and whiskers, came up with a cab of still more exquisite structure and appointments, and
at which Titmouse gazed with unutterable feelings of envy--in which sat a young man, evidently
of consequence; very handsome, with splendid mustaches; perfectly well-dressed; holding the
reins and whip gracefully in hands glistening in straw-colored kid gloves--and between the
two gentlemen ensued the following low-toned colloquy, which it were to be wished that every
such sighing simpleton (as Titmouse must, I fear, by this time appear to the reader) could
have overheard.

"Ah, Fitz!" said the former-mentioned gentleman to the latter, who suddenly reddened when he
perceived who had addressed him. The manner of the speaker was execrably familiar and presumptuous--but
how could the embarrassed swell help himself?--"When did you return to town?"

"Last night only"----

"Enjoyed yourself, I hope?"

"Pretty well--but--I--suppose you"----

"Sorry for it," interrupted the first speaker in a lower tone, perceiving the vexation of his
companion; "but can't help it, you know."

"When?"

"To-morrow at nine. Monstrous sorry for it--'pon my soul, you really must look sharp, Fitz,
or the thing won't go on much longer."

"Must it be, really?" inquired the other, biting his lips--at that moment kissing his hand
to a very beautiful girl, who slowly passed him in a coroneted chariot--"must it really be,
Joe?" he repeated, turning towards his companion a pale and bitterly chagrined countenance.

"Poz, 'pon my life. Cage clean, however, and not very full--just at present"----

"Would not Wednesday!"--inquired the other, leaning forward towards the former speaker's cab,
and whispering with an air of intense earnestness. "The fact is, I've engagements at C----'s
on Monday and Tuesday nights with one or two country cousins, and I may be in a condition--eh?
you understand?"

His companion shook his head distrustfully.

"Upon my word and honor as a gentleman, it's the fact!" said the other, in a low vehement tone.

"Then--say Wednesday, nine o'clock, A. M. You understand? No mistake, Fitz!" replied his companion,
looking him steadily in the face as he spoke.

"None--honor!"--After a pause--"Who is it?"

His companion took a slip of paper out of his pocket, and in a whisper read from it--"Cab,
harness, &c., £297, 10s."

"A villain! It's been of only three years' standing," interrupted the other, in an indignant
mutter.

"Between ourselves, he is rather a sharp hand. Then, I'm sorry to say there's a Detainer or
two I have had a hint of"----

The swell uttered an execration which I dare not convey to paper--his face distorted with an
expression of mingled disgust, vexation, and hatred; and adding, "Wednesday--nine"--drove off,
a picture of tranquil enjoyment.

I need hardly say that he was a fashionable young spendthrift, and the other a sheriff's officer
of the first water--the genteelest beak that ever was known or heard of--who had been on the
look-out for him several days, and with whom the happy youngster was doomed to spend some considerable
time at a cheerful residence in Chancery Lane, bleeding gold at every pore the while:--his
only chance of avoiding which, was, as he had truly hinted, an honorable attempt on the purses
of two hospitable country cousins, in the meanwhile, at C----'s! And if he did not succeed
in that enterprise, so that he must go to cage, he lost the only chance he had for some time
of securing an exemption from such annoyance, by entering Parliament to protect the liberties
of the people--an eloquent and resolute champion of freedom in trade, religion, and everything
else; and an abolitionist of everything, including, especially, negro slavery and imprisonment
for debt[2]--two execrable violations of the natural rights of mankind.

But I have, for several minutes, lost sight of the admiring Titmouse.

"Why," thought he, "am I thus spited by fortune?--The only thing she's given me is--nothing!--D--n
everything!" exclaimed Mr. Titmouse aloud, at the same time starting off, to the infinite astonishment
of an old peer, who had been for some minutes standing leaning against the railing, close beside
him; who was master of a magnificent fortune, "with all appliances and means to boot;" with
a fine grown-up family, his eldest son and heir having just gained a Double First, and promising
wonders; possessing many mansions in different parts of England; a reputation for exquisite
taste and accomplishment; and being the representative of one of the oldest families in England;
but who at that moment loathed everything and everybody, including himself, because the minister
had the day before intimated to him that he could not give him a vacant ribbon, for which he
had applied, unless he could command two more votes in the Lower House, and which at present
his lordship saw no earthly means of doing. Yes, the Earl of Cheviotdale and Mr. Tittlebat
Titmouse were both miserable men; both had been hardly dealt with by fortune; both were greatly
to be pitied; and both quitted the Park, about the same time, with a decided misanthropic tendency.

Mr. Titmouse walked along Piccadilly with a truly chopfallen and disconsolate air. He very
nearly felt dissatisfied even with his personal appearance! Dress as he would, no one seemed
to care a curse for him; and, to his momentarily jaundiced eye, he seemed equipped in only
second-hand and shabby finery; and then he was really such a poor devil!--Do not, however,
let the reader suppose that this was an unusual mood with Mr. Titmouse. No such thing. Like
the Irishman who "married a wife for to make him un-aisy;" and also not unlike the moth that
will haunt the brightness which is her destruction; so poor Titmouse, Sunday after Sunday,
dressed himself out as elaborately as he had done on the present occasion, and then always
betook himself to the scene he had just again witnessed, and which had once again excited only
those feelings of envy, bitterness, and despair, which I have been describing, and which, on
every such occasion, he experienced with, if possible, increased intensity.

What to do with himself till it should be time to return to his cheerless lodgings he did not
exactly know; so he loitered along at a snail's pace. He stood for some time staring at the
passengers, their luggage, and the coaches they were ascending and alighting from, and listening
to the strange medley of coachmens', guards', and porters' vociferations, and passengers' greetings
and leave-takings--always to be observed at the White Horse Cellar. Then he passed along, till
a street row, near the Haymarket, attracted his attention and interested his feelings; for
it ended in a regular set-to between two watermen attached to the adjoining coach-stand. Here
he conceived himself looking on with the easy air of a swell; and the ordinary penalty (paying
for his footing) was attempted to be exacted from him; but he had nothing to be picked out
of any of his pockets except that under his very nose, and which contained his white handkerchief!
This over, he struck into Leicester Square, where, (he was in luck that night,) hurrying up
to another crowd at the farther end, he found a man preaching with infinite energy. Mr. Titmouse
looked on, and listened for two or three minutes with apparent interest; and then, with a countenance
in which pity struggled with contempt, muttered, loud enough to be heard by all near him, "poor
devil!" and walked off. He had not proceeded many steps, before it occurred to him that a friend--one
Robert Huckaback, much such another one as himself--lived in one of the narrow, dingy streets
in the neighborhood. He determined to take the chances of his being at home, and if so, of
spending the remainder of the evening with him. Huckaback's quarters were in the same ambitious
proximity to heaven as his own; the only difference being, that they were a trifle cheaper
and larger. He answered the door himself, having only the moment before returned from his Sunday's
excursion,--i. e. the Jack Straw's Castle Tea-Gardens, at Highgate, where, in company with
several of his friends, he had "spent a jolly afternoon." He ordered in a glass of negus from
the adjoining public-house, after some discussion, which ended in an agreement that he should
stand treat that night, and Titmouse on the ensuing Sunday night. As soon as the negus had
arrived, accompanied by two sea-biscuits, which looked so hard and hopeless that they would
have made the nerves thrill within the teeth of him that meditated attempting to masticate
them, the candle was lit; Huckaback handed a cigar to his friend; and both began to puff away,
and chatter pleasantly concerning the many events and scenes of the day.

"Anything stirring in to-day's 'Flash?'" inquired Titmouse, as his eye caught sight of a copy
of that able and interesting Sunday newspaper, the "SUNDAY FLASH," which Huckaback had hired
for the evening from the news-shop on the ground-floor of his lodgings.

Mr. Huckaback removed his cigar from his mouth, and holding it between the first and second
fingers of his right hand, in a knowing style, with closed eyes and inflated cheeks, very slowly
ejected the smoke which he had last inhaled, and rose and got the paper from the top of the
drawers.

"Here's a mark of a beastly porter-pot that's been set upon it, by all that's holy! It's been
at the public-house! Too bad of Mrs. Coggs to send it me up in this state!" said he, handling
it as though its touch were contamination.--(He was to pay only a halfpenny for the perusal
of it.) "Faugh! how it stinks!"

"What a horrid beast she must be!" exclaimed Titmouse, after, in like manner as his friend,
expelling his mouthful of smoke. "But, since better can't be had, let's hear what news is in
it. Demmee! it's the only paper published, in my opinion, that's worth reading!--Any fights
astirring?"

"Haven't come to them yet; give a man time, Titty!" replied Huckaback, fixing his feet on another
chair, and drawing the candle closer to the paper. "It says, by the way, that the Duke of Dunderhead
is certainly making up to Mrs. Thumps, the rich cheesemonger's widow;--a precious good hit
that, isn't it? You know the Duke's as poor as a rat!"

"Oh! that's no news. It's been in the papers for I don't know how long. Egad, 't will quite
set him up--and no mistake. Seen the Duke ever?"

"Ye--es! Oh, several times!" replied Huckaback. This was a lie, and Huckaback knew that it was.

"Deuced good-looking, I suppose?"

"Why--middling; I should say middling. Know some that needn't fear to compare with him--eh!
Tit?"--and Huckaback winked archly at his friend, meaning him, however, to consider the words
as applicable to the speaker.

"Ah, ha, ha!--a pretty joke! But come, that's a good chap!--You can't be reading both of those
two sheets at once--give us the other sheet, and set the candle right betwixt us!--Come, fair's
the word among gents, you know!"

Huckaback thus appealed to, did as his friend requested; and the two gentlemen read and smoked
for some minutes in silence.

"Well--I shall spell over the advertisements now," said Titmouse, very emphatically; "there's
a pretty lot of them--and I've read everything else--(though precious little there is, here
besides!)--So, here goes!--One may hear of a prime situation, you know--and I'm quite sick
of Tag-rag!"

Another interval of silence ensued. Huckaback was deep in the ghastly but instructive details
of a trial for murder; and Titmouse, after having glanced listlessly over the entertaining
first sheet of advertisements, was on the point of laying down his half of the paper, when
he suddenly started in his chair, turned very pale, and stammered--

"Hollo!--hollo, Hucky!--Why"----

"What's the matter, Tit?--eh?" inquired Huckaback, greatly astonished.

For a moment Titmouse made no answer, but, dropping his cigar, fixed his eyes intently on the
paper, which began to rustle in his trembling hands. What occasioned this outbreak, with its
subsequent agitation, was the following advertisement, which appeared in the most conspicuous
part of the "SUNDAY FLASH:"--

     "NEXT OF KIN--Important.--The next of kin, if any such there be, of
     GABRIEL TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE, formerly of WHITEHAVEN, cordwainer, and
     who died somewhere about the year 1793, in London, may hear of
     something of the GREATEST POSSIBLE IMPORTANCE to himself, or
     herself, or themselves, by immediately communicating with Messrs.
     QUIRK, GAMMON, and SNAP, Solicitors, Saffron Hill. No time is to be
     lost. 9th July 18--.--The third advertisement."

"By George! Here is a go!" exclaimed Huckaback, almost as much flustered as Titmouse over whose
shoulder he had hastily read the above paragraph.

"We aren't dreaming, Hucky--are we?" inquired Titmouse, faintly, his eyes still glued to the
newspaper.

"No--by George! Never was either of us fellows so precious wide awake in our lives before!
that I'll answer for!" Titmouse sat still, and turned paler even than before.

"Read it up, Huck!--Let's hear how it sounds, and then we shall believe it!" said he, handing
the paper to his friend.

Huckaback read it aloud.

"It sounds like something, don't it?" inquired Titmouse, tremulously, his color a little returning.

"Uncommon!--If this isn't something, then there's nothing in anything any more!" replied Huckaback,
solemnly, at the same time emphatically slapping the table.

"No!--'Pon my soul! but do you really think so?" said Titmouse, seeking still further confirmation
than he had yet derived from his senses of sight and hearing.

"I do, by jingo!" repeated Huckaback--"What a go it is!--Well, my poor old mother used to say,
'depend on it, wonders never will cease;' and curse me if she ever said a truer word!"

Titmouse again read over the advertisement; and then picking up and relighting his fragment
of cigar, puffed earnestly in silence for some moments.

"Such things never happens to such a poor devil of a chap as me!" exclaimed Huckaback, with a sigh.

"What is in the wind, I wonder?" muttered Titmouse. "Who knows--hem!--who knows?--But now,
really"---- he paused, and once more read over the pregnant paragraph.--"It can't--no, curse
me, it can't be"---- he added, looking very serious.

"What, Tit? What can't be?" interrupted Huckaback, eagerly.

"Why, I've been thinking--but what do you think, eh?--it can't hardly be a cursed hoax of the
chaps in the premises at Tag-rag's?"

"Bo!--Is there any of 'em flush enough of money to do the thing? And how should they think
it would ever come to be seen by you?--Then, besides, there isn't a chap among them that could
come up to the composing a piece of composition like that--no, not for all a whole year's salary--there
isn't, by George! You and I couldn't do it, and, of course, they couldn't!"

"Ah! I don't know," said Titmouse, doubtfully. "But--honor!--do you really now think there's
anything in it?"

"I do--I'm blowed if I don't, Tit!" was the sententious answer.

"Tol de rol, de rol, de rol, de rol--diddl'em--daddl'em--bang!" almost shouted Titmouse, jumping
up, snapping his fingers, and dancing about in a wild ecstasy, which lasted for nearly a minute.

"Give me your hand, Hucky," said he presently, almost breathless. "If I am a made man--tol
de rol, lol de rol, lol de rol, lol!--you see, Huck!--if I don't give you the handsomest breastpin
you ever saw? No paste! real diamond!--Hurrah! I will, by jingo!"

Huckaback grasped and squeezed his hand. "We've always been friends, Tit--haven't we?" said
he, affectionately.

"My room won't hold me to-night!" continued Titmouse; "I'm sure it won't. I feel as if I was,
as you may say, swelling all over. I'll walk the streets all night: I couldn't sleep a wink
for the life of me! I'll walk about till the shop opens. Oh, faugh! how nasty! Confound the
shop, and Tag-rag, and everything and everybody in it! Thirty-five pounds a year? See if I
won't spend as much in cigars the first month!"

"Cigars! Is that your go? Now, I should take lessons in boxing, to begin with. It's a deuced
high thing, you may depend upon it, and you can't be fit company for swells without it, Tit!
You can't, by Jove!"

"Whatever you like, whatever you like, Hucky!" cried Titmouse--adding, in a sort of ecstasy,
"I'm sorry to say it, but how precious lucky that my father and mother's dead, and that I'm
an only child--too-ra-laddy, too-ra-laddy!" Here he took such a sudden leap, that I am sorry
to say he split his trousers very awkwardly, and that sobered him for a moment, while they
made arrangements for cobbling it up as well as might be, with a needle and thread which Huckaback
always had by him.

"We're rather jumping in the dark a-bit, aren't we, Tit?" inquired Huckaback, while his companion
was repairing the breach. "Let's look what it all means--here it is." He read it all aloud
again--"'greatest possible importance!'--what can it mean? Why the deuce couldn't they speak
out plainly?"

"What! in a newspaper? Lord, Hucky! how many Titmouses would start up on all sides, if there
isn't some already indeed! I wonder what 'greatest possible importance' can mean, now!"

"Some one's left you an awful lot of money, of course"----

"It's too good to be true"----

"Or you may have made a smite; you a'n't such a bad-looking fellow, when you're dressed as
you are now--you a'n't indeed, Titty!" Mr. Titmouse was quite flustered with the mere supposition,
and also looked as sheepish as his features would admit of.

"E-e-e-eh, Hucky! how ve-ry silly you are!" he simpered.

"Or you may be found out heir to some great property, and all that kind of thing.--But when
do you intend to go to Messrs. What's-their-name? I should say, the sooner the better. Come,
you've stitched them trousers well enough, now; they'll hold you till you get home, (you do
brace up uncommon tight!) and I'd take off my straps, if I was you. Why shouldn't we go to
these gents now? Ah, here they are--Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, solicitors."

"I wonder if they're great men? Did you ever hear of them before?"

"Haven't I! Their names is always in this same paper; they are every day getting people off
out of all kinds of scrapes--they're the chaps I should nat'rally go to if I anyhow got wrong--ahem!"

"But, my dear fellow--Saffron Hill!--Low that--devilish low, 'pon my soul! Never was near it
in my life."

"But they live there to be near the thieves. Lud, the thieves couldn't do without 'em! But
what's that to you! You know 'a very dirty ugly toad has often got a jewel in his belly,' so
Shakspeare or some one says. Isn't it enough for you, Tit, if they can make good their advertisement?
Let's off, Tit--let's off, I say; for you mayn't be able to get there to-morrow--your employers!"----

"My employers! Do you think, Hucky, I'm going back to business after this?"

"Come, come, Titty--not so fast--suppose it all turns out moonshine, after all"--quoth Huckaback,
seriously.

"Lord, but I won't suppose anything of the sort! It makes me sick to think of nothing coming
of it!--Let's go off at once, and see what's to be done!"

So Huckaback put the newspaper into his pocket, blew out the candle, and the two started on
their important errand. It was well that their means had been too limited to allow of their
indulging to a greater extent than a glass of port-wine negus (that was the name under which
they had drunk the "publican's port"--i. e. a warm sweetened decoction of oak bark, logwood
shavings, and a little brandy) between them; otherwise, excited as were the feelings of each
of them by the discovery of the evening, they must in all probability have been guilty of some
piece of extravagance in the streets. As it was, they talked very loudly as they went along,
and in a tone of conversation pitched perhaps a little too high for their present circumstances,
however in unison it might be with the expected circumstances of one of them.

In due time they reached the residence of which they were in search. It was a large house,
greatly superior to all its dingy neighbors; and on a bright brass plate, a yard long at least,
and a foot wide, stood the awe-inspiring words, "QUIRK, GAMMON, & SNAP, SOLICITORS."

"Now, Tit," whispered Huckaback, after they had paused for a second or two--"now for it--pluck
up a sperrit--ring!"

"I--I--'pon my life--I feel all of a sudden uncommon funky--I think that last cigar of yours
wasn't"----

"Stuff, Tit--ring! ring away! Faint heart never wins!"

"Well, it must be done: so--here goes at any rate!" he replied; and with a short nervous jerk,
he caused a startling clatter within, which was so distinctly audible without, that both of
them instinctively hemmed, as if to drown the noise which was so much greater than they had
expected. In a very few moments they heard some one undoing the fastenings of the door, and
the gentlemen looked at one another with an expression of mingled expectation and apprehension.
A little old woman at length, with a candle in her hand, retaining the heavy door-chain in
its fastening, peered round the edge of the door at them.

"Who are you?" she exclaimed crustily.

"Is this Messrs.--What is it, Huck?--Oh! Messrs. Quirk & Co.'s?" inquired Titmouse, tapping
the end of his cane against his chin, with a desperate effort to appear at his ease.

"Why, where's your eyes?" she replied angrily, "I should think you might have seen what was
wrote on this here plate--it's large enough, one should have thought, to be read by them as
can read--Is your's Newgate business? Because if----"

"We want--Give us the paper, Hucky"--he added, addressing his companion, who produced it in
a moment; and Titmouse would have proceeded to possess the old lady of all his little heart,
when she cut him short by saying snappishly--"They aren't none on 'em in; nor never is on Sundays--so
you'll just call to-morrow if you wants 'em. What's your names?"

"Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse," answered that gentleman, with a very particular emphasis on every
syllable.

"Mr. who?" exclaimed the old woman, opening her eyes very wide, and raising her hand to the
back of her ear. Mr. Titmouse repeated his name more loudly and distinctly.

"Tippetytippety--what's that?"

"No, no!" exclaimed Titmouse, peevishly; "I said, Mr. Tit-el-bat Tit-mouse!--will that suit you?"

"Tick-a-tick-a-tick?--Well, gracious! if ever I heard such a name. Oh!--I see!--you're making
a fool of me! Get off, or I'll call a constable in!--Get along with you, you couple of jail-birds!
Is this the way"----

"I tell you," interposed Mr. Huckaback, angrily, "that this gentleman's name is Mr. Tittlebat
Titmouse; and you'd better take care what you're at, old woman, for we've come on business
of wital consequence!"

"I dare say it'll keep, then, till to-morrow," tartly added the old woman.

The friends consulted for a moment, and then Titmouse asked if he might come in and write a
letter to Messrs. Quirk and Co.

"No indeed!" said she; "how do I know who you are? There's a public-house close by, where you
may write what you like, and bring it here, and they'll get it the first thing in the morning.
So that's what you may take away with you!"--with which the complaisant old janitrix shut the
door in their faces.

"Huck, 'pon my life, I am afraid there's nothing in it," said Titmouse, despondingly, to his
friend--both of them remaining rooted to the spot.

"Oudacious old toad!" muttered Huckaback, very indignantly.

"Hucky--I'm sure there's nothing in it!" exclaimed Titmouse, after a long pause, looking earnestly
at his friend, hoping to draw from him a contrary opinion.

"I--I own I don't half like the looks of it," replied Huckaback, putting his newspaper into
his pocket again; "but we'll try if we can't write a letter to sound 'em, and so far take the
old creature's advice. Here's the public-house she told us of. Come, let's see what's to be done!"

Titmouse, greatly depressed, followed his friend; and they soon provided themselves with two
glasses of stout, and after a little difficulty, with implements for writing. That they made
good use of their time and materials, let the following epistle prove. It was their joint composition,
and here is an exact copy of it:--

               "To Messrs. QUIRK, GAMMON and SNAP.

     "SIR,

     "Your Names being Put In an Advertisement in This present Sunday
     Flash, Newspaper of To Day's Date, Mr. T. T. Begs To inform Your
     respectable House I feel Uncommon anxious To speak with them On
     This truly interesting subject, seeing It mentions The Name Of
     Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse, which Two last Names Of That Deceased
     Person my Own Name Is, which can Any Day (As soon As Possible)
     call and prove To you, By telling you The Same, truly. He being
     Engaged in Business During the week Very close, (for The Present,)
     I hope that If they Have Anything particular To say To Him, they
     will write To me without The least Delay, and please address T. T.,
     At Tag-rag and Co.'s, No. 375, Oxford Street, Post-Paid, which will
     ensure Its Being duly Taken In By my Employers, and am,

                                         "Gents,
                                             "Your's to Command,
                                                   "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

     "P. S.--My Friend, which Is With me writing This, (Mr. Robert
     Huckaback,) can prove who I am If necessiated so to do.

     "N. B.--Shall have no objections to do the Liberal Thing if
     anything suitable Turns Up Of It.
                                                                "T. T.
                                           "(Sunday Evening, 9/7/18--.

     "Forgot to Say, am The only Child of my Honored Parents, one of
     which (my Mother) Died; before I knew them In Lawful Wedloc, and
     Was 27 last Birth Day, Never having Seen your Advertisement Till
     This Night, w^h, if Necessary can Prove.)"

This perspicuous and truly elegant performance having been thrice subjected to the critical
examination of the friends, (the paragraph concerning Huckaback having been inserted at the
instance of that gentleman, who wished to be mixed up from the beginning with so promising
an affair,) was then folded up, and directed to "Messrs. Quirk and Co.," a great straggling
wet wafer having been first put upon it. It was safely deposited, a few minutes afterwards,
with the old lady at Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap's; and then the two West-End gentlemen
hastened away from that truly plebeian part of the town! Under three different gas-lights did
they stop, take out the newspaper, and spell over the advertisement; by which ingenious processes
they at length succeeded in satisfying themselves that there was something in it--a fact of
which, upon the old woman shutting the door in their faces, it may be recollected they had
had grievous misgivings. They parted, however, with a considerable abatement of the excitement
with which they had set out on their voyage of discovery.

Mr. Titmouse did not, on reaching his room, take off and lay aside his precious Sunday apparel
with his accustomed care and deliberation. On the contrary, he peeled it off, as it were, and
threw himself on the bed as quickly as possible, in order that he might calmly revolve the
immense event of the day in his little mind, which it had agitated like a stone thrown into
a stagnant pool by the roadside. Oh, how restless was he!--not more so could he have been had
he lain between horse-hair sheets. He repeatedly got up and walked about two or three little
steps, which were all that his room admitted of. At the very first peep of daylight he started
out of bed, got out of his pocket the newspaper which Huckaback had lent him, strove to decipher
the advertisement, and then sank into bed again--but not to sleep, till four or five o'clock;
having nevertheless to rise at half-past six, to resume his detested duties at Tag-rag and
Co.'s, whose shop he assisted in opening at seven o'clock, as usual. When he and his shopmates
were sitting together at breakfast, he could not for the life of him help letting out a little,
vaguely and mysteriously, about "something that might happen in the course of the day;" and
thereby succeeded in satisfying his experienced companions that he expected the visit of a
policeman, for some row he had been concerned in over-night.--Well:--eight, nine, ten o'clock
wore away heavily, and nothing transpired, alas! to vary the monotonous duties in which Mr.
Titmouse was engaged; bale after bale, and package after package, he took down and put up again,
at the bidding of pretty, capricious customers; silk, satin, bombazines, crapes, muslins, ribbons,
gloves, he assisted in displaying, disposing of, or replacing as usual; but it was clear that
his powerful understanding could no longer settle itself, as before, upon his responsible and
arduous duties. Every other minute he cast a feverish furtive glance towards the door. He almost
dropped, at one time, as a postman crossed from the opposite side of the street, as if to enter
their shop--then passing on immediately, however, to the next door. Not a person, in short,
entered the premises, whom he did not scrutinize narrowly and anxiously, but in vain. No--buying
and selling was the order of the day, as usual!--Eleven o'clock struck, and he sighed. "You
don't seem well," said a pretty young woman, to whom, in a somewhat absent manner, he was exhibiting
and describing the qualities of some cambric. "Oh--ye--es, uncommon!" he replied; "never better,
ma'am, than when so well employed!" accompanying the latter words with what he conceived to
be a very arch, but which was in fact a very impudent, look at his fair customer. At that moment
a voice called out to him from the farther end of the shop, near the door--"Titmouse! Wanted!"

"Coming!" he shouted, turning as white as the cambric he held in his hands--which became suddenly
cold; while his heart went thump, thump, as he hastily exclaimed to the astonished lady, "Excuse
me, ma'am, if you please--Jones," addressing the shopman next him, "will you attend to this
lady?" and he hastened whither he had been called, amid a prevalent grin and "hem!" from his
companions on each side, as he passed along the shop, till he reached the spot where stood
the stranger who had inquired for him. He was of a slight and gentlemanly figure, above the
average height. His countenance was very striking: he was dressed with simplicity--somewhat
carelessly perhaps; and appeared somewhere about thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age. He
bowed slightly as Titmouse approached him, and an air of very serious surprise came over his
expressive countenance.

"Mr. Titmouse?" he inquired blandly.

"Ye-e-s, sir, at your service," replied Titmouse, trembling involuntarily all over. The stranger
again slightly inclined towards him, and--still more slightly--touched his hat; fixing on him,
at the same time, an inquisitive penetrating eye, which really abashed, or rather perhaps alarmed
him.

"You left--you favored us by leaving--a note at our office last night, sir, addressed to Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap?" he inquired, lowering his voice to a whisper.

"Yes, sir, hoping it was no"----

"Pray, Mr. Titmouse, can we be alone for about five or ten minutes?"

"I--I--don't exactly know, here, sir; I'm afraid--against the rules of the house--but I'll
ask. Here is Mr. Tag-rag.--May I step into the cloak-room with this gentleman for a few minutes,
sir?" he continued, addressing his imperious employer, who, with a pen behind his right ear,
his left hand in his breeches pocket, and his right hand impatiently tweedling about his watch-seals,
had followed Titmouse, on hearing him inquired for in the manner I have described, and stood
at a yard or two's distance, eying the two with a truculent dissatisfied look, wondering what
on earth any one could want with one of his young men.

As Mr. Tag-rag will be rather a prominent figure on my canvas, I may as well here give the
reader a slight preparatory sketch of that gentleman. He was about fifty-two years old; a great
tyrant in his little way; a compound of ignorance, selfishness, cant, and conceit. He knew
nothing on earth except the price of his goods, and how to make the most of his business. He
was of middle size, with a tendency to corpulence; and almost invariably wore a black coat
and waistcoat, a white neck handkerchief very primly tied, and gray trousers. He had a dull,
gray eye, with white eyelashes, and no eyebrows; a forehead which seemed ashamed of his face,
it retreated so far and so abruptly back from it; his face was pretty deeply pitted with the
small-pox; his nose--or rather semblance of a nose--consisted of two great nostrils looking
at you--as it were, impudently--out of the middle of his face; there was a perfect level space
from cheek-bone to cheek-bone; his gray whiskers, trimly and closely cut, came in points to
each corner of his mouth, which was large, shapeless, and sensual-looking. This may serve,
for the present, to give you an idea of the man who had contrived to excite towards himself
the hatred and contempt of everybody over whom he had any control--with whom in fact he had
anything to do.

"You know quite well, sir, we never allow anything of the sort," was his short reply, in a
very disagreeable tone and manner, to Titmouse's modest request.

"May I beg the favor of a few minutes' private conversation with Mr. Titmouse," said the stranger,
politely, "on a matter of the last importance to him? My name, sir, is Gammon, and I am a solicitor
of the firm of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap"----

"Why, sir," answered Tag-rag, somewhat cowed by the calm and gentlemanly, but at the same time
decisive manner of Mr. Gammon--"it's really very inconvenient, and decidedly against the rules
of the house, for any of my young men to be absent on business of their own during my business
hours; but--I suppose--what must be must be--I'll give him ten minutes--and he'd better not
stay longer," he subjoined fiercely--looking significantly first at his watch, and then at
Titmouse. "It's only for the sake of my other young men, you know, sir. In a large establishment
like ours, we're obliged, you know, sir," &c. &c. &c., he added, in a low cringing tone, deprecatory
of the contemptuous air with which he felt that Mr. Gammon was regarding him.

That gentleman, with a slight bow, and a sarcastic smile, presently quitted the shop, accompanied
by Titmouse, who scarce knew whether his head or heels were uppermost.

"How far do you live from this place, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Mr. Gammon, as soon as they had
got into the street.

"Not four minutes' walk, sir; but--hem!"--he was flustered at the idea of showing so eminent
a person into his wretched room--"Suppose we were to step into this tavern here, sir--I dare
say they have a room at our service"----

"Pray, allow me to ask, Mr. Titmouse--have you any private papers--family writings, or things
of that sort, at your rooms?"

Titmouse seemed considering.

"I--I think I have, sir," he replied--"one or two--but they're of no consequence."

"Are you a judge on that point, Mr. Titmouse?" inquired Mr. Gammon, with a smile; "pray let
us, my dear sir, at once proceed to your rooms--time is very short and valuable. I should vastly
like to look at these same insignificant papers of yours!"

In less than two minutes' further time, Mr. Gammon was sitting at Titmouse's little rickety
round table, at his lodgings, with a sheet of paper before him, and a small pencil-case in
his hand, asking him a number of questions concerning his birth and family connections, and
taking down his answers very carefully. Mr. Titmouse was surprised at the gentleman's knowledge
of the family history of the Titmouses. As for papers, &c., Mr. Titmouse succeeded in producing
four or five old letters and memoranda from the bottom of his trunk, and one or two entries,
in faded ink, on the fly-leaf of a Bible of his father's, which he did not recollect having
opened before for very many years, and of which said entries, till pressed on the subject by
Mr. Gammon, he had been hardly aware of even the existence. With these several documents Mr.
Gammon was so much struck that he proposed to take them away with him, for better and more
leisurely examination, and safer custody, at their office; but Mr. Titmouse significantly hinted
at his very recent acquaintance with Mr. Gammon, who, he intimated, was at liberty to come
and make exact copies of them whenever he pleased, in his (Mr. Titmouse's) presence.

"Oh, certainly--yes," replied Mr. Gammon, slightly coloring at the distrust implied by this
observation; "I applaud your caution, Mr. Titmouse. By all means keep these documents, and
most carefully; because, (I do not say that they are,) but it is quite possible that they may
become rather valuable--to you."

"Thank you, sir; and now, hoping you'll excuse the liberty," said Titmouse, with a very anxious
air, "I should most uncommonly like to know what all this means--what is to turn up out of it all?"

"The law, my dear sir, is proverbially uncertain"----

"Oh, Lord! but the law can surely give one a hint"----

"The law never hints," interrupted Mr. Gammon, impressively, with a bland smile.

"Well then, how did you come, sir, to know that there ever was such a person as Mr. Gabriel
Titmouse, my father? And what can come from him, seeing he was only a bit of a shoemaker--unless
he's heir to something?"

"Ah, yes--exactly; those are very interesting questions, Mr. Titmouse--very!"----

"Yes, sir; and them and many more I was going to ask long ago, but I saw you were"----

"Sir, I perceive that we have positively been absent from your place of business nearly an
hour--your employers will be getting rather impatient."

"Meaning no offence, sir--bother their impatience! I'm impatient, I assure you, to know what
all this means. Come, sir, 'pon my life I've told you everything! It isn't quite fair!"

"Why, certainly, you see, Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon, with an agreeable smile--(it was that
smile of his which had been the making of Mr. Gammon)--"it is only candid in me to acknowledge
that your curiosity is perfectly reasonable, and your frankness very obliging; and I see no
difficulty in admitting at once, that I have had a--motive"----

"Yes, sir--and all that--I know, sir,"--hastily interrupted Titmouse, but without irritating
or disturbing the placid speaker.

"And that we waited with some anxiety for the result of our advertisement."

"Ah, you can't escape from that, you know, sir!" interposed Titmouse, with a confident air.

"But it is a maxim with us, my dear sir, never to be premature in anything, especially when
it may be--very prejudicial; you've really no idea, my dear Mr. Titmouse, of the world of mischief
that is often done by precipitancy in legal matters; and in the present stage of the business--the
present stage, my dear sir--I really do see it necessary not to--do anything premature, and
without consulting my partners."

"Lord, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse, getting more and more irritated and impatient as he reflected
on the length of his absence from Tag-rag & Co.'s.

"I quite feel for your anxiety--so perfectly natural"----

"Oh, dear sir! if you'd only tell me the least bit"----

"If, my dear sir, I were to disclose just now the exact object we had in inserting that advertisement
in the papers"----

"How did you come to know of it at all, sir? Come, there can't be any harm in that anyhow"----

"Not the least, my dear sir. It was in the course of business--in the course of business."

"Is it money that's been left me--or--anything of that sort?"

"It quite pains me, I assure you, Mr. Titmouse, to suppose that our having put this advertisement
into the papers may have misled you, and excited false hopes--I think, by the way"--added Gammon,
suddenly, as something occurred to him of their previous conversation, which he was not quite
sure of--"you told me that that Bible had been given you by your father."

"Oh yes, sir! yes--- no doubt of it; surely that can't signify, seeing he's dead, and I'm his
only son?" asked Titmouse, quickly and eagerly.

"Oh, 'tis only a circumstance--a mere circumstance; but in business, you know, Mr. Titmouse,
every little helps--and you really, by the way, have no recollection of your mother, Mr. Titmouse?"

"No, sir, I said so! And--meaning no offence, sir--I can't abide being put off in this kind
of way,--I must own!--See what I have told you--you've told me nothing at all. I hope you haven't
been only making me a cat's-paw of? 'Pon my soul, I hate being made a cat's-paw of, sir!"

"Good heavens, Mr. Titmouse! how can you imagine it? Matters in some degree connected with
one or two former members of your family, are at this moment the object of some little of our
anxiety"----

"Not meaning it rudely, sir--please to tell me at once, plainly, am I to be the better for
anything you're now about, or was that advertisement all fudge?"

"That may or may not be, sir," answered Mr. Gammon, in the same imperturbable manner, drawing
on his gloves, and rising from his chair. "In justice to yourself, and other parties concerned"----

"Oh! is anybody to share in it?" exclaimed Titmouse, alarmedly.

"I am sure," said Gammon, smiling, "that you will give us credit for consulting your best interests,
if they should prove to be in any degree concerned in our present inquiries! We should, in
that event, sincerely desire to advance them. But--it is really," looking at his watch, "upwards
of an hour since we quitted your place of business--I fear I shall get into disgrace with that
respectable gentleman, your employer. Will you favor us with a call at our office to-morrow
night, when the business of the day is over? When do you quit at night?"

"About half-past nine o'clock, sir; but really--to-morrow night! Couldn't I come to-night, sir?"

"Not to-night, I fear, my dear sir. We have a very important engagement. Let us say to-morrow
night, at a quarter past ten--shall we say that hour?" inquired Mr. Gammon, with an imperative
smile.

"Well, sir, if not before--yes--I'll be with you. But I must say"---- quoth Titmouse, with
a sulky disconcerted air.

"Good-day, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon--they were by this time in Oxford Street again.--"Good-day,
my dear sir--good-day--to-morrow night, as soon after ten as possible--eh? Good-by."

This was all that Mr. Titmouse could get out of Mr. Gammon, who, hailing a coach off the stand
beside them, got in, and it was soon making its way eastward. What a miserable mixture of doubts,
hopes, and fears, had he left Titmouse! He felt as if he were a squeezed orange; he had told
everything he knew about himself, and got nothing in return out of the smooth, imperturbable,
impenetrable Mr. Gammon, but empty civilities.--"Lord, Lord!" thought Titmouse, as Mr. Gammon's
coach turned the corner; "what would I give to know half about it that that gent knows! But
Mr. Tag-rag! by Jove! what will he say? It's struck twelve. I've been more than an hour away--and
he gave me ten minutes! Sha'n't I catch it?"

And he did. Almost the very first person whom he met, on entering the shop, was his respected
employer; who, plucking his watch out of his fob, and looking furiously at it, motioned the
trembling Titmouse to follow him to the farther end of the long shop, where there happened
to be then no customers.

"Is this your ten minutes, sir, eh?"

"I am sorry"----

"Where may you have been, sir, all this while?"

"With that gentleman, sir, and I really did not know"----

"You didn't know, sir! Who cares what you know, or don't know? This, at any rate, you know--that
you ought to have been back fifty-five minutes ago, sir. You do, sir! Isn't your time my property,
sir? Don't I pay for it, sir? An hour!--in the middle of the day! I've not had such a thing
happen this five years! I'll stop it out of your salary, sir."

Titmouse did not attempt to interrupt him.

"And pray what have you been gossiping about, sir, in this disgraceful manner?"

"Something that he wanted to say to me, sir."

"You low puppy!--do you suppose I don't see your impertinence? I insist, sir, on knowing what
all this gossiping with that fellow has been about?"

"Then you won't know, sir, that's flat!" replied Titmouse, doggedly; returning to his usual
station behind the counter.

"I sha'n't!!" exclaimed Mr. Tag-rag, almost aghast at the presumption of his inferior.

"No, sir, you sha'n't know a single word about it."

"Sha'n't know a single word about it! Vastly good, sir!!--Do you know whom you're talking to,
sir? Do you really know in whose presence you are, sir?" inquired Mr. Tag-rag, nearly trembling
with rage.

"Mr. Tag-rag, I presume, of the firm of Tag-rag and Co.," replied Titmouse, looking him full
in the face.--One or two of his companions near him, almost turned pale at the audacity he
was displaying.

"And who are you, sir, that dare to presume to bandy words with ME, sir?" inquired Tag-rag,
his deeply pitted face having turned quite white, and his whole body quivering with rage.

"Tittlebat Titmouse, at your service," was the answer, in a glib tone, and with a sufficiently
saucy air; for Titmouse then felt that he had passed the Rubicon.

"You heard that, I hope?" inquired Tag-rag, with forced calmness, of a pale-faced young man,
the nearest to him.

"Ye--es, sir," was the meekly reluctant answer.

"This day month you leave, sir!" said Mr. Tag-rag, solemnly--as if conscious that he was passing
a sort of sentence of death upon the presumptuous delinquent.

"Very well, Mr. Tag-rag--anything that pleases you pleases your humble servant. I will go this
day month, and welcome--I've long wished--and now, p'r'aps," he added significantly--"it's
rather convenient than otherwise"----

"Then you sha'n't leave, sir," said Tag-rag, furiously.

"But I will, sir. You've given me warning; and, if you haven't, now I give you warning," replied
Titmouse; turning, however, very pale, and experiencing a certain sudden sinking of the heart--for
this was a serious and most unlooked-for event, and for a while put out of his head all the
agitating thoughts of the last few hours. Poor Titmouse had enough to bear--what with the delicate
raillery and banter of his refined companions for the rest of the day, find the galling tyranny
of Mr. Tag-rag, (who dogged him about all day, setting him about the most menial and troublesome
offices he could, and constantly saying mortifying things to him before customers,) and the
state of miserable suspense in which Mr. Gammon had thought fit to leave him; I say that surely
all this was enough for him to bear without having to encounter at night, as he did, on his
return to his lodgings, his blustering landlady, who vowed that if she sold him out and out
she would be put off no longer--and his pertinacious and melancholy tailor, who, with sallow
unshaven face, told him of five children at home, all ill of the small-pox, and his wife in
an hospital--and he implored a payment on account. This sufferer succeeded in squeezing out
of Titmouse seven shillings on account, and his landlady extorted ten; which staved off a distress--direful
word!--for some week or two longer; and so they left him in the possession of eight shillings
or so, to last till next quarter-day--six weeks off! He sighed heavily, barred his door, and
sat down opposite his little table, on which was nothing but a solitary thin candle, and on
which his eyes rested unconsciously, till the stench of it, burning right down into the socket,
roused him from his wretched revery. Then he unlocked his box, and took out his Bible and the
papers which had been produced to Mr. Gammon, and gazed at them with intense but useless scrutiny.
Unable to conjecture what bearing they could have upon himself or his fortunes, he hastily
replaced them in his box, threw off his clothes, and flung himself on his bed, to pass a far
more dismal night than he had known for years.

He ran the gantlet at Messrs. Tag-rag and Co.'s all Tuesday as he had done on the day preceding.
One should have supposed that when his companions beheld him persecuted by their common tyrant,
whom they all equally hated, they would have made common cause with their suffering companion,
or at all events given no countenance to his persecution; yet it was far otherwise. Without
stopping to analyze the feeling which produced it, (and which the moderately reflective reader
may easily analyze for himself if so disposed,) I am grieved to have to say, that when all
the young men saw that Tag-rag would be gratified by their cutting poor Titmouse, who, with
all his little vanities, fooleries, and even selfishness, had never personally offended or
injured any of them--they did cut him; and, when Tag-rag observed it, his miserable mind was
unspeakably gratified with what they had done: and he spoke to all of them with unusual blandness;
to the sinner, Titmouse, with augmented bitterness and sternness.

CHAPTER II.

A few minutes after ten o'clock that night, a gentle ringing at the bell of Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap's office, announced the arrival of poor Titmouse. The door was quickly opened
by a very fashionably dressed clerk, who seemed in the act of quitting for the night.

"Ah--Mr. Titmouse, I presume?" he inquired, with a kind of deference in his manner to which
Titmouse had never been accustomed.

"The same, sir--Tittlebat Titmouse."

"Oh! allow me, sir, to show you in to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; I know they're expecting
to see you. It's not often they're here so late! Walk in, sir"---- With this he led the way
to an inner room, and opening a green-baize door in the farther side of it, announced and showed
in Mr. Titmouse, and left him--sufficiently flustered. Three gentlemen were sitting at a large
table, on which he saw, by the strong but circumscribed light of two shaded candlesticks, were
lying a great number of papers and parchments. The three gentlemen rose when he entered, Mr.
Quirk and Mr. Snap involuntarily starting on first catching sight of the figure of Titmouse:
Mr. Gammon came and shook hands with him.

"Mr. Titmouse," said he, with a very polite air, "let me introduce you to Mr. Quirk"--(This
was the senior partner, a short, stout elderly gentleman, dressed in black, with a shining
bald crown fringed with white hair, and sharp black eyes, and who looked very earnestly, nay,
with even a kind of dismay, at him)--"and Mr. Snap"--(This was the junior partner, having recently
been promoted to be such after ten years' service in the office, as managing clerk: he was
about thirty, particularly well dressed, slight, active, and with a face like a terrier--so
hard, sharp, and wiry!) Of Mr. Gammon himself, I have already given the reader a slight notion.
He appeared altogether a different style of person from both his partners. He was of most gentlemanly
person and bearing--and at once acute, cautious, and insinuating--with a certain something
about the eye, which had from the first made Titmouse feel uneasy on looking at him.

"A seat, sir," said Mr. Quirk, rising, and placing a chair for him, on which he sat down, they
resuming theirs.

"You are punctual, Mr. Titmouse!" exclaimed Mr. Gammon, kindly; "more so than, I fear, you
were yesterday, after our long interview, eh? Pray what did that worthy person, Mr. Rag-bag--or
whatever his name is--say on your return?"

"Say, gents?"--(he tried to clear his throat, for he spoke somewhat more thickly, and his heart
beat more perceptibly than usual)--"Meaning no offence--I'm ruined by it, and no mistake."

"Ruined! I'm sorry to hear it," interposed Mr. Gammon, with a concerned air.

"I am, indeed, sir. Such a towering rage as he has been in ever since; and he's given me warning
to go on the 10th of next month." He thought he observed a faint smile flit over the faces
of all three. "He has, indeed!"

"Dear me, Mr. Titmouse!--Did he allege any reason for dismissing you?" keenly inquired Mr. Quirk.

"Yes, sir"----

"What might it have been?"

"Stopping out longer than I was allowed, and refusing to tell him what this gentleman and I
had been talking about."

"Don't think that'll do; sure it won't!" briskly exclaimed Mr. Snap; "no just cause of dismissal
that," and he jumped up, whisked down a book from the shelves behind him, and eagerly turned
over the leaves.

"Never mind that now, Mr. Snap," said Mr. Quirk, rather petulantly; "surely we have other matters
to talk about to-night!"

"Asking pardon, sir, but I think it does matter to me, sir," interposed Titmouse; "for on the
10th of next month I'm a beggar--being next door to it now."

"Not quite, we trust," said Mr. Gammon, with a benignant smile.

"But Mr. Tag-rag said he'd make me as good as one."

"That's evidence to show malice," again eagerly interjected Mr. Snap, who was a second time
tartly rebuffed by Mr. Quirk; even Mr. Gammon turning towards him with a surprised--"Really,
Mr. Snap!"

"So Mr. Tag-rag said he'd make you a beggar?" inquired Mr. Quirk.

"He vowed he would, sir!--He did, as true as the gospel, sir!"

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Mr. Quirk and Mr. Gammon--but such a laugh!--not careless or hearty,
but subdued, and with a dash of deference in it. "Well--it perhaps may not signify much, by
that time;" said Mr. Quirk, and laughed again, followed by the soft laugh of Mr. Gammon, and
a kind of sharp quick sound, like a bark, from Mr. Snap.

"But, gents, you'll excuse me if I say I think it does signify to me, and a'n't any laughing
matter, by any means!" quoth Titmouse, earnestly, and coloring with anger. "Without being rude,
I'd rather come to business, if there's any to be done, without so much laughing at one."

"Laughing at you! my dear sir,--no, no!" exclaimed all three in a breath--"laughing with you,"
said Mr. Quirk!--"By the time you mention, you may perhaps be able to laugh at Mr. Rag-bag,
and everybody else, for"----

[--"No use mincing matters?" he whispered, in a low tone, to Mr. Gammon, who nodded, but in
apparently very reluctant acquiescence, and fixed his eyes earnestly on Titmouse.]

"I really think we are warranted, sir, in preparing you to expect by that time--that is, you
will understand, sir, if our efforts are successful in your behalf, and if you yield yourself
implicitly in all things to our guidance--that is absolutely essential--a prospect--we say
at present, you will observe, only a prospect--of a surprising and splendid change in your
circumstances!" Titmouse began to tremble violently, his heart beat rapidly, and his hands
were bedewed with a cold moisture.

"I hear, gents," said he, thickly; and he also heard a faint ringing in his ears.

"It's not impossible, sir, in plain English," continued Mr. Quirk, himself growing a little
excited with the important communication which trembled on the tip of his tongue, "that you
may at no distant time (if you really turn out to be the person we are in search of) be put
into possession of an estate of somewhere about Ten Thousand a-year"----

The words seemed to have struck Titmouse blind--as he saw nothing for some moments; then everything
appeared to be swimming around him, and he felt a sort of faintness or sickness stealing over
him. They had hardly been prepared for their communication's affecting their little visitor
so powerfully. Mr. Snap hastened out, and in again, with a glass of water; and the earnest
attentions of the three soon restored Mr. Titmouse to his senses. It was a good while, however,
before he could appreciate the little conversation which they now and then addressed to him,
or estimate the full importance of the astounding intelligence which Mr. Quirk had just communicated,
"Beg pardon--but may I make free to ask for a little brandy and cold water, gents? I feel all
over in a kind of tremble," said he, some little time afterwards.

"Yes--by all means, Mr. Titmouse," replied Mr. Quirk--"Mr. Snap, will you be kind enough to
order Betty to bring in a glass of cold brandy and water from the Jolly Thieves, next door?"--Snap
shot out, gave the order, and returned in a trice. The old woman in a few minutes' time followed,
with a large tumbler of dark brandy and water, quite hot, for which Mr. Gammon apologized,
but Mr. Titmouse said he preferred it so--and soon addressed himself to the inspiriting mixture.
It quickly manifested its influence, reassuring him wonderfully. As he sat sipping it, Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap being engaged in an earnest conversation, of which he could not comprehend
a word, he had leisure to look about him, and observed that there was lying before them a large
sheet of paper, at which they all of them often and earnestly looked, filled with marks, so--

with writing at the ends of each of them, and round and square figures. When he saw them all
bending over and scrutinizing this mysterious object, it puzzled him (and many a better head
than his has a pedigree puzzled before) sorely, and he began to suspect it was a sort of conjuring
paper!--

"I hope, gents, that paper's all right--eh?" said he, supported by the brandy, which he had
nearly finished. They turned towards him with a smile of momentary surprise, and then--

"We hope so--a vast deal depends on it," said Mr. Quirk, looking over his glasses at Titmouse.
Now what he had hinted at, as far as he could venture to do so, was a thought that glanced
across his as yet unsettled brain, that there might have been invoked more than mere earthly
assistance; but he prudently pressed the matter no farther--that was all Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap's look-out; he had been no party to anything of the sort, nor would he knowingly.
He also observed the same sheets of paper written all over, which Mr. Gammon had filled up
at his (Titmouse's) room, the night before; and several new, and old-looking, papers and parchments.
Sometimes they addressed questions to him, but found it somewhat difficult to keep his attention
up to anything that was said to him for the wild visions which were chasing one another through
his heated brain; the passage of which said visions was not a little accelerated by the large
tumbler of brandy and water which he had just taken.

"Then, in point of fact," said Mr. Quirk, as Messrs. Gammon and Snap simultaneously sat down,
after having been for some time standing poring over the paper before Mr. Quirk. "This Tittlebat
Titmouse's title must have accrued in 18--. That's the point--eh, Gammon?"

"Precisely so," said Mr. Gammon, calmly.

"To be sure," confidently added Snap; who having devoted himself exclusively all his life to
the sharpest practice of the criminal law, knew about as much of real property law as a snipe--but
it would not have done to appear ignorant, or taking no part in the matter, in the presence
of the heir-at-law, and the future great client of the House.

"Well, Mr. Titmouse," at length said Mr. Quirk, with a sort of grunt, laying aside his glasses--"if
you turn out to be the Titmouse we have been speaking of, you are likely, through our immense
exertions, to become one of the luckiest men that ever lived! We may be mistaken, but it appears
to us that we shall by and by be able to put you into possession of a very fine estate in Yorkshire,
worth some £10,000 or £12,000 a-year at the least!"

"You--don't--say--so!" exclaimed Titmouse, elevating his hands and opening his eyes with amazement--"Oh,
gents, I do believe we're all dreaming! Is it all true, indeed?"

"It is, Mr. Titmouse--and we are very proud and happy indeed to be the honored instruments
of establishing your rights, my dear sir," said Mr. Gammon, in a most impressive manner.

"Then all the money that's been spent this ten or twelve years has been my money, has it?"

"If we are right, it is undoubtedly as you say," answered Mr. Quirk, giving a quick apprehensive
glance at Mr. Gammon.

"Then there'll be a jolly reckoning for some one, shortly--eh? My stars!"

"My dear Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon, gravely, "you have no more than a just regard for
your own interests. There will be a reckoning, and a very terrible one ere long, for somebody--but
we've a vast deal to go through, and a vast deal of money to be spent, before we come to discuss
that matter! Only let us have the unspeakable happiness of seeing you once fairly in possession
of your estates, and our office shall know no rest till you have got all you may be entitled
to--even to the uttermost farthing!"

"Oh, never fear our letting them rest!" said Mr. Quirk, judiciously accommodating himself to
the taste and apprehension of his excited auditor--"Those that must give up the goose, must
give up the giblets also--ha, ha, ha!" Messrs. Gammon and Snap echoed the laugh, duly tickled
with the joke of the head of the firm.

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Mr. Titmouse, immensely excited by the conjoint influence of the brandy,
and the news of the night; "capital! capital! hurrah! Such goings on there will be! You're
all of the right sort, gents, I see! 'Pon my life, law for ever! There's nothing like it! Let's
all shake hands, gents! Come, if you please, all together! all friends to-night!" And the little
fellow grasped each of the three readily-proffered right hands of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and
Snap, with an energy that was likely to make all the high contracting parties to that quadruple
alliance, remember its ratification.

"And is it all a ready-money affair, gents?--or rent, and all that kind of thing?" he inquired,
after many eloquent expressions of delight.

"Why, almost entirely the latter," answered Mr. Quirk, "except the accumulations."

"Then, 'pon my soul--I'm a great landlord, am I?"

"Indeed, my dear Mr. Titmouse, you are--(that is, unless we have made a blunder such as--I
will say--our house is not often in the habit of making)--and have two very fine houses, one
in town and the other in the country."

"Capital! delightful! I'll live in both of them--we'll have such goings on!--And is it quite
up to the mark of £10,000 a-year?"

"We really entertain no doubt at present that it is"----

"And such as that I can spend all of it, every year?"

"Certainly--no doubt of it--not the least. The rents are paid with most exemplary punctuality--at
least," added Mr. Gammon, with a captivating, an irresistible smile, and taking him affectionately
by the hand--"at least they will be, as soon as we have them fairly in our management."

"Oh, you're to get it all in for me, are you?" he inquired briskly. The three partners bowed,
with the most deprecatingly-disinterested air in the world; intimating that, for his sake,
they were ready to take upon themselves even that troublesome responsibility.

"Capital! couldn't be better! couldn't be better! Ah, ha, ha--you've catched the goose, and
must bring me its eggs. Ah, ha, ha! a touch in your line, old gent!" said he, slapping Mr.
Quirk's knee.

"Ha, ha, ha! excellent! ah, ha, ha!" laughed the three partners at the wit of their new client.
Mr. Titmouse joined them, and snapped his fingers in the air. Then he added suddenly--

"Lord--by the way--I've just thought of Tag-rag and Company's--I seem as if I hadn't seen or
heard of those gents for Lord knows how long! Only fancy old Tag-rag making me a beggar on
the 10th of next month--ha, ha, ha!--I sha'n't see that infernal hole any more, anyhow!"

["There!" whispered Mr. Gammon, suddenly and apprehensively, in the ear of Mr. Quirk, "you
hear that? A little wretch! We have been perfectly insane in going so far already with him!
Is not this what I predicted?"--"I don't care," said Mr. Quirk, stubbornly. "Who first found
it out, Mr. Gammon? and who's to be at the expense and responsibility? Pshaw! I know what I'm
about--I'll make him knuckle down--never fear me! Caleb Quirk a'n't a man to be trifled with!"]

"That," continued Titmouse, snapping his fingers with an air of defiance--"for Mr. Tag-rag!
That for Mother Squallop--Ah, ha, gents! It won't do to go back to that--eugh!--eh? will it?--you
know what I mean! Fancy Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse--or Mr. Tittlebat Titmouse, Esquire--standing
behind"----

The partners looked rather blank at this unexpected sally.

"We would venture to suggest, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Gammon, seriously, "the absolute necessity
there is for everything on your part, and our parts, to go on as quietly as before, for a little
time to come: to be safe and successful, my dear sir, we must be very--very secret."

"Oh, I see, gents! I see; mum--mum's the word, for the present! But, I must say, if there is
any one whom I want to hear of it, sooner than another, it's"----

"Rag-bag and Co., I suppose! ha, ha, ha!" interrupted Mr. Gammon, his partners echoing his
gentle laugh.

"Ha, ha, ha! Cuss the cats--that's it--ha, ha, ha!" echoed Mr. Titmouse; who, getting up out
of his chair, could not resist capering to and fro, sticking his hands on his hips, in something
of the attitude of a hornpipe dancer, whistling and humming by turns, and indulging in various
other wild antics.

"And now, gents--excuse me, but, to do a bit of business--when am I to begin scattering the
shiners, eh?" he inquired, interrupting a low-toned, but somewhat vehement conversation, between
the two senior partners; while Snap sat silently eying him like a terrier a rat coming within
his reach!

"Oh, of course, sir!" replied Mr. Gammon, rather coldly, "very--considerable--delay is unavoidable.
All we have done, as yet, is to discover that, as far as we are advised, and can judge, you
will turn out to be the right owner; but--as we've already intimated--very extensive and expensive
operations must be immediately commenced, before you can be put into possession. There are
some who won't be persuaded to part with £10,000 a-year, Mr. Titmouse, for the mere asking!"
added Mr. Gammon, with an anxious and bitter smile.

"The devil there are! Who are they that want to keep me any longer out of what's my own?--what's
justly mine? Eh? I want to know! Haven't they kept me out long enough?--hang 'em! Put 'em in
prison directly--don't spare 'em--the villains!"

"They'll probably, ere long, find their way in that direction--for how," replied Mr. Quirk,
"he's ever to make up, poor devil, the mesne profits"----

"Mean profits?--is that all you call them, gents? 'Pon my life, it's rogue's money--villain's
profits! So don't spare him--d--n him!--he's robbed the fatherless, which I am, and an orphan.
Keep me out of what's mine, indeed! Curse me if he shall, though!"

"My dear Mr. Titmouse," said Gammon, very gravely, "we are getting on too fast--dreadfully
too fast. It will never do, matters of such immense importance as these cannot be hurried on,
or talked of, in this way"----

"I like that, sir!--I do, by Jove!"--exclaimed Titmouse, scornfully.

"You will really, if you go on in this wild way, Mr. Titmouse, make us regret the trouble we
have taken in the affair, and especially the promptness with which we have communicated to
you the extent of your possible good fortune."

"Beg pardon, I'm sure, gents, but mean no offence: am monstrous obliged to you for what you've
done for me--but, by Jove, it's taken me rather a-back, I own, to hear that I'm to be kept
so long out of it all! Why can't you offer him, whoever he is that has my property, a slapping
sum to go out at once? Gents, I'll own to you I'm most uncommon low--never so low in my life--devilish
low! Done up, and yet it seems a'n't to get what's justly mine! What am I to do in the meanwhile?
Consider that, gents!"

"You are rather excited just now, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Quirk, seriously; "suppose we now
break up, and resume our conversation to-morrow, when we are all in better and calmer trim?"

"No, sir, thanking you all the same; but I think we'd better go on with it now," replied Titmouse,
impetuously. "Do you think I can stoop to go back to that nasty, beastly shop, and stand behind
that odious counter?--I'd almost as lieve go to the gallows!"

"Our decided opinion, Mr. Titmouse," said Mr. Quirk, emphatically--his other partners getting
graver and graver in their looks--"that is, if our opinion is worth offering"----

"That, by Jove! remains to be seen," said Titmouse, with a pettish shake of the head.

"Well, such as it is, we offer it you; and it is, that for many reasons you must continue,
for a little while longer, in your present situation"----

"What! own Tag-rag for my master--and I worth £10,000 a-year?" interrupted Titmouse, furiously.

"My dear sir, you've not got it yet," said Mr. Quirk, with a very bitter smile.

"Do you think you'd have told me what you have, if you weren't sure that I should, though?
No, no! you've gone too far, by Jove!--but I shall burst, I shall! Me to go on as before!--they
use me worse and worse every day. Gents, you'll excuse me--I hope you will; but business is
business, gents--it is; and if you won't do mine, I must look out for them that will--'pon
my soul, I must, and"--If Mr. Titmouse could have seen, or having seen, appreciated, the looks
which the three partners interchanged, on hearing this absurd, ungrateful, and insolent speech
of his--the expression that flitted across their shrewd faces; that was, of intense contempt
for him, hardly overmastered and concealed by a vivid perception of their own interest, which
was, of course, to manage, to soothe, to conciliate him!

How the reptile propensities of his mean nature had thriven beneath the sudden sunshine of
unexpected prosperity!--See already his selfishness, truculence, rapacity, in full play!

"So, gents," said he, after a long and keen expostulation with them on the same subject, "I'm
really to go to-morrow morning to Tag-rag and Co.'s, and go on with the cursed life I led there
to-day, all as if nothing had happened--ha, ha, ha!--I do so like that!"

"In your present humor, Mr. Titmouse, it would be in vain to discuss the matter," said Mr.
Quirk, sternly. "Again I tell you that the course we have recommended is, in our opinion, the
proper one; excuse me if I add, that you are entirely in our hands--and if I ask you--what
can you do but adopt our advice?"

"Why, hang me if I won't employ somebody else--that's flat! S' elp me, Heaven, I will! So,
good-night, gents; you'll find that Tittlebat Titmouse isn't to be trifled with!" So saying,
Mr. Titmouse clapped his hat on his head, bounced out of the room, and, no attempt being made
to stop him, he was in the street in a twinkling.

Mr. Gammon gazed at Mr. Quirk with a look, the significance of which the astounded old gentleman
thoroughly understood--'twas compounded of triumph, reproach, and apprehension.

"Did you ever see such a little beast!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, with an air of disgust, turning
to Mr. Snap.

"Beggar on horseback!" exclaimed Snap, with a bitter sneer.

"It won't do, however," said Mr. Quirk, with a most chagrined and apprehensive air, "for him
to go at large in his present frame of mind--he may ruin the thing altogether"----

"As good as £500 a-year out of the way of the office," quoth Snap.

"It cannot be helped now," said Mr. Gammon, with a sigh of vexation, turning to Mr. Quirk,
and seizing his hat--"he must be managed--so I'll go after him instantly, and bring him back
at all hazards; and we must really try and do something for him in the meanwhile, to keep him
quiet till the thing's brought a little into train." So out went after Titmouse, Mr. Gammon,
from whose lips dropped persuasion sweeter than honey;[3] and I should not be surprised if
he were to succeed in bringing back that little stubborn piece of conceited stupidity.

As soon as Mr. Titmouse heard the street door shut after him with a kind of bang, he snapped
his fingers once or twice, by way of letting off a little of the inflammable air that was in
him, and muttered, "Pretty chaps those, upon my soul!" said he, disdainfully. "I'll expose
them all! I'll apply to the lord-mayor--they're a pack of swindlers, they are! This is the
way they treat me, who've got a title to £10,000 a-year! To be sure"--He stood still for a
moment--and another moment--and another--and then dismay came quickly over him; for the thought
suddenly occurred to his partially obfuscated intellect--what hold had he got on Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap?--what could he do?--or rather, what HAD he done?

Ah--the golden vision of the last few hours was fading away momentarily, like a dream! Each
second of his deep and rapid reflection, rendered more impetuous his desire and determination
to return and make his peace with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. By submission for the present,
he could get the whip-hand of them hereafter! He was in the act of turning round towards the
office, when Mr. Gammon gently laid his hand upon the shoulder of his repentant client.

"Mr. Titmouse! my dear sir," said Mr. Gammon, softly, "what is the matter with you? How could
we so misunderstand each other?"

Titmouse's small cunning was on the qui vive, and he saw and followed up his advantage. "I
am going," said he, in a resolute tone, "to speak to some one else in the morning."

"Ah, to be sure!" replied Mr. Gammon, with a smile of utter unconcern--"I supposed as much--'tis
a matter which of course, however, signifies nothing to any one--but yourself. You will take
any steps, my dear sir, that occur to you, and act as you may be advised!"

"Monstrous kind of you, 'pon my life! to come and give me such good advice!" exclaimed Titmouse,
with a sneer--but consciously baffled.

"Oh, don't mention it!" said Gammon, coolly; "I came out of pure good-nature, to assure you
that our office, notwithstanding what has passed, entertains not the slightest personal ill
feeling towards you, in thus throwing off our hands a fearfully expensive, and most harassing
enterprise--which we have feared from the first had been too rashly undertaken"----

"Hem!" exclaimed Titmouse, involuntarily, once or twice.

"So good-night, Mr. Titmouse--good-night! God bless you! and think hereafter of all this as
a mere idle dream--as far as we are concerned!" Mr. Gammon, in the act of returning to the
door, extended his hand to Mr. Titmouse, whom he instantly perceived to be melting rapidly.

"Why, sir," quoth Titmouse, with a mixture of embarrassment and alarm, "if I thought you all
meant the correct thing--hem! I say, the correct thing by me--I shouldn't so much mind a little
disappointment for the time; but you must own, Mr. Gammon, it is very hard being kept out of
one's own so long--honor, now! isn't it?"

"True, very true, Mr. Titmouse. Very hard it is, indeed, to bear, and we all felt deeply for
you, and would have set everything in train"----

"Would have! oh my stars!"----

"Yes, my dear Mr. Titmouse, we would have done it, and believed we could have brought you through
every difficulty--over every obstacle, prodigious though they are, and almost innumerable."

"Why--you--don't--hardly--quite--mean to say you've given it all up?--What, already! 'Pon my
life! Oh Lord!" exclaimed Titmouse, in evident trepidation.

Mr. Gammon had triumphed over Mr. Titmouse! whom, nothing loath, he brought back, in two minutes'
time, into the room which Titmouse had just before so insolently quitted. Mr. Quirk and Mr.
Snap had now their parts to perform in the little scene which they had determined on enacting.
They were in the act of locking up desks and drawers, evidently on the move, and received Mr.
Titmouse with an air of cold surprise.

"Mr. Titmouse again!" exclaimed Mr. Quirk, taking his gloves out of his hat. "Back again!--This,
sir, is quite an unexpected honor!"

"Leave anything behind?" inquired Mr. Snap, affecting to look about him--"don't see anything"----

"Oh no, sir! No, sir!" exclaimed Titmouse, with eager anxiety. "This gent, Mr. Gammon, and
I, have made it all up, gents! I'm not angry any more--not the least, 'pon my soul I'm not--and
quite forgive you--and no mistake!"

"Angry!--Forgive!! Mr. Titmouse!" echoed Mr. Quirk, with an air sternly ironical. "We are under
great obligations to you for your forbearance!"

"Oh, come, gents!" said Titmouse, more and more disturbed, "I was too warm, I dare say, and--and--I
ask your pardon, all of you, gents! I won't say another word if you'll but buckle to business
again--quite exactly in your own way--because you see"----

"It's growing very late," said Mr. Quirk, coldly, and looking at his watch; "however, after
what you have said, probably at some future time, when we've leisure to look into the thing"----

Poor Titmouse was near dropping on his knees, in mingled agony and fright.

"May I be allowed to say," interposed the bland voice of Mr. Gammon, anxiously addressing himself
to Mr. Quirk, "that Mr. Titmouse a few minutes ago assured me, outside there, that if you,
as the head of the firm, could only be persuaded to permit our house to take up his case again"----

"I did--I did indeed, gents! so help me----!" interrupted Mr. Titmouse, eagerly backing with
an oath the ready lie of Mr. Gammon.

Mr. Quirk, with a stern countenance, drew his hand across his chin musingly, and stood silently
for a few moments, apparently irresolute.

"Well," said he at length, but very coldly, "since that is so, probably we may be induced to
resume our heavy labors in your behalf; and if you will favor us with a call to-morrow night,
at the same hour, we may have, by that time, made up our minds as to the course we shall think
fit to adopt."

"Lord, sir, I'll be here as the clock strikes, and as meek as a mouse; and pray, have it all
your own way for the future, gents--do!"--cried Titmouse, clasping his hands together on his
breast.

"Good-night, sir--good-night!" exclaimed the partners, stiffly--motioning him towards the door.

"Good-night, gents!" said Titmouse, bowing very low, and feeling himself at the same time being--bowed
out! As he passed out of the room, he cast a lingering look at their three frigid faces, as
if they were angels sternly shutting him out from Paradise. What misery was his, as he walked
slowly homeward, with much the same feelings (now that the fumes of the brandy had somewhat
evaporated, and the reaction of excitement was coming on, aggravated by a recollection of the
desperate check he had received) as those of a sick and troubled man, who, suddenly roused
out of a delicious dream, drops into wretched reality, as it were out of a fairyland, which,
with all its dear innumerable delights, is melting overhead into thin air--disappearing, forever!

Closet Court had never looked so odious to him as it did on his return from this memorable
interview. Dreadfully distressed and harassed, he flung himself on his bed for a moment, directly
he had shut his door, intending presently to rise and undress; but Sleep, having got him prostrate,
secured her victory. She waved her black wand over him, and--he awoke not completely till about
eight o'clock in the morning. A second long-drawn sigh was preparing to follow its predecessor,
when he heard the clock strike eight, and sprang off the bed in a fright; for he ought to have
been at the shop an hour before. Dashing a little water into his face, and scarce staying to
wipe it off, he ran down-stairs, through the court, and along the street, never stopping till
he had found his way into--almost the very arms of the dreaded Mr. Tag-rag; who, rarely making
his appearance till about half-past nine, had, as the deuce would have it, happened to come
down an hour and a half earlier than usual on that particular morning, the only one out of
several hundreds on which Titmouse had been more than ten minutes beyond his time.

"Yours ve-ry respectfully, Mr. Titmouse--Thomas Tag-rag!" exclaimed that personage, with mock
solemnity, bowing formally to his astounded and breathless shopman.

"I--I--beg your pardon, sir; but I wasn't very well, and overslept myself," stammered Titmouse.

"Ne-ver mind, Mr. Titmouse! ne-ver mind!--it don't much signify, as it happens," interrupted
Mr. Tag-rag, bitterly; "you've just got an hour and a half to take this piece of silk, with
my compliments, to Messrs. Shuttle and Weaver, in Dirt Street, Spitalfields, and ask them if
they aren't ashamed to send it to a West-end house like mine; and bring back a better piece
instead of it! D' ye hear, sir?"

"Yes, sir--but--am I to go before my breakfast, sir?"

"Did I say a word about breakfast, sir? You heard my orders, sir; you can attend to them or
not, Mr. Titmouse, as you please!"

Off trotted Titmouse instanter, without his breakfast; and so Tag-rag gained one object he
had had in view. Titmouse found this rather trying: a four-mile walk before him, with no inconsiderable
load under his arm; having, moreover, had nothing to eat since the preceding evening, when
he had partaken of a delicate repast of thick slices of bread, smeared slightly over with somewhat
high-flavored salt butter, and moistened with a most astringent decoction of quasi tea-leaves
sweetened with brown sugar, and discolored with sky-blue milk. He had not even a farthing about
him wherewith to buy a penny roll! As he went disconsolately along, so many doubts and fears
buzzed impetuously about him, that they completely darkened his little soul, and bewildered
his petty understanding. Ten Thousand a-Year!--it could never be meant for the like of him!
He soon worked himself into a conviction that the whole thing was infinitely too good to be
true; the affair was desperate; it had been all moonshine; for some cunning purpose or another,
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, had been--ah, here he was within a few yards of their residence,
the scene of last night's tragic transactions! As he passed Saffron Hill, he paused, looked
up towards the blessed abode,

    "Where centred all his hopes and fears,"--

uttered a profound sigh, and passed slowly on towards Smithfield. The words "Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap," seemed to be written over every shop-window which he passed--their images filled
his mind's eye. What could they be at? They had been all very polite and friendly at first--and
of their own seeking: but he had affronted them. How coldly and proudly they had parted with
him over-night, although they had professed themselves reconciled to him! It was evident that
they would stand no nonsense--they were great lawyers; so he must (if they really would allow
him to see them again) eat humble pie cheerfully till he had got all that they had to give
him. How he dreaded the coming night! Perhaps they intended civilly to tell him that, since
seeing him, they would have nothing more to do with him; they would get the estate for themselves,
or some one else who would be more manageable! They had taken care to tell him nothing at all
about the nature of his pretensions to this grand fortune. Oh, how crafty they were--they had
it all their own way!--But what, after all, had he really done? The estates were his, if they
were really in earnest--his and no one's else; and why should he be kept out of them at their
will and pleasure? Suppose he were to say he would give them all he was entitled to for £20,000
down, in cash? Oh no; on second thoughts, that would be only two years' income! But on the
other hand--he dared hardly even propose it to his thoughts--still, suppose it should really
all turn out true! Goodness gracious!--that day two months he might be riding about in his
carriage in the Parks, and poor devils looking on at him, as he now looked on all those who
now rode there. There he would be, holding up his head with the best of them, instead of slaving
as he was that moment, carrying about that cursed bundle--ough! how he shrunk with disgust
as he changed its position, to relieve his aching right arm! Why was his mouth to be stopped--why
might he not tell his shopmates? What would he not give for the luxury of telling it to the
odious Tag-rag? If he were to do so, Mr. Tag-rag, he was sure, would ask him to dinner the
very next Sunday, at his country house at Clapham!--Ah, ha!--Thoughts such as these so occupied
his mind, that he did not for a long while observe that he was walking at a rapid rate towards
the Mile-end road, having left Whitechapel church nearly half a mile behind him! The possible
master of £10,000 a-year was nearly dropping with fatigue, and sudden apprehension of the storm
he should have to encounter when he first saw Mr. Tag-rag after so unduly prolonged an absence
on his errand. He was detained for a cruel length of time at Messrs. Shuttle and Weaver's;
who, not having the exact kind of silk required by their imperious customer at that moment
on their premises, had some difficulty in obtaining it, after having sent for it to one or
two neighboring manufactories; by which means it came to pass that it was two o'clock before
Titmouse, completely exhausted, had returned to Tag-rag and Company's. The gentlemen of the
shop had finished their dinners.

"Go up-stairs and get your dinner, sir!" exclaimed Tag-rag, sternly, after having received
Messrs. Shuttle and Weaver's obsequious message of apologies and hopes.

Titmouse having laid down his heavy bundle on the counter, went up-stairs hungry enough, and
found himself the sole occupant of the long close-smelling room in which his companions had
been recently dining. His dinner was presently brought to him by a slatternly slipshod servant-girl.
It was in an uncovered basin, which appeared to contain nothing but the leavings of his companions--a
savory intermixture of cold potatoes, broken meat, (chiefly bits of fat and gristle,) a little
hot water having been thrown over it to make it appear warm and fresh--(faugh!) His plate (with
a small pinch of salt upon it) had not been cleaned after its recent use, but evidently only
hastily smeared over with a greasy towel, as also seemed his knife and fork, which, in their
disgusting state, he was fain to put up with--the table-cloth on which he might have wiped
them, having been removed. A hunch of bread that seemed to have been tossing about in the pan
for days, and half a pint of turbid table-beer, completed the fare set before him; opposite
which he sat for some minutes, too much occupied with his reflections to commence his repast.
He was in the act of scooping out of the basin some of its inviting contents, when--"Titmouse!"
exclaimed the voice of one of his shopmates, peering in at him through the half-opened door,
"Mr. Tag-rag wants you! He says you've had plenty of time to finish your dinner!"

"Oh, tell him, then, I'm only just beginning my dinner--eugh! such as it is," replied Titmouse,
sulkily.

In a few minutes' time Mr. Tag-rag himself entered the room, stuttering with fury--"How much
longer, sir, may it be your pleasure to spend over your dinner, eh?"

"Not another moment, sir," answered Titmouse, looking with unaffected loathing and disgust
at the savory victuals before him; "if you'll only allow me a few minutes to go home and buy
a penny roll instead of all this"----

"Ve--ry good, sir! Ve--ry parti--cu--larly good, Mr. Titmouse," replied Tag-rag, with ill-subdued
rage; "anything else that I can make a leetle memorandum of--against the day of--your leaving us?"

This hint of twofold terror, i. e. of withholding on the ground of misconduct the wretched
balance of salary which might be then due to him, and of also giving him a damning character--dispelled
the small remains of Titmouse's appetite, and he rose to return to the shop, involuntarily
clutching his fist as he brushed close past the tyrant Tag-rag on the stairs, whom he would
have been delighted to pitch down head-foremost. If he had done so, none of his fellow-slaves
below, in spite of their present sycophancy towards Tag-rag, would have shown any particular
alacrity in picking up their common oppressor. Poor Tittlebat resumed his old situation behind
the counter; but how different his present, from his former air and manner! With his pen occasionally
peeping pertly out of his bushy hair over his right ear, and his yard-measure in his hand,
no one, till the previous Monday morning, had been more cheerful, smirking, and nimble than
Tittlebat Titmouse: alas, how chopfallen now! None of his companions could make him out, or
guess what was in the wind; so they very justly concluded that he had been doing something
dreadfully disgraceful, the extent of which was known to Tag-rag and himself alone. Their jeers
and banter were giving place to cold distrustful looks, which were far more trying to bear.
How he longed to be able to burst upon their astounded minds with the pent-up intelligence
that was silently racking and splitting his little bosom! But if he did--the terrible firm
of Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--Oh! the very thought of them glued his lips together. There was
one, however, of whom he might surely make a confidant--the excellent Huckaback, with whom
he had had no opportunity of communicating since Sunday night. That gentleman was as close
a prisoner at the establishment of DIAPER and SARSENET, in Tottenham-court Road, as Titmouse
at Messrs. Tag-rag's, of which said establishment he was, by the way, quite as great an ornament
as Titmouse of Messrs. Tag-rag's. They were of about the same height, and equals in vulgar
puppyism of manners, dress, and appearance; but Titmouse was certainly the better-looking.
With equal conceit apparent in their faces, that of Huckaback, square, flat, and sallow, had
an expression of ineffable impudence, made a lady shudder, and a gentleman feel a tingling
sensation in his right toe. About his small black eyes there was a glimmer of low cunning;--but
he is not of sufficient importance to be painted any further. When Titmouse left the shop that
night, a little after nine, he hurried to his lodgings, to make himself as imposing in his
appearance before Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, as his time and means would admit of. Behold,
on a table lay a letter from Huckaback. It was written in a flourishing mercantile hand; and
here is a verbatim copy of it:

     "DEAR TIT,

     "Hope you are well, which is what I can only middling say in
     respect of me. Such a row with my governors as I have had to-day! I
     thought that as I had been in the House near upon Eighteen Months
     at £25 per annum, I might nat'rally ask for £30 a-year (which is
     what my Predecessor had) when, would you believe it, Mr. Sharpeye
     (who is going to be taken in as a Partner,) to whom I named the
     thing, ris up in rage against me, and I were had up into the
     counting-house, where both the governors was, and they gave it me
     in such a way that you never saw nor heard of; but it wasn't all on
     their own side, as you know me too well to think of. You would have
     thought I had been a-going to rob the house. They said I was most
     oudacious, and all that, and ungrateful, and what would I have
     next? Mr. Diaper said times was come to such a pitch!! since when
     he was first in the business, for salaries, says he, is ris to
     double, and not half the work done that was, and no
     gratitude--(cursed old curmudgeon!) He said if I left them just
     now, I might whistle for a character, except one that I should not
     like; but if he don't mind I'll give him a touch of law about
     that--which brings me to what happened to-day with our lawyers,
     Titty, the people at Saffron Hill, whom I thought I would call in
     on to-day, being near the neighborhood with some light goods, to
     see how affairs was getting on, and stir them up a bit"--

This almost took Titmouse's breath away----

     --"feeling most interested on your account, as you know, dear
     Tit, I do. I said I wanted to speak to one of the gentlemen on
     business of wital importance; whereat I was quickly shown into a
     room where two gents was sitting. Having put down my parcel for a
     minute on the table, I said I was a very partic'lar friend of
     yours, and had called in to see how things went on about the
     advertisement; whereat you never saw in your life how struck they
     looked, and stared at one another in speechless silence, till they
     said to me, what concerned me about the business? or something of
     that nature, but in such a way that ris a rage in me directly,
     all for your sake, (for I did not like the looks of things;) and
     says I, I said, we would let them know we were not to be
     gammoned; whereat up rose the youngest of the two, and ringing
     the bell, he says to a tight-laced young gentleman with a pen
     behind his ear, 'Show this fellow to the door,' which I was at
     once; but, in doing so, let out a little of my mind to them.
     They're no better than they should be, you see if they are; but
     when we touch the property, we'll show them who is their masters,
     which consoles me. Good-by, keep your sperrits up, and I will call
     and tell you more about it on Sunday. So farewell (I write this at
     Mr. Sharpeye's desk, who is coming down from dinner directly, the
     beast!)--Your true friend,
                                                        "R. HUCKABACK.

     "P. S.--Met a young Jew last night with a lot of prime cigars, and
     (knowing he must have stole them--betwixt you, and I, and the
     Post--they looked so good at the price,) I bought one shilling's
     worth for me, and two shillings' worth for you, your salary being
     higher, and to say nothing of your chances."

All that part of the foregoing letter which related to its gifted writer's interview with Messrs.
Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, Titmouse read in a kind of spasm--he could not draw a breath, and
felt a choking sensation coming over him. After a while, "I may spare myself," thought he,
"the trouble of rigging out--Huckaback has done my business for me with Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap!--Mine will only be a walk in vain!" And this cursed call of Huckaback's, too, to
have happened after what had occurred last night between Titmouse and them!! and so urgently
as he had been enjoined to keep the matter to himself! Of course, Huckaback would seem to have
been sent by him; seeing he appeared to have assumed the hectoring tone which Titmouse had
tried so vainly over-night, and now so bitterly repented of; and he had no doubt grossly insulted
the arbiters of Titmouse's destiny, (for he knew Huckaback's impudence)--he had even said that
he (Titmouse) would not be GAMMONED by them! But time was pressing--the experiment must be
made; and with a beating heart he scrambled into a change of clothes--bottling up his wrath
against the unconscious Huckaback till he should see that worthy. In a miserable state of mind
he set off soon after for Saffron Hill at a quick pace, which soon became a trot, and often
sharpened into a downright run. He saw, heard, and thought of nothing, as he hurried along
Oxford Street and Holborn, but Quirk, Gammon, Snap, and Huckaback, and the reception which
the last-mentioned gentleman might have secured for him--if, indeed, he was to be received
at all. The magical words, Ten Thousand a-year, had not disappeared from the field of his troubled
vision; but how faintly and dimly they shone!--like the Pleiades coldly glistening through
intervening mists far off--oh! at what a stupendous, immeasurable, and hopeless distance! Imagine
those stars gazed at by the anguished and despairing eyes of the bereaved lover, madly believing
one of them to contain HER who has just departed from his arms, and from this world, and you
may form a notion of the agonizing feelings--the absorbed contemplation of one dear, dazzling,
but distant object, experienced on this occasion by Mr. Titmouse. No, no; I don't mean seriously
to pretend that so grand a thought as this could be entertained by his little optics intellectual;
you might as well suppose the tiny eye of a black beetle to be scanning the vague, fanciful,
and mysterious figure and proportions of Orion, or a kangaroo to be perusing and pondering
over the immortal Principia. I repeat, that I have no desire of the sort, and am determined
not again foolishly to attempt fine writing, which I now perceive to be entirely out of my
line. In language more befitting me and my subject, I may be allowed to say that there is no
getting the contents of a quart into a pint pot; that Titmouse's mind was a half-pint--and
it was brim-full. All the while that I have been going on thus, however, Titmouse was hurrying
down Holborn at a rattling rate. When at length he had reached Saffron Hill, he was in a bath
of perspiration. His face was quite red; he breathed hard; his heart beat violently; he had
got a stitch in his side; and he could not get his gloves on his hot and swollen hands. He
stood for a moment with his hat off, wiping his reeking forehead, and endeavoring to recover
himself a little, before entering the dreaded presence to which he had been hastening. He even
fancied for a moment that his eyes gave out sparks of light. While thus pausing, St. Andrew's
Church struck ten, half electrifying Titmouse, who bolted up Saffron Hill, and was soon standing
opposite the door. How the sight of it smote him, as it reminded him of the way in which, on
the preceding night, he had bounced out of it! But that could not now be helped; so ring went
the bell; as softly, however, as he could; for he recollected that it was a very loud bell,
and he did not wish to offend. He stood for some time, and nobody answered. He waited for nearly
two minutes, and trembled, assailed by a thousand vague fears. He might not, however, have
rung loudly enough--so--again, a little louder, did he venture to ring. Again he waited. There
seemed something threatening in the great brass plate on the door, out of which "QUIRK, GAMMON,
AND SNAP" appeared to look at him ominously. While he thought of it, by the way, there was
something very serious and stern in all their faces--he wondered that he had not noticed it
before. What a drunken beast he had been to go on in their presence as he had! thought he;
then Huckaback's image flitted across his disturbed fancy. "Ah!" thought he, "that's the thing!--that's
it, depend upon it: this door will never be opened to me again--he's done for me!" He breathed
faster, clinched his fist, and involuntarily raised it in a menacing way, when he heard himself
addressed--"Oh! dear me, sir, I hope I haven't kept you waiting," said the old woman whom he
had before seen, fumbling in her pocket for the door-key. She had been evidently out shopping,
having a plate in her left hand, over which her apron was partially thrown. "Hope you've not
been ringing long, sir!"

"Oh dear! no ma'am," replied Titmouse, with anxious civility, and a truly miserable smile--"Afraid
I may have kept them waiting," he added, almost dreading to hear the answer.

"Oh no, sir, not at all--they've all been gone since a little after nine; but there's a letter
I was to give you!" She opened the door; Titmouse nearly dropping with fright. "I'll get it
for you, sir--let me see, where did I put it?--Oh, in the clerk's room, I think." Titmouse
followed her in. "Dear me--where can it be?" she continued, peering about, and then snuffing
the long wick of the candle, which she had left burning for the last quarter of an hour, during
her absence. "I hope none of the clerks has put it away in mistake! Well, it isn't here, anyhow."

"Perhaps, ma'am, it's in their own room," suggested Titmouse, in a faint tone.

"Oh, p'r'aps it is!" she replied. "We'll go and see"--and she led the way, followed closely
by Titmouse, who caught his breath spasmodically as he passed the green-baize door. Yes, there
was the room--the scene of last night was transacted there, and came crowding over his recollection--there
was the green-shaded candlestick--the table covered with papers--an arm-chair near it, in which,
probably, Mr. Quirk had been sitting only an hour before to write the letter they were now
in quest of, and which might be to forbid him their presence forever! How dreary and deserted
the room looked, thought he as he peered about it in search of the dreaded letter!

"Oh, here it is!--well, I never!--who could have put it here, now? I'm sure I didn't. Let me
see--it was, no doubt"--said the old woman, holding the letter in one hand and putting the
other to her head.

"Never mind, ma'am," said Titmouse, stretching his hand towards her--"now we've got it, it
don't much signify." She gave it to him. "Seem particularly anxious for me to get it--did they,
ma'am?" he inquired, with a strong effort to appear unconcerned--the dreaded letter quite quivering,
the while, in his fingers.

"No, sir--Mr. Quirk only said I was to give it you when you called. B'lieve they sent it to
you, but the clerk said he couldn't find your place out; by the way, (excuse me, sir,) but
yours is a funny name! How I heard 'em laughing at it, to be sure! What makes people give such
queer names? Would you like to read it here, sir?--you're welcome."

"No, thank you, ma'am--it's of not the least consequence," he replied, with a desperate air;
and tossing it with attempted carelessness into his hat, which he put on his head, he very
civilly wished her good-night, and departed--very nearly inclined to sickness, or faintness,
or something of the sort, which the fresh air might perhaps dispel. He quickly espied a lamp
at a corner, which promised to afford him an uninterrupted opportunity of inspecting his letter.
He took it out of his hat. It was addressed--simply, "Mr. Titmouse, Cocking Court, Oxford Street,"
(which accounted, perhaps, for the clerk's having been unable to find it;) and having been
opened with trembling eagerness, thus it read:--

     "Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, present their compliments to Mr.
     Titmouse, and are anxious to save him the trouble of his intended
     visit this evening.

     "They exceedingly regret that obstacles (which it is to be hoped,
     however, may not prove ultimately insurmountable) exist in the
     way of their prosecuting their intended inquiries on behalf of Mr.
     Titmouse.

     "Since their last night's interview with him, circumstances, which
     they could not have foreseen, and over which they have no control,
     have occurred, which render it unnecessary for Mr. T. to give
     himself any more anxiety in the affair--at least, not until he
     shall have heard from Messrs. Q. G. and S.

     "If anything of importance should hereafter transpire, it is not
     improbable that Mr. T. may hear from them.

     "They were favored, this afternoon, with a visit from Mr. T.'s
     friend--a Mr. Hucklebottom."

     "Saffron Hill, Wednesday Evening, 12th July 18--."

When poor Titmouse had finished reading over this vague, frigid, and disheartening note a second
time, a convulsive sob or two pierced his bosom, indicative of its being indeed swollen with
sorrow; and at length, overcome by his feelings, he cried bitterly--not checked even by the
occasional exclamations of one or two passers-by. He could not at all control himself. He felt
as if he could have almost relieved himself, by banging his head against the wall! A tumultuous
feeling of mingled grief and despair prevented his thoughts, for a long while, from settling
on any one idea or object. At length, when the violence of the storm had somewhat abated, on
concluding a third perusal of the death-warrant to all his hopes, which he held in his hand,
his eye lit upon the strange word which was intended to designate his friend Huckaback; and
it instantly changed both the kind of his feelings, and the current in which they had been
rushing. Grief became rage; and the stream foamed in quite a new direction--namely, towards
Huckaback. That accursed fellow he considered to be the sole cause of the direful disaster
which had befallen him. He utterly lost sight of one circumstance, which one might have imagined
likely to have occurred to his thoughts at such a time--viz. his own offensive and insolent
behavior over-night to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap. Yet so it was:--yes, upon the devoted
(but unconscious) head of Huckaback, was the lightning rage of Tittlebat Titmouse doomed to
descend. The fire that was thus quickly kindled within, soon dried up the source of his tears.
He crammed the letter into his pocket, and started off at once in the direction of Leicester
Square, breathing rage at every step--viresque acquirens eundo. His hands kept convulsively
clinching together as he pelted along. Hotter and hotter became his rage as he neared the residence
of Huckaback. When he had reached it, he sprang up-stairs; knocked at his quondam friend's
door; and on the instant of its being--doubtless somewhat surprisedly--opened by Huckaback,
who was undressing, Titmouse sprang towards him, let fly a goodly number of violent blows upon
his face and breast--and down fell Huckaback upon the bed behind him, insensible, and bleeding
profusely from his nose.

"There! there!"--gasped Titmouse, breathless and exhausted, discharging a volley of oaths and
opprobrious epithets at the victim of his fury. "Do it again! You will, won't you? You'll go--and
meddle again in other people's--you---- cu-cu-cursed officious"--but his rage was spent--the
paroxysm was over; the silent and bleeding figure of Huckaback was before his eyes; and he
gazed at him, terror-stricken. What had he done! He sank down on the bed beside Huckaback--then
started up, wringing his hands, and staring at him in an ecstasy of remorse and fright. It
was rather singular that the noise of such an assault should have roused no one to inquire
into it; but so it was. Frightened almost out of his bewildered senses, he closed and bolted
the door; and addressed himself, as well as he was able, to the recovering of Huckaback. After
propping him up, and splashing cold water into his face, Titmouse at length discovered symptoms
of restoration to consciousness, which he anxiously endeavored to accelerate, by putting to
the lips of the slowly-reviving victim of his violence some cold water, in a tea-cup. He swallowed
a little; and soon afterwards, opening his eyes, stared on Titmouse with a dull eye and bewildered
air.

"What's been the matter?" at length he faintly inquired.

"Oh, Hucky! so glad to hear you speak again. It's I--I--Titty! I did it! Strike me, Hucky,
as soon as you're well enough! Do--kick me--anything you choose! I won't hinder you!" cried
Titmouse, sinking on his knees, and clasping his hands together, as he perceived Huckaback
rapidly reviving.

"Why, what is the matter?" repeated that gentleman, with a wondering air, raising his hand
to his nose, from which the blood was still trickling. The fact is, that he had lost his senses,
probably from the suddenness, rather than the violence of the injuries which he had received.

"I did it all--yes, I did!" continued Titmouse, gazing on him with a look of agony and remorse.

"Why, I can't be awake--I can't!" said Huckaback, rubbing his eyes, and then staring at his
wet and blood-stained shirt-front and hands.

"Oh yes, you are--you are!" groaned Titmouse; "and I'm going mad as fast as I can! Do what
you like to me! Kick me if you please! Call in a constable! Send me to jail! Say I came to
rob you--anything--blow me if I care what becomes of me!"

"Why, what does all this jabber mean, Titmouse?" inquired Huckaback, sternly, and apparently
meditating reprisals.

"Oh, yes, I see! Now you are going to give it me! but I won't stir. So hit away, Hucky."

"Why--are you mad?" inquired Huckaback, grasping him by the collar rather roughly.

"Yes, quite! Mad!--ruined!--gone to the devil all at once!"

"And what if you are? What did it matter to me? What brought you here?" continued Huckaback,
in a tone of increasing vehemence. "What have I done to offend you? How dare you come here?
And at this time of night, too? Eh?"

"What, indeed! Oh lud, oh lud, oh lud! Kick me, I say--strike me! You'll do me good, and bring
me to my senses. Me to do all this to you! And we've been such precious good friends always.
I'm a brute, Hucky--I've been mad, stark mad, Hucky--and that's all I can say!"

Huckaback stared at him more and more; and began at length to suspect how matters stood--namely,
that the Sunday's incident had turned Titmouse's head--he having also, no doubt, heard some
desperate bad news during the day, smashing all his hopes. A mixture of emotions kept Huckaback
silent. Astonishment--apprehension--doubt--pride--pique--resentment. He had been struck--his
blood had been drawn--by the man there before him on his knees, formerly his friend; now, he
supposed, a madman.

"Why, curse me, Titmouse, if I can make up my mind what to do to you!" he exclaimed, "I--I
suppose you are going mad, or gone mad, and I must forgive you. But get away with you--out
with you, or--or--I'll call in"----

"Forgive me--forgive me, dear Hucky! Don't send me away--I shall go and drown myself if you do."

"What the d--l do I care if you do? You'd much better have gone and done it before you came
here. Nay, be off and do it now, instead of blubbering here in this way."

"Go on! go on!--it's doing me good--the worse the better!" sobbed Titmouse.

"Come, come," said Huckaback, roughly, "none of this noise here. I'm tired of it!"

"But, pray, don't send me away from you. I shall go straight to the devil if you do! I've no
friend but you, Hucky. Yet I've been such a villain to you!--But it quite put the devil into
me, when all of a sudden I found it was you."

"Me!--Why, what are you after?" interrupted Huckaback, with an air of angry wonder.

"Oh dear, dear!" groaned Titmouse; "if I've been a brute to you, which is quite true, you've
been the ruin of me, clean! I'm clean done for, Huck. Cleaned out! You've done my business
for me; knocked it all on the head!--I sha'n't never hear any more of it--they've said as much
in their letter--they say you called to-day"----

Huckaback now began to have a glimmering notion of his having been, in some considerable degree,
connected with the mischief of the day--an unconscious agent in it. He audibly drew in his
breath, as it were, as he more and more distinctly recollected his visit to Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap; and adverted more particularly to his threats, uttered, too, in Titmouse's
name, and as if by his authority. Whew! here was a kettle of fish.

Now, strange and unaccountable as, at first thought, it may appear, the very circumstance which
one should have thought calculated to assuage his resentment against Titmouse--namely, that
he had really injured Titmouse most seriously, (if not indeed irreparably,) and so provoked
the drubbing which had just been administered to him--had quite the contrary effect. Paradoxical
as it may seem, matter of clear mitigation was at once converted into matter of aggravation.
Were the feelings which Huckaback then experienced, akin to that which often produces hatred
of a person whom one has injured? May it be thus accounted for? That there is a secret satisfaction
in the mere consciousness of being a sufferer--a martyr--and that, too, in the presence of
a person whom one perceives to be aware that he has wantonly injured one; that one's bruised
spirit is soothed by the sight of his remorse--by the consciousness that he is punishing himself
infinitely more severely than we could punish him; and of the claim one has obtained to the
sympathy of everybody who sees, or may hear of one's sufferings, (that rich and grateful balm
to injured feeling.) But when, as in the case of Huckaback, feelings of this description (in
a coarse and small way, to be sure, according to his kind) were suddenly encountered by a consciousness
of his having deserved his sufferings; when the martyr felt himself quickly sinking into the
culprit and offender; when, I say, Huckaback felt an involuntary consciousness that the gross
indignities which Titmouse had just inflicted on him, had been justified by the provocation--nay,
had been far less than his mischievous and impudent interference had deserved;--and when feelings
of this sort, moreover, were sharpened by a certain tingling sense of physical pain from the
blows which he had received--the result was, that the sleeping lion of Huckaback's courage
was very nearly awakening.

"I've half a mind, Titmouse"--said Huckaback, knitting his brows, fixing his eyes, and appearing
inclined to raise his arm. There was an ominous pause for a moment or two, during which Titmouse's
feelings also underwent a slight alteration. His allusion to Huckaback's ruinous insult to
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, unconsciously converted his remorse into rage, which it rather,
perhaps, resuscitated. Titmouse rose from his knees. "Ah!" said he, in quite an altered tone,
"you may look fierce! you may!--you'd better strike me, Huckaback--do! Finish the mischief
you've begun this day! Hit away--you're quite safe"--and he secretly prepared himself for the
mischief which--did not come. "You have ruined me! you have, Huckaback!" he continued with
increasing vehemence; "and I shall be cutting my throat--nay," striking his fist on the table,
"I will!"

"You don't say so!" exclaimed Huckaback, apprehensively. "No, Titmouse, don't--don't think
of it; it will all come right yet, depend on't; you see if it don't!"

"Oh, no, it's all done for--it's all up with me!"

"But what's been done?--let us hear," said Huckaback, as he passed a wet towel to and fro over
his ensanguined features. It was by this time clear that the storm which had for some time
given out only a few faint fitful flashes or flickerings in the distance, had passed away.
Titmouse, with many grievous sighs, took out the letter which had produced the paroxysms I
have been describing, and read it aloud. "And only see how they've spelled your name, Huckaback--look!"
he added, handing his friend the letter.

"How partic'lar vulgar!" exclaimed Huckaback, with a contemptuous air, which, overspreading
his features, half-closed as was his left eye, and swollen as were his cheek and nose, would
have made him a queer object to one who had leisure to observe such matters. "And so this is
all they say of me," he continued. "How do you come to know that I've been doing you mischief?
All I did was just to look in, as respectful as possible, to ask how you was, and they very
civilly told me you was very well, and we parted"----

"Nay, now, that's a lie, Huckaback, and you know it!" interrupted Titmouse.

"It's true, so help me----!" vehemently asseverated Huckaback.

"Why, perhaps you'll deny that you wrote and told me all you said," interrupted Titmouse, indignantly,
feeling in his pocket for Huckaback's letter, which that worthy had at the moment quite forgotten
having sent, and on being reminded of it, he certainly seemed rather nonplussed. "Oh--ay, if
you mean that--hem!"--he stammered.

"Come, you know you're a liar, Huck--but it's no good now: liar or no liar, it's all over."

"The pot and kettle, anyhow, Tit, as far as that goes--hem!--but let's spell over this letter;
we haven't studied it yet; I'm a hand, rather, at getting at what's said in a letter!--Come"--and
they drew their chairs together, Huckaback reading over the letter slowly, alone; Titmouse's
eyes travelling incessantly from his friend's countenance to the letter, and so back again,
to gather what might be the effect of its perusal.

"There's a glimpse of daylight yet, Titty!" said Huckaback, as he concluded reading it.

"No! But is there really? Do tell me, Hucky"----

"Why, first and foremost, how uncommon polite they are, (except that they haven't manners enough
to spell my name right)"----

"Really--and so they are!" exclaimed Titmouse, rather elatedly.

"And then, you see, there's another thing--if they'd meant to give the thing the go-by altogether,
what could have been easier than to say so?--but they haven't said anything of the sort, so
they don't mean to give it all up!"

"Lord, Huck! what would I give for such a head as yours! What you say is quite true," said
Titmouse, still more cheerfully.

"To be sure, they do say there's an obstacle--an obstacle, you see--nay, it's obstacles, which
is several, and that"---- Titmouse's face fell.

"But they say again, that it's--it's--curse their big words--they say it's--to be got over
in time."

"Well--that's something, isn't it?"

"To be sure it is; and a'n't anything better than nothing? But then, again, here's a stone
in the other pocket--they say there's a circumstance!--don't you hate circumstances, Titty?--I do."

"So do I!--What does it mean? I've often heard--isn't it a thing? And that may be--anything."

"Oh, there's a great dif--hem! And they go on to say it's happened since you was there"----

"Curse me, then, if that don't mean you, Huckaback!" interrupted Titmouse, with returning anger.

"No, that can't be it; they said they'd no control over the circumstance;--now they had over
me; for they ordered me to the door, and I went; a'n't that so, Titty?--Lord, how my eye does
smart, to be sure!"

"And don't I smart all over, inside and out, if it comes to that?" inquired Titmouse, dolefully.

"There's nothing particular in the rest of the letter--only uncommon civil, and saying if anything
turns up you shall hear."

"I could make that out myself--so there's nothing in that"--said Titmouse, quickly.

"Well--if it is all over--what a pity! Such things as we could have done, Titty, if we'd got
the thing--eh?"

Titmouse groaned at this glimpse of the heaven he seemed shut out of forever.

"Can't you find anything--nothing at all comfortable-like, in the letter?" he inquired with
a deep sigh.

Huckaback again took up the letter and spelled it over.

"Well," said he, striving to give himself an appearance of thinking, "there's something in
it that, after all, I don't seem quite to get to the bottom of--they've seemingly taken a deal
of pains with it!"

[And undoubtedly it was a document which had been pretty well considered by its framers before
being sent out; though, probably, they had hardly anticipated its being so soon afterwards
subjected to the scrutiny of such acute intellects as were now engaged upon it.]

"And then, again, you know they're lawyers; and do they ever write anything that hasn't got
more in it than anybody can find out? These gents that wrote this, they're a trick too keen
for the thieves even--and how can we--hem!--but I wonder if that fat, old, bald-headed gent,
with sharp eyes, was Mr. Quirk"----

"To be sure it was," interrupted Titmouse, with a half shudder.

"Was it? Well, then, I'd advise Old Nick to look sharp before he tackles that old gent, that's
all!"

"Give me Mr. Gammon for my money," said Titmouse, sighing, "such an uncommon gentlemanlike
gent--he's quite taken to me"----

"Ah, that, I suppose, was him with the black velvet waistcoat, and pretty white hands! But
he can look stern, too, Tit! You should have seen him ring, when--hem!--But what was I saying
about the letter? Don't you see they say they'll be sure to write if anything turns up?"

"So they do, to be sure! Well--I'd forgot that!" interrupted Titmouse, brightening up.

"Then, isn't there their advertisement in the Flash? They hadn't their eye on anything when
they put it there, I dare say!--They can't get out of that, anyhow!"

"I begin to feel all of a sweat, Hucky; I'm sure there's something in the wind yet!" said Titmouse,
drawing nearer still to his comforter. "And more than that--would they have said half they
did to me last night"----

"Eh! hollo, by the way! I've not heard of what went on last night! So you went to 'em? Well--tell
us all that happened--and nothing but the truth, be sure you don't; come, Titty!" said Huckaback,
snuffing the candle, and then turning eagerly to his companion.

"Well--they'd such a number of queer-looking papers before them, some with old German-text
writing, and others with zigzag marks--and they were so uncommon polite--they all three got
up as I went in, and made me bows, one after the other, and said, 'Yours most obediently, Mr.
Titmouse,' and a great many more such things."

"Well--and then?"

"Why, Hucky, so help me----! and 'pon my soul, that old gent, Mr. Quirk, told me"--Titmouse's
voice trembled at the recollection--"he says, 'Sir, you're the real owner of Ten Thousand a-year,
and no mistake!'"

"Lawks!" ejaculated Huckaback, opening wider and wider his eyes and ears as his friend went on.

"'And a title--a lord, or something of that sort--and you've a great many country seats; and
there's been £10,000 a-year saving up for you ever since you was born--and heaps of interest
besides!'--'pon my soul he did!"

"Lord, Tit! you take my breath away," gasped Huckaback, his eyes fixed intently on his friend's
face.

"Yes; and they said I might marry the most beautifulest woman that ever my eyes saw, for the
asking."

"You'll forget poor Bob Huckaback, Tit!" murmured his friend, despondingly.

"Not I, Huckaback--if I get my rights, and you know how to behave yourself!"

"Have you been to Tag-rag's to-day, after hearing all this?"

[The thermometer seemed to have been here plunged out of hot water into cold--Titmouse was
down at zero in a trice.]

"Oh!--that's it! 'Tis all gone again! What a fool I am! We've clean forgot this cursed letter--and
that leads me to the end of what took place last night. That cursed shop was what we split on!"

"Split on the shop! eh? What's the meaning of that?" inquired Huckaback, with eager anxiety.

"Why, that's the thing," continued Titmouse, in a faltering tone, and with a depressed look--"That
was what I wanted to know myself; for they said I'd better go back!! So I said, 'Gents,' said
I, 'I'll be---- if I'll go back to the shop any more;' and I snapped my fingers at them--so!
(for you know what a chap I am when my blood's up.) And they all turned gashly pale--they did,
upon my life--you never saw anything like it! And one of them said then, in a humble way, 'Wouldn't
I please to go back to the shop, just for a day or two, till things is got to rights a bit.'
'Not a day nor a minute!' says I, in an immense rage. 'We think you'd better, really,' said
they. 'Then,' says I, 'if that's your plan, curse me if I won't cut with you all, and I'll
employ some one else!' and--would you believe me?--out I went, bang! into the street!!"

"You did, Tit!!" echoed Huckaback, aghast.

"They shouldn't have given me so much brandy and water as they did; I didn't well know what
I was about, what with the news and the spirits!"

"And you went into the street?" inquired Huckaback, with a kind of horror.

"I did, by Jove, Hucky!"

"They'd given you the sperrits to see what kind of chap you'd be if you got the property--only
to try you, depend on it!"

"Lord! I--I dare say they did!" exclaimed Titmouse, elevating his head with sudden amazement,
totally forgetting that same brandy and water he had asked for--"and me never to think of it
at the time."

"Now are you quite sure you wasn't in a dream last night, all the while?"

"Oh, dear, I wish I had been--I do, indeed, Hucky!"

"Well--you went into the street--what then?" inquired Huckaback, with a sigh of exhausted attention.

"Why, when I'd got there, I could have bitten my tongue off, as one may suppose; but, just
as I was a-turning to go in again, who should come up to me but Mr. Gammon, saying, he humbly
hoped there was no offence."

"Oh, glorious! So it was all set right again, then--eh?"

"Why--I--I can't quite exactly say that much, either--but--when I went back, (being obligated
by Mr. Gammon being so pressing,) the other two was sitting as pale as death; and though Mr.
Gammon and me went on our knees to the old gent, it wasn't any use for a long time; and all
that he could be got to say was, that perhaps I might look in again to-night--(but they first
made me swear a solemn oath on the Bible never to tell any one anything about the fortune)--and
then--you went, Huckaback, and you did the business; they of course concluding I'd sent you!"

"Oh, bother! that can't be. Don't you see how civilly they speak of me in their letter? They're
afraid of me, you may depend on it. By the way, Tit, how much did you promise to come down,
if you got the thing?"

"Come down!--I--really--by Jove, I didn't think of such a thing! No--I'm sure I didn't"--answered
Titmouse, as if new light had burst in upon him.

"Why, Tit, I never see'd such a goose! That's it, depend upon it--it's the whole thing! That's
what they're driving at, in the note!--Why, Tit, where was your wits? D' ye think such gents
as them--great lawyers, too--will work for nothing?--You must write at once and tell them you
will come down handsome--say a couple of hundreds, besides expenses--Gad! 'twill set you on
your pins again, Titty!--Rot me! now I think of it, if I didn't dream last night that you was
a Member of Parliament or something of that sort."

"A member of Parliament! And so I shall, if all this turns up well--I shall be that at least!"
replied Titmouse, exultingly.

"You see if my dream don't come true! You see, Titty, I'm always a-thinking of you, day and
night. Never was two fellows that was such close friends as we was from the very beginning
of knowing each other!"

[They had been acquainted with each other about half a year.]

"Hucky, what a cruel scamp I was to behave to you in the way I did--curse me, if I couldn't
cry to see your eye bunged up in that way!"

"Pho! dear Titty, I knew you loved me all the while"--whined Huckaback, "and meant no harm;
you wasn't yourself when you did it--and besides, I deserved ten times more! If you had killed
me I should have liked you as much as ever!"

"Give us your hand, Hucky! Let's forgive one another!" cried Titmouse, excitedly; and their
hands were quickly locked together.

"If we don't mismanage the thing, we shall be all right yet, Titty; but you won't do anything
without speaking to me first--will you, Titty?"

"The thoughts of it all going right again is enough to set me wild, Hucky--But what shall we
do to set the thing going again?"

"Quarter past one!" quivered the voice of the paralytic watchman beneath, startling the friends
out of their exciting colloquy; his warning being at the same time silently seconded by the
long-wicked candle, burning within half an inch of its socket. They hastily agreed that Titmouse
should immediately write to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, a proper [i. e. a most abject]
letter, solemnly pledging himself to obey their injunctions in everything for the future, and
offering them a handsome reward for their exertions, if successful.

"Well--good-night, Huck! good-night," said Titmouse, rising. "I'm not the least sleepy--I sha'n't
sleep a wink all night long! I shall sit up to write my letter--you haven't got a sheet of
paper here, by the way?--I've used all mine." [That was, he had, some months before, bought
a sheet to write a letter, and had so used it.]

Huckaback produced a sheet, somewhat crumpled, from a drawer. "I'd give a hundred if I had
them!" said he; "I sha'n't care a straw for the hiding I've got to-night--though I'm a leetle
sore after it, too--and what the deuce am I to say to-morrow to Messrs. Diaper"----

"Oh, you can't hardly be at a loss for a lie that'll suit them, surely!--So good-night, Hucky--good-night!"

Huckaback wrung his friend's hand, and was in a moment or two alone. "Haven't my fingers been
itching all the while to be at the fellow!" exclaimed he, as he shut the door. "But, somehow,
I've got too soft a sperrit, and can't bear to hurt any one;--and then--if the chap gets his
£10,000 a-year--why--hem! Titty a'n't such a bad fellow, in the main, after all."

If Titmouse had been many degrees higher in the grade of society, he would still have met with
his Huckaback;--a trifle more polished, perhaps, but hardly more quick-sighted or effective
than, in his way, had been the vulgar being he had just quitted.

Titmouse hastened homeward. How it was he knew not; but the feelings of elation with which
he had quitted Huckaback did not last long; they rapidly sank, in the cold night-air, lower
and lower, the farther he got from Leicester Square. He tried to recollect what it was that
had made him take so very different a view of his affairs from that with which he had entered
Huckaback's room. He had still a vague impression that they were not desperate; that Huckaback
had told him so, and somehow proved it; but how he now knew not--he could not recollect. As
Huckaback had gone on from time to time, Titmouse's little mind seemed to himself to comprehend
and appreciate what was being said, and to gather encouragement from it; but now--consume it!--he
stopped--rubbed his forehead--what the deuce WAS it? By the time that he had reached his own
door, he felt in as deplorable and despairing a humor as ever. He sat down to write his letter
at once; but, after many vain efforts to express his meaning--his feelings being not in the
least degree relieved by the many oaths he uttered--he at length furiously dashed his pen,
point-wise, upon the table, and thereby destroyed the only implement of the sort which he possessed.
Then he tore, rather than pulled off, his clothes; blew out his candle with a furious puff;
and threw himself on his bed--but in so doing banged the back of his head against the back
of the bed--and which of the two suffered more, for some time after, probably Mr. Titmouse
was best able to tell.

Hath, then--oh, Titmouse! fated to undergo much!--the blind jade Fortune, in her mad vagaries--she,
the goddess whom thou hast so long foolishly worshipped--at length cast her sportful eye upon
thee, and singled thee out to become the envy of millions of admiring fools, by reason of the
pranks she will presently make thee exhibit for her amusement? If this be indeed, as at present
it promises, her intent, she truly, to me calmly watching her movements, appears resolved first
to wreak her spite upon thee to the uttermost, and make thee pass through intense sufferings!
Oh me! Oh me! Alas!

CHAPTER III.

The means by which Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, became possessed of the important information
which had put them into motion, as we have seen, to find out by advertisement one yet unknown
to them, it will not be necessary for some time to explain. Theirs was a keen house, truly,
and dealing principally in the criminal line of business; and they would not, one may be sure,
have lightly committed themselves to their present extent, namely, in inserting such an advertisement
in the newspapers, and, above all, going so far in their disclosures to Titmouse. Their prudence
in the latter step, however, was very questionable to themselves even; and they immediately
afterwards deplored together the precipitation with which Mr. Quirk had communicated to Titmouse
the nature and extent of his possible good fortune. It was Mr. Quirk's own doing, however,
and done after as much expostulation as the cautious Gammon could venture to use. I say they
had not lightly taken up the affair; they had not "acted unadvisedly." They were fortified,
first, by the opinion of Mr. MORTMAIN, an able and experienced conveyancer, who thus wound
up an abstrusely learned opinion on the voluminous "case" which had been submitted to him:--

     "...Under all these circumstances, and assuming as above, I am
     decidedly of opinion that the title to the estates in question is
     at this moment not in their present possessor, (who represents the
     younger branch of the Dreddlington family,) but in the descendants
     of Stephen Dreddlington, through the female line; which brings us
     to Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse. This person, however, seems not to
     have been at all aware of the existence of his rights, or he could
     hardly have been concerned in the pecuniary arrangements mentioned
     at fol. 33 of the case. Probably something may be heard of his heir
     by making careful inquiry in the neighborhood where he was last
     heard of, and issuing advertisements for his heir-at-law; care, of
     course, being taken not to be so specific in the terms of such
     advertisements as to attract the notice of A. B., (the party now in
     possession.) If such person should, by the means above suggested,
     be discovered, I advise proceedings to be commenced forthwith,
     under the advice of some gentleman of experience at the common-law
     bar.
                                                      "MOULDY MORTMAIN.
     "Lincoln's Inn, January 19, 18--."

This was sufficiently gratifying to the "house;" but, to make assurance doubly sure, before
embarking in so harassing and expensive an enterprise--one which lay a good deal, too, without
the sphere of their practice, which as already mentioned, was chiefly in criminal law--the
same case (without Mr. Mortmain's opinion) was laid before a young conveyancer, who, having
much less business than Mr. Mortmain, would, it was thought, "look into the case fully," though
receiving only one-third of the fee which had been paid to Mr. Mortmain. And Mr. FUSSY FRANKPLEDGE--that
was his name--did "look into the case fully;" and in doing so, turned over two-thirds of his
little library;--and also gleaned--by note and verbally--the opinions upon the subject of some
half-dozen of his "learned friends;" to say nothing of the magnificent air with which he indoctrinated
his eager and confiding pupils upon the subject. At length his imp of a clerk bore the precious
result of his master's labors to Saffron Hill, in the shape of an "opinion," three times as
long as, and indescribably more difficult to understand than, the opinion of Mr. Mortmain;
and which if it demonstrated anything beyond the prodigious cram which had been undergone by
its writer for the purpose of producing it, demonstrated this--namely, that neither the party
indicated by Mr. Mortmain, nor the one then actually in possession, had any more right to the
estate than the aforesaid Mr. Frankpledge; but that the happy individual so entitled was some
third person. Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, a good deal flustered hereat, hummed and hawed on perusing
these contradictory opinions of counsel learned in the law; and the usual and proper result
followed--i. e. a "CONSULTATION," which was to solder up all the differences between Mr. Mortmain
and Mr. Frankpledge, or, at all events, strike out some light which might guide their clients
on their adventurous way.

Now, Mr. Mortmain had been Mr. Quirk's conveyancer (whenever such a functionary's services
had been required) for about twenty years; and Quirk was ready to suffer death in defence of
any opinion of Mr. Mortmain. Mr. Gammon swore by Frankpledge, who had been at school with him,
and was a "rising man." Mortmain belonged to the old school--Frankpledge steered by the new
lights. The former could point to some forty cases in the Law Reports, which had been ruled
in conformity with his previously given opinion, and some twenty which had been overruled thereby;
the latter gentleman, although he had been only five years in practice, had written an opinion
which had led to a suit--which had ended in a difference of opinion between the Court of King's
Bench and the Common Pleas; the credit of having done which was, however, some time afterward,
a little bit tarnished by the decision of a Court of Error, without hearing the other side,
against the opinion of Mr. Frankpledge. But----

Mr. Frankpledge quoted so many cases, and went to the bottom of everything, and gave so much
for his money--and was so civil!--

Well, the consultation came off, at length, at Mr. Mortmain's chambers, at eight o'clock in
the evening. A few minutes before that hour, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon were to be seen in the
clerk's room, in civil conversation with that prim functionary, who explained to them that
he did all Mr. Mortmain's drafting--pupils were so idle; that Mr. Mortmain did not score out
much of what he (the aforesaid clerk) had drawn; that he noted up Mr. Mortmain's new cases
for him in the reports, Mr. M. having so little time; and that the other day the Vice-Chancellor
called on Mr. Mortmain--with several other matters of that sort, calculated to enhance the
importance of Mr. Mortmain; who, as the clerk was asking Mr. Gammon, in a good-natured way,
how long Mr. Frankpledge had been in practice, and where his chambers were--made his appearance,
with a cheerful look and a bustling gait, having just walked down from his house in Queen's
Square, with a comfortable bottle of old port on board. Shortly afterwards Mr. Frankpledge
arrived, followed by his little clerk, bending beneath two bags of books, (unconscious bearer
of as much law as had well-nigh split thousands of learned heads, and broken tens of thousands
of hearts, in the making of, being destined to have a similar but far greater effect in the
applying of,) and the consultation began.

As Frankpledge entered, he could not help casting a sheep's eye towards a table that glistened
with such an array of "papers," (a tasteful arrangement of Mr. Mortmain's clerk before every
consultation;) and down sat the two conveyancers and the two attorneys. I devoutly wish I had
time to describe the scene at length; but greater events are pressing upon me. The two conveyancers
fenced with one another for some time very guardedly and good-humoredly: pleasant was it to
observe the conscious condescension of Mortmain, the anxious energy and volubility of Frankpledge.
When Mr. Mortmain said anything that seemed weighty or pointed, Quirk looked with an elated
air, a quick triumphant glance, at Gammon; who, in his turn, whenever Mr. Frankpledge quoted
an "old case" from Bendloe, Godbolt, or the Year Books, (which, having always piqued himself
on his almost exclusive acquaintance with the modern cases, he made a point of doing,) gazed
at Quirk with a smile of placid superiority. Mr. Frankpledge talked almost the whole time;
Mr. Mortmain, immovable in the view of the case which he had taken in his "opinion," listened
with an attentive, good-natured air, ruminating pleasantly the while upon the quality of the
port he had been drinking, (the first of the bin which he had tasted,) and upon the decision
which the Chancellor might come to on a case brought into court on his advice, and which had
been argued that afternoon. At last Frankpledge unwittingly fell foul of a favorite crotchet
of Mortmain's--and at it they went, hammer and tongs, for nearly twenty minutes, (it had nothing
whatever to do with the case they were consulting upon.) In the end, Mortmain of course adhered
to his points, and Frankpledge intrenched himself in his books; each slightly yielded to the
views of the other on immaterial points, (or what would have appeared the use of the consultation?)
but did that which both had resolved upon doing from the first, i. e. sticking to his original
opinion. Both had talked an amazing deal of deep law, which had at least one effect, viz. it
fairly drowned both Quirk and Gammon, who, as they went home, with not (it must be owned) the
clearest perceptions in the world of what had been going on, (though, before going to the consultation,
each had really known something about the case,) stood each stoutly by his conveyancer's opinion,
each protesting that he had never been once misled--Quirk by Mortmain, or Gammon by Frankpledge--and
each resolved to give his man more of the conveyancing business of the house than he had before.
I grieve to add, that they parted that night with a trifle less of cordiality than had been
their wont. In the morning, however, this little irritation had passed away; and they agreed,
before giving up the case, to take the final opinion of Mr. TRESAYLE--the great Mr. Tresayle.
He was, indeed, a wonderful conveyancer--a perfect miracle of real-property law-learning. He
had had such an enormous practice for forty-five years, that for the last ten he had never
put his nose out of chambers for pure want of time, and at last of inclination; and had been
so conversant with Norman French and law Latin, in the old English letter, that he had almost
entirely forgotten how to write the modern English character. His opinions made their appearance
in three different kinds of handwriting. First, one that none but he and his old clerk could
make out; secondly, one that none but he himself could read; and thirdly, one that neither
he, nor his clerk, nor any one on earth, could decipher. The use of any one of these styles
depended on--the difficulty of the case to be answered. If it were an easy one, the answer
was very judiciously put into No. I.; if rather difficult, it, of course, went into No. II.;
and if exceedingly difficult, (and also important,) it was very properly thrown into No. III.;
being a question that really ought not to have been asked, and did not deserve an answer. The
fruit within these uncouth shells, however, was precious. Mr. Tresayle's law was supreme over
everybody's else. It was currently reported that Lord Eldon even (who was himself slightly
acquainted with such subjects) reverently deferred to the authority of Mr. Tresayle; and would
lie winking and knitting his shaggy eyebrows half the night, if he thought that Mr. Tresayle's
opinion on a case, and his own, differed. This was the great authority to whom, as in the last
resort, Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap resolved to appeal. To his chambers they, within a
day or two after their consultation at Mr. Mortmain's, despatched their case, (making no mention
of the opinion which had been previously taken,) with a highly respectable fee, and a special
compliment to his clerk, hoping to hear from that awful quarter within a month--which was the
earliest average period within which Mr. Tresayle's opinions found their way to his patient
but anxious clients. It came at length, with a note from Mr. Prim, his clerk, intimating that
they would find him, i. e. the aforesaid Mr. Prim, at his chambers the next morning, prepared
to explain the opinion to them; having just had it read over to him by Mr. Tresayle, for it
proved to be in No. II. The opinion occupied about two pages; and the handwriting bore a strong
resemblance to Chinese or Arabic, with a quaint intermixture of the uncial Greek character--it
was impossible to contemplate it without a certain feeling of awe! In vain did old Quirk squint
at it, from all corners, for nearly a couple of hours, (having first called in the assistance
of a friend of his, an old attorney of upwards of fifty years' standing;) nay--even Mr. Gammon,
foiled at length, could not for the life of him refrain from a soft curse or two. Neither of
them could make anything of it--(as for Snap, they never showed it to him; it was not within
his province--i. e. the Insolvent Debtors' Court, the Old Bailey, the Clerkenwell Sessions,
the Police Offices, the inferior business of the Common Law Courts, and the worrying of the
clerks of the office--a department in which he was perfection itself.)

To their great delight, Mr. Tresayle took Mr. Mortmain's view of the case. Nothing could be
more terse, perspicuous, and conclusive than the great man's opinion. Mr. Quirk was in raptures,
and that very day sent to procure an engraving of Mr. Tresayle, which had lately come out,
for which he paid 5s., and ordered it to be framed and hung up in his own room, where already
grinned a quaint resemblance, in black profile, of Mr. Mortmain, cheek by jowl with that of
a notorious traitor who had been hanged in spite of Mr. Quirk's best exertions. In special
good-humor, he assured Mr. Gammon, (who was plainly somewhat crestfallen about Mr. Frankpledge,)
that everybody must have a beginning; that even he himself (Mr. Quirk) had been once only a
beginner.

Once fairly on the scent, Messrs. Quirk and Gammon soon began, secretly but energetically,
to push their inquiries in all directions. They discovered that Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse,
having spent the chief portion of his blissful days as a cobbler at Whitehaven, had died in
London, somewhere about the year 1793. At this point they stood for a long while, in spite
of two advertisements, to which they had been driven with the greatest reluctance, for fear
of attracting the attention of those most interested in thwarting their efforts. Even that
part of the affair had been managed somewhat skilfully. It was a stroke of Mr. Gammon's to
advertise not for "Heir-at-Law," but "Next of Kin," as the reader has seen. The former might
have challenged the notice of unfriendly curiosity, which the latter was hardly calculated
to attract. At length--at the "third time of asking"--up turned Tittlebat Titmouse, in the
way which we have seen. His relationship with Mr. Gabriel Tittlebat Titmouse was indisputable;
in fact, he was (to adopt his own words) that "deceased person's" son and heir-at-law.

The reader may guess the chagrin and disgust of Mr. Gammon at the appearance, manners, and
character of the person whom he fully believed, on first seeing him at Messrs. Tag-rag's, to
be the rightful owner of the fine estates held by one who, as against Mr. Titmouse, had no
more real title to them than had Mr. Tag-rag; and for whom their house was to undertake the
very grave risk and expense of instituting such proceedings as would be requisite to place
Mr. Titmouse in the position which they believed him entitled to occupy--having to encounter
a hot and desperate opposition at every point, from those who had nine-tenths of the law--to
wit, possession--on their side, on which they stood as upon a rock; and with immense means
for carrying on the war defensive. That Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap did not contemplate
undertaking all this, without having calculated upon its proving well worthy their while, was
only reasonable. They were going voluntarily to become the means of conferring immense benefits
upon one who was a total stranger to them--who had not a penny to spend upon the prosecution
of his own rights. Setting aside certain difficulties which collected themselves into two awkward
words, MAINTENANCE and CHAMPERTY, and stared them in the face whenever they contemplated any
obvious method of securing the just reward of their enterprise and toils--setting aside all
this, I say, it might turn out, only after a ruinous expenditure had been incurred, that the
high authorities which had sanctioned their proceedings in point of law, had expressed their
favorable opinions on a state of facts, which, however satisfactorily they looked on paper,
could not be substantiated, if keenly sifted, and determinedly resisted. All this, too--all
their time, labor, and money, to go for nothing--on behalf of a vulgar, selfish, ignorant,
presumptuous, ungrateful puppy, like Titmouse!--Well indeed, therefore, might Mr. Gammon, as
we have seen he did, give himself and partners a forty-eight hours' interval, between his interview
with Titmouse and formal introduction of him to the firm, in which to consider their position
and mode of procedure. The taste of his quality which that first interview afforded them all--so
far surpassing all that the bitter description of him given to them by Mr. Gammon had prepared
them for--filled the partners with inexpressible disgust, and would have induced them to throw
up the whole affair--so getting rid both of it, and of him, together. But then, on the other
hand, there were certain very great advantages, both of a professional and even directly pecuniary
kind, which it would have been madness indeed for any office lightly to throw away. It was
really, after all, an unequal struggle between feeling and interest. If they should succeed
in unseating the present wrongful possessor of a very splendid property, and putting in his
place the rightful owner, by means alone of their own professional ability, perseverance, and
heavy pecuniary outlay, (a fearful consideration, truly, but Mr. Quirk had scraped together
some thirty thousand pounds!) what recompense could be too great for such resplendent services?
To say nothing of the éclat which it would gain for their office, in the profession and in
the world at large, and the substantial and permanent advantages to the firm, if, as they ought
to be, they were intrusted with the general management of the property by the new and inexperienced
and confiding owner--ay, but there was the rub! What a disheartening and disgusting specimen
of such new owner had disclosed itself to their anxiously expecting but soon recoiling eyes--always,
however, making due allowances for one or two cheering indications, on Mr. Titmouse's part,
of a certain rapacious and litigious humor, which might hereafter right pleasantly and profitably
occupy their energies! Their professional position, and their interests had long made them
sharp observers; but when did ever before low and disgusting qualities force themselves into
revolting prominence, as those of Mr. Titmouse had done, in the very moment of an expected
display of the better feelings of human nature--such as enthusiastic gratitude? They had, in
their time, had to deal with some pleasant specimens of humanity, to be sure; but when with
any more odious and impracticable than Tittlebat Titmouse threatened to prove himself? What
hold could they get upon such a character as his? Beneath all his coarseness and weakness,
there was a glimmer of low cunning which might suffice to keep their superior and practised
astuteness at its full stretch. These were difficulties, cheerless enough in the contemplation,
truly; but, nevertheless, the partners could not bear the idea of escaping from them by throwing
up the affair altogether. Then came the question--How were they to manage Mr. Titmouse?--how
acquire an early and firm hold of him, so as to convert him into a capital client? His fears
and his interests were obviously the engines with which their experienced hands were to work;
and several long and most anxious consultations had Messrs. Quirk and Gammon had on this important
matter. The first great question with them was--To what extent, and when, they should acquaint
him with the nature of his expectations.

Gammon was for keeping him comparatively in the dark, till success was within reach: during
that interval, (which might be a long one,) by alternately stimulating his hopes and fears;
by habituating him to an entire dependence on them; by persuading him of the prodigious extent
of their exertions and sacrifices on his behalf--they might do something; mould him into a
shape fit for their purposes, and persuade him that his affairs must needs go to ruin but in
their hands. Something like this was the scheme of the cautious, acute, and placid Gammon.
Mr. Quirk, however, (with whom, as will be hereafter shown, had originated the whole discovery,)
thought thus:--tell the fellow at once the whole extent of what we can do for him, viz. turn
a half-starving linen-draper's shopman into the owner of £10,000 a-year, and of a great store
of ready money. This will, in a manner, stun him into submission, and make him at once and
for all what we want him to be. He will immediately fall prostrate with reverent gratitude--looking
at us, moreover, as three gods, who, at our will, can shut him out of heaven. "That's the way
to bring down your bird," said Mr. Quirk; and Mr. Quirk had been forty years in practice--had
made the business what it was--still held half of it in his own hands, (two-thirds of the remaining
half being Gammon's, and the residue Snap's:) and Gammon, moreover, had a very distinct perception
that the funds for carrying on the war would come out of the tolerably well-stored pockets
of the august head of the firm. So, after a long discussion, he openly yielded his opinion
to that of Mr. Quirk--cherishing, however, a very warm respect for it in his own bosom. As
for Snap, that distinguished member of the firm was very little consulted in the matter; which
had not yet been brought to that stage where his powerful energies could come into play. He
had of course, however, heard a good deal of what was going on; and knew that ere long there
would be the copying out and serving of the Lord knows how many copies of declarations in ejectment,
motions against the casual ejector, and so forth--so far at least as he was "up to" all those
quaint and anomalous proceedings. It had, therefore, been at length agreed that the communication
to Titmouse, on his first interview, of the full extent of his splendid expectations, should
depend upon the discretion of Mr. Quirk. The reader has seen the unexpected turn which matters
took upon that important occasion; and if it proved Quirk's policy to be somewhat inferior
in point of discretion and long-sightedness to that of Gammon, still it must be owned that
the latter had cause to admire the rapid generalship with which Mr. Quirk had obviated the
consequences of his false move--not ill seconded by Snap. What could have been more judicious
than his reception of Titmouse, on the occasion of his being led in again by the subtle Gammon?

The next and greatest matter was, how to obtain any hold upon such a person as Titmouse had
shown himself, so as to secure to themselves, in the event of success, the remuneration to
which they considered themselves entitled. Was it so perfectly clear that, if he felt disposed
to resist it, they could compel him to pay the mere amount of their bill of costs?

Suppose he should turn round upon them, and have their BILL TAXED--Mr. Quirk grunted with fright
at the bare thought. Then there was a slapping quiddam honorarium extra--undoubtedly for that
they must, they feared, trust to the honor and gratitude of Mr. Titmouse; and a pretty taste
of the quality of that animal they had already experienced! Such a disposition as his, to have
to rely upon for the prompt settlement of a bill of thousands of pounds of costs! and, besides
that, to have it to look to for the payment of at least some five or perhaps ten thousand pounds
douceur--nay, and this was not all. Mr. Quirk had, as well as Mr. Gammon, cast many an anxious
eye on the following passages from Blackstone's Commentaries:--

     "MAINTENANCE is an officious intermeddling in a suit that no way
     belongs to one, by 'maintaining' or assisting either party with
     money, or otherwise, to prosecute or defend it.... It is an offence
     against public justice, as it keeps alive strife and contention,
     and perverts the remedial process of the law into an engine of
     oppression.... The punishment by common law is fine and
     imprisonment, and by statute 32 Hen. VIII. c. 9, a forfeiture of
     £10!

     "CHAMPERTY--(campi partitio)--is a species of Maintenance, and
     punished in the same manner; being a bargain with a plaintiff or
     defendant 'campum partiri,' to divide the land, or other matter
     sued for, between them, if they prevail at law; whereupon the
     champertor is to carry on the suit at his own expense.... These
     pests of civil society, that are perpetually endeavoring to disturb
     the repose of their neighbors, and officiously interfering in other
     men's quarrels, even at the hazard of their own fortunes, were
     severely animadverted on by the Roman law; and they were punished
     by the forfeiture of a third part of their goods, and perpetual
     infamy."[4]

These were pleasant passages surely!----

Many were the conversations and consultations which the partners had had with Messrs. Mortmain
and Frankpledge respectively, upon the interesting question, whether there were any mode of
at once securing themselves against the ingratitude of Titmouse, and protecting themselves
against the penalties of the law. It made old Mr. Quirk's bald head, even, flush all over whenever
he thought of their bill being taxed, or contemplated himself the inmate of a prison, (above
all, at his advanced time of life,) with mournful leisure to meditate upon the misdeeds that
had sent him thither, to which profitable exercise the legislature would have specially stimulated
him by a certain fine above mentioned. As for Gammon, he knew there must be a way of doing
the thing somehow or another; for his friend Frankpledge felt infinitely less difficulty in
the way than Mortmain, whom he considered a timid and old-fashioned practitioner. The courts,
said Mr. Frankpledge, were now setting their faces strongly against the doctrine of Maintenance,
as being founded on a bygone state of things: cessante ratione cessat et ipsa lex, was his
favorite maxim. There was no wrong without a remedy, he said; and was there not a wrong in
the case of a poor man wrongfully deprived of his own? And how could this be remedied, if the
old law of Maintenance stood like a bugbear in the way of humane and spirited practitioners?
Was no one to be at liberty to take up the cause of the oppressed, encouraged by the prospect
of an ample recompense? It might be said, perhaps--let the claimant sue in formâ pauperis:
but then he must swear that he is not worth five pounds; and a man may not be able to take
that oath, and yet be unequal to the commencement of a suit requiring the outlay of thousands.
Moreover, a pretty prospect it was for such a suitor, (in formâ pauperis,) if he should happen
to be nonsuited--to be "put to his election, whether to be whipped or pay the costs."[5] Thus
reasoned within himself that astute person, Mr. Frankpledge; and at length satisfied himself
that he had framed an instrument which would "meet the case"--that "would hold water." To the
best of my recollection, it was a BOND, conditioned to pay the sum of ten thousand pounds to
Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, within two months of Titmouse's being put into possession
of the rents and profits of the estate in question. The condition of that bond was, as its
framer believed, drawn in a masterly manner; and his draft was lying before Messrs. Quirk,
Gammon, and Snap, on the Wednesday morning, (i. e. the day after Titmouse's interview with
them,) and had succeeded at length in exciting the approbation of Mr. Quirk himself; when--whew!--down
came a note from Mr. Frankpledge, to the effect that, "since preparing the draft bond," he
had "had reason slightly to modify his original opinion," owing to his "having lit upon a LATE
CASE," in which an instrument precisely similar to the one which he had prepared for his admiring
clients, had been held "totally ineffectual and void both at law and in equity." I say, Mr.
Frankpledge's note was to that effect; for so ingeniously had he framed it--so effectually
concealed his retreat beneath a little cloud of contradictory authorities, like as the ink-fish,
they say, eludeth its pursuers--that his clients cursed the law, not their draftsman; and,
moreover, by prudently withholding the name of the "late case," he, at all events for a while,
had prevented their observing that it was senior to some eight or ten cases which (indefatigable
man!) he had culled for them out of the legal garden, and arrayed on the back of his draft.
Slightly disconcerted were Messrs. Quirk and Gammon, it may be believed, at this new view of
the "result of the authorities." "Mortmain is always right!" said Quirk, looking hard at Gammon;
who observed simply that one day Frankpledge would be as old as Mortmain then was--by which
time (thought he) I also know where--please God--you will be, my old friend, if there's any
truth in the Scriptures! In this pleasant frame of mind were the partners, when the impudent
apparition of Huckaback presented itself, in the manner which has been described. Huckaback's
commentary upon the disgusting text of Titmouse over-night, (as a lawyer would say, in analogy
to a well-known term, "Coke upon Littleton,") produced an effect upon their minds which may
be easily imagined. It was while their minds were under these two soothing influences, i. e.
of the insolence of Huckaback and the vacillation of Frankpledge, that Mr. Gammon had penned
the note to Titmouse, (surely, under the circumstances, one of extraordinary temper and forbearance,)
which had occasioned him the agonies I have been attempting faintly to describe;--and that
Quirk, summoning Snap into the room, had requested him to give orders for denial to Titmouse
if he should again make his appearance at the office; which injunction Snap forthwith delivered
in the clerk's room, in a tone and manner that were a very model of the imperative mood.

A day or two afterwards, Mr. Quirk, (who was a man that stuck like a limpet to a rock to any
point which occurred to him,) in poring over that page in the fourth volume of Blackstone's
Commentaries, where were to be found the passages which have been already quoted, (and which
both Quirk and Gammon had long had off by heart,) as he sat one day at dinner, at home, whither
he had taken the volume in question, fancied he had at last hit upon a notable crotchet, which,
the more he thought of, the more he was struck with; determining to pay a visit in the morning
to Mr. Mortmain. The spark of light that had twinkled till it kindled in the tinder of his
mind, was struck by his hard head out of the following sentence of the text in question:--

     "A man may, however, maintain the suit of his near kinsman,
     servant, or POOR NEIGHBOR, out of charity and compassion, with
     impunity; otherwise, the punishment is," &c. &c.[6]

Now, it seemed to Mr. Quirk, that the words which I have placed in italics and small capitals,
met the case of poor Tittlebat Titmouse exactly. He stuck to that view of the case, till he
almost began to think that he really had a kind of a sort of a charity and compassion for poor
Tittlebat--kept out of his rights--tyrannized over by a vulgar draper in Oxford Street--where,
too, no doubt, he was half starved.--"It's a great blessing that one's got the means--and the
inclination, to serve one's poor neighbors"--thought Quirk, as he swallowed glass after glass
of the wine that maketh glad the heart of man--and also softens it;--for the more he drank,
the more and more pitiful became his mood--the more sensitive was he to compassionate suggestions;
and by the time that he had finished the decanter, he was all but in tears! These virtuous
feelings brought their own reward, too--for, from time to time, they conjured up, as it were,
the faint rainbow image of a bond conditioned for the payment of TEN THOUSAND POUNDS!

To change the metaphor a little--by the time that old Quirk had reached his office in the morning,
the heated iron had cooled. If his heart had retained any of the maudlin softness of the preceding
evening, the following pathetic letter from Titmouse might have made a very deep impression
upon it, and fixed him, in the benevolent and disinterested mind of the old lawyer, as indeed
his "poor neighbor." The following is an exact copy of that lucid and eloquent composition.
It had been written by Mr. Titmouse, all out of his own head; and with his own hand had he
left it at the office, at a late hour on the preceding evening.

                 "To Messrs. QUERK, GAMON, and SNAPE.

     "GENTS,

     "Y^r Esteem'd Favor lies now before Me, which must Say have Given
     me Much Concern, seeing I Thought it was All Made up betwixt us
     That was of Such an Unpleasant Nature on Tuesday night (ultimo)
     w^h I most humbly Own (and Acknowledge) was all alone and
     intirely of My Own Fault, and Not in the Least Your's which
     behaved to me, Must say, In the most Respectful and superior manner
     that was possible to think Of, for I truly Say I never was In the
     Company of Such Imminent and Superior Gents before In my Life w^h
     will take my Oath sincerely Of, Gents. Please to consider the
     Brandy (w^h do think was Uncommon Stiff) such a flustrum As I
     was In before, to, w^h was Evident to All of Us there then
     Assemblid and very natral like to be the Case Seeing I have nevir
     known what Peas of Mind was since I behaved in Such a Oudacious
     way w^h truly was the case I can't Deny to Such Gents as Yourselfs
     that were doing me such Good Fortune And Kindness to me as it would
     Be a Dreadful sin and shame (such as Trust I can never be Guilty
     of) to be (w^h am not) and never Can Be insensible Of, Gents do
     Consider all this Favorably because of my humble Amends w^h I here
     Make with the greatest Trouble in my Mind that I have Had Ever
     Since, it was all of the Sperrits I Tooke w^h made me Go On at such
     a Rate w^h was always (beg to Assure y^r most resp^e house) the
     Case Since my birth when I took Sperrits never so little Since I
     had the Meazles when I was 3 Years Old as I Well Recollect and hope
     it will be Born in Mind what is Often Said, and I'm Sure I've read
     it Somewhere Else that People that Is Drunk Always speaks the
     Direct Contrarywise of their True and Real Thoughts. (w^h am
     Certain never was any Thing Truer in my case) so as I get the Money
     or What not, do whatever you Like w^h are quite welcome to Do if
     you please, and No questions Asked, don't Mind saying by The Way It
     shall Be As Good as £200 note in The way of your resp^e House if I
     Get the Estate of w^h am much in Want of. Mr. Gamon (w^h is the
     most Upright gent that ever I came across in All my Life) will tell
     you that I Was Quite Cut up when he came After me in that kind Way
     and told him Then how I loved y^r Respect^e House and would do all
     In My power to Serve You, which see if I Don't, I was in Such a
     rage with that Fellow (He's only in a Situation in Tottenham C^t
     Road) Huckaback which is his true name it was an oudacious thing,
     and have given him such a Precious Good hiding last Night as you
     never saw when on his Bendid Knees He asked the pardon of your
     Respectable House, say^g nothing of Me w^h w^d not allow because I
     said I would Not Forgive Him because he had not injured me: But
     you, w^h I wonder at his Impudence in Calling on Professional
     Gents like you, if I get the Estate shall never cease to Think well
     of you and mean While how full of Trouble I am Often Thinking Of
     Death which is the End of Every Thing And then in that Case who
     will the Property Go to Seeing I Leave never a Brother or Sister
     Behind me. And Therefore Them That w^d Get it I Feel Sure of w^d
     Not do So well by you (if You will Only believe Me) So Gents. This
     is All at present That I will Make so Bold to trouble you With
     About my Unhappy Affairs Only to say That am used most
     Intolerably Bad now In The Shop quite Tyranicall And Mr. Tag-Rag as
     Set Them All Against Me and I shall Never Get Another Situat^n for
     want of a Char^r which he will give me say^g noth^g at Present of
     the Sort of Victules w^h give me Now to Eat Since Monday last, For
     Which am Sure the Devil must have Come In to That Gentleman (Mr.
     Tag-rag, he was only himself in a Situation in Holborn once, gett^g
     the Business by marry^g the widow w^h wonder At for he is nothing
     Particular to Look At.) I am y^rs

     Humbly to Command Till Death (always Humbly Begging pardon for the
     bad Conduct w^h was guilty of when In Liquor Especially On an Empty
     Stomach, Having Taken Nothing all that Day excepting what I could
     not Eat,)

                             "Your's most Resp^y
                                                  "TITTLEBAT TITMOUSE.

     "P. S. Will Bring That young Man with Tears In his Eyes to Beg y^r
     pardon Over again If You Like w^h will Solemnly Swear if Required
     That he did It all of His own Head And that Have given It him For
     it in the Way That is Written Above And humbly Trust You Will make
     Me So happy Once more by writing To Me (if it is only a Line) To
     say You Have Thought No more of it T. T. No. 9 Closet C^t. Oxford
     Street. 14/7/18--"

This exquisitely-skilful epistle might indeed have brought tears into Mr. Quirk's eyes, if
he had been used to the melting mood, which he was not; having never been seen actually to
shed a tear but once--when five-sixths of his little bill of costs (£196, 15s. 4d.) were taxed
off in an auction on a Bill of Exchange for £13.[7] As it was, he tweedled the letter about
in his hands for about five minutes, in a musing mood, and then stepped with it into Mr. Gammon's
room. That gentleman took the letter with an air of curiosity, and read it over; at every sentence
(if indeed a sentence there was in it) bursting into soft laughter.

"Ha, ha, ha!" he laughed on concluding it--"a comical gentleman, Mr. Titmouse, upon my honor!"

"Funny--isn't it rather?" interposed Mr. Quirk, standing with his hands fumbling about in his
breeches pockets.

"What a crawling despicable little rascal!--ha, ha, ha!"

"Why--I don't quite say that, either," said Quirk, doubtingly--"I--don't exactly look at it
in that light!"

"My dear sir!" exclaimed Gammon, leaning back in his chair, and laughing rather heartily, (at
least for him.)

"You can't leave off that laugh of yours," said Quirk, a little tartly; "but I must say I don't
see anything in the letter to laugh at so particularly. It is written in a most respectful
manner, and shows a proper feeling towards the House!"

"Ay! see how he speaks of me!" interrupted Gammon, with such a smile!--

"And doesn't he speak so of me? and all of us?"

"He'll let the house tread on him till he can tread on the house, I dare say."

"But you must own, Mr. Gammon, it shows we've licked him into shape a bit--eh?"

"Oh, it's a little vile creeping reptile now, and so it will be to the end of the chapter--of
our proceedings; and when we've done everything--really, Mr. Quirk! if one were apt to lose
one's temper, it would be to see such a thing as that put into possession of such a fortune."

"That may be, Mr. Gammon; but I really--hem!--trust--I've--a higher feeling!--To right--the
injured"---- He could get no farther.

"Hem!" exclaimed Gammon.

The partners smiled at one another. A touch, or an attempted touch at disinterestedness!--and
at Quirk's time of life!

"But he's now in a humor for training, at all events--isn't he?" exclaimed Quirk--"we've something
now to go to work upon--gradually."

"Isn't that a leaf out of my book, Mr. Quirk?--isn't that exactly what"----

"Well, well--what does it signify?" interrupted Quirk, rather petulantly--"I've got a crotchet
that'll do for us, yet, about the matter of law, and make all right and tight--so I'm going
to Mortmain."

"I've got a little idea of my own of that sort, Mr. Quirk," said Gammon--"I've got an extract
from Co-Litt--. I can't imagine how either of them could have missed it; and, as Frankpledge
dines with me to-day, we shall talk it all over. But, by the way, Mr. Quirk, I should say,
with all deference, that we'll take no more notice of this fellow till we've got some screw
tight enough"----

"Why--all that may be very well; but you see, Gammon, the fellow seems the real heir, after
all--and if he don't get it, no one can; and if he don't--we don't! eh?"

"There's a very great deal of force in that observation, Mr. Quirk--it gives one another view
of the subject!"--said Gammon, emphatically:--and, tolerably well pleased with one another,
they parted. If Quirk might be compared to an old file, Gammon was the oil!--so they got on,
in the main, very well together. It hardly signifies what was the result of their interviews
with their two conveyancers. The two partners met the next morning on ordinary business; and
as each made no allusions whatever to the "crotchet" of the day before, it may be safely inferred
that each had been satisfied by his conveyancer of having found out a mare's nest.

"I think, by the way," said Mr. Gammon to Mr. Quirk, before they parted on the previous evening,
"it may be as well, all things considered, to acknowledge the receipt of the fellow's note--eh?--Can't
do any harm, you know, and civility costs nothing--hem!"

"The very thing I was thinking of," replied Quirk, as he always did, on hearing any suggestion
from Mr. Gammon. So by that night's post was despatched (post-paid) the following note to Mr.
Titmouse:--

     "Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap have the pleasure of acknowledging
     the receipt of Mr. Titmouse's polite letter of last night's date;
     and earnestly beg that he will not distress himself about the
     little incident that occurred at their office on Tuesday night, and
     which they assure him they have quite forgotten. They made all
     allowances, however their feelings suffered at the time. They beg
     Mr. T. will give them credit for not losing sight of his interests,
     to the best of their ability; obstructed as they are, however, by
     numerous serious difficulties. If they should be hereafter
     overcome, he may rest assured of their promptly communicating with
     him; and till then they trust Mr. T. will not inconvenience himself
     by calling on, or writing to them.

     Saffron Hill, 15th July 18--.

     "P. S.--Messrs. Q. G. and S. regret to hear that any unpleasantness
     has arisen (Gammon could hardly write for laughing) between Mr.
     Titmouse and his friend Mr. Hicklebagle, who, they assure him,
     manifested a very warm interest in behalf of Mr. T., and conducted
     himself with the greatest propriety on the occasion of his calling
     upon Messrs. Q. G. and S. They happened at that moment to be
     engaged in matters of the highest importance; which will, they
     trust, explain any appearance of abruptness they might have
     exhibited towards that gentleman. Perhaps Mr. Titmouse will be so
     obliging as to intimate as much to Mr. Hickerbag."

There was an obvious reason for this polite allusion to Huckaback. Gammon thought it very possible
that that gentleman might be in Mr. Titmouse's confidence, and exercise a powerful influence
over him hereafter; and that influence Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap might find it well worth
their while to secure beforehand.

The moment that Titmouse, with breathless haste, had read over this mollifying document, which
being directed to his lodgings correctly, he obtained as soon as he had got home, after quitting
Mr. Tag-rag, about ten o'clock, he hastened to his friend Huckaback. That gentleman (who seemed
now virtually recognized by Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap as Titmouse's confidant) shook
his head ominously, exclaiming--"Blarny, blarny!" and a bitter sneer settled on his disagreeable
features, till he had read down to the postscript; the perusal of which effected a sudden change
in his feelings. He declared, with a great oath, that Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap were
"perfect gentlemen," and would "do the right thing after all--Titmouse might depend upon it;"
an assurance which greatly cheered Titmouse, to whose keen discernment it never once occurred
to refer Huckaback's altered tone to the right cause, viz. the lubricating quality of the postscript;
and since Titmouse did not allude to it, no more did Mr. Huckaback, although his own double
misnomer stuck not a little in his throat. So effectual, indeed, had been that most skilful
postscript upon the party at whom it had been aimed, that he exerted himself unceasingly to
revive Titmouse's confidence in Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap; and so far succeeded, that
Titmouse returned to his lodgings at a late hour, a somewhat happier, if not a wiser man than
he had left them. By the time, however, that he had got into bed, having once more spelled
over the note in question, he felt as despondent as ever, and thought that Huckaback had not
known what he had been talking about. He also adverted to an apparently careless allusion by
Huckaback to the injuries which had been inflicted upon him by Titmouse on the Wednesday night:
and which, by the way, Huckaback determined it should be no fault of his if Titmouse easily
forgot! He hardly knew why--but he disliked this particularly.--Whom had he, however, in the
world, but Huckaback? In company with him alone, Titmouse felt that his pent-up feelings could
discharge themselves. Huckaback had certainly a wonderful knack of keeping up Titmouse's spirits,
whatever cause he fancied he might really have for depression. In short, he longed for the
Sunday morning, ushering in a day of rest and sympathy. Titmouse would indeed then have to
look back upon an agitating and miserable week, what with the dismal upsetting of his hopes
in the manner I have described, and the tyrannical treatment which he had experienced at Tag-rag
and Co.'s. His tormentor there, however, began at length, in some degree, to relax his active
exertions against Titmouse, simply because of the exertion requisite for keeping them up. He
attributed the pallid cheek and depressed manner of Titmouse entirely to the discipline which
had been inflicted upon him at the shop; and was gratified at perceiving that all his other
young men seemed, especially in his presence, to have imbibed his hatred of Titmouse. What
produced in Tag-rag this hatred of Titmouse? Simply what had taken place on the Monday. Mr.
Tag-rag's dignity and power had been doggedly set at nought by one of his shopmen, who had
since refused to make the least submission, or offer any kind of apology. Such conduct struck
at the root of subordination in his great establishment. Again, there is perhaps nothing in
the world so calculated to enrage a petty and vulgar mind to the highest pitch of malignity,
as the cool persevering defiance of an inferior, whom it strives to despise, while it is only
hating, feeling at the same time such to be the case. Tag-rag now and then, when he looked
towards Titmouse, as he stood behind the counter, felt as though he could have killed the little
ape. Titmouse attempted once or twice, during the week, to obtain a situation elsewhere, but
in vain. He could expect no character from Tag-rag; and when the 10th of August should have
arrived, what was to become of him? These were the kind of thoughts often passing through his
mind during the Sunday, which he and Huckaback spent together in unceasing conversation on
the one absorbing event of the last week. Titmouse, poor little puppy, had dressed himself
with just as much care as usual; but as he was giving the finishing touches at his toilet,
pumping up grievous sighs every half minute, the sum of his reflections might be stated in
the miserable significance of a quaint saying of Poor Richard's--"How hard is it to make an
empty sack stand upright!"

Although the sun shone as vividly and beautifully as on the preceding Sunday, to Titmouse's
saddened eye there seemed a sort of gloom everywhere. Up and down the Park he and Huckaback
walked, towards the close of the afternoon; but Titmouse had not so elastic a strut as before.
He felt empty and sinking. Everybody seemed to know what a sad pretender he was: and the friends
quitted the magic circle much earlier than had been usual with Titmouse. What with the fatigue
of a long day's saunter, the vexation of having had but a hasty, inferior, and unrefreshing
meal, which did not deserve the name of dinner, and their unpleasant thoughts, both seemed
depressed as they walked along the streets. At length they arrived at the open doors of a gloomy-looking
building, into which two or three sad and prim-looking people were entering. After walking
a few paces past the door--"Do you know, Huck," said Titmouse, stopping, "I've often thought
that--that--there's something in Religion."

"To be sure there is, for those that like it--who doubts it? It's all very well in its place,
no doubt," replied Huckaback, with much surprise, which increased, as he felt himself being
slowly swayed round towards the building in question. "But what of that?"

"Oh, nothing; but--hem! hem!" replied Titmouse, sinking his voice to a whisper--"a touch of--religion--eh?--would
not be so much amiss, just now! I feel--uncommon inclined that way, somehow, 'pon my soul!"

"Religion's all very well, Titty, dear!--for them that has much to be thankful for; but devil
take me! what have either you or me to be"----

"But, Huck--how do you know but we might get something to be thankful for, by praying?--I've
often heard of great things in that line--but--do come in with me, Huck!"

Huckaback stood for a moment irresolute, twirling about his cane, and looking rather distastefully
towards the dingy building. "It won't answer," said he, faintly. Titmouse drew him nearer;
but he suddenly started back.--"No! oh, 'tis only a meeting-house, Tit! Curse Dissenters, how
I hate 'em! Isn't your precious governor one in that line? Give me a regular-like, respectable
church, with a proper steeple, and parson, and prayers, and an organ, and all that!"

Titmouse secretly acknowledged the force of these observations; and the intelligent and piously
disposed couple, with perhaps a just, but certainly a somewhat sudden regard for orthodoxy,
were not long before they had found their way into a church where evening service was being
performed. They ascended the gallery stair; and seeing no reason to be ashamed of being at
church, down they both went, with loud clattering steps and a bold air, into the very central
seat (which happened to be vacant) in the front of the gallery. Titmouse paid a most exemplary
attention to what was going on, kneeling, sitting, and standing with exact propriety, in the
proper places; joining audibly in the responses, and keeping his eyes pretty steadily on the
prayer-book, which he found lying there. He even rebuked Huckaback for whispering (during one
of the most solemn parts of the service) that "there was an uncommon pretty gal in the next
pew!"--He thought that the clergyman was a remarkable fine preacher, and said some things that
he must have meant for him, Titmouse, in particular!

"Curse me, Hucky!" said he, heatedly, as soon as they had quitted the church, and were fairly
in the street--"Curse me if--if--ever I felt so comfortable-like in my mind before, as I do
now--see if I don't go again next Sunday!"

"Lord, Tit, you don't really mean--eh?--it's deuced dull work!"

"Hang me if I don't, though! and if anything should come of it--if I do but get the estate--(I
wonder, now, where Mr. Gammon goes to church. I should like to know!--I'd go there regularly)--But
if I do get the thing--you see if I don't"----

"Ah, I don't know; it's not much use praying for money, Tit; I've tried it myself, once or
twice, but it didn't answer!"

"I'll take my oath you was staring at the gals all the while, Hucky!"

"Ah, Titty!" exclaimed Huckaback, and winked his eye, and put the tip of his forefinger to
the tip of his nose, and laughed.

Titmouse continued in what he doubtless imagined to be a devout frame of mind, for several
minutes after quitting the church. But close by the aforesaid church, the devil had a thriving
little establishment, in the shape of a cigar-shop; in which a showily-dressed young Jewess
sat behind the counter, right underneath a glaring gas-light--with a narrow stripe of greasy
black velvet across her forehead, and long ringlets resting on her shoulders--bandying slang
with two or three other such creatures as Titmouse and Huckaback. Our friends entered and purchased
a cigar a-piece, which they lit on the spot; and after each of them had exchanged an impudent
wink with the Jewess, out they went, puffing away--all the remains of their piety! When they
had come to the end of their cigars they parted, each speeding homeward. Titmouse, on reaching
his lodgings, sank into profound depression. He felt an awful conviction that his visit to
the cigar-shop had entirely spoiled the effect of his previous attendance at the church; and
that, if so disposed, (and it served him right,) he might now sit and whistle for his ten thousand
a-year. Thoughts such as these drove him nearly distracted. If, indeed, he had foreseen having
to go through such another week as the one just over, I think it not impossible that before
the arrival of the ensuing Sunday, he might have afforded a little employment to that ancient
and gloomy functionary, a coroner, and his jury. At that time, however, inquests of this sort
were matter-of-fact and melancholy affairs enough; which I doubt not would have been rather
a dissuasive from suicide, in the estimation of one who might be supposed ambitious of the
éclat of a modern inquest; where, indeed, such strange antics are played by certain new performers
as would suffice to revive the corpse, (if it were a corpse that had ever had a spark of sense
or spirit in it,) and make it kick the coroner out of the room.[8] But to one of so high an
ambition as Tittlebat Titmouse, how delightful would it not have been, to anticipate becoming
(what had been quite impracticable during life) the object of public attention after his death--by
means of a flaming dissertation by the coroner on his own zeal and spirit--the nature and extent
of his rights, powers, and duties;--when high doctors are brow-beaten, the laws set at defiance,
and public decency plucked by the beard, and the torn and bleeding hearts of surviving relatives
still further agonized by an exposure, all quivering under the recent stroke, to the gaping
vulgar! Indeed, I sometimes think that the object of certain coroners, now-a-days, is twofold;
first, public--to disgust people with suicide, by showing what horrid proceedings will take
place over their carcasses; and secondly, private--to get the means of studying anatomy by
post mortems, which the said coroner never could procure in his own practice; which enables
us to account for some things one has lately seen, viz. that if a man come to his death by
means of a wagon crushing his legs, the coroner institutes an exact examination of the structure
of the lungs and heart. I take it to be getting now into a rule--the propriety whereof, some
people think, cannot be doubted--namely, that bodies ought now to be opened only to prove that
they ought not to have been opened; an inquest must be held, in order to demonstrate that it
need not have been held, except that certain fees thereby find their way into the pocket of
the aforesaid coroner, which would otherwise not have done so. In short, such a coroner as
I have in my eye may be compared to a great ape squatting on a corpse, furiously chattering
and spitting at all around it; and I am glad that it hath at last had wit enough first to shut
the door before proceeding to its horrid tricks.

Touching, by the way, the moral of suicide, it is a way which some have of cutting the Gordian
knot of the difficulties of life; which having been done, possibly the very first thing made
manifest to the spirit, after taking its mad leap into the dark may be--how very easily the
said knot might have been UNTIED; nay, that it was on the very point of being untied, if the
impatient spirit had stayed only a moment longer!

I said it was not impossible that Mr. Titmouse might, under the circumstances alluded to, have
done the deed which has called forth the above natural and profound reflections; but, upon
the whole, it is hardly probable; for he knew that by doing so he would (first) irreparably
injure society, by depriving it of an enlightened and invaluable member; (secondly,) inflict
great indignity on his precious body, of which, during life, he had always taken the most affectionate
care, by consigning it to burial in a cross-road, at night-time, with a stake run through it,[9]
and moreover peril the little soul that had just leaped out of it, by not having any burial-service
said over his aforesaid remains; and (lastly) lose all chance of enjoying Ten Thousand a-Year--at
least upon the earth. I own I was a little startled (as I dare say was the pensive reader)
at a passage of mournful significance in Mr. Titmouse's last letter to Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap, viz.--"How full of trouble I am, often thinking of death, which is the end of everything;"
but on carefully considering the context, I am disposed to think that the whole was only an
astute device of Titmouse's, either to rouse the fears, or stimulate the feelings, or excite
the hopes of the three arbiters of his destiny to whom it was addressed. Mr. Gammon, he thought,
might be thereby moved to pity; while Mr. Quirk would probably be operated upon by fears, lest
the sad contingency pointed at might deprive the house of one who would richly repay their
exertions; and by hopes of indefinite advantage, if they could by any means prevent its happening.
That these gentlemen really did keenly scrutinize, and carefully weigh every expression in
that letter, ridiculous as it was, and contemptible as, I fear, it showed its writer to be,
is certain; but it did not occur to them to compare with it the spirit, at least, and intention
of their own answer to it. Did the latter document contain less cunning and insincerity, because
it was couched in somewhat superior phraseology? They could conceal their selfish and over-reaching
designs, while poor Titmouse exposed all his little mean-mindedness and hypocrisy, simply because
he had not learned how to conceal it effectually. 'Twas indeed a battle for the very same object,
but between unequal combatants. Each was trying to take in the other. If Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap despised and loathed the man to whom they exhibited such anxious courtesy, Titmouse
hated and feared those whom his interests compelled him for a while to conciliate. Was there,
in fact, a pin to choose between them--except perhaps that Titmouse was, in a manner, excused
by his necessities? But, in the mean while--to proceed--his circumstances were becoming utterly
desperate. He continued to endure great suffering at Mr. Tag-rag's during the day--the constant
butt of the ridicule and insult of his amiable companions, and the victim of his employer's
vile and vulgar spirit of hatred and oppression. His spirit, (such as it was,) in short, was
very nearly broken. Though he seized every opportunity that offered, to inquire for another
situation, he was unsuccessful; for all whom he applied to, spoke of the strict character they
should require, "before taking a new hand into their establishment." His occupation at nights,
after quitting the shop, was twofold only--either to call upon Huckaback, (whose sympathy,
however, he was exhausting rapidly,) or solace his feelings by walking down to Saffron Hill,
and lingering about the closed office of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap--there was a kind
of gratification even in that! He once or twice felt flustered even on catching a glimpse of
the old housekeeper returning home with a pint of porter in her hand. How he would have rejoiced
to get into her good graces, and accompany her into even the kitchen--when he would be on the
premises, at least, and conversing with one of the establishment, of those who he believed
could, with a stroke of their pens, turn this wilderness of a world into a paradise for him!
But he dared not make any overtures in that quarter, for fear of their getting to the notice
of the dreaded Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap.

At length, no more than three or four shillings stood between him and utter destitution; and
the only person in the world to whom he could apply for even the most trivial assistance, was
Huckaback--whom, however, he knew to be really little better off than himself; and whom, moreover,
he felt to be treating him more and more coldly, as the week wore on, without his hearing of
any the least tidings from Saffron Hill. Huckaback evidently felt now scarcely any interest
or pleasure in the visits of his melancholy friend, and was plainly disinclined to talk about
his affairs. At length he quite turned up his nose with disgust, whenever Titmouse took out
the well-worn note of Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap, (which was almost dropping in pieces
with being constantly carried about in his pocket, taken in and out, and folded and unfolded,)
for the purpose of conning over its contents, as if there might yet linger in it some hitherto
undiscovered source of consolation. Poor Titmouse, therefore, looked at it on every such occasion
with as eager and vivid an interest as ever; but it was glanced at by Huckaback with a half-averted
eye, and a cold drawling, yawning "Ya--a--as--I see--I--dare--say!" While his impressions of
Titmouse's bright prospects were thus being rapidly effaced, his smarting recollections of
the drubbing he had received became more distinct and frequent, his feelings of resentment
more lively, nor the less so, because the expression of them had been stifled, (while he had
considered the star of Titmouse to be in the ascendant,) till the time for setting them into
motion and action, had gone by. In fact, the presence of Titmouse, suggesting such thoughts
and recollections, became intolerable to Huckaback; and Titmouse's perceptions (dull as they
naturally were, but a little quickened by recent suffering) gave him more and more distinct
notice of this circumstance, at the precise time when he meditated applying for the loan of
a few shillings. These feelings made him as humble towards Huckaback, and as tolerant of his
increasing rudeness and ill-humor, as he felt abject towards Messrs. Quirk, Gammon, and Snap;
for, unless he could succeed in wringing some trifling loan from Huckaback, (if he really had
it in his power to advance him anything,) Titmouse really could not conjecture what was to
become of him. Various faint but unadroit hints and feelers of his had been thrown away upon
Huckaback, who did not, or would not, comprehend them. At length, however, a sudden and fearful
pressure compelled poor Titmouse to speak out. Gripe, the collector, called one morning for
the poor's rates due from Mrs. Squallop, and drained her of almost every penny of ready money
which she had by her. This threw the good woman upon her resources to replenish her empty pocket--and
down she came upon Titmouse--or rather, up she went to him; for his heart sank within him,
one night on his return from the shop, having only just taken off his hat and lit his candle,
as he heard the fat old termagant's well-known heavy step ascending the stairs, and approaching
nearer and nearer to his door. Her loud imperative single knock vibrated through his very heart.

"Oh, Mrs. Squallop! How d'ye do, Mrs. Squallop?" commenced Titmouse, faintly, when he had opened
the door; "Won't you take a chair?" with trepidation offering to the panting dame almost the
only chair he had.

"No--I a'n't come to stay, Mr. Titmouse, because, d'ye see, in coorse you've got a pound, at
least, ready for me, as you promised long ago--and never more welcome; there's old Gripe been
here to-day, and had his hodious rates--(drat the poor, say I! them as can't work should starve!--rates
is a robbery!)--but howsomdever he's cleaned me out to-day; so, in coorse, I come up to you.
Got it, Mr. Titmouse?"

"I--I--I--'pon my life, Mrs. Squallop, I'm uncommon sorry"----

"Oh, bother your sorrow, Mr. Titmouse!--out with the needful, for I can't stop palavering here."

"I--I can't, so help me----!" gasped Titmouse, with the calmness of desperation.

"You can't! And marry, sir, why not, may I make bold to ask?" inquired Mrs. Squallop, after
a moment's pause, striving to choke down her rage.

"P'r'aps you can get blood out of a stone, Mrs. Squallop; it's what I can't," replied Titmouse,
striving to screw his courage up to the sticking place, to encounter one who was plainly bent
upon mischief. "I've got two shillings--there they are," throwing them on the table; "and cuss
me if I've another rap in the world; there, ma'am! take 'em, do; and drive me desperate!"

"You're a liar, then, that's flat!" exclaimed Mrs. Squallop, slapping her hand upon the table,
with a violence that made the candle quiver on it, and almost fall down. "You have the himperance,"
said she, sticking her arms akimbo, and commencing the address she had been preparing in her
own mind ever since Mr. Gripe had quitted her house, "to stand there and tell me you've got
nothing in the world but them two shillings! Heugh! Out on you, you oudacious fellow!--you
jack-a-dandy! You tell me you haven't got more than them two shillings, and yet turns out every
Sunday morning of your life like a lord, with your pins, and your rings, and your chains, and
your fine coat, and your gloves, and your spurs, and your dandy cane--ough! you whipper-snapper!
You're a cheat--you're a swindler, jack-a-dandy! You're the contempt of the whole court, you
are--you jack-a-dandy! You've got all my rent on your back, and so you've had every Sunday
for three months, you cheat!--you low fellow!--you ungrateful chap! You're a-robbing the widow
and fatherless! Look at me, and my six fatherless children down there, you good-for-nothing,
nasty, proud puppy!--eugh! it makes me sick to see you. You dress yourself out like my lord
mayor! You've bought a gold chain with my rent, you rascally cheat! You dress yourself out?--Ha,
ha!--you're a nasty, mean-looking, humpty-dumpty, carroty-headed"----

"You'd better not say that again, Mrs. Squallop," quoth Titmouse, with a fierce glance.

"Not say it again!--ha, ha! Hoighty-toighty, carroty-haired jack-a-dandy!--Why, you hop-o-my-thumb!
d'ye think I won't say whatever I choose, and in my own house, and to a man that can't pay
his rent? You're a Titmouse by name and by nature; there a'n't a cockroach crawling in our
kitchen that a'n't more harmless than you!--You're a himperant cheat, and dandy, and knave,
and a liar, and a red-haired rascal--and that in your teeth! (snapping her fingers.) Ough!
Your name stinks in the court. You're a-taking of everybody in as will trust you to a penny's
amount. There's poor old Cox, the tailor, with a sick wife and children, whom you've cheated
this many months, all of his not having sperrit to summons you! But I'll set him upon you;
you see if I don't--and I'll have my own, too, or I wouldn't give that for the laws!" shouted
Mrs. Squallop, again furiously snapping her fingers in his face; and then pausing for breath
after her eloquent invective.

"Now, what is the use," said Titmouse, gently, being completely cowed--"now, what good can
it do to go on in this way, Mrs. Squallop?"

"Missus me no missus, Mr. Titmouse, but pay me my rent, you jack-a-dandy! You've got my rent
on your back, and on your little finger; and I'll have it off you before I've done with you,
I warrant you. I'm your landlady, and I'll sell you up; I'll have old Thumbscrew here the first
thing in the morning, and distrain everything, and you, too, you jackdaw, if any one would
buy you, which they won't! I'll have my rent at last: I've been too easy with you, you ungrateful
chap; for, mark, even Gripe this morning says, 'Haven't you a gentleman lodger up above? get
him to pay you your own,' says he; and so I will. I'm sick of all this, and I'll have my rights!
Here's my son, Jem, a far better-looking chap than you, though he hasn't got hair like a sandy
mop all under his chin, and he's obligated for to work from one week's end to another, in a
paper cap and fustian jacket; and you--you painted jackanapes! But now I have got you, and
I'll turn you inside out, though I know there's nothing in you! But I'll try to get at your
fine coats, and spurs, and trousers, your chains and pins, and make something of them before
I've done with you, you jack-a-dandy!"--and the virago shook her fist at him, looking as though
she had not yet uttered even half that was in her heart towards him.

[Alas, alas, unhappy Titmouse, much-enduring son of sorrow! I perceive that you now feel the
sharpness of an angry female tongue; and indeed to me, not in the least approving of the many
coarse and heart-splitting expressions which she uses, it seems, nevertheless, that she hath
not gone exceeding far off the mark in much that she hath said; for, in truth, in your conduct
there is not a little that to me, piteously inclined towards you as I am, yet appeareth obnoxious
to the edge of this woman's reproaches. But think not, O bewildered and not-with-sufficient-distinctness-discerning-the-nature-of-things
Titmouse! that she hath only a sharp and bitter tongue. In this woman behold a mother, and
it may be that she will soften before you, who have plainly, as I hear, neither father nor
mother. Oh me!]

Poor Titmouse trembled violently; his lips quivered; and the long pent-up tears forced their
way at length over his eyelids, and fell fast down his cheeks.

"Ah, you may well cry!--you may! But it's too late!--it's my turn to cry now! Don't you think
that I feel for my own flesh and blood, which is my six children? And isn't what's mine theirs?
And aren't you keeping the fatherless out of their own? It's too bad of you--it is! and you
know it is," continued Mrs. Squallop, vehemently.

"They've got a mother--a kind--good--mother--to take--care of them," sobbed Titmouse; "but
there's been no one in the--the--world that cares a straw for me--this twenty--years!" He fairly
wept aloud.

"Well, then, more's the pity for you. If you had, they wouldn't have let you make such a puppy
of yourself--and at your landlady's expense, too. You know you're a fool," said Mrs. Squallop,
dropping her voice a little; for she was a MOTHER, after all, and she knew that what poor Titmouse
had just stated was quite true. She tried hard to feed the fire of her wrath, by forcing into
her thoughts every aggravating topic against Titmouse that she could think of; but it became
every moment harder and harder to do so, for she was consciously softening rapidly towards
the weeping and miserable little object, on whom she had been heaping such violent and bitter
abuse. He was a great fool, to be sure--he was very fond of fine clothes--- he knew no better--he
had, however, paid his rent well enough till lately--he was a very quiet, well-disposed lodger,
for all she had known--he had given her youngest, child a pear not long ago. Really, thought
Mrs. Squallop, I may have gone a leetle too far.

"Come--it a'n't no use crying in this way," she began in an altered tone. "It won't put money
into your pocket, nor my rent into mine. You know you've wronged me, and I must be paid," she
added, but in a still lower tone. She tried to cough away a certain rising disagreeable sensation
about her throat; for Titmouse, having turned his back to hide the extent of his emotions,
seemed half-choked with suppressed sobs.

"So you won't speak a word--not a word--to the woman you've injured so much?" inquired Mrs.
Squallop, trying to assume a harsh tone; but her eyes were a little obstructed with tears.

"I--I--can't speak," sobbed Titmouse--"I--I feel ready to drop into a cold early grave!--everybody
hates me"--here he paused; and for some moments neither of them spoke. "I've been kept on my
legs the whole day about the town by Mr. Tag-rag, and had no dinner. I--I--wish I was dead!
I do!--you may take all I have--here it is," continued Titmouse, with his foot pushing towards
Mrs. Squallop the old hair trunk that contained all his little finery. "I sha'n't want them
much longer, for I'm turned out of my situation."

This was too much for Mrs. Squallop, and she was obliged to wipe her full eyes with the corner
of her apron, without saying a word. Her heart smote her for the misery she had inflicted on
one who seemed quite broken down. Pity suddenly flew, fluttering his wings--soft dove!--into
her heart, and put to flight in an instant all her enraged feelings. "Come, Mr. Titmouse,"
said she, in quite an altered tone, "never mind me; I'm a plain-spoken woman enough, I dare
say--and often say more than I mean--for I know I a'n't over particular when my blood's up--but--lord!--I--I
wouldn't hurt a hair of your head, poor chap!--for all I've said--no, not for double the rent
you owe me. Come! don't go on so, Mr. Titmouse--what's the use?--it's all quite--over--I'm
so sorry--Lud! if I had really thought"--she almost sobbed--"you'd been so--so--why, I'd have
waited till to-morrow night before I'd said a word. But, Mr. Titmouse, since you haven't had
any dinner, won't you have a mouthful of something--a bit of bread and cheese I--I'll soon
fetch you up a bit, and a drop of beer--we've just had it in for our suppers."

"No, thank you--I can't--I can't eat!" sobbed Titmouse.

"Oh, bother it, but you shall! I'll go down and fetch it up in half a minute, as sure as my
name's Squallop!" And out of the room and down-stairs she bustled, glad of a moment to recover
herself.

"Lord-a-mercy!" said she, on entering her room, to her eldest daughter and a neighbor who had
just come in to supper--and while she hastily cut a thick hunch of bread, and a good slice
of cheese--"there I've been a-rating that poor little chap, up at the top room, (my dandy lodger,
you know,) like anything--and I really don't think he's had a morsel of victuals in his belly
this precious day; and I've made him cry, poor soul! as if his heart would break. Pour us out
half a pint of that beer, Sally--a good half pint, mind!--I'm going to take it up-stairs directly.
I've gone a deal too far with him, I do think; but it's all of that nasty old Gripe; I've been
wrong all the day through it! How I hate the sight of old Gripe! What hodious looking people
they do get to collect the rates and taxes, to be sure!--Poor chap," she continued, as she
wiped out a plate with her apron, and put into it the bread and cheese, together with a knife--"he
offered me a chair when I went in, so uncommon civil-like, it took a good while before I could
get myself into the humor to give it him as I wanted. And he's no father nor mother, (half
of which has happened to you, Sal, and the rest will happen one of these days, you know--so
you mind me while you have me!) and he's not such a very bad lodger, after all, though he does
get a little behind-hand now and then, and though he turns out every Sunday like a lord, poor
fool--as your poor dear father used to say, 'with a shining back and empty belly.'"

"But that's no reason why honest people should be kept out of their own, to feed his pride,"
interposed her neighbor, a skinny old widow, who had never had chick nor child, and was always
behind-hand with her own rent; but whose effects were not worth distraining upon. "I'd get
hold of some of his fine crincum-crancums and gimcracks, for security like, if I was you. I
would, indeed."

"Why--no, poor soul--I don't hardly like: he's a vain creature, and puts everything he can
on his back, to be sure; but he a'n't quite a rogue, neither."

"Ah, ha, Mrs. Squallop--you're such a simple soul!--Won't my fine gentleman make off with his
finery after to-night?"

"Well, I shouldn't have thought it! To be sure he may! Really, there can't be much harm in
asking him (in a proper kind of way) to deposit one of his fine things with me, by way of security--that
ring of his, you know--eh?--Well, I'll try it anyhow," said Mrs. Squallop, as she set off up-stairs.

"I know what I should do, if so be he was a lodger of mine, that's all," said her visitor,
significantly, (as Mrs. Squallop quitted the room,) vexed to find her supper so considerably
and unexpectedly diminished, especially as to the pot of porter, which she strongly suspected
would not be replenished.

"There," said Mrs. Squallop, setting down on the table what she had brought for Titmouse, "there's
a bit of supper for you; and you're welcome to it, I'm sure, Mr. Titmouse."

"Thank you, thank you--I can't eat," said he, casting, however, upon the victuals a hungry
eye, which belied what he said, while in his heart he longed to be left alone with them for
about three minutes.

"Come, don't be ashamed--fall to work--it's good wholesome victuals," said she, lifting the
table near to the edge of the bed, on the side of which he was sitting, and taking up the two
shillings lying on the table--"and capital good beer, I warrant me; you'll sleep like a top
after it."

"You're uncommon kind, Mrs. Squallop; but I sha'n't get a wink of sleep to-night for thinking"----

"Oh, bother your thinking! Let me begin to see you eat a bit. Well, I suppose you don't like
to eat and drink before me, so I'll go." [Here arose a sudden conflict in the good woman's
mind, whether or not she would act on the suggestion which had been put into her head down-stairs.
She was on the point of yielding to the impulse of her own good-natured, though coarse feelings;
but at last--] "I--I--dare say, Mr. Titmouse, you mean what's right and straightforward," she
stammered.

"Yes, Mrs. Squallop--you may keep those two shillings; they're the last farthing I have left
in the whole world."

"No--hem!--hem!--ahem! I was just suddenly a-thinking--now can't you guess, Mr. Titmouse?"

"What, Mrs. Squallop?" inquired Titmouse, meekly but anxiously.

"Why--suppose now--if it were only to raise ten shillings with old Balls, round the corner,
on one of those fine things of yours--your ring, say!" [Titmouse's heart sank within him.]
"Well, well--never mind--don't fear," said Mrs. Squallop, observing him suddenly turn pale
again. "I--I only thought--but never mind! it don't signify--good-night! we can talk about
that to-morrow--good-night--a good night's rest to you, Mr. Titmouse!" and the next moment
he heard her heavy step descending the stairs. Some little time elapsed before he could recover
from the agitation into which he had been thrown by her last proposal; but within five minutes
of her quitting the room, there stood before him, on the table, an empty plate and jug.

CHAPTER IV.

"The beast! the fat old toad!" thought he, the instant that he had finished masticating what
had been supplied to him by real charity and good-nature--"the vulgar wretch!--the nasty canting
old hypocrite!--I saw what she was driving at all the while!--she had her eye on my ring!--She'd
have me pawn it at old Balls's--ha, ha!--Catch me! that's all!--Seven shillings a-week for
this nasty hole!--I'll be bound I pay nearly half the rent of the whole house--the old cormorant!--out
of what she gets from me! How I hate her! More than half my salary goes into her greasy pocket!
Cuss me if I couldn't have kicked her down-stairs--porter, bread and cheese, and all--while
she was standing canting there!--A snivelling old beldam!--Pawn my ring!!--Lord!!"--Here he
began to undress. "Ha! I'm up to her; she'll be coming here to-morrow, with that devil Thumbscrew,
to distrain, I'll be sworn. Well--I'll take care of these anyhow;" and, kneeling down and unlocking
his trunk, he took out of it his guard-chain, breast-pin, studs, and ring, carefully folded
them up in paper, and depositing them in his trousers' pockets, resolved that henceforth their
nightly resting-place should be--under his pillow; while during the day they should accompany
his person whithersoever he went. Next he bethought himself of the two or three important papers
to which Mr. Gammon had referred; and, with tremulous eagerness, read them over once or twice,
but without being able to extract from them the slightest clew to their real character and
bearing. Then he folded them up in a half sheet of writing-paper, which he proceeded to stitch
carefully beneath the lining of his waistcoat; after which he blew out his slim candle, and
with a heavy sigh got into bed. For some moments after he had blown out the candle did the
image of it remain on his aching and excited retina; and just so long did the thoughts of ten
thousand a-year dwell on his fancy, fading, however, quickly away amid the thickening gloom
of doubts, and fears, and miseries, which oppressed him. There he lies, stretched on his bed,
a wretched figure, lying on his breast, his head buried beneath his feverish arms. Anon, he
turns round upon his back, stretches his wearied limbs to their uttermost, folds his arms on
his breast, then buries them beneath the pillow, under his head. Now he turns on his right
side, then on his left--presently he starts up, and with muttered curse shakes his little pillow,
flinging it down angrily. He cannot sleep--he cannot rest--he cannot keep still. Bursting with
irritability, he gets out of bed, and steps to the window, which opening wide, a slight gush
of fresh air cools his hot face for a moment or two. His wearied eye looks upward and beholds
the moon shining overhead in cold splendor, turning the clouds to gold as they flit past her,
and shedding a softened lustre upon the tiled roofs and irregular chimney-pots--the only objects
visible to him. No sound is heard, but occasionally the dismal cry of disappointed cat, the
querulous voice of the watchman, and the echo of the rumbling hubbub of Oxford Street. O miserable
Titmouse! of what avail is it for thee thus to fix thy sorrowful lack-lustre eye upon the cold
Queen of Night!

       *       *       *       *       *

At that moment there happened to be also gazing at the same glorious object, but at some two
hundred miles' distance from London, a very different person, with very different feelings,
and in very different circumstances. It was one of the angels of the earth--a pure-hearted
and very beautiful girl; who, after a day of peaceful, innocent, and charitable employment,
and having just quitted the piano, where her exquisite strains had soothed and delighted the
feelings of her brother, harassed with political anxieties, had retired to her chamber for
the night. A few moments before she was presented to the reader, she had extinguished her taper,
and dismissed her maid without her having discharged more than half her accustomed duties--telling
her that she should finish undressing by the light of the moon, which then poured her soft
radiance into every corner of the spacious but old-fashioned chamber. Then she drew her chair
to the window-recess, and pushing open the window, sat before it, only partially undressed
as she was, her hair dishevelled, her head leaning on her hand, gazing upon the scenery before
her with tranquil admiration. Silence reigned absolutely. Not a sound issued from the ancient
groves, which spread far and wide on all sides of the fine old mansion in which she dwelt--solemn
solitudes, nor yet less soothing than solemn! Was not the solitude enhanced by a glimpse she
caught of a restless fawn, glancing in the distance across the avenue, as he silently changed
the tree under which he slept?--Then the gentle breeze would enter her window, laden with sweet
scents of which he had just been rifling the coy flowers beneath, in their dewy repose, tended
and petted during the day by her own delicate hand!--Beautiful moon!--cold and chaste in thy
skyey palace, studded with brilliant and innumerable gems, and shedding down thy rich and tender
radiance upon this lovely seclusion--was there upon the whole earth a more exquisite countenance
then turned towards thee than hers?--Wrap thy white robe, dearest Kate, closer round thy fair
bosom, lest the amorous night-breeze do thee hurt, for he groweth giddy with the sight of thy
charms! Thy rich tresses, half-uncurled, are growing damp--- so it is time that thy blue eyes
should seek repose. Hie thee, then, my love!--to yon antique couch, with its quaint carvings
and satin draperies dimly visible in the dusky shade, inviting thee to sleep: and having first
bent in cheerful reverence before thy Maker--to bed!--to bed!--sweet Kate, nothing disturbing
thy serene slumbers, or agitating that beautiful bosom.--Hush! hush!--now she sleeps! It is
well that thine eyes are closed in sleep; for BEHOLD--see!--the brightness without is disappearing;
sadness and gloom are settling on the face of nature; the tranquil night is changing her aspect;
clouds are gathering, winds are moaning; the moon is gone:--but sleep on, sweet Kate--sleep
on, dreaming not of dark days before thee--Oh, that thou couldst sleep on till the brightness
returned!

       *       *       *       *       *

After having stood thus leaning against the window for nearly half an hour, Titmouse, heavily
sighing, returned to bed--but there he tossed about in wretched restlessness till nearly four
o'clock in the morning. If he now and then sank into forgetfulness for a while, it was only
to be harassed by the dreadful image of Mrs. Squallop, shouting at him, tearing his hair, cuffing
him, flinging a pot of porter in his face, opening his boxes, tossing his clothes about, taking
out his invaluable ornaments; by Tag-rag kicking him out of the shop; and Messrs. Quirk, Gammon,
and Snap dashing past him in a fine carriage, with six horses, and paying no attention to him
as he ran shouting and breathless after him; Huckaback following, kicking and pinching him
behind. These were the few little bits of different colored glass in a mental kaleidoscope,
which, turned capriciously round, produced those innumerable fantastic combinations out of
the simple and ordinary events of the day, which we call dreams--tricks of the wild sisters
Fancy, when sober Reason has left her seat for a while. But this is fitter for the Royal Society
than the bedroom of Tittlebat Titmouse; and I beg the reader's pardon.

About six o'clock, Titmouse rose and dressed himself; and, slipping noiselessly and swiftly
down-stairs, and out of the court, in order to avoid all possibility of encountering his landlady
or his tailor, soon found himself in Oxford Street. Not many people were stirring there. One
or two men who passed him were smoking their morning's pipe, with a half-awakened air, as if
they had only just got out of a snug bed, in which they always slept every moment that they
lay upon it. Titmouse almost envied them! What a squalid figure he looked, as he paced up and
down, till at length he saw the porter of Messrs. Tag-rag & Co. opening the shop-door. He soon
entered it, and commenced another jocund day in that delightful establishment. The amiable
Mr. Tag-rag continued unaltered.

"You're at liberty to take yourself off, sir, this very day--this moment, sir; and a good riddance,"
said he, bitterly, during the course of the day, after demanding of Titmouse how he dared to
give himself such sullen airs; "and then we shall see how charming easy it is for gents like
you to get another sitiwation, sir! Your looks and manner is quite a recommendation, sir! If
I was you, sir, I'd raise my terms! You're worth double what I give, sir!" Titmouse made no
reply. "What do you mean, sir, by not answering me--eh, sir?" suddenly demanded Mr. Tag-rag,
with a look of fury.

"I don't know what you'd have me say, sir. What am I to say, sir?" inquired Titmouse, with a sigh.

"What, indeed! I should like to catch you! Say, indeed! Only say a word--and out you go, neck
and crop. Attend to that old lady coming in, sir. And mind, sir, I've got my eye on you!" Titmouse
did as he was bid; and Tag-rag, a bland smile suddenly beaming on his attractive features,
hurried down towards the door, to receive some lady-customers, whom he observed alighting from
a carriage; and at that moment you would have sworn that he was one of the kindest-hearted
sweetest-tempered men in the world.

When at length this day had come to a close, Titmouse, instead of repairing to his lodgings,
set off, with a heavy heart, to pay a visit to his excellent friend Huckaback, whom he knew
to have received his quarter's salary the day before, and from whom he faintly hoped to succeed
in extorting some trifling loan. "If you want to learn the value of money, try to borrow some,"
says Poor Richard--and Titmouse was now going to learn that useful but bitter lesson. Oh, how
disheartening was Mr. Huckaback's reception of him! That gentleman, in answering the modest
knock of Titmouse, suspecting who was his visitor, opened the door but a little way, and in
that little way, with his hand on the latch, he stood, with a plainly repulsive look.

"Oh! it's you, Titmouse, is it?" he commenced coldly.

"Yes. I--I just want to speak a word to you--only a word or two, Hucky, if you aren't busy?"

"Why, I was just going to go--but what d'ye want, Titmouse?" he inquired in a freezing manner,
not stirring from where he stood.

"Let me come inside a minute," implored Titmouse, feeling as if his little heart were really
dropping out of him: and, in a most ungracious manner, Huckaback motioned him in.

"Well," commenced Huckaback, with a chilling distrustful look.

"Why, Huck, I know you're a good-natured chap--you couldn't, just for a short time, lend me
ten shill"----

"No, curse me if I can: and that's flat!" briskly interrupted Huckaback, finding his worst
suspicions confirmed.

"Why, Hucky, wasn't you only yesterday paid your salary?"

"Well!--suppose I was?--what then? You're a monstrous cool hand, Titmouse! I never!! So I'm
to lend to you, when I'm starving myself! I've received such a lot, too, haven't I?"

"I thought we'd always been friends, Hucky," said Titmouse, faintly; "and so we shouldn't mind
helping one another a bit! Don't you remember, I once lent you half-a-crown?"

"Half-a-crown!--and that's nine months ago!"

"Do, Hucky, do lend me a few shillings. 'Pon my soul, I've not a sixpence in the whole world."

"Ha, ha! A pretty chap to borrow! You can pay so well! By George, Titmouse, you're a cool hand!"

"If you won't lend me, I must starve."

"Go to my uncle's." [Titmouse groaned aloud.] "Well--and why not? What of that?" continued
Huckaback, sharply and bitterly. "I dare say it wouldn't be the first time you've done such
a trick no more than me. I've been obligated to do it. Why shouldn't you? A'n't there that ring?"

"Oh, Lord! oh, Lord! that's just what Mrs. Squallop said last night!"

"Whew! She's down on you, is she? And you have the face to come to me!! You--that's a-going
to be sold up, come to borrow! Lord, that's good, anyhow! A queer use that to make of one's
friends;--it's a taking them in, I say!"

"Oh, Huck, Huck, if you only knew what a poor devil"----

"Yes, that's what I was a-saying; but it a'n't 'poor devils' one lends money to so easily,
I warrant me; though you a'n't such a poor devil--you're only shamming! Where's your guard-chain,
your studs, your breast-pin, your ring, and all that? Sell 'em! if not, anyhow, pawn 'em. Can't
eat your cake and have it; fine back must have empty belly with us sort of chaps."

"If you'll only be so uncommon kind as to lend me--this once--ten shillings," continued Titmouse,
in an imploring tone, "I'll bind myself, by a solemn oath, to pay you the very first moment
I get what's due to me from Tag-rag & Co."---- Here he was almost choked by the sudden recollection
that he had next to nothing to receive.

