In the first point of view, Henry's well-known project of expelling the House of Austria from
all its possessions, and dividing the spoil among the European powers, deserves the title of
a chimera, which men have so liberally bestowed upon it; but did it merit that appellation
in the second?  It had never entered into the head of that excellent monarch, in the choice
of those who must be the instruments of his designs, to reckon on the sufficiency of such motives
as animated himself and Sully to the enterprise.  All the states whose co-operation was necessary,
were to be persuaded to the work by the strongest motives that can set a political power in
action.  From the Protestants in Germany nothing more was required than that which, on other
grounds, had been long their object,--their throwing off the Austrian yoke; from the Flemings,
a similar revolt from the Spaniards.  To the Pope and all the Italian republics no inducement
could be more powerful than the hope of driving the Spaniards for ever from their peninsula;
for England, nothing more desirable than a revolution which should free it from its bitterest
enemy.  By this division of the Austrian conquests, every power gained either land or freedom,
new possessions or security for the old; and as all gained, the balance of power remained undisturbed.
France might magnanimously decline a share in the spoil, because by the ruin of Austria it
doubly profited, and was most powerful if it did not become more powerful.  Finally, upon condition
of ridding Europe of their presence, the posterity of Hapsburg were to be allowed the liberty
of augmenting her territories in all the other known or yet undiscovered portions of the globe.
But the dagger of Ravaillac delivered Austria from her danger, to postpone for some centuries
longer the tranquillity of Europe.

With his view directed to this project, Henry felt the necessity of taking a prompt and active
part in the important events of the Evangelical Union, and the disputed succession of Juliers.
His emissaries were busy in all the courts of Germany, and the little which they published
or allowed to escape of the great political secrets of their master, was sufficient to win
over minds inflamed by so ardent a hatred to Austria, and by so strong a desire of aggrandizement.
The prudent policy of Henry cemented the Union still more closely, and the powerful aid which
he bound himself to furnish, raised the courage of the confederates into the firmest confidence.
A numerous French army, led by the king in person, was to meet the troops of the Union on the
banks of the Rhine, and to assist in effecting the conquest of Juliers and Cleves; then, in
conjunction with the Germans, it was to march into Italy, (where Savoy, Venice, and the Pope
were even now ready with a powerful reinforcement,) and to overthrow the Spanish dominion in
that quarter.  This victorious army was then to penetrate by Lombardy into the hereditary dominions
of Hapsburg; and there, favoured by a general insurrection of the Protestants, destroy the
power of Austria in all its German territories, in Bohemia, Hungary, and Transylvania.  The
Brabanters and Hollanders, supported by French auxiliaries, would in the meantime shake off
the Spanish tyranny in the Netherlands; and thus the mighty stream which, only a short time
before, had so fearfully overflowed its banks, threatening to overwhelm in its troubled waters
the liberties of Europe, would then roll silent and forgotten behind the Pyrenean mountains.

At other times, the French had boasted of their rapidity of action, but upon this occasion
they were outstripped by the Germans.  An army of the confederates entered Alsace before Henry
made his appearance there, and an Austrian army, which the Bishop of Strasburg and Passau had
assembled in that quarter for an expedition against Juliers, was dispersed.  Henry IV.  had
formed his plan as a statesman and a king, but he had intrusted its execution to plunderers.
According to his design, no Roman Catholic state was to have cause to think this preparation
aimed against itself, or to make the quarrel of Austria its own.  Religion was in nowise to
be mixed up with the matter.  But how could the German princes forget their own purposes in
furthering the plans of Henry?  Actuated as they were by the desire of aggrandizement and by
religious hatred, was it to be supposed that they would not gratify, in every passing opportunity,
their ruling passions to the utmost?  Like vultures, they stooped upon the territories of the
ecclesiastical princes, and always chose those rich countries for their quarters, though to
reach them they must make ever so wide a detour from their direct route.  They levied contributions
as in an enemy's country, seized upon the revenues, and exacted, by violence, what they could
not obtain of free-will.  Not to leave the Roman Catholics in doubt as to the true objects
of their expedition, they announced, openly and intelligibly enough, the fate that awaited
the property of the church.  So little had Henry IV.  and the German princes understood each
other in their plan of operations, so much had the excellent king been mistaken in his instruments.
It is an unfailing maxim, that, if policy enjoins an act of violence, its execution ought never
to be entrusted to the violent; and that he only ought to be trusted with the violation of
order by whom order is held sacred.

Both the past conduct of the Union, which was condemned even by several of the evangelical
states, and the apprehension of even worse treatment, aroused the Roman Catholics to something
beyond mere inactive indignation.  As to the Emperor, his authority had sunk too low to afford
them any security against such an enemy.  It was their Union that rendered the confederates
so formidable and so insolent; and another union must now be opposed to them.

The Bishop of Wurtzburg formed the plan of the Catholic union, which was distinguished from
the evangelical by the title of the League.  The objects agreed upon were nearly the same as
those which constituted the groundwork of the Union.  Bishops formed its principal members,
and at its head was placed Maximilian, Duke of Bavaria.  As the only influential secular member
of the confederacy, he was entrusted with far more extensive powers than the Protestants had
committed to their chief. In addition to the duke's being the sole head of the League's military
power, whereby their operations acquired a speed and weight unattainable by the Union, they
had also the advantage that supplies flowed in much more regularly from the rich prelates,
than the latter could obtain them from the poor evangelical states.  Without offering to the
Emperor, as the sovereign of a Roman Catholic state, any share in their confederacy, without
even communicating its existence to him as emperor, the League arose at once formidable and
threatening; with strength sufficient to crush the Protestant Union and to maintain itself
under three emperors. It contended, indeed, for Austria, in so far as it fought against the
Protestant princes; but Austria herself had soon cause to tremble before it.

The arms of the Union had, in the meantime, been tolerably successful in Juliers and in Alsace;
Juliers was closely blockaded, and the whole bishopric of Strasburg was in their power.  But
here their splendid achievements came to an end.  No French army appeared upon the Rhine; for
he who was to be its leader, he who was the animating soul of the whole enterprize, Henry IV.,
was no more! Their supplies were on the wane; the Estates refused to grant new subsidies; and
the confederate free cities were offended that their money should be liberally, but their advice
so sparingly called for.  Especially were they displeased at being put to expense for the expedition
against Juliers, which had been expressly excluded from the affairs of the Union--at the united
princes appropriating to themselves large pensions out of the common treasure--and, above all,
at their refusing to give any account of its expenditure.

The Union was thus verging to its fall, at the moment when the League started to oppose it
in the vigour of its strength.  Want of supplies disabled the confederates from any longer
keeping the field.  And yet it was dangerous to lay down their weapons in the sight of an armed
enemy. To secure themselves at least on one side, they hastened to conclude a peace with their
old enemy, the Archduke Leopold; and both parties agreed to withdraw their troops from Alsace,
to exchange prisoners, and to bury all that had been done in oblivion.  Thus ended in nothing
all these promising preparations.

The same imperious tone with which the Union, in the confidence of its strength, had menaced
the Roman Catholics of Germany, was now retorted by the League upon themselves and their troops.
The traces of their march were pointed out to them, and plainly branded with the hard epithets
they had deserved.  The chapters of Wurtzburg, Bamberg, Strasburg, Mentz, Treves, Cologne,
and several others, had experienced their destructive presence; to all these the damage done
was to be made good, the free passage by land and by water restored, (for the Protestants had
even seized on the navigation of the Rhine,) and everything replaced on its former footing.
Above all, the parties to the Union were called on to declare expressly and unequivocally its
intentions.  It was now their turn to yield to superior strength.  They had not calculated
on so formidable an opponent; but they themselves had taught the Roman Catholics the secret
of their strength.  It was humiliating to their pride to sue for peace, but they might think
themselves fortunate in obtaining it.  The one party promised restitution, the other forgiveness.
All laid down their arms.  The storm of war once more rolled by, and a temporary calm succeeded.
The insurrection in Bohemia then broke out, which deprived the Emperor of the last of his hereditary
dominions, but in this dispute neither the Union nor the League took any share.

At length the Emperor died in 1612, as little regretted in his coffin as noticed on the throne.
Long afterwards, when the miseries of succeeding reigns had made the misfortunes of his reign
forgotten, a halo spread about his memory, and so fearful a night set in upon Germany, that,
with tears of blood, people prayed for the return of such an emperor.

Rodolph never could be prevailed upon to choose a successor in the empire, and all awaited
with anxiety the approaching vacancy of the throne; but, beyond all hope, Matthias at once
ascended it, and without opposition.  The Roman Catholics gave him their voices, because they
hoped the best from his vigour and activity; the Protestants gave him theirs, because they
hoped every thing from his weakness.  It is not difficult to reconcile this contradiction.
The one relied on what he had once appeared; the other judged him by what he seemed at present.

The moment of a new accession is always a day of hope; and the first Diet of a king in elective
monarchies is usually his severest trial. Every old grievance is brought forward, and new ones
are sought out, that they may be included in the expected reform; quite a new world is expected
to commence with the new reign.  The important services which, in his insurrection, their religious
confederates in Austria had rendered to Matthias, were still fresh in the minds of the Protestant
free cities, and, above all, the price which they had exacted for their services seemed now
to serve them also as a model.

It was by the favour of the Protestant Estates in Austria and Moravia that Matthias had sought
and really found the way to his brother's throne; but, hurried on by his ambitious views, he
never reflected that a way was thus opened for the States to give laws to their sovereign.
This discovery soon awoke him from the intoxication of success. Scarcely had he shown himself
in triumph to his Austrian subjects, after his victorious expedition to Bohemia, when a humble
petition awaited him which was quite sufficient to poison his whole triumph.  They required,
before doing homage, unlimited religious toleration in the cities and market towns, perfect
equality of rights between Roman Catholics and Protestants, and a full and equal admissibility
of the latter to all offices of state.  In several places, they of themselves assumed these
privileges, and, reckoning on a change of administration, restored the Protestant religion
where the late Emperor had suppressed it.  Matthias, it is true, had not scrupled to make use
of the grievances of the Protestants for his own ends against the Emperor; but it was far from
being his intention to relieve them.  By a firm and resolute tone he hoped to check, at once,
these presumptuous demands.  He spoke of his hereditary title to these territories, and would
hear of no stipulations before the act of homage.  A like unconditional submission had been
rendered by their neighbours, the inhabitants of Styria, to the Archduke Ferdinand, who, however,
had soon reason to repent of it.  Warned by this example, the Austrian States persisted in
their refusal; and, to avoid being compelled by force to do homage, their deputies (after urging
their Roman Catholic colleagues to a similar resistance) immediately left the capital, and
began to levy troops.

They took steps to renew their old alliance with Hungary, drew the Protestant princes into
their interests, and set themselves seriously to work to accomplish their object by force of arms.

With the more exorbitant demands of the Hungarians Matthias had not hesitated to comply.  For
Hungary was an elective monarchy, and the republican constitution of the country justified
to himself their demands, and to the Roman Catholic world his concessions.  In Austria, on
the contrary, his predecessors had exercised far higher prerogatives, which he could not relinquish
at the demand of the Estates without incurring the scorn of Roman Catholic Europe, the enmity
of Spain and Rome, and the contempt of his own Roman Catholic subjects.  His exclusively Romish
council, among which the Bishop of Vienna, Melchio Kiesel, had the chief influence, exhorted
him to see all the churches extorted from him by the Protestants, rather than to concede one
to them as a matter of right.

But by ill luck this difficulty occurred at a time when the Emperor Rodolph was yet alive,
and a spectator of this scene, and who might easily have been tempted to employ against his
brother the same weapons which the latter had successfully directed against him--namely, an
understanding with his rebellious subjects.  To avoid this blow, Matthias willingly availed
himself of the offer made by Moravia, to act as mediator between him and the Estates of Austria.
Representatives of both parties met in Vienna, when the Austrian deputies held language which
would have excited surprise even in the English Parliament.  "The Protestants," they said,
"are determined to be not worse treated in their native country than the handful of Romanists.
By the help of his Protestant nobles had Matthias reduced the Emperor to submission; where
80 Papists were to be found, 300 Protestant barons might be counted. The example of Rodolph
should be a warning to Matthias.  He should take care that he did not lose the terrestrial,
in attempting to make conquests for the celestial."  As the Moravian States, instead of using
their powers as mediators for the Emperor's advantage, finally adopted the cause of their co-religionists
of Austria; as the Union in Germany came forward to afford them its most active support, and
as Matthias dreaded reprisals on the part of the Emperor, he was at length compelled to make
the desired declaration in favour of the Evangelical Church.

This behaviour of the Austrian Estates towards their Archduke was now imitated by the Protestant
Estates of the Empire towards their Emperor, and they promised themselves the same favourable
results.  At his first Diet at Ratisbon in 1613, when the most pressing affairs were waiting
for decision--when a general contribution was indispensable for a war against Turkey, and against
Bethlem Gabor in Transylvania, who by Turkish aid had forcibly usurped the sovereignty of that
land, and even threatened Hungary--they surprised him with an entirely new demand. The Roman
Catholic votes were still the most numerous in the Diet; and as every thing was decided by
a plurality of voices, the Protestant party, however closely united, were entirely without
consideration.  The advantage of this majority the Roman Catholics were now called on to relinquish;
henceforward no one religious party was to be permitted to dictate to the other by means of
its invariable superiority.  And in truth, if the evangelical religion was really to be represented
in the Diet, it was self-evident that it must not be shut out from the possibility of making
use of that privilege, merely from the constitution of the Diet itself.  Complaints of the
judicial usurpations of the Aulic Council, and of the oppression of the Protestants, accompanied
this demand, and the deputies of the Estates were instructed to take no part in any general
deliberations till a favourable answer should be given on this preliminary point.

The Diet was torn asunder by this dangerous division, which threatened to destroy for ever
the unity of its deliberations.  Sincerely as the Emperor might have wished, after the example
of his father Maximilian, to preserve a prudent balance between the two religions, the present
conduct of the Protestants seemed to leave him nothing but a critical choice between the two.
In his present necessities a general contribution from the Estates was indispensable to him;
and yet he could not conciliate the one party without sacrificing the support of the other.
Insecure as he felt his situation to be in his own hereditary dominions, he could not but tremble
at the idea, however remote, of an open war with the Protestants.  But the eyes of the whole
Roman Catholic world, which were attentively regarding his conduct, the remonstrances of the
Roman Catholic Estates, and of the Courts of Rome and Spain, as little permitted him to favour
the Protestant at the expense of the Romish religion.

So critical a situation would have paralysed a greater mind than Matthias; and his own prudence
would scarcely have extricated him from his dilemma.  But the interests of the Roman Catholics
were closely interwoven with the imperial authority; if they suffered this to fall, the ecclesiastical
princes in particular would be without a bulwark against the attacks of the Protestants.  Now,
then, that they saw the Emperor wavering, they thought it high time to reassure his sinking
courage.  They imparted to him the secret of their League, and acquainted him with its whole
constitution, resources and power.  Little comforting as such a revelation must have been to
the Emperor, the prospect of so powerful a support gave him greater boldness to oppose the
Protestants.  Their demands were rejected, and the Diet broke up without coming to a decision.
But Matthias was the victim of this dispute.  The Protestants refused him their supplies, and
made him alone suffer for the inflexibility of the Roman Catholics.

The Turks, however, appeared willing to prolong the cessation of hostilities, and Bethlem Gabor
was left in peaceable possession of Transylvania.  The empire was now free from foreign enemies;
and even at home, in the midst of all these fearful disputes, peace still reigned. An unexpected
accident had given a singular turn to the dispute as to the succession of Juliers.  This duchy
was still ruled conjointly by the Electoral House of Brandenburg and the Palatine of Neuburg;
and a marriage between the Prince of Neuburg and a Princess of Brandenburg was to have inseparably
united the interests of the two houses.  But the whole scheme was upset by a box on the ear,
which, in a drunken brawl, the Elector of Brandenburg unfortunately inflicted upon his intended
son-in-law.  From this moment the good understanding between the two houses was at an end.
The Prince of Neuburg embraced popery.  The hand of a princess of Bavaria rewarded his apostacy,
and the strong support of Bavaria and Spain was the natural result of both.  To secure to the
Palatine the exclusive possession of Juliers, the Spanish troops from the Netherlands were
marched into the Palatinate.  To rid himself of these guests, the Elector of Brandenburg called
the Flemings to his assistance, whom he sought to propitiate by embracing the Calvinist religion.
Both Spanish and Dutch armies appeared, but, as it seemed, only to make conquests for themselves.

The neighbouring war of the Netherlands seemed now about to be decided on German ground; and
what an inexhaustible mine of combustibles lay here ready for it!  The Protestants saw with
consternation the Spaniards establishing themselves upon the Lower Rhine; with still greater
anxiety did the Roman Catholics see the Hollanders bursting through the frontiers of the empire.
It was in the west that the mine was expected to explode which had long been dug under the
whole of Germany.  To the west, apprehension and anxiety turned; but the spark which kindled
the flame came unexpectedly from the east.

The tranquillity which Rodolph II.'s 'Letter of Majesty' had established in Bohemia lasted
for some time, under the administration of Matthias, till the nomination of a new heir to this
kingdom in the person of Ferdinand of Gratz.

This prince, whom we shall afterwards become better acquainted with under the title of Ferdinand
II., Emperor of Germany, had, by the violent extirpation of the Protestant religion within
his hereditary dominions, announced himself as an inexorable zealot for popery, and was consequently
looked upon by the Roman Catholic part of Bohemia as the future pillar of their church.  The
declining health of the Emperor brought on this hour rapidly; and, relying on so powerful a
supporter, the Bohemian Papists began to treat the Protestants with little moderation.  The
Protestant vassals of Roman Catholic nobles, in particular, experienced the harshest treatment.
At length several of the former were incautious enough to speak somewhat loudly of their hopes,
and by threatening hints to awaken among the Protestants a suspicion of their future sovereign.
But this mistrust would never have broken out into actual violence, had the Roman Catholics
confined themselves to general expressions, and not by attacks on individuals furnished the
discontent of the people with enterprising leaders.

Henry Matthias, Count Thurn, not a native of Bohemia, but proprietor of some estates in that
kingdom, had, by his zeal for the Protestant cause, and an enthusiastic attachment to his newly
adopted country, gained the entire confidence of the Utraquists, which opened him the way to
the most important posts.  He had fought with great glory against the Turks, and won by a flattering
address the hearts of the multitude.  Of a hot and impetuous disposition, which loved tumult
because his talents shone in it--rash and thoughtless enough to undertake things which cold
prudence and a calmer temper would not have ventured upon--unscrupulous enough, where the gratification
of his passions was concerned, to sport with the fate of thousands, and at the same time politic
enough to hold in leading-strings such a people as the Bohemians then were.  He had already
taken an active part in the troubles under Rodolph's administration; and the Letter of Majesty
which the States had extorted from that Emperor, was chiefly to be laid to his merit.  The
court had intrusted to him, as burgrave or castellan of Calstein, the custody of the Bohemian
crown, and of the national charter.  But the nation had placed in his hands something far more
important--ITSELF--with the office of defender or protector of the faith.  The aristocracy
by which the Emperor was ruled, imprudently deprived him of this harmless guardianship of the
dead, to leave him his full influence over the living.  They took from him his office of burgrave,
or constable of the castle, which had rendered him dependent on the court, thereby opening
his eyes to the importance of the other which remained, and wounded his vanity, which yet was
the thing that made his ambition harmless.  From this moment he was actuated solely by a desire
of revenge; and the opportunity of gratifying it was not long wanting.

In the Royal Letter which the Bohemians had extorted from Rodolph II., as well as in the German
religious treaty, one material article remained undetermined.  All the privileges granted by
the latter to the Protestants, were conceived in favour of the Estates or governing bodies,
not of the subjects; for only to those of the ecclesiastical states had a toleration, and that
precarious, been conceded.  The Bohemian Letter of Majesty, in the same manner, spoke only
of the Estates and imperial towns, the magistrates of which had contrived to obtain equal privileges
with the former.  These alone were free to erect churches and schools, and openly to celebrate
their Protestant worship; in all other towns, it was left entirely to the government to which
they belonged, to determine the religion of the inhabitants.  The Estates of the Empire had
availed themselves of this privilege in its fullest extent; the secular indeed without opposition;
while the ecclesiastical, in whose case the declaration of Ferdinand had limited this privilege,
disputed, not without reason, the validity of that limitation.  What was a disputed point in
the religious treaty, was left still more doubtful in the Letter of Majesty; in the former,
the construction was not doubtful, but it was a question how far obedience might be compulsory;
in the latter, the interpretation was left to the states.  The subjects of the ecclesiastical
Estates in Bohemia thought themselves entitled to the same rights which the declaration of
Ferdinand secured to the subjects of German bishops, they considered themselves on an equality
with the subjects of imperial towns, because they looked upon the ecclesiastical property as
part of the royal demesnes.  In the little town of Klostergrab, subject to the Archbishop of
Prague; and in Braunau, which belonged to the abbot of that monastery, churches were founded
by the Protestants, and completed notwithstanding the opposition of their superiors, and the
disapprobation of the Emperor.

In the meantime, the vigilance of the defenders had somewhat relaxed, and the court thought
it might venture on a decisive step.  By the Emperor's orders, the church at Klostergrab was
pulled down; that at Braunau forcibly shut up, and the most turbulent of the citizens thrown
into prison.  A general commotion among the Protestants was the consequence of this measure;
a loud outcry was everywhere raised at this violation of the Letter of Majesty; and Count Thurn,
animated by revenge, and particularly called upon by his office of defender, showed himself
not a little busy in inflaming the minds of the people.  At his instigation deputies were summoned
to Prague from every circle in the empire, to concert the necessary measures against the common
danger.  It was resolved to petition the Emperor to press for the liberation of the prisoners.
The answer of the Emperor, already offensive to the states, from its being addressed, not to
them, but to his viceroy, denounced their conduct as illegal and rebellious, justified what
had been done at Klostergrab and Braunau as the result of an imperial mandate, and contained
some passages that might be construed into threats.

Count Thurn did not fail to augment the unfavourable impression which this imperial edict made
upon the assembled Estates.  He pointed out to them the danger in which all who had signed
the petition were involved, and sought by working on their resentment and fears to hurry them
into violent resolutions.  To have caused their immediate revolt against the Emperor, would
have been, as yet, too bold a measure.  It was only step by step that he would lead them on
to this unavoidable result.  He held it, therefore, advisable first to direct their indignation
against the Emperor's counsellors; and for that purpose circulated a report, that the imperial
proclamation had been drawn up by the government at Prague, and only signed in Vienna.  Among
the imperial delegates, the chief objects of the popular hatred, were the President of the
Chamber, Slawata, and Baron Martinitz, who had been elected in place of Count Thurn, Burgrave
of Calstein.  Both had long before evinced pretty openly their hostile feelings towards the
Protestants, by alone refusing to be present at the sitting at which the Letter of Majesty
had been inserted in the Bohemian constitution.  A threat was made at the time to make them
responsible for every violation of the Letter of Majesty; and from this moment, whatever evil
befell the Protestants was set down, and not without reason, to their account.  Of all the
Roman Catholic nobles, these two had treated their Protestant vassals with the greatest harshness.
They were accused of hunting them with dogs to the mass, and of endeavouring to drive them
to popery by a denial of the rites of baptism, marriage, and burial.  Against two characters
so unpopular the public indignation was easily excited, and they were marked out for a sacrifice
to the general indignation.

On the 23rd of May, 1618, the deputies appeared armed, and in great numbers, at the royal palace,
and forced their way into the hall where the Commissioners Sternberg, Martinitz, Lobkowitz,
and Slawata were assembled.  In a threatening tone they demanded to know from each of them,
whether he had taken any part, or had consented to, the imperial proclamation.  Sternberg received
them with composure, Martinitz and Slawata with defiance.  This decided their fate; Sternberg
and Lobkowitz, less hated, and more feared, were led by the arm out of the room; Martinitz
and Slawata were seized, dragged to a window, and precipitated from a height of eighty feet,
into the castle trench. Their creature, the secretary Fabricius, was thrown after them.  This
singular mode of execution naturally excited the surprise of civilized nations.  The Bohemians
justified it as a national custom, and saw nothing remarkable in the whole affair, excepting
that any one should have got up again safe and sound after such a fall.  A dunghill, on which
the imperial commissioners chanced to be deposited, had saved them from injury.

