"Not on your life!" Bert swung him up bodily into the sphere as he contacted with the invisible
metal of its hull. Kicking off the nearest of the spider men, he clambered in after the scientist.

       *       *       *       *       *

The tableau then presented in the sphere's interior was to remain forever imprinted on Bert's
memory, though it was only a momentary flash in his consciousness at the time: the Wanderer,
calm and erect at the control panel, his benign countenance alight with satisfaction; Tom Parker,
pulling himself to his feet, clutching at the big man's free arm, his mouth opened in astonishment;
Joan, seated at the Wanderer's feet with awed and reverent eyes upturned.

There is no passing directly between the planes. One must have the force area as a gateway,
and, besides, a medium such as the cage of the Bardeks, the orange light of the metal monsters,
or the sphere of the Wanderer. Bert knew this instinctively as the sphere darkened and the
flashing light-forms leaped across the blackness.

The motors screamed in rising crescendo as their speed increased. Then, abruptly, the sound
broke off into deathly silence as the limit of audibility was passed. Against the brilliant
background of swift color changes and geometric light-shapes that so quickly merged into the
familiar blur, Bert saw his companions as dim wraithlike forms. He moved toward Joan, groping.

Then came the tremendous thump, the swinging of a colossal page across the void, the warping
of the very universe about them, the physical torture and the swift rush through Stygian inkiness....

"Farewell." A single word, whispered like a benediction in the Wanderer's mellow voice, was
in Bert's consciousness. He knew that their benefactor had slipped away into the mysterious
regions of intra-dimensional space.

       *       *       *       *       *

Raising himself slowly and dazedly from where he had been flung, he saw they were in Tom's
laboratory. Joan lay over there white and still, a pitiful crumpled heap. Panicky, Bert crossed
to her. His trembling fingers found her pulse; a sobbing breath of relief escaped his lips.
She had merely swooned.

Tom Parker, exhausted from his efforts in that other plane and with the very foundations of
his being wrenched by the passage through the fifth dimension, was unable to rise. Only semiconscious,
his eyes were glazed with pain, and incoherent moaning sounds came from his white lips when
he attempted to speak.

Bert's mind was clearing rapidly. That diabolical machine of Tom's was still operating, the
drone of its motors being the only sound in the laboratory as the inventor closed his mouth
grimly and made a desperate effort to raise his head. But Bert had seen shapes materializing
on the lighted disk that was the gateway between planes and he rushed to the controls of the
instrument. That starting lever must be shifted without delay.

"Don't!" Tom Parker had found his voice; his frantic warning was a hoarse whistling gasp. He
had struggled to his knees. "It will kill you, Bert. Those things in the force area--partly
through--the reaction will destroy the machine and all of us if you turn it off. Don't, I say!"

"What then?" Bert fell back appalled. Hazily, the steel prow of a war machine was forming itself
on the metal disk; caterpillar treads moved like ghostly shadows beneath. It was the vanguard
of the Bardek hordes!

"Can't do it that way!" Tom had gotten to his feet and was stumbling toward the force area.
"Only one way--during the change of oscillation periods. Must mingle other atoms with those
before they stabilize in our plane. Must localize annihilating force. Must--"

What was the fool doing? He'd be in the force area in another moment. Bert thrust forward to
intercept him; saw that Joan had regained consciousness and was sitting erect, swaying weakly.
Her eyes widened with horror as they took in the scene and she screamed once despairingly and
was on her feet, tottering.

"Back!" Tom Parker yelled, wheeling. "Save yourselves."

       *       *       *       *       *

Bert lunged toward him but was too late. Tom had already burst into the force area and cast
himself upon the semitransparent tank of the spider men. A blast of searing heat radiated from
the disk and the motors of Tom's machine groaned as they slowed down under a tremendous overload.

Joan cried out in awful despair and moved to follow, but her knees gave way beneath her. Moaning
and shuddering, she slumped into Bert's arms and he drew her back from the awful heat of the
force area.

Then, horrified, they watched as Tom Parker melted into the misty shape of the Bardek war machine.
Swiftly his body merged with the half-substance of the tank and became an integral part of
the mass. For a horrible instant Tom, too, was transparent--a ghost shape writhing in a ghostly
throbbing mechanism of another world. His own atomic structure mingled with that of the alien
thing and yet, for a moment, he retained his Earthly form. His lean face was peaceful in death,
satisfied, like the Wanderer's when they had last seen him.

A terrific thunderclap rent the air and a column of flame roared up from the force area. Tom's
apparatus glowed to instant white heat, then melted down into sizzling liquid metal and glass.
The laboratory was in sudden twilight gloom, save for the tongue of fire that licked up from
the force area to the paneled ceiling. On the metal disk, now glowing redly, was no visible
thing. The gateway was closed forever.

       *       *       *       *       *

What more fearful calamity might have befallen had the machine been switched off instead, Bert
was never to know. Nor did he know how he reached his parked flivver with Joan a limp sobbing
bundle in his arms. He only knew that Tom Parker's sacrifice had saved them, had undoubtedly
prevented a horrible invasion of Earth; and that the efforts of the Wanderer had not been in vain.

The old house was burning furiously when he climbed in under the wheel of his car. He held
Joan very close and watched that blazing funeral pyre in wordless sorrow as the bereaved girl
dropped her head to his shoulder.

A group of men came up the winding road, a straggling group, running--the loungers from the
village. In the forefront was the beardless youth who had directed Bert, and, bringing up the
rear, limping and scurrying, was the old man they had called Gramp. He was puffing prodigiously
when the others gathered around the car, demanding information.

And the old fellow with the thick spectacles talked them all down.

"What'd I tell you?" he screeched. "Didn't I say they was queer doin's up here? Didn't I say
the devil was here with his imps--an' the thunder? You're a passel o' idjits like I said--"

The roar of Bert's starting motor drowned out the rest, but the old fellow was still gesticulating
and dancing about when they clattered off down the winding road to Lenville.

       *       *       *       *       *

An hour later Joan had fallen asleep, exhausted.

Night had fallen and, as mile after mile of smooth concrete unrolled beneath the flivver's
wheels, Bert gave himself over to thoughts he had not dared to entertain in nearly two years.
They'd be happy, he and Joan, and there'd be no further argument. If she still objected to
living on the fruit farm, that could be managed easily. They'd live in Indianapolis and he'd
buy a new car, a good one, to run back and forth. If, when her grief for Tom had lessened,
she wanted to go on with laboratory work and such--well, that was easy, too. Only there would
be no fooling around with this dimensional stuff--she'd had enough of that, he knew.

He drew her close with his free arm and his thoughts shifted--moved far out in infra-dimensional
space to dwell upon the man of the past who had called himself Wanderer of Infinity. He who
would go on and on until the end of time, until the end of all things, watching over the many
worlds and planes. Warning peoples of humanlike mold and emotions wherever they might dwell.
Helping them. Atoning throughout infinity. Suffering.

       *       *       *       *       *