  The sun
shines on its waters, giving it a sheen, and for many a mile its glistening surface can be
seen - winding its serpentine course through the broad, gray-looking sage and grease-wood plains,
while at occasional intervals narrow patches of green, in striking contrast to the surrounding
gray, show where the hardy mountain grasses venturously endeavor to invade the domains of the
autocratic sagebrush.  What is that queer-looking little reptile, half lizard, half frog, that
scuttles about among the rocks.  It is different from anything I have yet seen.  Around the
back of its neck and along its sides, and, in a less prominent degree, all over its yellowishgray
body, are small, horn-like protuberances that give the little fellow a very peculiar appearance.
Ah, I know who he is.  I have heard of him, and have seen his picture in books.  I am happy
to make his acquaintance.  He is "Prickey," the famed horned toad of Nevada.  On this mountain
spur, between the Golconda miningcamp and Iron Point, is the only place I have seen him on
the tour.  He is a very interesting little creature, more lizard than frog, perfectly harmless;
and his little bead-like eyes are bright and fascinating as the eyes of a rattlesnake.

Alkali flats abound, and some splendid riding is to be obtained east of Iron Point.  Just before
darkness closes down over the surrounding area of plain and mountain I reach Stone-House section-house.

" Yes, I guess we can get you a bite of something; but it will be cold," is the answer vouchsafed
in reply to my query about supper.  Being more concerned these days about the quantity of provisions
I can command than the quality, the prospect of a cold supper arouses no ungrateful emotions.
I would rather have a four-pound loaf and a shoulder of mutton for supper now than a smaller
quantity of extra choice viands; and I manage to satisfy the cravings of my inner man before
leaving the table.  But what about a place to sleep.  For some inexplicable reason these people
refuse to grant me even the shelter of their roof for the night.  They are not keeping hotel,
they say, which is quite true; they have a right to refuse, even if it is twenty miles to the
next place; and they do refuse.  "There's the empty Chinese bunk-house over there.  You can
crawl in there, if you arn't afeerd of ghosts," is the parting remark, as the door closes and
leaves me standing, like an outcast, on the dark, barren plain.

A week ago this bunk-house was occupied by a gang of Chinese railroaders, who got to quarrelling
among themselves, and the quarrel wound up in quite a tragic poisoning affair, that resulted
in the death of two, and nearly killed a third.  The Chinese are nothing, if not superstitious,
and since this affair no Chinaman would sleep in the bunk-house or work on this section; consequently
the building remains empty.  The "spooks" of murdered Chinese are everything but agreeable
company; nevertheless they are preferable to inhospitable whites, and I walk over to the house
and stretch my weary frame in - for aught I know - the same bunk in which, but a few days ago,
reposed the ghastly corpses of the poisoned Celestials. Despite the unsavory memories clinging
around the place, and my pillowless and blanketless couch, I am soon in the land of dreams.
It is scarcely presumable that one would be blessed with rosy-hued visions of pleasure under
such conditions, however, and near midnight I awake in a cold shiver.  The snowy mountains
rear their white heads up in the silent night, grim and ghostly all around, and make the midnight
air chilly, even in midsummer.  I lie there, trying in vain to doze off again, for it grows
perceptibly cooler.  At two o'clock I can stand it no longer, and so get up and strike out
for Battle Mountain, twenty miles ahead.

The moon has risen; it is two-thirds full, and a more beautiful sight than the one that now
greets my exit from the bunk-house it is scarcely possible to conceive.  Only those who have
been in this inter-mountain country can have any idea of a glorious moonlight night in the
clear atmosphere of this dry, elevated region.  It is almost as light as day, and one can see
to ride quite well wherever the road is ridable.  The pale moon seems to fill the whole broad
valley with a flood of soft, silvery light; the peaks of many snowy mountains loom up white
and spectral; the stilly air is broken by the excited yelping of a pack of coyotes noisily
baying the pale-yellow author of all this loveliness, and the wild, unearthly scream of an
unknown bird or animal coming from some mysterious, undefinable quarter completes an ideal
Western picture, a poem, a dream, that fully compensates for the discomforts of the preceding
hour.  The inspiration of this beautiful scene awakes the slumbering poesy within, and I am
inspired to compose a poem-"Moonlight in the Rockies"-that I expect some day to see the world
go into raptures over!

A few miles from the Chinese shanty I pass a party of Indians camped by the side of my road.
They are squatting around the smouldering embers of a sage-brush fire, sleeping and dozing.
I am riding slowly and carefully along the road that happens to be ridable just here, and am
fairly past them before being seen.  As I gradually vanish in the moonlit air I wonder what
they think it was - that strange-looking object that so silently and mysteriously glided past.
It is safe to warrant they think me anything but flesh and blood, as they rouse each other
and peer at my shadowy form disappearing in the dim distance.

>From Battle Mountain my route leads across a low alkali bottom, through which dozens of small
streams are flowing to the Humboldt.  Many of them are narrow enough to be jumped, but not
with a bicycle on one's shoulder, for under such conditions there is always a disagreeable
uncertainty that one may disastrously alight before he gets ready.  But I am getting tired
of partially undressing to ford streams that are little more than ditches, every little way,
and so I hit upon the novel plan of using the machine for a vaulting-pole.  Beaching it out
into the centre of the stream, I place one hand on the head and the other on the saddle, and
vault over, retaining my hold as I alight on the opposite shore.  Pulling the bicycle out after
me, the thing is done.  There is no telling to what uses this two-wheeled "creature" could
be put in case of necessity. Certainly the inventor never expected it to be used for a vaulting-pole
in leaping across streams.  Twenty-five miles east of Battle Mountain the valley of the Humboldt
widens into a plain of some size, through which the river meanders with many a horseshoe curve,
and maps out the pot-hooks and hangers of our childhood days in mazy profusion.  Amid these
innumerable curves and counter-curves, clumps of willows and tall blue-joint reeds grow thickly,
and afford shelter to thousands of pelicans, that here make their homes far from the disturbing
presence of man.  All unconscious of impending difficulties, I follow the wagon trail leading
through this valley until I find myself standing on the edge of the river, ruefully looking
around for some avenue by which I can proceed on my way.  I am in the bend of a horseshoe curve,
and the only way to get out is to retrace my footsteps for several miles, which disagreeable
performance I naturally feel somewhat opposed to doing.  Casting about me I discover a couple
of old fence-posts that have floated down from the Be-o-wa-we settlement above and lodged against
the bank.  I determine to try and utilize them in getting the machine across the river, which
is not over thirty yards wide at this point.  Swimming across with my clothes first, I tie
the bicycle to the fence-posts, which barely keep it from sinking, and manage to navigate it
successfully across.  The village of Be-o-wa-we is full of cowboys, who are preparing for the
annual spring round-up. Whites, Indians, and Mexicans compose the motley crowd.  They look
a wild lot, with their bear-skin chaparejos and semi-civilized trappings, galloping to and
fro in and about the village.  "I can't spare the time, or I would," is my slightly un-truthful
answer to an invitation to stop over for the day and have some fun.  Briefly told, this latter,
with the cowboy, consists in getting hilariously drunk, and then turning his "pop" loose at
anything that happens to strike his whiskey-bedevilled fancy as presenting a fitting target.
Now a bicycle, above all things, would intrude itself upon the notice of a cowboy on a " tear"
as a peculiar and conspicuous object, especially if it had a man on it; so after taking a "smile"
with them for good-fellowship, and showing them the modus operandi of riding the wheel, I consider
it wise to push on up the valley.

Three miles from Be-o-wa-we is seen the celebrated "Maiden's Grave," on a low hill or bluff
by the road-side; and "thereby hangs a tale." In early days, a party of emigrants were camped
near by at Gravelly Ford, waiting for the waters to subside, so that they could cross the liver,
when a young woman of the party sickened and died.  A rudely carved head- board was set up
to mark the spot where she was buried.  Years afterward, when the railroad was being built
through here, the men discovered this rude head-board all alone on the bleak hill-top, and
were moved by worthy sentiment to build a rough stone wall around it to keep off the ghoulish
coyotes; and, later on, the superintendent of the division erected a large white cross, which
now stands in plain view of the railroad.  On one side of the cross is written the simple inscription,
"Maiden's Grave;" on the other, her name, "Lucinda Duncan" Leaving the bicycle by the road-side,
I climb the steep bluff and examine the spot with some curiosity.  There are now twelve other
graves beside the original "Maiden's Grave," for the people of Be-o-wa-we and the surrounding
country have selected this romantic spot on which to inter the remains of their departed friends.
This afternoon I follow the river through Humboldt Ca¤on in preference to taking a long circuitous
route over the mountains. The first noticeable things about this ca¤on are the peculiar water-marks
plainly visible on the walls, high up above where the water could possibly rise while its present
channels of escape exist unobstructed.  It is thought that the country east of the spur of
the Red Range, which stretches clear across the valley at Be-o-wa-we, and through which the
Humboldt seems to have cut its way, was formerly a lake, and that the water gradually wore
a passage-way for itself through the massive barrier, leaving only the high-water marks on
the mountain sides to tell of the mighty change.  In this ca¤on the rocky walls tower like
gigantic battlements, grim and gloomy on either side, and the seething, boiling waters of the
Humboldt - that for once awakens from its characteristic lethargy, and madly plunges and splutters
over a bed of jagged rocks which seem to have been tossed into its channel by some Herculean
hand - fill this mighty "rift" in the mountains with a never-ending roar.  It has been threatening
rain for the last two hours, and now the first peal of thunder I have heard on the whole journey
awakens the echoing voices of the ca¤on and rolls and rumbles along the great jagged fissure
like an angry monster muttering his mighty wrath.  Peal after peal follow each other in quick
succession, the vigorous, newborn echoes of one peal seeming angrily to chase the receding
voices of its predecessor from cliff to cliff, and from recess to projection, along its rocky,
erratic course up the ca¤on.  Vivid flashes of forked lightning shoot athwart the heavy black
cloud that seems to rest on either wall, roofing the ca¤on with a ceiling of awful grandeur.
Sheets of electric flame light up the dark, shadowy recesses of the towering rocks as they
play along the ridges and hover on the mountain-tops; while large drops of rain begin to patter
down, gradually increasing with the growing fury of their battling allies above, until a heavy,
drenching downpour of rain and hail compels me to take shelter under an overhanging rock. 
At 4 P.M.  I reach Palisade, a railroad village situated in the most romantic spot imaginable,
under the shadows of the towering palisades that hover above with a sheltering care, as if
their special mission were to protect it from all harm.  Evidently these mountains have been
rent in twain by an earthquake, and this great gloomy chasm left open, for one can plainly
see that the two walls represent two halves of what was once a solid mountain.  Curious caves
are observed in the face of the cliffs, and one, more conspicuous than the rest, has been christened
"Maggie's Bower," in honor of a beautiful Scottish maiden who with her parents once lingered
in a neighboring creek-bottom for some time, recruiting their stock.  But all is not romance
and beauty even in the glorious palisades of the Humboldt; for great, glaring, patent-medicine
advertisements are painted on the most conspicuously beautiful spots of the palisades.  Business
enterprise is of course to be commended and encouraged; but it is really annoying that one
cannot let his esthetic soul - that is constantly yearning for the sublime and beautiful -
rest in gladsome reflection on some beautiful object without at the same time being reminded
of " corns," and " biliousness," and all the multifarious evils that flesh is heir to.

It grows pitchy dark ere I leave the ca¤on on my way to Carlin.  Farther on, the gorge widens,
and thick underbrush intervenes between the road and the river.  From out the brush I see peering
two little round phosphorescent balls, like two miniature moons, turned in my direction. I
wonder what kind of an animal it is, as I trundle along through the darkness, revolver in hand,
ready to defend myself, should it make an attack.  I think it is a mountain-lion, as they seem
to be plentiful in this part of Nevada, Late as it is when I reach Carlin, the "boys" must
see how a bicycle is ridden, and, as there is no other place suitable, I manage to circle around
the pool-table in the hotel bar-room a few times, nearly scalping myself against the bronze
chandelier in the operation.  I hasten, however, to explain that these proceedings took place
immediately after my arrival, lest some worldly wise, over-sagacious person should be led to
suspect them to be the riotous undertakings of one who had "smiled with the boys once too often."
Little riding is possible all through this section of Nevada, and, in order to complete the
forty miles a day that I have rigorously imposed upon myself, I sometimes get up and pull out
at daylight.  It is scarce more than sunrise when, following the railroad through Five-mile
Canon - another rift through one of the many mountain chains that cross this part of Nevada
in all directions under the general name of the Humboldt Mountains-I meet with a startling
adventure.  I am trundling through the ca¤on alongside the river, when, rounding the sharp
curve of a projecting mountain, a tawny mountain lion is perceived trotting leisurely along
ahead of me, not over a hundred yards in advance.  He hasn't seen me yet; he is perfectly oblivious
of the fact that he is in "the presence." A person of ordinary discretion would simply have
revealed his presence by a gentlemanly sneeze, or a slight noise of any kind, when the lion
would have immediately bolted back into the underbrush.  Unable to resist the temptation, I
fired at him, and of course missed him, as a person naturally would at a hundred yards with
a bull-dog revolver.  The bullet must have singed him a little though, for, instead of wildly
scooting for the brush, as I anticipated, he turns savagely round and comes bounding rapidly
toward me, and at twenty paces crouches for a spring.  Laying his cat-like head almost on the
ground, his round eyes flashing fire, and his tail angrily waving to and fro, he looks savage
and dangerous.  Crouching behind the bicycle, I fire at him again.  Nine times out of ten a
person will overshoot the mark with a revolver under such circumstances, and, being anxious
to avoid this, I do the reverse, and fire too low.  The ball strikes the ground just in front
of his head, and throws the sand and gravel in his face, and perhaps in his wicked round eyes;
for he shakes his head, springs up, and makes off into the brush.  I shall shed blood of some
sort yet before I leave Nevada.  There isn't a day that I don't shoot at something or other;
and all I ask of any animal is to come within two hundred yards and I will squander a cartridge
on him, and I never fail to hit the ground.

At Elko, where I take dinner, I make the acquaintance of an individual, rejoicing in the sobriquet
of "Alkali Bill," who has the largest and most comprehensive views of any person I ever met.
He has seen a paragraph, something about me riding round the world, and he considerately takes
upon himself the task of summing up the few trifling obstacles that I shall encounter on the
way round:

"There is only a small rise at Sherman," he rises to explain, " and another still smaller at
the Alleghanies; all the balance is downhill to the Atlantic.  Of course you'll have to 'boat
it' across the Frogpond; then there's Europe - mostly level; so is Asia, except the Himalayas
- and you can soon cross them; then you're all 'hunky,' for there's no mountains to speak of
in China." Evidently Alkali Bill is a person who points the finger of scorn at small ideas,
and leaves the bothersome details of life to other and smaller-minded folks.  In his vast and
glorious imagery he sees a centaur-like cycler skimming like a frigate-bird across states and
continents, scornfully ignoring sandy deserts and bridgeless streams, halting for nothing but
oceans, and only slowing up a little when he runs up against a peak that bobs up its twenty
thousand feet of snowy grandeur serenely in his path.  What a Ceasar is lost to this benighted
world, because in its blindness, it will not search out such men as Alkali and ask them to
lead it onward to deeds of inconceivable greatness. Alkali Bill can whittle more chips in an
hour than some men could in a week.  Much of the Humboldt Valley, through which my road now
runs, is at present flooded from the vast quantities of water that are pouring into it from
the Ruby Range of mountains now visible to the southeast, and which have the appearance of
being the snowiest of any since leaving the Sierras.  Only yesterday I threatened to shed blood
before I left Nevada, and sure enough my prophecy is destined to speedy fulfilment. Just east
of the Osino Ca¤on, and where the North Fork of the Humboldt comes down from the north and
joins the main stream, is a stretch of swampy ground on which swarms of wild ducks and geese
are paddling about. I blaze away at them, and a poor inoffensive gosling is no more.  While
writing my notes this evening, in a room adjoining the "bar" at Halleck, near the United States
fort of the same name, I overhear a boozy soldier modestly informing his comrades that forty-five
miles an hour is no unusual speed to travel with a bicycle.  Gradually I am nearing the source
of the Humboldt, and at the town of Wells I bid it farewell for good. Wells is named from a
group of curious springs near the town.  They are supposed to be extinct volcanoes, now filled
with water; and report says that no sounding-line has yet been found long enough to fathom
the bottom. Some day when some poor, unsuspecting tenderfoot is peering inquisitively down
one of these well-like springs, the volcano may suddenly come into play again and convert the
water into steam that will shoot him clear up into the moon.  These volcanoes may have been
soaking in water for millions of years; but they are not to be trusted on that account; they
can be depended upon to fill some citizen full of lively surprise one of these days.  Everything
here is surprising.  You look across the desert and see flowing water and waving trees; but
when you get there, with your tongue hanging out and your fate wellnigh sealed, you are surprised
to find nothing but sand and rocks.  You climb a mountain expecting to find trees and birds'
eggs, and you are surprised to find high-water marks and sea-shells.  Finally, you look in
the looking-glass and are surprised to find that the wind and exposure have transformed your
nice blonde complexion to a semi-sable hue that would prevent your own mother from recognizing you.

The next day, when nearing the entrance to Moutella Pass, over the Goose Creek Range, I happen
to look across the mingled sagebrush and juniper-spruce brush to the right, and a sight greets
my eyes that causes me to instinctively look around for a tall tree, though well knowing that
there is nothing of the kind for miles; neither is there any ridable road near, or I might
try my hand at breaking the record for a few miles.  Standing bolt upright on their hind legs,
by the side of a clump of juniper-spruce bushes and intently watching my movements, are a pair
of full-grown cinnamon bears.  When a bear sees a man before the man happens to descry him,
and fails to betake himself off immediately, it signifies that he is either spoiling for a
fight or doesn't care a continental password whether war is declared or not.  Moreover, animals
recognize the peculiar advantages of two to one in a fight equally with their human infer!
- superiors; and those two over there are apparently in no particular hurry to move on.  They
don't seem awed at my presence.  On the contrary, they look suspiciously like being undecided
and hesitative about whether to let me proceed peacefully on my way or not.  Their behavior
is outrageous; they stare and stare and stare, and look quite ready for a fight.  I don't intend
one to come off, though, if I can avoid it.  I prefer to have it settled by arbitration.  I
haven't lost these bears; they aren't mine, and I don't want anything that doesn't belong to
me.  I am not covetous; so, lest I should be tempted to shoot at them if I come within the
regulation two hundred yards, I "edge off" a few hundred yards in the other direction, and
soon have the intense satisfaction of seeing them stroll off toward the mountains.  I wonder
if I don't owe my escape on this occasion to my bicycle.  Do the bright spokes glistening in
the sunlight as they revolve make an impression on their bearish intellects that influences
their decision in favor of a retreat.  It is perhaps needless to add that, all through this
mountain-pass, I keep a loose eye busily employed looking out for bears.

But nothing more of a bearish nature occurs, and the early gloaming finds me at Tacoma, a village
near the Utah boundary line.  There is an awful calamity of some sort hovering over this village.
One can feel it in the air.  The habitues of the hotel barroom sit around, listless and glum.
When they speak at all it is to predict all sorts of difficulties for me in my progress through
Utah and Wyoming Territories.  "The black gnats of the Salt Lake mud flat'll eat you clean
up," snarls one.  "Bear River's flooding the hull kintry up Weber Ca¤on way," growls another.
"The slickest thing you kin do, stranger, is to board the keers and git out of this," says
a third, in a tone of voice and with an emphasis that plainly indicates his great disgust at
"this." By " this" he means the village of Tacoma; and he is disgusted with it.  They are all
disgusted with it and with the whole world this evening, because Tacoma is "out of whiskey."
Yes, the village is destitute of whiskey; it should have arrived yesterday, and hasn't shown
up yet; and the effect on the society of the bar-room is so depressing that I soon retire to
my couch, to dream of Utah's strange intermingling of forbidding deserts and beautiful orchards
through which my route now leads me.

CHAPTER III.

THROUGH  MORMON-LAND AND OVER  THE  ROCKIES.

A dreary-looking country is the " Great American Desert," in Utah, the northern boundary line
of which I traverse next morning.  To the left of the road is a low chain of barren hills;
to the right, the uninviting plain, over which one's eye wanders in vain for some green object
that might raise hopes of a less desolate region beyond; and over all hangs an oppressive silence
- the silence of a dead country - a country destitute of both animal and vegetable life.  Over
the great desert hangs a smoky haze, out of which Pilot Peak, thirty-eight miles away, rears
its conical head 2,500 feet above the level plain at its base.

Some riding is obtained at intervals along this unattractive stretch of country, but there
are no continuously ridable stretches, and the principal incentive to mount at all is a feeling
of disgust at so much compulsory walking.  A noticeable feature through the desert is the almost
unquenchable thirst that the dry saline air inflicts upon one.  Reaching a railway section-house,
I find no one at home; but there is a small underground cistern of imported water, in which
"wrigglers " innumerable wriggle, but which is otherwise good and cool.  There is nothing to
drink out of, and the water is three feet from the surface; while leaning down to try and drink,
the wooden framework at the top gives way and precipitates me head first into the water.  Luckily,
the tank is large enough to enable me to turn round and reappear at the surface, head first,
and with considerable difficulty I scramble out again, with, of course, not a dry thread on me.

At three in the afternoon I roll into Terrace, a small Mormon town.  Here a rather tough-looking
citizen, noticing that my garments are damp, suggests that 'cycling must be hard work to make
a person perspire like that in this dry climate.  At the Matlin section-house I find accommodation
for the night with a whole-souled section-house foreman, who is keeping bachelor's hall temporarily,
as his wife is away on a visit at Ogden. >From this house, which is situated on the table-land
of the Bed Dome Mountains, can be obtained a more comprehensive view of the Great American
Desert than when we last beheld it.  It has all the appearance of being the dry bed of an ancient
salt lake or inland sea.  A broad, level plain of white alkali, which is easily mistaken in
the dim distance for smooth, still water, stretches away like a dead, motionless sea as far
as human vision can penetrate, until lost in the haze; while, here and there, isolated rocks
lift their rugged heads above the dreary level, like islets out of the sea.  It is said there
are many evidences that go to prove this desert to have once been covered by the waters of
the great inland sea that still, in places, laves its eastern borders with its briny flood.
I am informed there are many miles of smooth, hard, salt-flats, over which a 'cycler could
skim like a bird; but I scarcely think enough of bird-like skimming to go searching for it
on the American Desert.  A few miles east of Matlin the road leads over a spur of the Red Dome
Range, from whence I obtain my first view of the Great Salt Lake, and soon I am enjoying a
long-anticipated bath in its briny waters.  It is disagreeably cold, but otherwise an enjoyable
bath.  One can scarce sink beneath the surface, so strongly is the water impregnated with salt.
For dinner, I reach Kelton, a town that formerly prospered as the point from which vast quantities
of freight were shipped to Idaho.  Scores of huge freight-wagons are now bunched up in the
corrals, having outlived their usefulness since the innovation from mules and "overland ships
" to locomotives on the Utah Northern Railway.  Empty stores and a general air of vanished
prosperity are the main features of Kelton to-day; and the inhabitants seem to reflect in their
persons the aspect of the town; most of them being freighters, who, finding their occupation
gone, hang listlessly around, as though conscious of being fit for nothing else. >From Kelton
I follow the lake shore, and at six in the afternoon arrive at the salt-works, near Monument
Station, and apply for accommodation, which is readily given.  Here is erected a wind-mill,
which pumps the water from the lake into shallow reservoirs, where it evaporates and leaves
a layer of coarse salt on the bottom.  These people drink water that is disagreeably brackish
and unsatisfactory to one unaccustomed to it, but which they say has become more acceptable
to them, from habitual use, than purely fresh water.  This spot, is the healthiest and most
favorable for the prolific production of certain forms of insect life I ever was in, and I
spend the liveliest night here I ever spent anywhere. These people professed to give me a bed
to myself, but no sooner have I laid my head on the pillow than I recognize the ghastly joke
they are playing on me.  The bed is already densely populated with guests, who naturally object
to being ousted or overcrowded.  They seem quite a kittenish and playful lot, rather inclined
to accomplish their ends by playing wild pranks than by resorting to more austere measures.
Watching till I have closed my eyes in an attempt to doze off, they slip up and playfully tickle
me under the chin, or scramble around in my ear, and anon they wildly chase each other up and
down my back, and play leap-frog and hide-and-go-seek all over my sensitive form, so that I
arise in the morning anything but refreshed from my experience.

Still following the shores of the lake, for several miles, my road now leads over the northern
spur of the Promontory Mountains.  On these hills I find a few miles of hard gravel that affords
the best riding I have experienced in Utah, and I speed along as rapidly as possible, for dark,
threatening clouds are gathering overhead.  But ere I reach the summit of the ridge a violent
thunder-storm breaks over the hills, and I seem to be verily hobnobbing with the thunder and
lightning, that appears to be round about me, rather than overhead.  A troop of wild bronchos,
startled and stampeded by the vivid lightning and sharp peals of thunder, come wildly charging
down the mountain trail, threatening to run quite over me in their mad career.  Pulling my
six-shooter, I fire a couple of shots in the air to attract their attention, when they rapidly
swerve to the left, and go tearing frantically over the rolling hills on their wild flight
to the plains below.

Most of the rain falls on the plain and in the lake, and when I arrive at the summit I pause
to take a view at the lake and surrounding country. A more auspicious occasion could scarcely
have been presented.  The storm has subsided, and far beneath my feet a magnificent rainbow
spans the plain, and dips one end of its variegated beauty in the sky-blue waters of the lake.
From this point the view to the west and south is truly grand-rugged, irregular mountain-chains
traverse the country at every conceivable angle, and around among them winds the lake, filling
with its blue waters the intervening spaces, and reflecting, impartially alike, their grand
majestic beauty and their faults.  What dreams of empire and white-winged commerce on this
inland sea must fill the mind and fire the imagery of the newly arrived Mormon convert who,
standing on the commanding summit of these mountains, feasts his eyes on the glorious panorama
of blue water and rugged mountains that is spread like a wondrous picture before him.  Surely,
if he be devotionally inclined, it fails not to recall to his mind another inland sea in far-off
Asia Minor, on whose pebbly shores and by whose rippling waves the cradle of an older religion
than Morrnonism was rocked - but not rocked to sleep.

Ten miles farther on, from the vantage-ground of a pass over another spur of the same range,
is obtained a widely extended view of the country to the east.  For nearly thirty miles from
the base of the mountains, low, level mud-flats extend eastward, bordered on the south by the
marshy, sinuous shores of the lake, and on the north by the Blue Creek Mountains. Thirty miles
to the east - looking from this distance strangely like flocks of sheep grazing at the base
of the mountains - can be seen the white- painted houses of the Mormon settlements, that thickly
dot the narrow but fertile strip of agricultural land, between Bear River and the mighty Wahsatch
Mountains, that, rearing their snowy crest skyward, shut out all view of what lies beyond.
From this height the level mud-flats appear as if one could mount his wheel and bowl across
at a ten-mile pace; but I shall be agreeably surprised if I am able to aggregate ten miles
of riding out of the thirty.  Immediately after getting down into the bottom I make the acquaintance
of the tiny black gnats that one of our whiskey- bereaved friends at Tacoma had warned me against.
One's head is constantly enveloped in a black cloud of these little wretches.  They are of
infinitesimal proportions, and get into a person's ears, eyes, and nostrils, and if one so
far forgets himself as to open his mouth, they swarm in as though they think it the "pearly
gates ajar," and this their last chance of effecting an entrance.  Mingled with them, and apparently
on the best of terms, are swarms of mosquitoes, which appear perfect Jumbos in comparison with
their disreputable associates.

As if partially to recompense me for the torments of the afternoon, Dame Fortune considerately
provides me with two separate and distinct suppers this evening.  I had intended, when I left
Promontory Station, to reach Corinne for the night; consequently I bring a lunch with me, knowing
it will take me till late to reach there.  These days, I am troubled with an appetite that
makes me blush to speak of it, and about five o'clock I sit down - on the bleached skeleton
of a defunct mosquito! - and proceed to eat my lunch of bread and meat - and gnats; for I am
quite certain of eating hundreds of these omnipresent creatures at every bite I take.  Two
hours afterward I am passing Quarry section-house, when the foreman beckons me over and generously
invites me to remain over night.  He brings out canned oysters and bottles of Milwaukee beer,
and insists on my helping him discuss these acceptable viands; to which invitation it is needless
to say I yield without extraordinary pressure, the fact of having eaten two hours before being
no obstacle whatever.  So much for 'cycling as an aid to digestion.  Arriving at Corinne, on
Bear River, at ten o'clock next morning, I am accosted by a bearded, patriarchal Mormon, who
requests me to constitute myself a parade of one, and ride the bicycle around the town for
the edification of the people's minds.

" In course they knows what a ' perlocefede' is, from seein' 'em in picturs; but they never
seed a real machine, and it'd be a 'hefty' treat fer 'em,"is the eloquent appeal made by this
person in behalf of the Corinnethians, over whose destinies and happiness he appears to preside
with fatherly solicitude.  As the streets of Corinne this morning consist entirely of black
mud of uncertain depth, I am reluctantly compelled to say the elder nay, at the same time promising
him that if he would have them in better condition next time I happened around, I would willingly
second his brilliant idea of making the people happy by permitting them a glimpse of my " perlocefede
" in action.

After crossing Bear River I find myself on a somewhat superior road leading through the Mormon
settlements to Ogden.  No greater contrast can well be imagined than that presented by this
strip of country lying between the lake and the "Wahsatch Mountains, and the desert country
to the westward.  One can almost fancy himself suddenly transported by some good genii to a
quiet farming community in an Eastern State.  Instead of untamed bronchos and wild-eyed cattle,
roaming at their own free will over unlimited territory, are seen staid work-horses ploughing
in the field, and the sleek milch-cow peacefully cropping tame grass in enclosed meadows. 
Birds are singing merrily in the willow hedges and the shade-trees; green fields of alfalfa
and ripening grain line the road and spread themselves over the surrounding country in alternate
squares, like those of a vast checker-board.  Farms, on the average, are small, and, consequently,
houses are thick; and not a farm-house among them all but is embowered in an orchard of fruit
and shade-trees that mingle their green leaves and white blossoms harmoniously.  At noon I
roll into a forest of fruit- trees, among which, I am informed, Willard City is situated; but
one can see nothing of any city.  Nothing but thickets of peach, plum, and apple trees, all
in full bloom, surround the spot where I alight and begin to look around for some indications
of the city.  "Where is Willard City.  " I inquire of a boy who comes out from one of the orchards
carrying a can of kerosene in his hand, suggestive of having just come from a grocery, and
so he has.  " This is Willard City, right here," replies the boy; and then, in response to
my inquiry for the hotel, he points to a small gate leading into an orchard, and tells me the
hotel is in there.

The hote l -like every other house and store here - is embowered amid an orchard of blooming
fruit-trees, and looks like anything but a public eating-house.  No sign up, nothing to distinguish
it from a private dwelling; and I am ushered into a nicely furnished parlor, on the neatly
papered walls of which hang enlarged portraits of Brigham Young and other Mormon celebrities,
while a large-sized Mormon bible, expensively bound in morocco, reposes on the centre-table.
A charming Miss of -teen summers presides over a private table, on which is spread for my material
benefit the finest meal I have eaten since leaving California.  Such snow-white bread.  Such
delicious butter.  And the exquisite flavor of "spiced peach- butter" lingers in my fancy even
now; and as if this were not enough for "two bits" (a fifty per cent, come-down from usual
rates in the mountains), a splendid bouquet of flowers is set on the table to round off the
repast with their grateful perfume.  As I enjoy the wholesome, substantial food, I fall to
musing on the mighty chasm that intervenes between the elegant meal now before me and the "Melican
plan-cae " of two weeks ago.  "You have a remarkably pleasant country here, Miss," I venture
to remark to the young lady who has presided over my table, and whom I judge to be the daughter
of the house, as she comes to the door to see the bicycle.

"Yes; we have made it pleasant by planting so many orchards," she answers, demurely.

"I should think the Mormons ought to be contented, for they possess the only good piece of
farming country between California and 'the States,'" I blunderingly continued.

"I never heard anyone say they are not contented, but their enemies," replies this fair and
valiant champion of Mormonism in a voice that shows she quite misunderstands my meaning.  "What
I intended to say was, that the Mormon people are to be highly congratulated on their good
sense in settling here," I hasten to explain; for were I to leave at this house, where my treatment
has been so gratifying, a shadow of prejudice against the Mormons, I should feel like kicking
myself all over the Territory. The women of the Mormon religion are instructed by the wiseacres
of the church to win over strangers by kind treatment and by the charm of their conversation
and graces; and this young lady has learned the lesson well; she has graduated with high honors.
Coming from the barren deserts of Nevada and Western Utah - from the land where the irreverent
and irrepressible "Old Timer" fills the air with a sulphurous odor from his profanity and where
nature is seen in its sternest aspect, and then suddenly finding one's self literally surrounded
by flowers and conversing with Beauty about Religion, is enough to charm the heart of a marble
statue.  Ogden is reached for supper, where I quite expect to find a 'cycler or two (Ogden
being a city of eight thousand inhabitants); but the nearest approach to a bicycler in Ogden
is a gentleman who used to belong to a Chicago club, but who has failed to bring his "wagon"
West with him. Twelve miles of alternate riding and walking eastwardly from Ogden bring me
to the entrance of Weber Canon, through which the Weber River, the Union Pacific Railroad,
and an uncertain wagon-trail make their way through the Wahsatch Mountains on to the elevated
table-lands of Wyoming Territory.  Objects of interest follow each other in quick succession
along this part of the journey, and I have ample time to examine them, for Weber River is flooding
the canon, and in many places has washed away the narrow space along which wagons are wont
to make their way, so that I have to trundle slowly along the railway track.  Now the road
turns to the left, and in a few minutes the rugged and picturesque walls of the canon are towering
in imposing heights toward the clouds.  The Weber River comes rushing - a resistless torrent
- from under the dusky shadows of the mountains through which it runs for over fifty miles,
and onward to the pkin below, where it assumes a more moderate pace, as if conscious that it
has at last escaped from the hurrying turmoil of its boisterous march down the mountain.

Advancing into the yawning jaws of the range, a continuously resounding roar is heard in advance,
which gradually becomes louder as I proceed eastward; in a short time the source of the noise
is discovered, and a weird scene greets my enraptured vision.  At a place where the fall is
tremendous, the waters are opposed in their mad march by a rough-and-tumble collection of huge,
jagged rocks, that have at some time detached themselves from the walls above, and come crashing
down into the bed of the stream.  The rushing waters, coming with haste from above, appear
to pounce with insane fury on the rocks that dare thus to obstruct their path; and then for
the next few moments all is a hissing, seething, roaring caldron of strife, the mad waters
seeming to pounce with ever- increasing fury from one imperturbable antagonist to another,
now leaping clear over the head of one, only to dash itself into a cloud of spray against another,
or pour like a cataract against its base in a persistent, endless struggle to undermine it;
while over all tower the dark, shadowy rocks, grim witnesses of the battle.  This spot is known
by the appropriate name of "The Devil's Gate." Wherever the walls of the canon recede from
the river's brink, and leave a space of cultivable land, there the industrious Mormons have
built log or adobe cabins, and converted the circumscribed domain into farms, gardens, and
orchards.  In one of these isolated settlements I seek shelter from a passing shower at the
house of a "three-ply Mormon " (a Mormon with three wives), and am introduced to his three
separate and distinct better-halves; or, rather, one should say, " better-quarters," for how
can anything have three halves.  A noticeable feature at all these farms is the universal plurality
of women around the house, and sometimes in the field.  A familiar scene in any farming community
is a woman out in the field, visiting her husband, or, perchance, assisting him in his labors.
The same thing is observable at the Mormon settlements along the Weber River - only, instead
of one woman, there are generally two or three, and perhaps yet another standing in the door
of the house.  Passing through two tunnels that burrow through rocky spurs stretching across
the canon, as though to obstruct farther progress, across the river, to the right, is the "Devil's
Slide" - two perpendicular walls of rock, looking strangely like man's handiwork, stretching
in parallel lines almost from base to summit of a sloping, grass-covered mountain.  The walls
are but a dozen feet apart.  It is a curious phenomenon, but only one among many that are scattered
at intervals all through here.  A short distance farther, and I pass the famous "Thousand-mile
Tree" - a rugged pine, that stands between the railroad and the river, and which has won renown
by springing up just one thousand miles from Omaha.  This tree is having a tough struggle for
its life these days; one side of its honored trunk is smitten as with the leprosy.  The fate
of the Thousand-mile Tree is plainly sealed.  It is unfortunate in being the most conspicuous
target on the line for the fe-ro-ci-ous youth who comes West with a revolver in his pocket
and shoots at things from the car-window.  Judging from the amount of cold lead contained in
that side of its venerable trunk next the railway few of these thoughtless marksmen go past
without honoring it with a shot.  Emerging from "the Narrows" of Weber Canon, the route follows
across a less contracted space to Echo City, a place of two hundred and twenty-five inhabitants,
mostly Mormons, where I remain over-night.  The hotel where I put up at Echo is all that can
be desired, so far as "provender" is concerned; but the handsome and picturesque proprietor
seems afflicted with sundry eccentric habits, his leading eccentricity being a haughty contempt
for fractional currency.  Not having had the opportunity to test him, it is difficult to say
whether this peculiarity works both ways, or only when the change is due his transient guests.
However, we willingly give him the benefit of the doubt.

Heavily freighted rain-clouds are hovering over the mountains next morning and adding to the
gloominess of the gorge, which, just east of Echo City, contracts again and proceeds eastward
under the name of Echo Gorge. Turning around a bold rocky projection to the left, the far-famed
"Pulpit Rock" towers above, on which Brigham Young is reported to have stood and preached to
the Mormon host while halting over Sunday at this point, during their pilgrimage to their new
home in the Salt Lake Valley below.  Had the redoubtable prophet turned "dizzy " while haranguing
his followers from the elevated pinnacle of his novel pulpit, he would at least have died a
more romantic death than he is accredited with - from eating too much green corn.

Fourteen miles farther brings me to "Castle Rocks," a name given to the high sandstone bluffs
that compose the left-hand side of the canon at this point, and which have been worn by the
elements into all manner of fantastic shapes, many of them calling to mind the towers and turrets
of some old-world castle so vividly, that one needs but the pomp and circumstance of old knight-errant
days to complete the illusion.  But, as one gazes with admiration on these towering buttresses
of nature, it is easy to realize that the most massive and imposing feudal castle, or ramparts
built with human hands, would look like children's toys beside them.  The weather is cool and
bracing, and when, in the middle of the afternoon, I reach Evanston, Wyo. Terr., too late to
get dinner at the hotel, I proceed to devour the contents of a bakery, filling the proprietor
with boundless astonishment by consuming about two-thirds of his stock. When I get through
eating, he bluntly refuses to charge anything, considering himself well repaid by having witnessed
the most extraordinary gastronomic feat on record - the swallowing of two-thirds of a bakery.
Following the trail down Yellow Creek, I arrive at Hilliard after dark. The Hilliardites are
"somewhat seldom," but they are made of the right material.  The boarding-house landlady sets
about preparing me supper, late though it be; and the "boys" extend me a hearty invitation
to turn in with them for the night.  Here at Hilliard is a long V-shaped flume, thirty miles
long, in which telegraph poles, ties, and cord wood are floated down to the railroad from the
pineries of the Uintah Mountains, now plainly visible to the south.  The "boys" above referred
to are men engaged in handling ties thus floated down; and sitting around the red-hot stove,
they make the evening jolly with songs and yarns of tie-drives, and of wild rides down the
long "V" flume.  A happy, light-hearted set of fellows are these "tie-men," and not an evening
but their rude shanty resounds with merriment galore.  Fun is in the air to-night, and "Beaver"
(so dubbed on account of an unfortunate tendency to fall into every hole of water he goes anywhere
near) is the unlucky wight upon whom the rude witticisms concentrate; for he has fallen into
the water again to- day, and is busily engaged in drying his clothes by the stove.  They accuse
him of keeping up an uncomfortably hot fire, detrimental to everybody's comfort but his own,
and threaten him with dire penalties if he doesn't let the room cool off; also broadly hinting
their disapproval of his over-fondness for "Adam's ale," and threaten to make him "set 'em
up" every time he tumbles in hereafter.  In revenge for these remarks, "Beaver" piles more
wood into the stove, and, with many a westernism - not permitted in print - threatens to keep
up a fire that will drive them all out of the shanty if they persist in their persecutions.
Crossing next day the low, broad pass over the Uintah Mountains, some stretches of ridable
surface are passed over, and at this point I see the first band of antelope on the tour; but
as they fail to come within the regulation two hundred yards they are graciously permitted to live.

At Piedmont Station I decide to go around by way of Port Bridger and strike the direct trail
again at Carter Station, twentyfour miles farther east.

A tough bit of Country.  The next day at noon finds me "tucked in my little bed" at Carter,
decidedly the worse for wear, having experienced the toughest twenty-four hours of the entire
journey.  I have to ford no less than nine streams of ice-cold water; get benighted on a rain-soaked
adobe plain, where I have to sleep out all night in an abandoned freight- wagon; and, after
carrying the bicycle across seven miles of deep, sticky clay, I finally arrive at Carter, looking
like the last sad remnant of a dire calamity - having had nothing to eat for twenty-four hours.
From Carter my route leads through the Bad-Lands, amid buttes of mingled clay and rock, which
the elements have worn into all conceivable shapes, and conspicuous among them can be seen,
to the south, "Church Buttes," so called from having been chiselled by the dexterous hand of
nature into a group of domes and pinnacles, that, from a distance, strikingly resembles some
magnificent cathedral.  High-water marks are observable on these buttes, showing that Noah's
flood, or some other aqueous calamity once happened around here; and one can easily imagine
droves of miserable, half-clad Indians, perched on top, looking with doleful, melancholy expression
on the surrounding wilderness of waters.  Arriving at Granger, for dinner, I find at the hotel
a crest-fallen state of affairs somewhat similar to the glumness of Tacoma.  Tacoma had plenty
of customers, but no whiskey; Granger on the contrary has plenty of whiskey, but no customers.
The effect on that marvellous, intangible something, the saloon proprietor's intellect, is
the same at both places.  Here is plainly a new field of research for some ambitious student
of psychology.  Whiskey without customers.  Customers without whiskey.  Truly all is vanity
and vexation of spirit.

Next day I pass the world-renowned castellated rocks of Green River, and stop for the night
at Rock Springs, where the Union Pacific Railway Company has extensive coal mines.  On calling
for my bill at the hotel here, next morning, the proprietor - a corpulent Teuton, whose thoughts,
words, and actions, run entirely to beer - replies, "Twenty-five cents a quart." Thinking my
hearing apparatus is at fault, I inquire again. "Twenty-five cents a quart and vurnish yer
own gan." The bill is abnormally large, but, as I hand over the amount, a "loaded schooner"
is shoved under my nose, as though a glass of beer were a tranquillizing antidote for all the
ills of life.  Splendid level alkali flats abound east of Rock Springs, and I bowl across them
at a lively pace until they terminate, and my route follows up Bitter Creek, where the surface
is just the reverse; being seamed and furrowed as if it had just emerged from a devastating
flood.  It is said that the teamster who successfully navigated the route up Bitter Creek,
considered himself entitled to be called "a tough cuss from Bitter Creek, on wheels, with a
perfect education." A justifiable regard for individual rights would seem to favor my own assumption
of this distinguished title after traversing the route with a bicycle.  Ten o'clock next morning
finds me leaning on my wheel, surveying the scenery from the "Continental Divide" - the backbone
of the continent. Pacing the north, all waters at my right hand flow to the east, and all on
my left flow to the west - the one eventually finding their way to the Atlantic, the other
to the Pacific.  This spot is a broad low pass through the Rockies, more plain than mountain,
but from which a most commanding view of numerous mountain chains are obtained.  To the north
and northwest are the Seminole, Wind River, and Sweet-water ranges - bold, rugged mountain-
chains, filling the landscape of the distant north with a mass of great, jagged, rocky piles,
grand beyond conception; their many snowy peaks peopling the blue ethery space above with ghostly,
spectral forms well calculated to inspire with feelings of awe and admiration a lone cycler,
who, standing in silence and solitude profound on the great Continental Divide, looks and meditates
on what he sees.  Other hoary monarchs are visible to the east, which, however, we shall get
acquainted with later on.  Down grade is the rule now, and were there a good road, what an
enjoyable coast it would be, down from the Continental Divide! but half of it has to be walked.
About eighteen miles from the divide I am greatly amused, and not a little astonished, at the
strange actions of a coyote that comes trotting in a leisurely, confidential way toward me;
and when he reaches a spot commanding a good view of my road he stops and watches my movements
with an air of the greatest inquisitiveness and assurance. He stands and gazes as I trundle
along, not over fifty yards away, and he looks so much like a well-fed collie, that I actually
feel like patting my knee for him to come and make friends.  Shoot at him .  Certainly not.
One never abuses a confidence like that.  He can come and rub his sleek coat up against the
bicycle if he likes, and - blood-thirsty rascal though he no doubt is - I will never fire at
him.  He has as much right to gaze in astonishment at a bicycle as anybody else who never saw
one before.

Staying over night and the next day at Rawlins, I make the sixteen miles to Port Fred Steele
next morning before breakfast, there bein" a very good road between the two places.  This fort
stands on the west bank of North Platte River, and a few miles west of the river I ride through
the first prairie dog town encountered in crossing the continent from the west, though I shall
see plenty of these interesting little fellows during the next three hundred miles.  These
animals sit near their holes and excitedly bark at whatever goes past.  Never before have they
had an opportunity to bark at a bicycle, and they seem to be making the most of their opportunity.
I see at this village none of the small speckled owls, which, with the rattlesnake, make themselves
so much at home in the prairie-dogs' comfortable quarters, but I see them farther east. These
three strangely assorted companions may have warm affections toward each other; but one is
inclined to think the great bond of sympathy that binds them together is the tender regard
entertained by the owl and the rattlesnake for the nice, tender young prairie-pups that appear
at intervals to increase the joys and cares of the elder animals.

I am now getting on to the famous Laramie Plains, and Elk Mountain looms up not over ten miles
to the south - a solid, towery mass of black rocks and dark pine forests, that stands out bold
and distinct from surrounding mountain chains as though some animate thing conscious of its
own strength and superiority.  A snow-storm is raging on its upper slopes, obscuring that portion
of the mountain; but the dark forest-clad slopes near the base are in plain view, and also
the rugged peak which elevates its white crowned head above the storm, and reposes peacefully
in the bright sunlight in striking contrast to the warring elements lower down.  I have heard
old hunters assert that this famous "landmark of the Rockies" is hollow, and that they have
heard wolves howling inside the mountain; but some of these old western hunters see and hear
strange things!

As I penetrate the Laramie Plains the persistent sage-brush, that has constantly hovered around
my path for the last thousand miles, grows beautifully less, and the short, nutritious buffalo-grass
is creeping everywhere.  In Carbon, where I arrive after dark, I mention among other things
in reply to the usual volley of questions, the fact of having to foot it so great a proportion
of the way through the mountain country; and shortly afterward, from among a group of men,
I hear a voice, thick and husky with "valley tan," remark: " Faith, Oi cud roide a bicycle
meself across the counthry av yeez ud lit me walluk it afut!" and straightway a luminous bunch
of shamrocks dangled for a brief moment in the air, and then vanished.  After passing Medicine
Bow Valley and Como Lake I find some good ridable road, the surface being hard gravel and the
plains high and dry.  Reaching the brow of one of those rocky ridges that hereabouts divide
the plains into so many shallow basins, I find myself suddenly within a few paces of a small
herd of antelope peacefully grazing on the other side of the narrow ridge, all unconscious
of the presence of one of creation's alleged proud lords.  My ever-handy revolver rings out
clear and sharp on the mountain air, and the startled antelope go bounding across the plain
in a succession of quick, jerky jumps peculiar to that nimble animal; but ere they have travelled
a hundred yards one of them lags behind and finally staggers and lays down on the grass.  As
I approach him he makes a gallant struggle to rise and make off after his companions, but the
effort is too much for him, and coming up to him, I quickly put him out of pain by a shot behind
the ear.  This makes a proud addition to my hitherto rather small list of game, which now comprises
jack-rabbits, a badger, a fierce gosling, an antelope, and a thin, attenuated coyote, that
I bowled over in Utah.

>From this ridge an extensive view of the broad, billowy plains and surrounding mountains is
obtained.  Elk Mountain still seems close at hand, its towering form marking the western limits
of the Medicine Bow Range whose dark pine-clad slopes form the western border of the plains.
Back of them to the west is the Snowy Range, towering in ghostly grandeur as far above the
timber-clad summits of the Medicine Bow Range as these latter are above the grassy plains at
their base.  To the south more snowy mountains stand out against the sky like white tracery
on a blue ground, with Long's Peak and Fremont's Peak towering head and shoulders above them
all.  The Rattlesnake Range, with Laramie Peak rearing its ten thousand feet of rugged grandeur
to the clouds, are visible to the north. On the east is the Black Hills Range, the last chain
of the Rockies, and now the only barrier intervening between me and the broad prairies that
roll away eastward to the Missouri River and "the States."

A genuine Laramie Plains rain-storm is hovering overhead as I pull out of Rock Creek, after
dinner, and in a little while the performance begins. There is nothing of the gentle pattering
shower about a rain and wind storm on these elevated plains; it comes on with a blow and a
bluster that threatens to take one off his feet.  The rain is dashed about in the air by the
wild, blustering wind, and comes from all directions at the same time.  While you are frantically
hanging on to your hat, the wind playfully unbuttons your rubber coat and lifts it up over
your head and flaps the wet, muddy corners about in your face and eyes; and, ere you can disentangle
your features from the cold uncomfortable embrace of the wet mackintosh, the rain - which "falls"
upward as well as down, and sidewise, and every other way-has wet you through up as high as
the armpits; and then the gentle zephyrs complete your discomfiture by purloining your hat
and making off across the sodden plain with it, at a pace that defies pursuit.  The storm winds
up in a pelting shower of hailstones - round chunks of ice that cause me to wince whenever
one makes a square hit, and they strike the steel spokes of the bicycle and make them produce
harmonious sounds.  Trundling through Cooper Lake Basin, after dark, I get occasional glimpses
of mysterious shadowy objects flitting hither and thither through the dusky pall around me.
The basin is full of antelope, and my presence here in the darkness fills them with consternation;
their keen scent and instinctive knowledge of a strange presence warn them of my proximity;
and as they cannot see me in the darkness they are flitting about in wild alarm.  Stopping
for the night at Lookout, I make an early start, in order to reach Laramie City for dinner.
These Laramie Plains "can smile and look pretty" when they choose, and, as I bowl along over
a fairly good road this sunny Sunday morning, they certainly choose.  The Laramie River on
my left, the Medicine Bow and Snowy ranges - black and white respectively - towering aloft
to the right, and the intervening plains dotted with herds of antelope, complete a picture
that can be seen nowhere save on the Laramie Plains.  Reaching a swell of the plains, that
almost rises to the dignity of a hill, I can see the nickel-plated wheels of the Laramie wheelmen
glistening in the sunlight on the opposite side of the river several miles from where I stand.
They have come out a few miles to meet me, but have taken the wrong side of the river, thinking
I had crossed below Rock Creek.  The members of the Laramie Bicycle Club are the first wheelmen
I have seen since leaving California; and, as I am personally acquainted at Laramie, it is
needless to dwell on my reception at their hands.  The rambles of the Laramie Club are well
known to the cycling world from the many interesting letters from the graphic pen of their
captain, Mr. Owen, who, with two other members, once took a tour on their wheels to the Yellowstone
National Park.  They have some very good natural roads around Laramie, but in their rambles
over the mountains these "rough riders of the Rockies" necessarily take risks that are unknown
to their fraternal brethren farther east.

Tuesday morning I pull out to scale the last range that separates me from "the plains" - popularly
known as such - and, upon arriving at the summit, I pause to take a farewell view of the great
and wonderful inter- mountain country, across whose mountains, plains, and deserts I have been
travelling in so novel a manner for the last month.  The view from where I stand is magnificent
- ay, sublime beyond human power to describe - and well calculated to make an indelible impression
on the mind of one gazing upon it, perhaps for the last time.  The Laramie Plains extend northward
and westward, like a billowy green sea.  Emerging from a black canon behind Jelm Mountain,
the Laramie River winds its serpentine course in a northeast direction until lost to view behind
the abutting mountains of the range, on which I now stand, receiving tribute in its course
from the Little Laramie and numbers of smaller streams that emerge from the mountainous bulwarks
forming the western border of the marvellous picture now before me.  The unusual rains have
filled the numberless depressions of the plains with ponds and lakelets that in their green
setting glisten and glimmer in the bright morning sunshine like gems.  A train is coming from
the west, winding around among them as if searching out the most beautiful, and finally halts
at Laramie City, which nestles in their midst - the fairest gem of them all - the "Gem of the
Rockies." Sheep Mountain, the embodiment of all that is massive and indestructible, juts boldly
and defiantly forward as though its mission were to stand guard over all that lies to the west.
The Medicine Bow Eange is now seen to greater advantage, and a bald mountain-top here and there
protrudes above the dark forests, timidly, as if ashamed of its nakedness.  Our old friend,
Elk Mountain, is still in view, a stately and magnificent pile, serving as a land-mark for
a hundred miles around.  Beyond all this, to the west and south - a good hundred miles away
- are the snowy ranges; their hoary peaks of glistening purity penetrating the vast blue dome
above, like monarchs in royal vestments robed.  Still others are seen, white and shadowy, stretching
away down into Colorado, peak beyond peak, ridge beyond ridge, until lost in the impenetrable
distance.

As I lean on my bicycle on this mountain-top, drinking in the glorious scene, and inhaling
the ozone-laden air, looking through the loop-holes of recent experiences in crossing the great
wonderland to the west; its strange intermingling of forest-clad hills and grassy valleys;
its barren, rocky mountains and dreary, desolate plains; its vast, snowy solitudes and its
sunny, sylvan nooks; the no less strange intermingling of people; the wandering red-skin with
his pathetic history; the feverishly hopeful prospector, toiling and searching for precious
metals locked in the eternal hills; and the wild and free cow-boy who, mounted on his wiry
bronco, roams these plains and mountains, free as the Arab of the desert - I heave a sigh as
I realize that no tongue or pen of mine can hope to do the subject justice.

My road is now over Cheyenne Pass, and from this point is mostly down-grade to Cheyenne.  Soon
I come to a naturally smooth granite surface which extends for twelve miles, where I have to
keep the brake set most of the distance, and the constant friction heats the brake-spoon and
scorches the rubber tire black.  To-night I reach Cheyenne, where I find a bicycle club of
twenty members, and where the fame of my journey from San Francisco draws such a crowd on the
corner where I alight, that a blue-coated guardian of the city's sidewalks requests me to saunter
on over to the hotel.  Do I.  Yes, I saunter over.  The Cheyenne "cops" are bold, bad men to
trifle with.  They have to be "bold, bad men to trifle with," or the wild, wicked cow-boys
would come in and "paint the city red " altogether too frequently.  It is the morning of June
4th as I bid farewell to the "Magic City," and, turning my back to the mountains, ride away
over very fair roads toward the rising sun.  I am not long out before meeting with that characteristic
feature of a scene on the Western plains, a "prairie schooner;" and meeting prairie schooners
will now be a daily incident of my eastward journey.  Many of these "pilgrims" come from the
backwoods of Missouri and Arkansas, or the rural districts of some other Western State, where
the persevering, but at present circumscribed, cycler has not yet had time to penetrate, and
the bicycle is therefore to them a wonder to be gazed at and commented on, generally - it must
be admitted - in language more fluent as to words than in knowledge of the subject discussed.
Not far from where the trail leads out of Crow Creek bottom on to the higher table-land, I
find the grassy plain smoother than the wagon-trail, and bowl along for a short distance as
easily as one could wish.  But not for long is this permitted; the ground becomes covered with
a carpeting of small, loose cacti that stick to the rubber tire with the clinging tenacity
of a cuckle-burr to a mule's tail.  Of course they scrape off again as they come round to the
bridge of the fork, but it isn't the tire picking them up that fills me with lynx-eyed vigilance
and alarm; it is the dreaded possibility of taking a header among these awful vegetables that
unnerves one, starts the cold chills chasing each other up and down my spinal column, and causes
staring big beads of perspiration to ooze out of my forehead.  No more appalling physical calamity
on a small scale could befall a person than to take a header on to a cactus-covered greensward;
millions of miniature needles would fill his tender hide with prickly sensations, and his vision
with floating stars.  It would perchance cast clouds of gloom over his whole life. Henceforth
he would be a solemn-visaged, bilious-eyed needle-cushion among men, and would never smile
again.  I once knew a young man named Whipple, who sat down on a bunch of these cacti at a
picnic in Virginia Dale, Wyo., and he never smiled again.  Two meek-eyed maidens of the Rockies
invited him to come and take a seat between them on a thin, innocuous-looking layer of hay.
Smilingly poor, unsuspecting Whipple accepted the invitation; jokingly he suggested that it
would be a rose between two thorns.  But immediately he sat down he became convinced that it
was the liveliest thorn - or rather millions of thorns - between two roses.  Of course the
two meek-eyed maidens didn't know it was there, how should they.  But, all the same, he never
smiled again - not on them.

At the section-house, where I call for dinner, I make the mistake of leaving the bicycle behind
the house, and the woman takes me for an uncommercial traveller - yes, a tramp.  She snaps
out, "We can't feed everybody that comes along," and shuts the door in my face.  Yesterday
I was the centre of admiring crowds in the richest city of its size in America; to-day I am
mistaken for a hungry-eyed tramp, and spurned from the door by a woman with a faded calico
dress and a wrathy what - are? look in her eye.  Such is life in the Far West.

Gradually the Rockies have receded from my range of vision, and I am alone on the boundless
prairie.  There is a feeling of utter isolation at finding one's self alone on the plains that
is not experienced in the mountain country.  There is something tangible and companionable
about a mountain; but here, where there is no object in view anywhere - nothing but the boundless,
level plains, stretching away on every hand as far as the eye can reach, I and all around,
whichever way one looks, nothing but the green carpet below and the cerulean arch above-one
feels that he is the sole occupant of a vast region of otherwise unoccupied space. This evening,
while fording Pole Creek with the bicycle, my clothes, and shoes - all at the same time - the
latter fall in the river; and m my wild scramble after the shoes I drop some of the clothes;
then I drop the machine in my effort to save the clothes, and wind up by falling down in the
water with everything.  Everything is fished out again all right, but a sad change has come
over the clothes and shoes.  This morning I was mistaken for a homeless, friendless wanderer;
this evening as I stand on the bank of Pole Creek with nothing over me but a thin mantle of
native modesty, and ruefully wring the water out of my clothes, I feel considerably like one.
Pine Bluffs provides me with shelter for the night, and a few miles' travel next morning takes
me across the boundary-line into Nebraska My route leads down Pole Creek, with ridable roads
probably half the distance, and low, rocky bluffs lining both sides of the narrow valley, and
leading up to high, rolling prairie beyond.  Over these rocky bluffs the Indians were wont
to stampede herds of buffalo, which falling over the precipitous bluffs, would be killed by
hundreds, thus procuring an abundance of beef for the long winter.  There are no buffalo here
now - they have departed with the Indians - and I shall never have a chance to add a bison
to my game-list on this tour.  But they have left plenty of tangible evidence behind, in the
shape of numerous deeply worn trails leading from the bluffs to the creek.

The prairie hereabouts is spangled with a wealth of divers-colored flowers that fill the morning
air with gratifying perfume.  The air is soft and balmy, in striking contrast to the chilly
atmosphere of early morning in the mountain country, where the accumulated snows of a thousand
winters exert their chilling influence in opposition to the benign rays of old Sol.  This evening
I pass through "Prairie-dog City," the largest congregation of prairie-dog dwellings met with
on the tour.  The "city" covers hundreds of acres of ground, and the dogs come out in such
multitudes to present their noisy and excitable protests against my intrusion, that I consider
myself quite justified in shooting at them. I hit one old fellow fair and square, but he disappears
like a flash down his hole, which now becomes his grave.  The lightning-like movements of the
prairie-dog, and his instinctive inclination toward his home, combine to perform the last sad
rites of burial for his body at death. As, toward dark, I near Potter Station, where I expect
accommodation for the night, a storm comes howling from the west, and it soon resolves into
a race between me and the storm.  With a good ridable road I could win the race; but, being
handicapped with an unridable trail, nearly obscured beneath tall, rank grass, the storm overtakes
me, and comes in at Potter Station a winner by about three hundred lengths.

In the morning I start out in good season, and, nearing Sidney, the road becomes better, and
I sweep into that enterprising town at a becoming pace.  I conclude to remain at Sidney for
dinner, and pass the remainder of the forenoon visiting the neighboring fort.

CHAPTER IV.

FROM THE GREAT PLAINS TO THE ATLANTIC.

Through the courtesy of the commanding officer at Fort Sidney I am enabled to resume my journey
eastward under the grateful shade of a military summer helmet in lieu of the semi-sombrero
slouch that has lasted me through from San Francisco.  Certainly it is not without feelings
of compunction that one discards an old friend, that has gallantly stood by me through thick
and thin throughout the eventful journey across the inter-mountain country; but the white helmet
gives such a delightfully imposing air to my otherwise forlorn and woebegone figure that I
ride out of Sidney feeling quite vain.  The first thing done is to fill a poor yellow-spotted
snake - whose head is boring in the sand - with lively surprise, by riding over his mottled
carcass; and only the fact of the tire being rubber, and not steel, enables him to escape unscathed.
This same evening, while halting for the night at Lodge Pole Station, the opportunity of observing
the awe-inspiring aspect of a great thunder-storm on the plains presents itself.  With absolutely
nothing to obstruct the. vision the Alpha and Omega of the whole spectacle are plainly observable.
The gradual mustering of the forces is near the Rockies to the westward, then the skirmish-line
of fleecy cloudlets comes rolling and tumbling in advance, bringing a current of air that causes
the ponderous wind-mill at the railway tank to "about face" sharply, and sets its giant arms
to whirling vigorously around.  Behind comes the compact, inky veil that spreads itself over
the whole blue canopy above, seemingly banishing all hope of the future; and athwart its Cimmerian
surface shoot zigzag streaks of lightning, accompanied by heavy, muttering thunder that rolls
and reverberates over the boundless plains seemingly conscious of the spaciousness of its play-ground.
Broad sheets of electric flame play along the ground, filling the air with a strange, unnatural
light; heavy, pattering raindrops begin to fall, and, ten minutes after, a pelting, pitiless
down-pour is drenching the sod-cabin of the lonely rancher, and, for the time being, converting
the level plain into a shallow lake. A fleet of prairie schooners is anchored in the South
Platte bottom, waiting for it to dry up, as I trundle down that stream - every mile made interesting
by reminiscences of Indian fights and massacres - next day, toward Ogallala; and one of the
"Pilgrims" looks wise as I approach, and propounds the query, "Does it hev ter git very muddy
afore yer kin ride yer verlocify, mister?" "Ya-as, purty dog-goned muddy," I drawl out in reply;
for, although comprehending his meaning, I don't care to venture into an explanatory lecture
of uncertain length.  Seven weeks' travel through bicycleless territory would undoubtedly convert
an angel into a hardened prevaricator, so far as answering questions is concerned. This afternoon
is passed the first homestead, as distinguished from a ranch-consisting of a small tent pitched
near a few acres of newly upturned prairie - in the picket-line of the great agricultural empire
that is gradually creeping westward over the plains, crowding the autocratic cattle-kings and
their herds farther west,. even as the Indians and their still greater herds - buffaloes -
have been crowded out by the latter.  At Ogallala--which but a few years ago was par excellence
the cow-boys' rallying point - "homesteads," "timber claims," and "pre-emption" now form the
all-absorbing topic.  "The Platte's 'petered' since the hoosiers have begun to settle it up,"
deprecatingly reflects a bronzed cow-boy at the hotel supper-table; and, from his standpoint,
he is correct.  Passing the next night in the dug-out of a homesteader, in the forks of the
North and South Platte, I pass in the morning Buffalo Bill's home ranch (the place where a
ranch proprietor himself resides is denominated the "home ranch" as distinctive from a ranch
presided over by employes only), the house and improvements of which are said to be the finest
in Western Nebraska.  Taking dinner at North Platte City, I cross over a substantial wagon-bridge,
spanning the turgid yellow stream just below where the north and south branches fork, and proceed
eastward as " the Platte " simply, reaching Brady Island for the night.  Here I encounter extraordinary
difficulties in getting supper.  Four families, representing the Union Pacific force at this
place, all living in separate houses, constitute the population of Brady Island.  "All our
folks are just recovering from the scarlet fever," is the reply to my first application; "Muvver's
down to ve darden on ve island, and we ain't dot no bread baked," says a barefooted youth at
house No. 2; "Me ould ooman's across ter the naybur's, 'n' there ain't a boite av grub cooked
in the shanty," answers the proprietor of No. 3, seated on the threshold, puffing vigorously
at the traditional short clay; "We all to Nord Blatte been to veesit, und shust back ter home
got mit notings gooked," winds up the gloomy programme at No. 4.  I am hesitating about whether
to crawl in somewhere, supperless, for the night, or push on farther through the darkness,
when, "I don't care, pa! it's a shame for a stranger to come here where there are four families
and have to go without supper," greet my ears in a musical, tremulous voice.  It is the convalescent
daughter of house No. 1, valiantly championing my cause; and so well does she succeed that
her "pa" comes out, and notwithstanding my protests, insists on setting out the best they have
cooked.  Homesteads now become more frequent, groves of young cottonwoods, representing timber
claims, are occasionally encountered, and section-house accommodation becomes a thing of the past.

Near Willow Island I come within a trifle of stepping on a belligerent rattlesnake, and in
a moment his deadly fangs are hooked to one of the thick canvas gaiters I am wearing.  Were
my exquisitely outlined calves encased in cycling stockings only, I should have had a "heap
sick foot" to amuse myself with for the next three weeks, though there is little danger of
being "snuffed out" entirely by a rattlesnake favor these days; an all-potent remedy is to
drink plenty of whiskey as quickly as possible after being bitten, and whiskey is one of the
easiest things to obtain in the West.  Giving his snakeship to understand that I don't appreciate
his ''good intentions " by vigorously shaking him off, I turn my "barker "loose on him, and
quickly convert him into a "goody-good snake; " for if "the only good Indian is a dead one,"
surely the same terse remark applies with much greater force to the vicious and deadly rattler.
As I progress eastward, sod-houses and dug-outs become less frequent, and at long intervals
frame school-houses appear to remind me that I am passing through a civilized country.  Stretches
of sand alternate with ridable roads all down the Platte.  Often I have to ticklishly wobble
along a narrow space between two yawning ruts, over ground that is anything but smooth.  I
consider it a lucky day that passes without adding one or more to my long and eventful list
of headers, and to-day I am fairly "unhorsed" by a squall of wind that-taking me unawares-blows
me and the bicycle fairly over.

East of Plum Creek a greater proportion of ridable road is encountered, but they still continue
to be nothing more than well-worn wagon-trails across the prairie, and when teams are met en
route westward one has to give and the other take, in order to pass.  It is doubtless owing
to misunderstanding a cycler's capacities, rather than ill-nature, that makes these Western
teamsters oblivious to the precept, "It is better to give than to receive;" and if ignorance
is bliss, an outfit I meet to-day ought to comprise the happiest mortals in existence.  Near
Elm Creek I meet a train of "schooners," whose drivers fail to recognize my right to one of
the two wheel-tracks; and in my endeavor to ride past them on the uneven greensward, I am rewarded
by an inglorious header.  A dozen freckled Arkansawish faces are watching my movements with
undisguised astonishment; and when my crest - alien self is spread out on the prairie, these
faces - one and all - resolve into expansive grins, and a squeaking female voice from out nearest
wagon, pipes: "La me! that's a right smart chance of a travelling machine, but, if that's the
way they stop 'em, I wonder they don't break every blessed bone in their body." But all sorts
of people are mingled promiscuously here, for, soon after this incident, two young men come
running across the prairie from a semi-dug-out, who prove to be college graduates from "the
Hub," who are rooting prairie here in Nebraska, preferring the free, independent life of a
Western farmer to the restraints of a position at an Eastern desk.  They are more conversant
with cycling affairs than myself, and, having heard of my tour, have been on the lookout, expecting
I would pass this way.  At Kearney Junction the roads are excellent, and everything is satisfactory;
but an hour's ride east of that city I am shocked at the gross misconduct of a vigorous and
vociferous young mule who is confined alone in a pasture, presumably to be weaned.  He evidently
mistakes the picturesque combination of man and machine for his mother, as, on seeing us approach,
he assumes a thirsty, anxious expression, raises his unmusical, undignified voice, and endeavors
to jump the fence.  He follows along the whole length of the pasture, and when he gets to the
end, and realizes that I am drawing away from him, perhaps forever, he bawls out in an agony
of grief and anxiety, and, recklessly bursting through the fence, comes tearing down the road,
filling the air with the unmelodious notes of his soul- harrowing music.  The road is excellent
for a piece, and I lead him a lively chase, but he finally overtakes me, and, when I slow up,
he jogs along behind quite contentedly.  East of Kearney the sod-houses disappear entirely,
and the improvements are of a more substantial character.  At "Wood River I "make my bow" to
the first growth of natural timber since leaving the mountains, which indicates my gradual
advance off the vast timberless plains.  Passing through Grand Island, Central City, and other
towns, I find myself anchored Saturday evening, June 14th, at Duncan - a settlement of Polackers
- an honest-hearted set of folks, who seem to thoroughly understand a cycler's digestive capacity,
though understanding nothing whatever about the uses of the machine.  Resuming my journey next
morning, I find the roads fair.  After crossing the Loup River, and passing through Columbus,
I reach-about 11 A.M.- a country school-house, with a gathering of farmers hanging around outside,
awaiting the arrival of the parson to open the meeting.  Alighting, I am engaged in answering
forty questions or thereabouts to the minute when that pious individual canters up, and, dismounting
from his nag, comes forward and joins in the conversation.  He invites me to stop over and
hear the sermon; and when I beg to be excused because desirous of pushing ahead while the weather
is favorable His Reverence solemnly warns me against desecrating the Sabbath by going farther
than the prescribed "Sabbath-day's journey."

At Premont I bid farewell to the Platte - which turns south and joins the Missouri River at
Plattsmouth - and follow the old military road through the Elkhorn Valley to Omaha.  "Military
road" sounds like music in a cycler's ear - suggestive of a well-kept and well-graded highway;
but this particular military road between Fremont and Omaha fails to awaken any blithesome
sensations to-day, for it is almost one continuous mud-hole. It is called a military road simply
from being the route formerly traversed by troops and supply trains bound for the Western forts.
Besting a day in Omaha, I obtain a permit to trundle my wheel across the Union Pacific Bridge
that spans the Missouri River - the "Big Muddy," toward which I have been travelling so long
- between Omaha and Council Bluffs; I bid farewell to Nebraska, and cross over to Iowa.  Heretofore
I have omitted mentioning the tremendously hot weather I have encountered lately, because of
my inability to produce legally tangible evidence; but to-day, while eating dinner at a farm-house,
I leave the bicycle standing against the fence, and old Sol ruthlessly unsticks the tire, so
that, when I mount, it comes off, and gives me a gymnastic lesson all unnecessary.  My first
day's experience in the great "Hawkeye State" speaks volumes for the hospitality of the people,
there being quite a rivalry between two neighboring farmers about which should take me in to
dinner.  A compromise is finally made, by which I am to eat dinner at one place, and be "turned
loose" in a cherry orchard afterward at the other, to which happy arrangement I, of course,
enter no objections.  In striking contrast to these friendly advances is my own unpardonable
conduct the same evening in conversation with an honest old farmer.

"I see you are taking notes.  I suppose you keep track of the crops as you travel along?" says
the H.  O.  F.  "Certainly, I take more notice of the crops than anything; I'm a natural born
agriculturist myself." "Well," continues the farmer, "right here where we stand is Carson Township."
"Ah! indeed.  Is it possible that I have at last arrived at Carson Township." "You have heard
of the township before, then, eh." "Heard of it! why, man alive, Carson Township is all the
talk out in the Rockies; in fact, it is known all over the world as the finest Township for
corn in Iowa." This sort of conduct is, I admit, unwarrantable in the extreme; but cycling
is responsible for it all.  If continuous cycling is productive of a superfluity of exhilaration,
and said exhilaration bubbles over occasionally, plainly the bicycle is to blame.  So forcibly
does this latter fact intrude upon me as I shake hands with the farmer, and congratulate him
on his rare good fortune in belonging to Carson Township that I mount, and with a view of taking
a little of the shine out of it, ride down the long, steep hill leading to the bridge across
the Nishnebotene River at a tremendous pace.  The machine "kicks" against this treatment, however,
and, when about half wray down, it strikes a hole and sends me spinning and gyrating through
space; and when I finally strike terra firma, it thumps me unmercifully in the ribs ere it
lets me up.  "Variable" is the word descriptive of the Iowa roads; for seventy-five miles due
east of Omaha the prairie rolls like a heavy Atlantic swell, and during a day's journey I pass
through a dozen alternate stretches of muddy and dusky road; for like a huge watering-pot do
the rain-clouds pass to and fro over this great garden of the West, that is practically one
continuous fertile farm from the Missouri to the Mississippi.  Passing through Des Moines on
the 23d, muddy roads and hot, thunder-showery weather characterize my journey through Central
Iowa, aggravated by the inevitable question, "Why don't you ride?" one Solomon-visaged individual
asking me if the railway company wouldn't permit me to ride along one of the rails.  No base,
unworthy suspicions of a cycler's inability to ride on a two-inch rail finds lodgement in the
mind of this wiseacre; but his compassionate heart is moved with tender solicitude as to whether
the soulless "company" will, or will not, permit it.  Hurrying timorously through Grinnell
- the city that was badly demolished and scattered all over the surrounding country by a cyclone
in 1882 - I pause at Victor, where I find the inhabitants highly elated over the prospect of
building a new jail with the fines nightly inflicted on graders employed on a new railroad
near by, who come to town and "hilare" every evening.  " What kind of a place do you call this."
I inquire, on arriving at a queer-looking town twenty-five miles west of Iowa City.

"This is South Amana, one of the towns of the Amana Society," is the civil reply.  The Amana
Society is found upon inquiry to be a communism of Germans, numbering 15,000 souls, and owning
50,000 acres of choice land in a body, with woollen factories, four small towns, and the best
of credit everywhere.  Everything is common property, and upon withdrawal or expulsion, a member
takes with him only the value of what he brought in.  The domestic relations are as usual;
and while no person of ambition would be content with the conditions of life here, the slow,
ease-loving, methodical people composing the society seem well satisfied with their lot, and
are, perhaps, happier, on the whole, than the average outsider. I remain here for dinner, and
take a look around.  The people, the buildings, the language, the food, everything, is precisely
as if it had been picked up bodily in some rural district in Germany, and set down unaltered
here in Iowa.  "Wie gehts," I venture, as I wheel past a couple of plump, rosy-cheeked maidens,
in the quaint, old-fashioned garb of the German peasantry.  "Wie gehts," is the demure reply
from them, both at once; but not the shadow of a dimple responds to my unhappy attempt to win
from them a smile.  Pretty but not coquettish are these communistic maidens of Amana.  At Tiffin,
the stilly air of night, is made joyous with the mellifluous voices of whip-poor-wills-the
first I have heard on the tour-and their tuneful concert is impressed on my memory in happy
contrast to certain other concerts, both vocal and instrumental, endured en route. Passing
through Iowa City, crossing Cedar River at Moscow, nine days after crossing the Missouri, I
hear the distant whistle of a Mississippi steamboat.  Its hoarse voice is sweetest music to
me, heralding the fact that two-thirds of my long tour across the continent is completed. Crossing
the "Father of Waters" over the splendid government bridge between Davenport and Rock Island,
I pass over into Illinois.  For several miles my route leads up the Mississippi River bottom,
over sandy roads; but nearing Rock River, the sand disappears, and, for some distance, an excellent
road winds through the oak-groves lining this beautiful stream. The green woods are free from
underbrush, and a cool undercurrent of air plays amid the leafy shades, which, if not ambrosial,
are none the less grateful, as it registers over 100° in the sun; without, the silvery sheen
of the river glimmers through the interspaces; the dulcet notes of church-bells come floating
on the breeze from over the river, seeming to proclaim, with their melodious tongues, peace
and good-will to all. Eock River, with its 300 yards in width of unbridged waters, now obstructs
my path, and the ferryboat is tied up on the other shore.  "Whoop-ee," I yell at the ferryman's
hut opposite, but without receiving any response. "Wh-o-o-p-e-ee," I repeat in a gentle, civilized
voice-learned, by the by, two years ago on the Crow reservation in Montana, and which sets
the surrounding atmosphere in a whirl and drowns out the music of the church- bells it has
no effect whatever on the case-hardened ferryman in the hut; he pays no heed whatever until
my persuasive voice is augmented by the voices of two new arrivals in a buggy, when he sallies
serenely forth and slowly ferries us across.  Riding along rather indifferent roads, between
farms worth $100 an acre, through the handsome town of Genesee, stopping over night at Atkinson,
I resume my journey next morning through a country abounding in all that goes to make people
prosperous, if not happy.  Pretty names are given to places hereabouts, for on my left I pass
"Pink Prairie, bordered with Green River." Crossing over into Bureau County, I find splendid
gravelled roads, and spend a most agreeable hour with the jolly Bicycle Club, of Princeton,
the handsome county seat of Bureau County, Pushing on to Lamoille for the night, the enterprising
village barber there hustles me into his cosey shop, and shaves, shampoos, shingles, bay-rums,
and otherwise manipulates me, to the great enhancement of my personal appearance, all, so he
says, for the honor of having lathered the chin of the "great and only--" In fact, the Illinoisians
seem to be most excellent folks.  After three days' journey through the great Prairie State
my head is fairly turned with kindness and flattery; but the third night, as if to rebuke my
vanity, I am bluntly refused shelter at three different farm-houses.  I am benighted, and conclude
to make the best of it by "turning in" under a hay-cock; but the Fox River mosquitoes oust
me in short order, and compel me to "mosey along" through the gloomy night to Yorkville.  At
Yorkville a stout German, on being informed that I am going to ride to Chicago, replies, "What.
Ghigago mit dot.  Why, mine dear Yellow, Ghi-gago's more as vorty miles; you gan't ride mit
dot to Ghigago;" and the old fellow's eyes fairly bulge with astonishment at the bare idea
of riding forty miles "mit dot." I considerately refrain from telling him of my already 2,500-mile
jaunt "mit dot," lest an apoplectic fit should waft his Teutonic soul to realms of sauer-kraut
bliss and Limburger happiness forever.  On the morning of July 4th I roll into Chicago, where,
having persuaded myself that I deserve a few days' rest, I remain till the Democratic Convention
winds up on the 13th.

Fifteen miles of good riding and three of tough trundling, through deep sand, brings me into
Indiana, which for the first thirty-five miles around the southern shore of Lake Michigan is
"simply and solely sand." Finding it next to impossible to traverse the wagon-roads, I trundle
around the water's edge, where the sand is firmer because wet.  After twenty miles of this
I have to shoulder the bicycle and scale the huge sand-dunes that border the lake here, and
after wandering for an hour through a bewildering wilderness of swamps, sand-hills, and hickory
thickets, I finally reach Miller Station for the night.  This place is enough to give one the
yellow-edged blues: nothing but swamps, sand, sad-eyed turtles, and ruthless, relentless mosquitoes.
At Chesterton the roads improve, but still enough sand remains to break the force of headers,
which, notwithstanding my long experience on the road, I still manage to execute with undesirable
frequency.  To-day I take one, and while unravelling myself and congratulating my lucky stars
at being in a lonely spot where none can witness my discomfiture, a gruff, sarcastic "haw-haw"
falls like a funeral knell on my ear, and a lanky "Hoosier" rides up on a diminutive pumpkin-colored
mule that looks a veritable pygmy between his hoop-pole legs.  It is but justice to explain
that this latter incident did not occur in "Posey County."

At La Porte the roads improve for some distance, but once again I am benighted, and sleep under
a wheat-shock.  Traversing several miles of corduroy road, through huckleberry swamps, next
morning, I reach Cram's Point for breakfast.  A remnant of some Indian tribe still lingers
around here and gathers huckleberries for the market, two squaws being in the village purchasing
supplies for their camp in the swamps.  "What's the name of these Indians here?" I ask..  "One
of em's Blinkie, and t'other's Seven-up," is the reply, in a voice that implies such profound
knowledge of the subject that I forbear to investigate further.

Splendid gravel roads lead from Crum's Point to South Bend, and on through Mishawaka, alternating
with sandy stretches to Goshen, which town is said - by the Goshenites - to be the prettiest
in Indiana; but there seems to be considerable pride of locality in the great Hoosier State,
and I venture there are scores of "prettiest towns in Indiana." Nevertheless, Goshen is certainly
a very handsome place, with unusually broad, well-shaded streets; the centre of a magnificent
farming country, it is romantically situated on the banks of the beautiful Elkhart Eiver. 
At "Wawaka I find a corpulent 300-pound cycler, who, being afraid to trust his jumbolean proportions
on an ordinary machine, has had an extra stout bone-shaker made to order, and goes out on short
runs with a couple of neighbor wheelmen, who, being about fifty per cent, less bulky, ride
regulation wheels.  "Jumbo" goes all right when mounted, but, being unable to mount without
aid, he seldom ventures abroad by himself for fear of having to foot it back.  Ninety-five
degrees in the shade characterizes the weather these days, and I generally make a few miles
in the gloaming - not, of course, because it is cooler, but because the "gloaming" is so delightfully
romantic.

At ten o'clock in the morning, July 17th, I bowl across the boundary line into Ohio.  Following
the Merchants' and Bankers' Telegraph road to Napoleon, I pass through a district where the
rain has overlooked them for two months; the rear wheel of the bicycle is half buried in hot
dust; the blackberries are dead on the bushes, and the long-suffering corn looks as though
afflicted with the yellow jaundice.  I sup this same evening with a family of Germans, who
have been settled here forty years, and scarcely know a word of English yet.  A fat, phlegmatic-looking
baby is peacefully reposing in a cradle, which is simply half a monster pumpkin scooped out
and dried; it is the most intensely rustic cradle in the world.  Surely, this youngster's head
ought to be level on agricultural affairs, when he grows up, if anybody's ought.  From Napoleon
my route leads up the Maumee River and canal, first trying the tow-path of the latter, and
then relinquishing it for the very fair wagon-road.  The Maumee River, winding through its
splendid rich valley, seems to possess a peculiar beauty all its own, and my mind, unbidden,
mentally compares it with our old friend, the Humboldt.  The latter stream traverses dreary
plains, where almost nothing but sagebrush grows; the Maumee waters a smiling valley, where
orchards, fields, and meadows alternate with sugar- maple groves, and in its fair bosom reflects
beautiful landscape views, that are changed and rebeautified by the master-hand of the sun
every hour of the day, and doubly embellished at night by the moon.  It is whispered that during
" the late unpleasantness " the Ohio regiments could out-yell the Louisiana tigers, or any
other Confederate troops, two to one.  Who has not heard the "Ohio yell?" Most people are magnanimously
inclined to regard this rumor as simply a "gag" on the Buckeye boys; but it isn't.  The Ohioans
are to the manner born; the "Buckeye yell" is a tangible fact.  All along the Maumee it resounds
in my ears; nearly every man or boy, who from the fields, far or near, sees me bowling along
the road, straightway delivers himself of a yell, pure and simple.  At Perrysburg, I strike
the famous "Maumee pike"-forty miles of stone road, almost a dead level.  The western half
is kept in rather poor repair these days; but from Fremont eastward it is splendid wheeling.
The atmosphere of Bellevue is blue with politics, and myself and another innocent, unsuspecting
individual, hailing from New York, are enticed into a political meeting by a wily politician,
and dexterously made to pose before the assembled company as two gentlemen who have come -
one from the Atlantic, the other from the Pacific - to witness the overwhelming success of
the only honest, horny-handed, double-breasted patriots - the... party.  The roads are found
rather sandy east of the pike, and the roadful of wagons going to the circus, which exhibits
to-day at Norwalk, causes considerable annoyance.

Erie County, through which I am now passing, is one of the finest fruit countries in the world,
and many of the farmers keep open orchard.  Staying at Eidgeville overnight, I roll into Cleveland,
and into the out-stretched arms of a policeman, at 10 o'clock, next morning.  "He was violating
the city ordinance by riding on the sidewalk," the arresting policeman informs the captain.
"Ah! he was, hey!" thunders the captain, in a hoarse, bass voice that causes my knees to knock
together with fear and trembling; and the captain's eye seems to look clear through my trembling
form. "P-l-e-a-s-e, s-i-r, I d-i-d-n't t-r-y t-o d-o i-t," I falter, in a weak, gasping voice
that brings tears to the eyes of the assembled officers and melts the captain's heart, so that
he is already wavering between justice and mercy when a local wheelman comes gallantly to the
rescue, and explains my natural ignorance of Cleveland's city laws, and I breathe the joyous
air of freedom once again.  Three members of the Cleveland Bicycle Club and a visiting wheelman
accompany me ten miles out, riding down far-famed Euclid Avenue, and calling at Lake View Cemetery
to pay a visit to Garfleld's tomb.  I bid them farewell at Euclid village. Following the ridge
road leading along the shore of Lake Erie to Buffalo, I ride through a most beautiful farming
country, passing through "Willoughby and Mentor-Garfield's old home.  Splendidly kept roads
pass between avenues of stately maples, that cast a grateful shade athwart the highway, both
sides of which are lined with magnificent farms, whose fields and meadows fairly groan beneath
their wealth of produce, whose fructiferous orchards arc marvels of productiveness, and whose
barns and stables would be veritable palaces to the sod-housed homesteaders on Nebraska's frontier
prairies.  Prominent among them stands the old Garfield homestead - a fine farm of one hundred
and sixty-five acres, at present managed by Mrs. Garfield's brother.  Smiling villages nestling
amid stately groves, rearing white church-spires from out their green, bowery surroundings,
dot the low, broad, fertile shore-land to the left; the gleaming waters of Lake Erie here and
there glisten like burnished steel through the distant interspaces, and away beyond stretches
northward, like a vast mirror, to kiss the blue Canadian skies.  Near Conneaut I whirl the
dust of the Buckeye State from my tire and cress over into Pennsylvania, where, from the little
hamlet of Springfield, the roads become good, then better, and finally best at Girard-the home
of the veteran showman, Dan Rice, the beautifying works of whose generous hand are everywhere
visible in his native town.  Splendid is the road and delightful the country coming east from
Girard; even the red brick school-houses are embowered amid leafy groves; and so it continues
with ever-varying, ever-pleasing beauty to Erie, after which the highway becomes hardly so good.

Twenty-four hours after entering Pennsylvania I make my exit across the boundary into the Empire
State.  The roads continue good, and after dinner I reach Westfield, six miles from the famous
Lake Chautauqua, which beautiful hill and forest embowered sheet of water is popularly believed
by many of its numerous local admirers to be the highest navigable lake in the world.  If so,
however, Lake Tahoe in the Sierra Nevada Mountains comes next, as it is about six thousand
feet above the level of the sea, and has three steamers plying on its waters.  At Fredonia
I am shown through the celebrated watch-movement factory here, by the captain of the Fredonia
Club, who accompanies me to Silver Creek, where we call on another enthusiastic wheelman-a
physician who uses the wheel in preference to a horse, in making professional calls throughout
the surround-in' country.  Taking supper with the genial "Doc.," they both accompany me to
the s.ummit of a steep hill leading up out of the creek bottom.  No wheelman has ever yet rode
up this hill, save the muscular and gritty captain of the Fredonia Club, though several have
attempted the feat.  From the top my road ahead is plainly visible for miles, leading through
the broad and smiling Cattaraugus Valley that is spread out like a vast garden below, through
which Cattaraugus Creek slowly winds its tortuous way.  Stopping over night at Angola I proceed
to Buffalo next morning, catching the first glimpse of that important " seaport of the lakes,"
where, fifteen miles across the bay, the wagon-road is almost licked by the swashing waves;
and entering the city over a " misfit" plank-road, off which I am almost upset by the most
audaciously indifferent woman in the world.  A market woman homeward bound with her empty truck-wagon,
recognizes my road-rights to the extent of barely room to squeeze past between her wagon and
the ditch; and holds her long, stiff buggy-whip so that it " swipes " me viciously across the
face, knocks my helmet off into the mud ditch, and well-nigh upsets mo into the same. The woman-a
crimson-crested blonde - jogs serenely along without even deigning to turn her head.  Leaving
the bicycle at "Isham's "-who volunteers some slight repairs-I take a flying visit by rail
to see Niagara Falls, returning the same evening to enjoy the proffered hospitality of a genial
member of the Buffalo Bicycle Club.  Seated on the piazza of his residence, on Delaware Avenue,
this evening, the symphonious voice of the club-whistle is cast adrift whenever the glowing
orb of a cycle-lamp heaves in sight through the darkness, and several members of the club are
thus rounded up and their hearts captured by the witchery of a smile-a " smile " in Buffalo,
I hasten to explain, is no kin whatever to a Rocky Mountain "smile" - far be it from it.  This
club-wliistle of the Buffalo Bicycle Club happens to sing the same melodious song as the police
- whistle at Washington, D. C.; and the Buffalo cyclers who graced the national league - meet
at the Capital with their presence took a folio of club music along.  A small but frolicsome
party of them on top of the Washington monument, "heaved a sigh " from their whistles, at a
comrade passing along the street below, when a corpulent policeman, naturally mistaking it
for a signal from a brother "cop," hastened to climb the five hundred feet or thereabouts of
ascent up the monument.  When he arrived, puffing and perspiring, to the summit, and discovered
his mistake, the wheelmen say he made such awful use of the Queen's English that the atmosphere
had a blue, sulphurous tinge about it for some time after.  Leaving Buffalo next morning I
pass through Batavia, where the wheelmen have a most aesthetic little club-room. Besides being
jovial and whole-souled fellows, they are awfully sesthetic; and the sweetest little Japanese
curios and bric-d-brac decorate the walls and tables.  Stopping over night at LeBoy, in company
with the president and captain of the LeBoy Club, I visit the State fish-hatchery at Mumford
next morning, and ride on through the Genesee Valley, finding fair roads through the valley,
though somewhat hilly and stony toward Canandaigua.  Inquiring the best road to Geneva I am
advised of the superiority of the one leading past the poor-house.  Finding them somewhat intricate,
and being too super-sensitive to stop people and ask them the road to the poor-house, I deservedly
get lost, and am wandering erratically eastward through the darkness, when I fortunately meet
a wheelman in a buggy, who directs me to his mother's farm-house near by, with instructions
to that most excellent lady to accommodate me for the night.  Nine o'clock next morning I reach
fair Geneva, so beautifully situated on Seneca's silvery lake, passing the State agricultural
farm en route; continuing on up the Seneca Eiver, passing-through Waterloo and Seneca Falls
to Cayuga, and from thence to Auburn and Skaneateles, where I heave a sigh at the thoughts
of leaving the last - I cannot say the loveliest, for all are equally lovely - of that beautiful
chain of lakes that transforms this part of New York State into a vast and delightful summer
resort.

"Down a romantic Swiss glen, where scores of sylvan nooks and rippling rills invite one to
cast about for fairies and sprites," is the word descriptive of my route from Marcellus next
morning.  Once again, on nearing the Camillus outlet from the narrow vale, I hear the sound
of Sunday bells, and after the church-bell-less Western wilds, it seems to me that their notes
have visited me amid beautiful scenes, strangely often of late.  Arriving at Camillus, I ask
the name of the sparkling little stream that dances along this fairy glen like a child at play,
absorbing the sun-rays and coquettishly reflecting them in the faces of the venerable oaks
that bend over it like loving guardians protecting it from evil.  My ears are prepared to hear
a musical Indian name - "Laughing-Waters " at least; but, like a week's washing ruthlessly
intruding upon love's young dream, falls on my waiting ears the unpoetic misnomer, "Nine-Mile
Creek." Over good roads to Syracuse, and from thence my route leads down the Erie Canal, alternately
riding down the canal tow-path, the wagon-roads, and between the tracks of the New York Central
Railway. On the former, the greatest drawback to peaceful cycling is the towing-mule and his
unwarrantable animosity toward the bicycle, and the awful, unmentionable profanity engendered
thereby in the utterances of the boatmen.  Sometimes the burden of this sulphurous profanity
is aimed at me, sometimes at the inoffensive bicycle, or both of us collectively, but oftener
is it directed at the unspeakable mule, who is really the only party to blame.  A mule scares,
not because he is really afraid, but because he feels skittishly inclined to turn back, or
to make trouble between his enemies - the boatmen, his task-master, and the cycler, an intruder
on his exclusive domain, the Erie tow-path.  A span of mules will pretend to scare, whirl around,
and jerk loose from the driver, and go "scooting" back down the tow-path in a manner indicating
that nothing less than a stone wall would stop them; but, exactly in the nick of time to prevent
the tow-line jerking them sidewise into the canal, they stop. Trust a mule for never losing
his head when he runs away, as does his hot-headed relative, the horse; who never once allows
surrounding circumstances to occupy his thoughts to an extent detrimental to his own self-preservative
interests.  The Erie Canal mule's first mission in life is to engender profanity and strife
between boatmen and cyclists, and the second is to work and chew hay, which brings him out
about even with the world all round.  At Rome I enter the famous and beautiful Mohawk Valley,
a place long looked forward to with much pleasurable anticipation, from having heard so often
of its natural beauties and its interesting historical associations.  "It's the garden spot
of the world; and travellers who have been all over Europe and everywhere, say there's nothing
in the world to equal the quiet landscape beauty of the Mohawk Valley," enthusiastically remarks
an old gentelman in spectacles, whom I chance to encounter on the heights east of Herkimer.
Of the first assertion I have nothing to say, having passed through a dozen "garden spots of
the world " on this tour across America; but there is no gainsaying the fact that the Mohawk
Valley, as viewed from this vantage spot, is wonderfully beautiful.  I think it must have been
on this spot that the poet received inspiration to compose the beautiful song that is sung
alike in the quiet homes of the valley itself and in the trapper's and hunter's tent on the
far off Yellowstone - "Fair is the vale where the Mohawk gently glides, On its clear, shining
way to the sea." The valley ia one of the natural gateways of commerce, for, at Little Falls
- where it contracts to a mere pass between the hills - one can almost throw a stone across
six railway tracks, the Erie Canal and the Mohawk River. Spending an hour looking over the
magnificent Capitol building at Albany, I cross the Hudson, and proceed to ride eastward between
the two tracks of the Boston & Albany Railroad, finding the riding very fair.  From the elevated
road-bed I cast a longing, lingering look down the Hudson Valley, that stretches away southward
like a heaven-born dream, and sigh at the impossibility of going two ways at once.  " There's
$50 fine for riding a bicycle along the B. & A.  Railroad," I am informed at Albany, but risk
it to Schodack, where I make inquiries of a section foreman.  "No; there's no foine; but av
yeez are run over an' git killed, it'll be useless for yeez to inther suit agin the company
for damages," is the reassuring reply; and the unpleasant visions of bankrupting fines dissolve
in a smile at this characteristic Milesian explanation.  Crossing the Massachusetts boundary
at the village of State Line, I find the roads excellent; and, thinking that the highways of
the " Old Bay State " will be good enough anywhere, I grow careless about the minute directions
given me by Albany wheelmen, and, ere long, am laboriously toiling over the heavy roads and
steep grades of the Berkshire Hills, endeavoring to get what consolation I can, in return for
unridable roads, out of the charming scenery, and the many interesting features of the Berkshire-Hill
country.  It is at Otis, in the midst of these hills, that I first become acquainted with the
peculiar New England dialect in its native home.  The widely heralded intellectual superiority
of the Massachusetts fair ones asserts itself even in the wildest parts of these wild hills;
for at small farms - that, in most States, would be characterized by bare-footed, brown-faced
housewives - I encounter spectacled ladies whose fair faces reflect the encyclopaedia of knowledge
within, and whose wise looks naturally fill me with awe.  At Westfield I learn that Karl Kron,
the author and publisher of the American roadbook, " Ten Thousand Miles on a Bicycle" - not
to be outdone by my exploit of floating the bicycle across the Humboldt - undertook the perilous
feat of swimming the Potomac with his bicycle suspended at his waist, and had to be fished
up from the bottom with a boat-hook. Since then, however, I have seen the gentleman himself,
who assures me that the whole story is a canard.  Over good roads to Springfield - and on through
to Palmer; from thence riding the whole distance to Worcester between the tracks of the railway,
in preference to the variable country roads.

On to Boston next morning, now only forty miles away, I pass venerable weather-worn mile-stones,
set up in old colonial days, when the Great West, now trailed across with the rubber hoof-marks
of "the popular steed of today," was a pathless wilderness, and on the maps a blank.  Striking
the famous "sand-papered roads " at Framingham - which, by the by, ought to be pumice-stoned
a little to make them as good for cycling as stretches of gravelled road near Springfield,
Sandwich, and Piano, Ill.; La Porte, and South Bend, Ind.; Mentor, and Willoughby, O.; Girard,
Penn.; several places on the ridge road between Erie and Buffalo, and the alkali flats of the
Rocky Mountain territories.  Soon the blue intellectual haze hovering over " the Hub " heaves
in sight, and, at two o'clock in the afternoon of August 4th, I roll into Boston, and whisper
to the wild waves of the sounding Atlantic what the sad sea-waves of the Pacific were saying
when I left there, just one hundred and three and a half days ago, having wheeled about 3,700
miles to deliver the message.  Passing the winter of 1884-85 in New York, I became acquainted
with the Outing Magazine, contributed to it sketches of my tour across America, and in the
Spring of 1885 continued around the world as its special correspondent; embarking April 9th
from New York, for Liverpool, aboard the City of Chicago.

CHAPTER V.

FROM AMERICA TO THE GERMAN FRONTIER.

At one P.M., on that day, the ponderous but shapely hull of the City of Chicago, with its living
and lively freight, moves from the dock as though it, too, were endowed with mind as well with
matter; the crowds that a minute ago disappeared down the gangplank are now congregated on
the outer end of the pier, a compact mass of waving handkerchiefs, and anxious-faced people
shouting out signs of recognition to friends aboard the departing steamer.

>From beginning to end of the voyage across the Atlantic the weather is delightful; and the
passengers - well, half the cabin-passengers are members of Henry Irving's Lyceum Company en
route home after their second successful tour in America; and old voyagers abroad who have
crossed the Atlantic scores of times pronounce it altogether the most enjoyable trip they ever
experienced.  The third day out we encountered a lonesome-looking iceberg - an object that
the captain seemed to think would be better appreciated, and possibly more affectionately remembered,
if viewed at the respectful distance of about four miles.  It proves a cold, unsympathetic
berg, yet extremely entertaining in its own way, since it accommodates us by neutralizing pretty
much all the surplus caloric in the atmosphere around for hours after it has disappeared below
the horizon of our vision. I am particularly fortunate in finding among my fellow-passengers
Mr. Harry B. French, the traveller and author, from whom I obtain much valuable information,
particularly of China.  Mr. French has travelled some distance through the Flowery Kingdom
himself, and thoughtfully forewarns me to anticipate a particularly lively and interesting
time in invading that country with a vehicle so strange and incomprehensible to the Celestial
mind as a bicycle.  This experienced gentleman informs me, among other interesting things,
that if five hundred chattering Celestials batter down the door and swarm unannounced at midnight
into the apartment where I am endeavoring to get the first wink of sleep obtained for a whole
week, instead of following the natural inclinations of an AngloSaxon to energetically defend
his rights with a stuffed club, I shall display Solomon-like wisdom by quietly submitting to
the invasion, and deferentially bowing to Chinese inquisitiveness.  If, on an occasion of this
nature, one stationed himself behind the door, and, as a sort of preliminary warning to the
others, greeted the first interloper with the business end of a boot-jack, he would be morally
certain of a lively one-sided misunderstanding that might end disastrously to himself; whereas,
by meekly submitting to a critical and exhaustive examination by the assembled company, he
might even become the recipient of an apology for having had to batter down the door in order
to satisfy their curiosity. One needs more discretion than valor in dealing with the Chinese.
At noon on the 19th we reach Liverpool, where I find a letter awaiting me from A. J. Wilson
(Faed), inviting me to call on him at Powerscroft House, London, and offering to tandem me
through the intricate mazes of the West End; likewise asking whether it would be agreeable
to have him, with others, accompany me from London down to the South coast - a programme to
which, it is needless to say, I entertain no objections.  As the custom- house officer wrenches
a board off the broad, flat box containing my American bicycle, several fellow-passengers,
prompted by their curiosity to obtain a peep at the machine which they have learned is to carry
me around the world, gather about; and one sympathetic lady, as she catches a glimpse of the
bright nickeled forks, exclaims, "Oh, what a shame that they should be allowed to wrench the
planks off.  They might injure it;" but a small tip thoroughly convinces the individual prying
off the board that, by removing one section and taking a conscientious squint in the direction
of the closed end, his duty to the British government would be performed as faithfully as though
everything were laid bare; and the kind-hearted lady's apprehensions of possible injury are
thus happily allayed.  In two hours after landing, the bicycle is safely stowed away in the
underground store-rooms of the Liverpool & Northwestern Railway Company, and in two hours more
I am wheeling rapidly toward London, through neatly cultivated fields, and meadows and parks
of that intense greenness met with nowhere save in the British Isles, and which causes a couple
of native Americans, riding in the same compartment, and who are visiting England for the first
time, to express their admiration of it all in the unmeasured language of the genuine Yankee
when truly astonished and delighted.  Arriving in London I lose no time in seeking out Mr.
Bolton, a well-known wheelman, who has toured on the continent probably as extensively as any
other English cycler, and to whom I bear a letter of introduction.  Together, on Monday afternoon,
we ruthlessly invade the sanctums of the leading cycling papers in London.  Mr. Bolton is also
able to give me several useful hints concerning wheeling through France and Germany.  Then
comes the application for a passport, and the inevitable unpleasantness of being suspected
by every policeman and detective about the government buildings of being a wild-eyed dynamiter
recently arrived from America with the fell purpose of blowing up the place.  On Tuesday I
make a formal descent on the Chinese Embassy, to seek information regarding the possibility
of making a serpentine trail through the Flowery Kingdom via Upper Burmah to Hong-Kong or Shanghai.
Here I learn from Dr.  McCarty, the interpreter at the Embassy, as from Mr. French, that, putting
it as mildly as possible, I must expect a wild time generally in getting through the interior
of China with a bicycle. The Doctor feels certain that I may reasonably anticipate the pleasure
of making my way through a howling wilderness of hooting Celestials from one end of the country
to the other.  The great danger, he thinks, will be not so much the well-known aversion of
the Chinese to having an "outer barbarian" penetrate the sacred interior of their country,
as the enormous crowds that would almost constantly surround me out of curiosity at both rider
and wheel, and the moral certainty of a foreigner unwittingly doing something to offend the
Chinamen's peculiar and deep-rooted notions of propriety.  This, it is easily seen, would be
a peculiarly ticklish thing to do when surrounded by surging masses of dangling pig-tails and
cerulean blouses, the wearers of which are from the start predisposed to make things as unpleasant
as possible.  My own experience alone, however, will prove the kind of reception I am likely
to meet with among them; and if they will only considerately refrain from impaling me on a
bamboo, after a barbarous and highly ingenious custom of theirs, I little reck what other unpleasantries
they have in store.  After one remains in the world long enough to find it out, he usually
becomes less fastidious about the future of things in general, than when in the hopeful days
of boyhood every prospect ahead was fringed with the golden expectations of a budding and inexperienced
imagery; nevertheless, a thoughtful, meditative person, who realizes the necessity of drawing
the line somewhere, would naturally draw it at impalation.  Not being conscious of any presentiment
savoring of impalation, however, the only request I make of the Chinese, at present, is to
place no insurmountable obstacle against my pursuing the even-or uneven, as the case may be-tenor
of my way through their country.  China, though, is several revolutions of my fifty-inch wheel
away to the eastward, at this present time of writing, and speculations in regard to it are
rather premature.

Soon after reaching London I have the pleasure of meeting "Faed," a gentleman who carries his
cycling enthusiasm almost where some people are said to carry their hearts-on his sleeve; so
that a very short acquaintance only is necessary to convince one of being in the company of
a person whose interest in whirling wheels is of no ordinary nature. When I present myself
at Powerscroft House, Faed is busily wandering around among the curves and angles of no less
than three tricycles, apparently endeavoring to encompass the complicated mechanism of all
three in one grand comprehensive effort of the mind, and the addition of as many tricycle crates
standing around makes the premises so suggestive of a flourishing tricycle agency that an old
gentleman, happening to pass by at the moment, is really quite excusable in stopping and inquiring
the prices, with a view to purchasing one for himself.  Our tandem ride through the West End
has to be indefinitely postponed, on account of my time being limited, and our inability to
procure readily a suitable machine; and Mr. Wilson's bump of discretion would not permit him
to think of allowing me to attempt the feat of manoeuvring a tricycle myself among the bewildering
traffic of the metropolis, and risk bringing my "wheel around the world" to an inglorious conclusion
before being fairly begun.  While walking down Parliament Street my attention is called to
a venerable-looking gentleman wheeling briskly along among the throngs of vehicles of every
description, and I am informed that the bold tricycler is none other than Major Knox Holmes,
a vigorous youth of some seventy-eight summers, who has recently accomplished the feat of riding
one hundred and fourteen miles in ten hours; for a person nearly eighty years of age this is
really quite a promising performance, and there is small doubt but that when the gallant Major
gets a little older - say when he becomes a centenarian - he will develop into a veritable
prodigy on the cinder-path! Having obtained my passport, and got it vised for the Sultan's
dominions at the Turkish consulate, and placed in Faed's possession a bundle of maps, which
he generously volunteers to forward , to me, as I require them in the various countries it
is proposed to traverse, I return on April 30th to Liverpool, from which point the formal start
on the wheel across England is to be made.  Four o'clock in the afternoon of May 2d is the
time announced, and Edge Hill Church is the appointed place, where Mr. Lawrence , Fletcher,
of the Anfield Bicycle Club, and a number of other Liverpool wheelmen, have volunteered to
meet and accompany me some distance out of the city.  Several of the Liverpool daily papers
have made mention of the affair.  Accordingly, upon arriving at the appointed place and time,
I find a crowd of several hundred people gathered to satisfy their curiosity as to what sort
of a looking individual it is who has crossed America awheel, and furthermore proposes to accomplish
the greater feat of the circumlocution of the globe.  A small sea of hats is enthusiastically
waved aloft; a ripple of applause escapes from five hundred English throats as I mount my glistening
bicycle; and, with the assistance of a few policemen, the twenty-five Liverpool cyclers who
have assembled to accompany me out, extricate themselves from the crowd, mount and fall into
line two abreast; and merrily we wheel away down Edge Lane and out of Liverpool.

English weather at this season is notoriously capricious, and the present year it is unusually
so, and ere the start is fairly made we are pedaling along through quite a pelting shower,
which, however, fails to make much impression on the roads beyond causing the flinging of more
or less mud. The majority of my escort are members of the Anfield Club, who have the enviable
reputation of being among the hardest road-riders in England, several members having accomplished
over two hundred miles within the twenty-four hours; and I am informed that Mr. Fletcher is
soon to undertake the task of beating the tricycle record over that already well-contested
route, from John O'Groat's to Land's End.  Sixteen miles out I become the happy recipient of
hearty well-wishes innumerable, with the accompanying hand-shaking, and my escort turn back
toward home and Liverpool - all save four, who wheel on to Warrington and remain overnight,
with the avowed intention of accompanying me twenty-five miles farther to-morrow morning. Our
Sunday morning experience begins with a shower of rain, which, however, augurs well for the
remainder of the day; and, save for a gentle head wind, no reproachful remarks are heard about
that much-criticised individual, the clerk of the weather; especially as our road leads through
a country prolific of everything charming to one's sense of the beautiful. Moreover, we are
this morning bowling along the self-same highway that in days of yore was among the favorite
promenades of a distinguished and enterprising individual known to every British juvenile as
Dick Turpin - a person who won imperishable renown, and the undying affection of the small
Briton of to-day, by making it unsafe along here for stage-coaches and travellers indiscreet
enough to carry valuables about with them.

"Think I'll get such roads as this all through England." "Oh, you'll get much better roads
than this in the southern counties," is the reply; though, fresh from American roads, one can
scarce see what shape the improvements can possibly take.  Out of Lancashire into Cheshire
we wheel, and my escort, after wishing me all manner of good fortune in hearty Lancashire style,
wheel about and hie themselves back toward the rumble and roar of the world's greatest sea-port,
leaving me to pedal pleasantly southward along the green lanes and amid the quiet rural scenery
of Staffordshire to Stone, where I remain Sunday night.  The country is favored with another
drenching down-pour of rain during the night, and moisture relentlessly descends at short,
unreliable intervals on Monday morning, as I proceed toward Birmingham.  Notwithstanding the
superabundant moisture the morning ride is a most enjoyable occasion, requiring but a dash
of sunshine to make everything perfect.  The mystic voice of the cuckoo is heard from many
an emerald copse around; songsters that inhabit only the green hedges and woods of "Merrie
England" are carolling their morning vespers in all directions; skylarks are soaring, soaring
skyward, warbling their unceasing paeans of praise as they gradually ascend into cloudland's
shadowy realms; and occasionally I bowl along beneath an archway of spreading beeches that
are colonized by crowds of noisy rooks incessantly "cawing" their approval or disapproval of
things in general. Surely England, with its wellnigh perfect roads, the wonderful greenness
of its vegetation, and its roadsters that meet and regard their steel-ribbed rivals with supreme
indifference, is the natural paradise of 'cyclers. There is no annoying dismounting for frightened
horses on these happy highways, for the English horse, though spirited and brim-ful of fire,
has long since accepted the inevitable, and either has made friends with the wheelman and his
swift-winged steed, or, what is equally agreeable, maintain a a haughty reserve.  Pushing along
leisurely, between showers, into Warwickshire, I reach Birmingham about three o'clock, and,
after spending an hour or so looking over some tricycle works, and calling for a leather writing-case
they are making especially for my tour, I wheel on to Coventry, having the company, of Mr.
Priest, Jr., of the tricycle works, as far as Stonehouse.  Between Birmingham and Coventry
the recent rainfall has evidently been less, and I mentally note this fifteen-mile stretch
of road as the finest traversed since leaving Liverpool, both for width and smoothness of surface,
it being a veritable boulevard. Arriving at Coventry I call on "Brother Sturmey, " a gentleman
well and favorably known to readers of 'cycling literature everywhere; and, as I feel considerably
like deserving reasonably gentle treatment after perseveringly pressing forward sixty miles
in spite of the rain, I request him to steer me into the Cyclists' Touring Club Hotel - an
office which he smilingly performs, and thoughtfully admonishes the proprietor to handle me
as tenderly as possible.  I am piloted around to take a hurried glance at Coventry, visiting,
among other objects of interest, the Starley Memorial.  This memorial is interesting to 'cyclers
from having been erected by public subscription in recognition of the great interest Mr. Starley
took in the 'cycle industry, he having been, in fact, the father of the interest in Coventry,
and, consequently, the direct author of the city's present prosperity.  The mind of the British
small boy along my route has been taxed to its utmost to account for my white military helmet,
and various and interesting are the passing remarks heard in consequence.  The most general
impression seems to be that I am direct from the Soudan, some youthful Conservatives blandly
intimating The Starley Memorial, Coventry, that I am the advance-guard of a general scuttle
of the army out of Egypt, and that presently whole regiments of white-helmeted wheelmen will
come whirling along the roads on nickel-plated steeds, some even going so far as to do me the
honor of calling me General Wolseley; while others - rising young Liberals, probably - recklessly
call me General Gordon, intimating by this that the hero of Khartoum was not killed, after
all, and is proving it by sweeping through England on a bicycle, wearing a white helmet to
prove his identity!

A pleasant ride along a splendid road, shaded for miles with rows of spreading elms, brings
me to the charming old village of Dunchurch, where everything seems moss-grown and venerable
with age.  A squatty, castle-like church-tower, that has stood the brunt of many centuries,
frowns down upon a cluster of picturesque, thatched cottages of primitive architecture, and
ivy-clad from top to bottom; while, to make the picture complete, there remain even the old
wooden stocks, through the holes of which the feet of boozy unfortunates were wont to be unceremoniously
thrust in the good old times of rude simplicity; in fact, the only really unprimitive building
about the place appears to be a newly erected Methodist chapel.  It couldn't be - no, of course
it couldn't be possible, that there is any connecting link between the American peculiarity
of elevating the feet on the window-sill or the drum of the heating-stove and this old-time
custom of elevating the feet of those of our ancestors possessed of boozy, hilarious proclivities!
At Weedon Barracks I make a short halt to watch the soldiers go through the bayonet exercises,
and suffer myself to be persuaded into quaffing a mug of delicious, creamy stout at the canteen
with a genial old sergeant, a bronzed veteran who has seen active service in several of the
tough expeditions that England seems ever prone to undertake in various uncivilized quarters
of the world; after which I wheel away over old Roman military roads, through Northamptonshire
and Buckinghamshire, reaching Fenny Stratford just in time to find shelter against the machinations
of the "weather-clerk", who, having withheld rain nearly all the afternoon, begins dispensing
it again in the gloaming.  It rains uninterruptedly all night; but, although my route for some
miles is now down cross-country lanes, the rain has only made them rather disagreeable, without
rendering them in any respect unridable; and although I am among the slopes of the Chiltern
Hills, scarcely a dismount is necessary during the forenoon.  Spending the night at Berkhamstead,
Hertfordshire, I pull out toward London on Thursday morning, and near Watford am highly gratified
at meeting Faed and the captain of the North London Tricycle Club, who have come out on their
tricycles from London to meet and escort me into the metropolis.  At Faed's suggestion I decide
to remain over in London until Saturday to be present at the annual tricycle meet on Barnes
Common, and together we wheel down the Edgeware Road, Park Road, among the fashionable turnouts
of Piccadilly, past Knightsbridge and Brompton to the "Inventories" Exhibition, where we spend
a most enjoyable afternoon inspecting the thousand and one material evidences of inventive
genius from the several countries represented.

Five hundred and twelve 'cyclers, including forty-one tandem tricycles and fifty ladies, ride
in procession at the Barnes Common meet, making quite an imposing array as they wheel two abreast
between rows of enthusiastic spectators.  Here, among a host of other wheeling celebrities,
I am introduced to Major Knox Holmes, before mentioned as being a gentleman of extraordinary
powers of endurance, considering his advanced age.  After tea a number of tricyclers accompany
me down as far as Croydon, which place we enter to the pattering music of a drenching rain-storm,
experiencing the accompanying pleasure of a wet skin, etc.  The threatening aspect of the weather
on the following morning causes part of our company to hesitate about venturing any farther
from London; but Faed and three companions wheel with me toward Brighton through a gentle morning
shower, which soon clears away, however, and, before long, the combination of the splendid
Sussex roads, fine breezy weather, and lovely scenery, amply repays us for the discomforts
of yester-eve.  Fourteen miles from Brighton we are met by eight members of the Kempton Rangers
Bicycle Club, who have sallied forth thus far northward to escort us into town; having done
which, they deliver us over to Mr. C---, of the Brighton Tricycle Club, and brother-in-law
to the mayor of the city.  It is two in the afternoon.  This gentleman straightway ingratiates
himself into our united affections, and wins our eternal gratitude, by giving us a regular
wheelman's dinner, after which he places us under still further obligations by showing us as
many of the lions of Brighton as are accessible on Sunday, chief among which is the famous
Brighton Aquarium, where, by his influence, he kindly has the diving-birds and seals fed before
their usual hour, for our especial delectation-a proceeding which naturally causes the barometer
of our respective self-esteems to rise several notches higher than usual, and doubtless gives
equal satisfaction to the seals and diving-birds.  We linger at the aquarium until near sun-down,
and it is fifteen miles by what is considered the smoothest road to Newhaven.  Mr. C---- declares
his intention of donning his riding-suit and, by taking a shorter, though supposably rougher,
road, reach Newhaven as soon as we.  As we halt at Lewes for tea, and ride leisurely, likewise
submitting to being photographed en route, he actually arrives there ahead of us.  It is Sunday
evening, May 10th, and my ride through "Merrie England " is at an end.  Among other agreeable
things to be ever remembered in connection with it is the fact that it is the first three hundred
miles of road I ever remember riding over without scoring a header - a circumstance that impresses
itself none the less favorably perhaps when viewed in connection with the solidity of the average
English road.  It is not a very serious misadventure to take a flying header into a bed of
loose sand on an American country road; but the prospect of rooting up a flint-stone with one's
nose, or knocking a curb-stone loose with one's bump of cautiousness, is an entirely different
affair; consequently, the universal smoothness of the surface of the English highways is appreciated
at its full value by at least one wheelman whose experience of roads is nothing if not varied.
Comfortable quarters are assigned me on board the Channel steamer, and a few minutes after
bidding friends and England farewell, at Newhaven, at 11.30 P.M., I am gently rocked into unconsciousness
by the motion of the vessel, and remain happily and restfully oblivious to my surroundings
until awakened next morning at Dieppe, where I find myself, in a few minutes, on a foreign
shore.  All the way from San Francisco to Newhaven. there is a consciousness of being practically
in one country and among one people-people who, though acknowledging separate governments,
are bound so firmly together by the ties of common instincts and interests, and the mystic
brotherhood of a common language and a common civilization, that nothing of a serious nature
can ever come between them.  But now I am verily among strangers, and the first thing talked
of is to make me pay duty on the bicycle.

The captain of the vessel, into whose hands Mr. C---- assigned me at Newhaven, protests on
my behalf, and I likewise enter a gentle demurrer; but the custom-house officer declares that
a duty will have to be forthcoming, saying that the amount will be returned again when I pass
over the German frontier.  The captain finally advises the payment of the duty and the acceptance
of a receipt for the amount, and takes his leave. Not feeling quite satisfied as yet about
paying the duty, I take a short stroll about Dieppe, leaving my wheel at tho custom-house and
when I shortly return, prepared to pay the assessment, whatever it may be, the officer who,
but thirty minutes since, declared emphatically in favor of a duty, now answers, with all the
politeness imaginable: "Monsieur is at liberty to take the velocipede and go whithersoever
he will." It is a fairly prompt initiation into the impulsiveness of the French character.
They don't accept bicycles as baggage, though, on the Channel steamers, and six shillings freight,
over and above passage-money, has to be yielded up.

Although upon a foreign shore, I am not yet, it seems, to be left entirely alone to the tender
mercies of my own lamentable inability to speak French.  Fortunately there lives at Dieppe
a gentleman named Mr. Parkinson, who, besides being an Englishman to the backbone, is quite
an enthusiastic wheelman, and, among other things, considers it his solemn duty to take charge
of visiting 'cyclers from England and America and see them safely launched along the magnificent
roadways of Normandy, headed fairly toward their destination.  Faed has thoughtfully notified
Mr. Parkinson of my approach, and he is watching for my coming - as tenderly as though I were
a returning prodigal and he charged with my welcoming home.  Close under the frowning battlements
of Dieppe Castle - a once wellnigh impregnable fortress that was some time in possession of
the English - romantically nestles Mr. Parldnson's studio, and that genial gentleman promptly
proposes accompanying me some distance into the country.  On our way through Dieppe I notice
blue-bloused peasants guiding small flocks of goats through the streets, calling them along
with a peculiar, tuneful instrument that sounds somewhat similar to a bagpipe.  I learn that
they are Normandy peasants, who keep their flocks around town all summer, goat's milk being
considered beneficial for infants and invalids.  They lead the goats from house to house, and
milk whatever quantity their customers want at their own door - a custom that we can readily
understand will never become widely popular among AngloSaxon milkmen, since it leaves no possible
chance for pump-handle combinations and corresponding profits.  The morning is glorious with
sunshine and the carols of feathered songsters as together we speed away down the beautiful
Arques Valley, over roads that are simply perfect for wheeling; and, upon arriving at the picturesque
ruins of the Chateau d'Arques, we halt and take a casual peep at the crumbling walls of this
of the famous fortress, which the trailing ivy of Normandy now partially covers with a dark-green
mantle of charity, as though its purpose and its mission were to hide its fallen grandeur from
the rude gaze of the passing stranger.  All along the roads we meet happy-looking peasants
driving into Dieppe market with produce. They are driving Normandy horses - and that means
fine, large, spirited animals - which, being unfamiliar with bicycles, almost invariably take
exception to ours, prancing about after the usual manner of high-strung steeds.  Unlike his
English relative, the Norman horse looks not supinely upon the whirling wheel, but arrays himself
almost unanimously against us, and umially in the most uncompromising manner, similar to the
phantom- eyed roadster of the United States agriculturist.  The similarity between the turnouts
of these two countries I am forced to admit, however, terminates abruptly with the horse itself,
and does not by any means extend to the driver; for, while the Normandy horse capers about
and threatens to upset the vehicle into the ditch, the Frenchman's face is wreathed in apologetic
smiles; and, while he frantically endeavors to keep the refractory horse under control, he
delivers himself of a whole dictionary of apologies to the wheelman for the animal's foolish
conduct, touches his cap with an air of profound deference upon noticing that we have considerately
slowed up, and invariably utters his Bon jour, monsieur, as we wheel past, in a voice that
plainly indicates his acknowledgment of the wheelman's - or anybody else's - right to half
the roadway.  A few days ago I called the English roads perfect, and England the paradise of
'cyclers; and so it is; but the Normandy roads are even superior, and the scenery of the Arques
Valley is truly lovely.  There is not a loose stone, a rut, or depression anywhere on these
roads, and it is little exaggeration to call them veritable billiard-tables for smoothness
of surface.  As one bowls smoothly along over them he is constantly wondering how they can
possibly keep them in such condition.  Were these fine roads in America one would never be
out of sight of whirling wheels.  A luncheon of Normandy cheese and cider at Cleres, and then
onward to Bouen is the word.  At every cross-roads is erected an iron guide-post, containing
directions to several of the nearest towns, telling the distances in kilometres and yards;
and small stone pillars are set up alongside the road, marking every hundred yards.  Arriving
at Rouen at four o'clock, Mr. Parkiuson shows me the famous old Rouen Cathedral, the Palace
of Justice, and such examples of old mediaeval Rouen as I care to visit, and, after inviting
me to remain and take dinner with him by the murmuring waters of the historic Seine, he bids
me bon voyage, turns my head southward, and leaves me at last a stranger among strangers, to
"cornprendre Franyais" unassisted.  Some wiseacre has placed it on record that too much of
a good thing is worse than none at all; however that may be, from having concluded that the
friendly iron guide-posts would be found on every corner where necessary, pointing out the
way with infallible truthfulness, and being doubtless influenced by the superior levelness
of the road leading down the valley of the Seine in comparison with the one leading over the
bluffs, I wander toward eventide into Elbeuf, instead of Pont de l' Arques, as I had intended;
but it matters little, and I am content to make the best of my surroundings.  Wheeling along
the crooked, paved streets of Elbeuf, I enter a small hotel, and, after the customary exchange
of civilities, I arch my eyebrows at an intelligent -looking madaine, and inquire, " Comprendre
Anglais." "Non," replies the lady, looking puzzled, while I proceed to ventilate my pantomimic
powers to try and make my wants understood.  After fifteen minutes of despairing effort, mademoiselle,
the daughter, is despatched to the other side of the town, and presently returns with a be
whiskered Frenchman, who, in very much broken English, accompanying his words with wondrous
gesticulations, gives me to understand that he is the only person in all Elbeuf capable of
speaking the English language, and begs me to unburden myself to him without reserve.  He proves
himself useful and obliging, kindly interesting himself in obtaining me comfortable accommodation
at reasonable rates.  This Elbeuf hotel, though, is anything but an elegant establishment,
and le proprietaire, though seemingly intelligent enough, brings me out a bottle of the inevitable
vin ordinaire (common red wine) at breakfast-time, instead of the coffee for which my opportune
interpreter said he had given the order yester-eve.  If a Frenchman only sits down to a bite
of bread and cheese he usually consumes a pint bottle of vin ordinaire with it.  The loaves
of bread here are rolls three and four feet long, and frequently one of these is laid across
- or rather along, for it is oftentimes longer than the table is wide - the table for you to
hack away at during your meal, according to your bread-eating capacity or inclination.

Monsieur, the accomplished, come down to see his Anglais friend and protege next morning, a
few minutes after his Anglais friend and protege, has started off toward a distant street called
Rue Poussen, which le garcon had unwittingly directed him to when he inquired the way to the
bureau de poste; the natural result, I suppose, of the difference between Elbeuf pronunciation
and mine.  Discovering my mistake upon arriving at the Rue Poussen, I am more fortunate in
my attack upon the interpreting abilities of a passing citizen, who sends an Elbeuf gamin to
guide me to the post-office.

Post office clerks are proverbially intelligent people in any country, consequently it doesn't
take me long to transact my business at the bureau de poste; but now - shades of Caesar! -
I have thoughtlessly neglected to take down either the name of the hotel or the street in which
it is located, and for the next half-hour go wandering about as helplessly as the "babes in
the wood" Once, twice I fancy recognizing the location; but the ordinary Elbeuf house is not
easily recognized from its neighbors, and I am standing looking around me in the bewildered
attitude of one uncertain of his bearings, when, lo! the landlady, who has doubtless been wondering
whatever has become of me, appears at the door of a building which I should certainly never
have recognized as my hotel, besom in hand, and her pleasant, "Oui, monsieur," sounds cheery
and welcome enough, under the circumstances, as one may readily suppose.

Fine roads continue, and between Gaillon and Vernon one can see the splendid highway, smooth,
straight, and broad, stretching ahead for miles between rows of stately poplars, forming magnificent
avenues that add not a little to the natural loveliness of the country.  Noble chateaus appear
here and there, oftentimes situated upon the bluffs of the Seine, and forming the background
to a long avenue of chestnuts, maples, or poplars, running at right angles to the main road
and principal avenue. The well-known thriftincss of the French peasantry is noticeable on every
hand, and particularly away off to the left yonder, where their small, well-cultivated farms
make the sloping bluffs resemble huge log-cabin quilts in the distance.  Another glaring and
unmistakable evidence of the Normandy peasants' thriftiness is the remarkable number of patches
they manage to distribute over the surface of their pantaloons, every peasant hereabouts averaging
twenty patches, more or less, of all shapes and sizes.  When the British or United States Governments
impose any additional taxation on the people, the people gruinblingly declare they won't put
up with it, and then go ahead and pay it; but when the Chamber of Deputies at Paris turns on
the financial thumb-screw a little tighter, the French peasant simply puts yet another patch
on the seat of his pantaloons, and smilingly hands over the difference between the patch and
the new pair he intended to purchase!

Huge cavalry barracks mark the entrance to Vernon, and, as I watch with interest the manoauvring
of the troops going through their morning drill, I cannot help thinking that with such splendid
loads as France possesses she might take many a less practical measure for home defence than
to mount a few regiments of light infantry on bicycles; infantry travelling toward the front
at the late of seventy-five or a hundred miles a day would be something of an improvement,
one would naturally think.  Every few miles my road leads through the long, straggling street
of a village, every building in which is of solid stone, and looks at least a thousand years
old; while at many cross-roads among the fields, and in all manner of unexpected nooks and
corners of the villages, crucifixes are erected to accommodate the devotionally inclined. 
Most of the streets of these interior villages are paved with square stones which the wear
and tear of centuries have generally rendered too rough for the bicycle; but occasionally one
is ridable, and the astonishment of the inhabitants as I wheel leisurely through, whistling
the solemn strains of "Roll, Jordan, roll," is really quite amusing.  Every village of any
size boasts a church that, for fineness of architecture and apparent costliness of construction,
looks out of all proportion to the straggling street of shapeless structures that it overtops.
Everything here seems built as though intended to last forever, it being no unusual sight to
see a ridiculously small piece of ground surrounded by a stone wall built as though to resist
a bombardment; an enclosure that must have cost more to erect than fifty crops off the enclosed
space could repay.  The important town of Mantes is reached early in the evening, and a good
inn found for the night.

The market-women are arraying their varied wares all along the main street of Mantes as I wheel
down toward the banks of the Seine this morning.  I stop to procure a draught of new milk,
and, while drinking it, point to sundry long rows of light, flaky-looking cakes strung on strings,
and motion that I am desirous of sampling a few at current rates; but the good dame smiles
and shakes her head vigorously, as well enough she might, for I learn afterward that the cakes
are nothing less than dried yeast-cakes, a breakfast off which would probably have produced
spontaneous combustion.  Getting on to the wrong road out of Mantes, I find myself at the river's
edge down among the Seine watermen.  I am shown the right way, but from Mantes to Paris they
are not Normandy roads; from Mantes southward they gradually deteriorate until they are little
or no better than the "sand-papered roads of Boston." Having determined to taboo vin ordinaire
altogether I astonish the restaurateur of a village where I take lunch by motioning away the
bottle of red wine and calling for " de I'eau," and the glances cast in my direction by the
other customers indicate plainly enough that they consider the proceeding as something quite
extraordinary.  Rolling through Saint Germain, Chalon Pavey, and Nanterre, the magnificent
Arc de Triomphe looms up in the distance ahead, and at about two o'clock, Wednesday, May 13th,
I wheel into the gay capital through the Porte Maillott.  Asphalt pavement now takes the place
of macadam, and but a short distance inside the city limits I notice the 'cycle depot of Renard
Ferres.  Knowing instinctively that the fraternal feelings engendered by the magic wheel reaches
to wherever a wheelman lives, I hesitate not to dismount and present my card.  Yes, Jean Glinka,
apparently an employe there, comprehends Anglais; they have all heard of my tour, and wish
me bon voyage, and Jean and his bicycle is forthwith produced and delegated to accompany me
into the interior of the city and find me a suitable hotel.  The streets of Paris, like the
streets of other large cities, are paved with various compositions, and they have just been
sprinkled.  French-like, the luckless Jean is desirous of displaying his accomplishments on
the wheel to a visitor so distingue; he circles around on the slippery pavement in a manner
most unnecessary, and in so doing upsets himself while crossing a car-track, rips his pantaloons,
and injures his wheel.  At the Hotel du Louvre they won't accept bicycles, having no place
to put them; but a short distance from there we find a less pretentious establishment, where,
after requiring me to fill up a formidable-looking blank, stating my name, residence, age,
occupation, birthplace, the last place I lodged at, etc., they finally assign me quarters.
From Paul Devilliers, to whom I bring an introduction, I learn that by waiting here till Friday
evening, and repairing to the rooms of the Societe Velocipedique Metropolitaine, the president
of that club can give me the best bicycle route between Paris and Vienna; accordingly I domicile
myself at the hotel for a couple of days.  Many of the lions of Paris are within easy distance
of my hotel. The reader, however, probably knows more about the sights of Paris than one can
possibly find out in two days; therefore I refrain from any attempt at describing them; but
my hotel is worthy of remark.

Among other agreeable and sensible arrangements at the Hotel uu Loiret, there is no such thing
as opening one's room-door from the outside save with the key; and unless one thoroughly understands
this handy peculiarity, and has his wits about him continually, he is morally certain, sometime
when he is leaving his room, absent-mindedly to shut the door and leave the key inside.  This
is, of course, among the first things that happen to me, and it costs me half a franc and three
hours of wretchedness before I see the interior of my room again.  The hotel keeps a rude skeleton-key
on hand, presumably for possible emergencies of this nature; but in manipulating this uncouth
instrument le portier actually locks the door, and as the skeleton-key is expected to manage
the catch only, and not the lock, this, of course, makes matters infinitely worse.  The keys
of every room in the house are next brought into requisition and tried in succession, but not
a key among them all is a duplicate of mine. What is to be done.  Le portier looks as dejected
as though Paris was about to be bombarded, as he goes down and breaks the dreadful news to
le proprietaire.  Up comes le proprietaire - avoirdupois three hundred pounds - sighing like
an exhaust-pipe at every step.  For fifteen unhappy minutes the skeleton-key is wriggled and
twisted about again in the key- hole, and the fat proprietaire rubs his bald head impatiently,
but all to no purpose.  Each returns to his respective avocation.  Impatient to get at my writing
materials, I look up at the iron bars across the fifth- story windows above, and motion that
if they will procure a rope I will descend from thence and enter the window.  They one and
all point out into the street; and, thinking they have sent for something or somebody, I sit
down and wait with Job-like patience for something to turn up. Nothing, however, turns up,
and at the expiration of an hour I naturally begin to feel neglected and impatient, and again
suggest the rope; when, at a motion from le proprietaire, le portier pilots me around a neighboring
corner to a locksmith's establishment, where, voluntarily acting the part of interpreter, he
engages on my behalf, for half a franc, a man to come with a bunch of at least a hundred skeleton-keys
of all possible shapes to attack the refractory key-hole.  After trying nearly all the keys,
and disburdening himself of whole volumes of impulsive French ejaculations, this man likewise
gives it up in despair; but, now everything else has been tried and failed, the countenance
of la portier suddenly lights up, and he slips quietly around to an adjoining room, and enters
mine inside of two minutes by simply lifting a small hook out of a staple with his knife-blade.
There appears to be a slight coolness, as it were, between le proprietaire and me after this
incident, probably owing to the intellectual standard of each becoming somewhat lowered in
the other's estimation in consequence of it.  Le proprietaire, doubtless, thinks a man capable
of leaving the key inside of the door must be the worst type of an ignoramus; and certainly
my opinion of him for leaving such a diabolical arrangement unchanged in the latter half of
the nineteenth century is not far removed from the same.

Visiting the headquarters of the Societe Velocipedique Mctropolitaine on Friday evening, I
obtain from the president the desired directions regarding the route, and am all prepared to
continue eastward in the morning.  Wheeling down the famous Champs Elysees at eleven at night,
when the concert gardens are in full blast and everything in a blaze, of glory, with myriads
of electric lights festooned and in long brilliant rows among the trees, is something to be
remembered for a lifetime. Before breakfast I leave the city by the Porte Daumesiul, and wheel
through the environments toward Vincennes and Jonville, pedalling, to the sound of martial
music, for miles beyond the Porte.  The roads for thirty miles east of Paris are not Normandy
roads, but the country for most of the distance is fairly level, and for mile after mile, and
league beyond league, the road is beneath avenues of plane and poplar, which, crossing the
plain in every direction like emerald walls of nature's own building, here embellish and beautify
an otherwise rather monotonous stretch of country.  The villages are little different from
the villages of Normandy, but the churches have not the architectural beauty of the Normandy
churches, being for the most part massive structures without any pretence to artistic embellishment
in their construction.  Monkish-looking priests are a characteristic feature of these villages,
and when, on passing down the narrow, crooked streets of Fontenay, I wheel beneath a massive
stone archway, and looking around, observe cowled priests and everything about the place seemingly
in keeping with it, one can readily imagine himself transported back to medieval times.  One
of these little interior French villages is the most unpromising looking place imaginable for
a hungry person to ride into; often one may ride the whole length of the village expectantly
looking around for some visible evidence of wherewith to cheer the inner man, and all that
greets the hungry vision is a couple of four-foot sticks of bread in one dust-begrimed window,
and a few mournful-looking crucifixes and Roman Catholic paraphernalia in another.  Neither
are the peasants hereabouts to be compared with the Normandy peasantry in personal appearance.
True, they have as many patches on their pantaloons, but they don't seem to have acquired the
art of attaching them in a manner to produce the same picturesque effect as does the peasant
of Normandy; the original garment is almost invariably a shapeless corduroy, of a bagginess
and an o'er-ampleness most unbeautiful to behold.

The well-known axiom about fair paths leading astray holds good with the high-ways and by-ways
of France, as elsewhere, and soon after leaving the ancient town of Provins, I am tempted by
a splendid road, following the windings of a murmuring brook, that appears to be going in my
direction, in consequence of which I soon find myself among cross-country by-ways, and among
peasant proprietors who apparently know little of the world beyond their native Tillages. 
Four o'clock finds me wheeling through a hilly vineyard district toward Villenauxe, a town
several kilometres off my proper route, from whence a dozen kilometres over a very good road
brings me to Sezanne, where the Hotel de France affords excellent accommodation.  After the
table d'hote the clanging bells of the old church hard by announce services of some kind, and
having a natural penchant when in strange places from wandering whithersoever inclination leads,
in anticipation of the ever possible item of interest, I meander into the church and take a
seat.  There appears to be nothing extraordinary about the service, the only unfamiliar feature
to me being a man wearing a uniform similar to the gendarmerie of Paris: cockade, sash, sword,
and everything complete; in addition to which he carries a large cane and a long brazen-headed
staff resembling the boarding-pike of the last century. It has rained heavily during the night,
but the roads around here are composed mainly of gravel, and are rather improved than otherwise
by the rain; and from Sezanne, through Champenoise and on to Vitry le Francois, a distance
of about sixty-five kilometres, is one of the most enjoyable stretches of road imaginable.
The contour of the country somewhat resembles the swelling prairies of Western Iowa, and the
roads are as perfect for most of the distance as an asphalt boulevard.  The hills are gradual
acclivities, and, owing to the good roads, are mostly ridable, while - the declivities make
the finest coasting imaginable; the exhilaration of gliding down them in the morning air, fresh
after the rain, can be compared only to Canadian tobogganing.  Ahead of you stretches a gradual
downward slope, perhaps two kilometres long.  Knowing full well that from top to bottom there
exists not a loose stone or a dangerous spot, you give the ever-ready steel-horse the rein;
faster and faster whirl the glistening wheels until objects "by the road-side become indistinct
phantoms as they glide instantaneously by, and to strike a hole or obstruction is to be transformed
into a human sky-rocket, and, later on, into a new arrival in another world.  A wild yell of
warning at a blue- bloused peasant in the road ahead, shrill screams of dismay from several
females at a cluster of cottages, greet the ear as you sweep past like a whirlwind, and the
next moment reach the bottom at a rate of speed that would make the engineer of the Flying
Dutchman green with envy. Sometimes, for the sake of variety, when gliding noiselessly along
on the ordinary level, I wheel unobserved close up behind an unsuspecting peasant walking on
ahead, without calling out, and when he becomes conscious of my presence and looks around and
sees the strange vehicle in such close proximity it is well worth the price of a new hat to
see the lively manner in which he hops out of the way, and the next moment becomes fairly rooted
to the ground with astonishment; for bicycles and bicycle riders are less familiar objects
to the French peasant, outside of the neighborhood of a few large cities, than one would naturally
suppose.

Vitry le Frangois is a charming old town in the beautiful valley of the Marne; in the middle
ages it was a strongly fortified city; the moats and earth-works are still perfect.  The only
entrance to the town, even now, is over the old draw-bridges, the massive gates, iron wheels,
chains, etc., still being intact, so that the gates can yet be drawn up and entrance denied
to foes, as of yore; but the moats are now utilized for the boats of the Marne and Rhine Canal,
and it is presumable that the old draw-bridges are nowadays always left open.  To-day is Sunday
- and Sunday in France is equivalent to a holiday - consequently Vitry le Frangois, being quite
an important town, and one of the business centres of the prosperous and populous Marne Valley,
presents all the appearance of circus-day in an American agricultural community.  Several booths
are erected in the market square, the proprietors and attaches of two peregrinating theatres,
several peep-shows, and a dozen various games of chance, are vying with each other in the noisiness
of their demonstrations to attract the attention and small change of the crowd to their respective
enterprises.  Like every other highway in this part of France the Marne and Bhine Canal is
fringed with an avenue of poplars, that from neighboring elevations can be seen winding along
the beautiful valley for miles, presenting a most pleasing effect.

East of Vitry le Francois the roads deteriorate, and from thence to Bar- le they are inferior
to any hitherto encountered in France; nevertheless, from the American standpoint they are
very good roads, and when, at five o'clock, I wheel into Bar-le-Duc and come to sum up the
aggregate of the day's journey I find that, without any undue exertion, I have covered very
nearly one hundred and sixty kilometres, or about one hundred English miles, since 8.30 A.M.,
notwithstanding a good hour's halt at Vitry le Francois for dinner.  Bar-le-Duc appears to
be quite an important business centre, pleasantly situated in the valley of the Ornain River,
a tributary of the Marne; and the stream, in its narrow, fertile valley, winds around among
hills from whose sloping sides, every autumn, fairly ooze the celebrated red wines of the Meuse
and Moselle regions.  The valley has been favored with a tremendous downpour of rain and hail
during the night, and the partial formation of the road leading along the level valley eastward
being a light-colored, slippery clay, I find it anything but agreeable wheeling this morning;
moreover, the Ornain Valley road is not so perfectly kept as it might be.  As in every considerable
town in France, so also in Bar-le-Duc, the military element comes conspicuously to the fore.
Eleven kilometres of slipping and sliding through the greasy clay brings me to the little village
of Tronville, where I halt to investigate the prospect of obtaining something to eat.  As usual,
the prospect, from the street, is most unpromising, the only outward evidence being a few glass
jars of odds and ends of candy in one small window. Entering this establishment, the only thing
the woman can produce besides candy and raisins is a box of brown, wafer-like biscuits, the
unsubstantial appearance of which is, to say the least, most unsatisfactory to a person who
has pedalled his breakfastless way through eleven kilometres of slippery clay.  Uncertain of
their composition, and remembering my unhappy mistake at Mantes in desiring to breakfast off
yeast-cakes, I take the precaution of sampling one, and in the absence of anything more substantial
conclude to purchase a few, and so motion to the woman to hand me the box in order that I can
show her how many I want.  But the o'er-careful Frenchwoman, mistaking my meaning, and fearful
that I only want to sample yet another one, probably feeling uncertain of whether I might not
wish to taste a whole handful this time, instead of handing it over moves it out of my reach
altogether, meanwhile looking quite angry, and not a little mystified at her mysterious, pantomimic
customer.  A half-franc is produced, and, after taking the precaution of putting it away in
advance, the cautious female weighs me out the current quantity of her ware; and I notice that,
after giving lumping weight, she throws in a few extra, presumably to counterbalance what,
upon sober second thought, she perceives to have been an unjust suspicion.  While I am extracting
what satisfaction my feathery purchase contains, it begins to rain and hail furiously, and
so continues with little interruption all the forenoon, compelling me, much against my inclination,
to search out in Tronville, if possible, some accommodation till to-morrow morning.  The village
is a shapeless cluster of stone houses and stables, the most prominent feature of the streets
being huge heaps of manure and grape-vine prunings; but I manage to obtain the necessary shelter,
and such other accommodations as might be expected in an out-of-the-way village, unfrequented
by visitors from one year's end to another.  The following morning is still rainy, and the
clayey roads of the Ornain Valley are anything but inviting wheeling; but a longer stay in
Tronville is not to be thought of, for, among other pleasantries of the place here, the chief
table delicacy appears to be boiled escargots, a large, ungainly snail procured from the neighboring
hills.  Whilst fond of table delicacies, I emphatically draw the line at escargots.  Pulling
out toward Toul I find the roads, as expected, barely ridable; but the vineyard-environed little
valley, lovely in its tears, wrings from one praise in spite of muddy roads and lowering weather.
En route down the valley I meet a battery of artillery travelling from Toul to Bar-le Duc or
some other point to the westward; and if there is any honor in throwing a battery of French
artillery into confusion, and wellnigh routing them, then the bicycle and I are fairly entitled
to it.

As I ride carelessly toward them, the leading horses suddenly wheel around and begin plunging
about the road.  The officers' horses, and, in fact, the horses of the whole company, catch
the infection, and there is a plunging and a general confusion all along the line, seeing which
I, of course, dismount and retire - but not discomfited - from the field until they have passed.
These French horses are certainly not more than half-trained.  I passed a battery of English
artillery on the road leading out of Coventry, and had I wheeled along under the horses' noses
there would have been no confusion whatever.

On the divide between the Ornain and Moselle Valleys the roads are hillier, but somewhat less
muddy.  The weather continues showery and unsettled, and a short distance beyond Void I find
myself once again wandering off along the wrong road.  The peasantry hereabout seem to have
retained a lively recollection of the Prussians, my helmet appearing to have the effect of
jogging their memory, and frequently, when stopping to inquire about the roads, the first word
in response will be the pointed query, "Prussian." By following the directions given by three
different peasants, I wander along the muddy by-roads among the vineyards for two wet, unhappy
hours ere I finally strike the main road to Toul again. After floundering along the wellnigh
unimproved by-ways for two hours one thoroughly appreciates how much he is indebted to the
military necessities of the French Government for the splendid highways of France, especially
among these hills and valleys, where natural roadways would be anything but good.  Following
down the Moselle Valley, I arrive at the important city of Nancy in the eventide, and am fortunate,
I suppose, in discovering a hotel where a certain, or, more properly speaking, an uncertain,
quantity and quality of English are spoken.  Nancy is reputed to be one of the loveliest towns
in France.  But I merely remained in it over night, and long enough next morning to exchange
for some German money, as I cross over the frontier to-day.

Luneville is a town I pass through, some distance nearer the border, and the military display
here made is perfectly overshadowing.  Even the scarecrows in the fields are military figures,
with wooden swords threateningly waving about in their hands with every motion of the wind,
and the most frequent sound heard along the route is the sharp bang! bang! of muskets, where
companies of soldiers are target-practising in the woods.  There seems to be a bellicose element
in the very atmosphere; for every dog in every village I ride through verily takes after me,
and I run clean over one bumptious cur, which, miscalculating the speed at which I am coming,
fails to get himself out of the way in time.  It is the narrowest escape from a header I have
had since starting from Liverpool; although both man and dog were more scared than hurt.  Sixty-five
kilometres from Nancy, and I take lunch at the frontier town of Blamont. The road becomes more
hilly, and a short distance out of Blamont, behold, it is as though a chalk-line were made
across the roadway, on the west side of which it had been swept with scrupulous care, and on
the east side not swept at all; and when, upon passing the next roadman, I notice that he bears
not upon his cap the brass stencil-plate bearing the inscription, " Cantonnier," I know that
I have passed over the frontier into the territory of Kaiser Wilhelm.

My journey through fair Prance has been most interesting, and perhaps instructive, though I
am afraid that the lessons I have taken in French politeness are altogether too superficial
to be lasting.  The "Bonjour, monsieur," and "Bon voyage," of France, may not mean any more
than the "If I don't see you again, why, hello." of America, but it certainly sounds more musical
and pleasant.  It is at the table d'hote, however, that I have felt myself to have invariably
shone superior to the natives; for, lo! the Frenchman eats soup from the end of his spoon.
True, it is more convenient to eat soup from the prow of a spoon than from the larboard; nevertheless,
it is when eating soup that I instinctively feel my superiority.  The French peasants, almost
without exception, conclude that the bright-nickelled surface of the bicycle is silver, and
presumably consider its rider nothing less than a millionnaire in consequence; but it is when
I show them the length of time the rear wheel or a pedal will spin round that they manifest
their greatest surprise.  The crowning glory of French landscape is the magnificent avenues
of poplars that traverse the country in every direction, winding with the roads, the railways,
and canals along the valleys, and marshalled like sentinels along the brows of the distant
hills; without them French scenery would lose half its charm.

CHAPTER VI.

GERMANY, AUSTRIA, AND HUNGARY.

Notwithstanding Alsace was French territory only fourteen years ago (1871) there is a noticeable
difference in the inhabitants, to me the most acceptable being their great linguistic superiority
over the people on the French side of the border.  I linger in Saarburg only about thirty minutes,
yet am addressed twice by natives in my own tongue; and at Pfalzburg, a smaller town, where
I remain over night, I find the same characteristic.  Ere I penetrate thirty kilometres into
German territory, however, I have to record what was never encountered in France; an insolent
teamster, who, having his horses strung across a narrow road- way in the suburbs of Saarburg,
refuses to turn his leaders' heads to enable me to ride past, thus compelling me to dismount.
Soldiers drilling, soldiers at target practice, and soldiers in companies marching about in
every direction, greet my eyes upon approaching Pfalzburg; and although there appears to be
less beating of drums and blare of trumpets than in French garrison towns, one seldom turns
a street corner without hearing the measured tramp of a military company receding or approaching.
These German troops appear to march briskly and in a business-like manner in comparison with
the French, who always seem to carry themselves with a tired and dejected deportment; but the
over-ample and rather slouchy-looking pantaloons of the French are probably answerable, in
part, for this impression.  One cannot watch these sturdy-looking German soldiers without a
conviction that for the stern purposes of war they are inferior only to the soldiers of our
own country.  At the little gasthaus at Pfalzburg the people appear to understand and anticipate
an Englishman's gastronomic peculiarities, for the first time since leaving England I am confronted
at the supper-table with excellent steak and tea.

It is raining next morning as I wheel over the rolling hills toward Saverne, a city nestling
pleasantly in a little valley beyond those dark wooded heights ahead that form the eastern
boundary of the valley of the Rhine.  The road is good but hilly, and for several kilometres,
before reaching Saverne, winds its way among the pine forests tortuously and steeply down from
the elevated divide.  The valley, dotted here and there with pleasant villages, is spread out
like a marvellously beautiful picture, the ruins of several old castles on neighboring hill-tops
adding a charm, as well as a dash of romance.

The rain pours down in torrents as I wheel into Saverne.  I pause long enough to patronize
a barber shop; also to procure an additional small wrench.  Taking my nickelled monkey-wrench
into a likely-looking hardware store, I ask the proprietor if he has anything similar.  He
examines it with lively interest, for, in comparison with the clumsy tools comprising his stock-in-trade,
the wrench is as a watch-spring to an old horse-shoe. I purchase a rude tool that might have
been fashioned on the anvil of a village blacksmith.  From Saverne my road leads over another
divide and down into the glorious valley of the Rhine, for a short distance through a narrow
defile that reminds me somewhat of a canon in the Sierra Nevada foot-hills; but a fine, broad
road, spread with a coating of surface-mud only by this morning's rain, prevents the comparison
from assuming definite shape for a cycler.  Extensive and beautifully terraced vineyards mark
the eastern exit.  The road-beds of this country are hard enough for anything; but a certain
proportion of clay in their composition makes a slippery coating in rainy weather.  I enter
the village of Marienheim and observe the first stork's nest, built on top of a chimney, that
I have yet seen in Europe, though I saw plenty of them afterward.  The parent stork is perched
solemnly over her youthful brood, which one would naturally think would get smoke-dried.  A
short distance from Marlenheim I descry in the hazy distance the famous spire of Strasburg
cathedral looming conspicuously above everything else in all the broad valley; and at 1.30
P.M.  I wheel through the massive arched gateway forming part of the city's fortifications,
and down the broad but roughly paved streets, the most mud-be-spattered object in all Strasburg.
The fortifications surrounding the city are evidently intended strictly for business, and not
merely for outward display.  The railway station is one of the finest in Europe, and among
other conspicuous improvements one notices steam tram-cars.  While trundling through the city
I am imperatively ordered off the sidewalk by the policeman; and when stopping to inquire of
a respectable-looking Strasburger for the Appeuweir road, up steps an individual with one eye
and a cast off military cap three sizes too small.  After querying, " Appenweir.  Englander?"
he wheels "about face" with military precision doubtless thus impelled by the magic influence
of his headgear - and beckons me to follow.  Not knowing what better course to pursue I obey,
and after threading the mazes of a dozen streets, composed of buildings ranging in architecture
from the much gabled and not unpicturesque structures of mediaeval times to the modern brown-stone
front, he pilots me outside the fortifications again, points up the Appenweir road, and after
the never neglected formality of touching his cap and extending his palm, returns city-ward.

Crossing the Rhine over a pontoon bridge, I ride along level and, happily, rather less muddy
roads, through pleasant suburban villages, near one of which I meet a company of soldiers in
undress uniform, strung out carelessly along the road, as though returning from a tramp into
the country.  As I approach them, pedalling laboriously against a stiff head wind, both myself
and the bicycle fairly yellow with clay, both officers and soldiers begin to laugh in a good-natured,
bantering sort of manner, and a round dozen of them sing out in chorus "Ah! ah! der Englander."
and as I reply, "Yah! yah." in response, and smile as I wheel past them, the laughing and banter
go all along the line.  The sight of an "Englander" on one of his rambling expeditions of adventure
furnishes much amusement to the average German, who, while he cannot help admiring the spirit
of enterprise that impels him, fails to comprehend where the enjoyment can possibly come in.
The average German would much rather loll around, sipping wine or beer, and smoking cigarettes,
than impel a bicycle across a continent.  A few miles eastward of the Rhine another grim fortress
frowns upon peaceful village and broad, green meads, and off yonder to the right is yet another;
sure enough, this Franco-German frontier is one vast military camp, with forts, and soldiers,
and munitions of war everywhere.  When I crossed the Rhine I left Lower Alsace, and am now
penetrating the middle Rhine region, where villages are picturesque clusters of gabled cottages
- a contrast to the shapeless and ancient-looking stone structures of the French villages.
The difference also extends to the inhabitants; the peasant women of France, in either real
or affected modesty, would usually pretend not to notice anything extraordinary as I wheeled
past, but upon looking back they would almost invariably be seen standing and gazing after
my receding figure with unmistakable interest; but the women of these Rhine villages burst
out into merry peals of laughter.

Rolling over fair roads into the village of Oberkirch, I conclude to remain for the night,
and the first thing undertaken is to disburden the bicycle of its covering of clay.  The awkward-looking
hostler comes around several times and eyes the proceedings with glances of genuine disapproval,
doubtless thinking I am cleaning it myself instead of letting him swab it with a besom with
the single purpose in view of dodging the inevitable tip.  The proprietor can speak a few words
of English.  He puts his bald head out of the window above, and asks: "Pe you Herr Shtevens
?" "Yah, yah," I reply.

" Do you go mit der veld around ?" "Yah; I goes around mit the world."

"I shoust read about you mit der noospaper." " Ah, indeed! what newspaper?"

"Die Frankfurter Zeitung.  You go around mit der veld." The landlord looks delighted to have
for a guest the man who goes "mit der veld around," and spreads the news.  During the evening
several people of importance and position drop in to take a curious peep at me and my wheel.

A dampness about the knees, superinduced by wheeling in rubber leggings, causes me to seek
the privilege of the kitchen fire upon arrival.  After listening to the incessant chatter of
the cook for a few moments, I suddenly dispense with all pantomime, and ask in purest English
the privilege of drying my clothing in peace and tranquillity by the kitchen fire.  The poor
woman hurries out, and soon returns with her highly accomplished master, who, comprehending
the situation, forthwith tenders me the loan of his Sunday pantaloons for the evening; which
offer I gladly accept, notwithstanding the wide disproportion in their size and mine, the landlord
being, horizontally, a very large person.  Oberkirch is a pretty village at the entrance to
the narrow and charming valley of the River Bench, up which my route leads, into the fir-clad
heights of the Black Forest.  A few miles farther up the valley I wheel through a small village
that nestles amid surroundings the loveliest I have yet seen.  Dark, frowning firs intermingled
with the lighter green of other vegetation crown the surrounding spurs of the Knibis Mountains;
vineyards, small fields of waving rye, and green meadow cover the lower slopes with variegated
beauty, at the foot of which huddles the cluster of pretty cottages amid scattered orchards
of blossoming fruit-trees.  The cheery lute of the herders on the mountains, the carol of birds,
and the merry music of dashing mountain-streams fill the fresh morning air with melody. All
through this country there are apple-trees, pear-trees, cherry-trees In the fruit season one
can scarce open his mouth out-doors without having the goddess Pomona pop in some delicious
morsel.  The poplar avenues of France have disappeared, but the road is frequently shaded for
miles with fruit-trees.  I never before saw a spot so lovely-certainly not in combination with
a wellnigh perfect road for wheeling.  On through Oppenau and Petersthal my way leads - this
latter a place of growing importance as a summer resort, several commodious hotels with swimming-baths,
mineral waters, etc., being already prepared to receive the anticipated influx of health and
pleasure-seeking guests this coming summer - and then up, up, up among the dark pines leading
over the Black Forest Mountains. Mile after mile of steep incline has now been trundled, following
the Bench River to its source.  Ere long the road I have lately traversed is visible far below,
winding and twisting up the mountain-slopes.  Groups of swarthy peasant women are carrying
on their heads baskets of pine cones to the villages below.  At a distance the sight of their
bright red dresses among the sombre green of the pines is suggestive of the fairies with which
legend has peopled the Black Forest.

The summit is reached at last, and two boundary posts apprise the traveller that on this wooded
ridge he passes from Baden into Wurtemberg.  The descent for miles is agreeably smooth and
gradual; the mountain air blows cool and refreshing, with an odor of the pines; the scenery
is Black Forest scenery, and what more could be possibly desired than this happy combination
of circumstances.  Reaching Freudenstadt about noon, the mountain-climbing, the bracing air,
and the pine fragrance cause me to give the good people at the gasthaus an impressive lesson
in the effect of cycling on the human appetite.  At every town and village I pass through in
Wurtemberg the whole juvenile population collects around me in an incredibly short time.  The
natural impulse of the German small boy appears to be to start running after me, shouting and
laughing immoderately, and when passing through some of the larger villages, it is no exaggeration
to say that I have had two hundred small Germans, noisy and demonstrative, clattering along
behind in their heavy wooden shoes.

Wurtemburg, by this route at least, is a decidedly hilly country, and the roads are far inferior
to those of both England and France.  There will be, perhaps, three kilometres of trundling
up through wooded heights leading out of a small valley, then, after several kilometres over
undulating, stony upland roads, a long and not always smooth descent into another small valley,
this programme, several times repeated, constituting the journey of the clay.  The small villages
of the peasantry are frequently on the uplands, but the larger towns are invariably in the
valleys, sheltered by wooded heights, perched among the crags of the most inaccessible of which
are frequently seen the ruins of an old castle. Scores of little boys of eight or ten are breaking
stones by the road-side, at which I somewhat marvel, since there is a compulsory school law
in Germany; but perhaps to-day is a holiday; or maybe, after school hours, it is customary
for these unhappy youngsters to repair to the road-sides and blister their hands with cracking
flints.  "Hungry as a buzz-saw" I roll into the sleepy old town of Rothenburg at six o'clock,
and, repairing to the principal hotel, order supper.  Several flunkeys of different degrees
of usefulness come in and bow obsequiously from time to time, as I sit around, expecting supper
to appear every minute.  At seven o'clock the waiter comes in, bows profoundly, and lays the
table-cloth; at 7.15 he appears again, this time with a plate, knife, and fork, doing more
bowing and scraping as he lays them on the table.  Another half-hour rolls by, when, doubtless
observing my growing impatience as he happens in at intervals to close a shutter or re-regulate
the gas, he produces a small illustrated paper, and, bowing profoundly; lays it before me.
I feel very much like making him swallow it, but resigning myself to what appears to be inevitable
fate, I wait and wait, and at precisely 8.15 he produces a plate of soup; at 8.30 the kalbscotolet
is brought on, and at 8.45 a small plate of mixed biscuits.  During the meal I call for another
piece of bread, and behold there is a hurrying to and fro, and a resounding of feet scurrying
along the stone corridors of the rambling old building, and ten minutes later I receive a small
roll.  At the opposite end of the long table upon which I am writing some half-dozen ancient
and honorable Rothenburgers are having what they doubtless consider a "howling time." Confronting
each is a huge tankard of foaming lager, and the one doubtless enjoying himself the most and
making the greatest success of exciting the envy and admiration of those around him is a certain
ponderous individual who sits from hour to hour in a half comatose condition, barely keeping
a large porcelain pipe from going out, and at fifteen-minute intervals taking a telling pull
at the lager.  Were it not for an occasional blink of the eyelids and the periodical visitation
of the tankard to his lips, it would be difficult to tell whether he were awake or sleeping,
the act of smoking being barely perceptible to the naked eye.

In the morning I am quite naturally afraid to order anything to eat here for fear of having
to wait until mid-day, or thereabouts, before getting it; so, after being the unappreciative
recipient of several more bows, more deferential and profound if anything than the bows of
yesterday eve, I wheel twelve kilometres to Tubingen for breakfast.  It showers occasionally
during the forenoon, and after about thirty-five kilometres of hilly country it begins to descend
in torrents, compelling me to follow the example of several peasants in seeking the shelter
of a thick pine copse.  We are soon driven out of it, however, and donning my gossamer rubber
suit, I push on to Alberbergen, where I indulge in rye bread and milk, and otherwise while
away the hours until three o'clock, when, the rain ceasing, I pull out through the mud for
Blaubeuren.  Down the beautiful valley of one of the Danube's tributaries I ride on Sunday
morning, pedalling to the music of Blaubeuren's church-bells.  After waiting until ten o'clock,
partly to allow the roads to dry a little, I conclude to wait no longer, and so pull out toward
the important and quite beautiful city of Ulm.  The character of the country now changes, and
with it likewise the characteristics of the people, who verily seem to have stamped upon their
features the peculiarities of the region they inhabit.  My road eastward of Blaubeuren follows
down a narrow, winding valley, beside the rippling head-waters of the Danube, and eighteen
kilometres of variable road brings me to the strongly fortified city of Ulm, the place I should
have reached yesterday, except for the inclemency of the weather, and where I cross from Wurtemberg
into Bavaria.  On the uninviting uplands of Central Wurtemberg one looks in vain among the
peasant women for a prepossessing countenance or a graceful figure, but along the smiling valleys
of Bavaria, the women, though usually with figures disproportionately broad, nevertheless carry
themselves with a certain gracefulness; and, while far from the American or English idea of
beautiful, are several degrees more so than their relatives of the part of Wilrtemberg I have
traversed.  I stop but a few minutes at Ulm, to test a mug of its lager and inquire the details
of the road to Augsburg, yet during that short time I find myself an object of no little curiosity
to the citizens, for the fame of my undertaking has pervaded Ulm.

The roads of Bavaria possess the one solitary merit of hardness, otherwise they would be simply
abominable, the Bavarian idea of road-making evidently being to spread unlimited quantities
of loose stones over the surface. For miles a wheelman is compelled to follow along narrow,
wheel-worn tracks, incessantly dodging loose stones, or otherwise to pedal his way cautiously
along the edges of the roadway.  I am now wheeling through the greatest beer-drinking, sausage-consuming
country in the world; hop- gardens are a prominent feature of the landscape, and long links
of sausages are dangling in nearly every window.  The quantities of these viands I see consumed
to-day are something astonishing, though the celebration of the Whitsuntide holidays is probably
augmentative of the amount.

The strains of instrumental music come floating over the level bottom of the Lech valley as,
toward eventide, I approach the beautiful environs of Augsburg, and ride past several beer-gardens,
where merry crowds of Augsburgers are congregated, quaffing foaming lager, eating sausages,
and drinking inspiration from the music of military bands.  "Where is the headquarters of the
Augsburg Velocipede Club?" I inquire of a promising-looking youth as, after covering one hundred
and twenty kilometres since ten o'clock, I wheel into the city.  The club's headquarters are
at a prominent cafe and beer-garden in the south-eastern suburbs, and repairing thither I find
an accommodating individual who can speak English, and who willingly accepts the office of
interpreter between me and the proprietor of the garden.  Seated amid hundreds of soldiers,
Augsburg civilians, and peasants from the surrounding country, and with them extracting genuine
enjoyment from a tankard of foaming Augsburg lager, I am informed that most of the members
of the club are celebrating the Whitsuntide holidays by touring about the surrounding country,
but that I am very welcome to Augsburg, and I am conducted to the Hotel Mohrenkopf (Moor's
Head Hotel), and invited to consider myself the guest of the club as long as I care to remain
in Augsburg-the Bavarians are nothing if not practical.

Mr. Josef Kling, the president of the club, accompanies me as far out as Friedburg on Monday
morning; it is the last day of the holidays, and the Bavarians are apparently bent on making
the most of it.  The suburban beer-gardens are already filled with people, and for some distance
out of the city the roads are thronged with holiday-making Augsburgers repairing to various
pleasure resorts in the neighboring country, and the peasantry streaming cityward from the
villages, their faces beaming in anticipation of unlimited quantities of beer.  About every
tenth person among the outgoing Augsburgers is carrying an accordion; some playing merrily
as they walk along, others preferring to carry theirs in blissful meditation on the good time
in store immediately ahead, while a thoughtful majority have large umbrellas strapped to their
backs.  Music and song are heard on every hand, and as we wheel along together in silence,
enforced by an ignorance of each other's language, whichever way one looks, people in holiday
attire and holiday faces are moving hither and thither.

Some of the peasants are fearfully and wonderfully attired: the men wear high top-boots, polished
from the sole to the uppermost hair's breadth of leather; black, broad-brimmed felt hats, frequently
with a peacock's feather a yard long stuck through the band, the stem protruding forward, and
the end of the feather behind; and their coats and waistcoats are adorned with long rows of
large, ancestral buttons.  I am now in the Swabian district, and these buttons that form so
conspicuous a part of the holiday attire are made of silver coins, and not infrequently have
been handed down from generation to generation for several centuries, they being, in fact,
family heirlooms.  The costumes of the Swabish peasant women are picturesque in the extreme:
their finest dresses and that wondrous head-gear of brass, silver, or gold - the Schwabische
Bauernfrauenhaube (Swabish farmer-woman hat) - being, like the buttons of the men, family heirlooms.
Some of these wonderful ancestral dresses, I am told, contain no less than one hundred and
fifty yards of heavy material, gathered and closely pleated in innumerable perpendicular folds,
frequently over a foot thick, making the form therein incased appear ridiculously broad and
squatty.  The waistbands of the dresses are up in the region of the shoulder-blades; the upper
portion of the sleeves are likewise padded out to fearful proportions.

The day is most lovely, the fields are deserted, and the roads and villages are alive with
holiday-making peasants.  In every village a tall pole is erected, and decorated from top to
bottom with small flags and evergreen wreaths.  The little stone churches and the adjoining
cemeteries are filled with worshippers chanting in solemn chorus; not so preoccupied with their
devotional exercises and spiritual meditations, however, as to prevent their calling one another's
attention to me as I wheel past, craning their necks to obtain a better view, and, in one instance,
an o'er-inquisitive worshipper even beckons for me to stop - this person both chanting and
beckoning vigorously at the same time.

Now my road leads through forests of dark firs; and here I overtake a procession of some fifty
peasants, the men and women alternately chanting in weird harmony as they trudge along the
road.  The men are bareheaded, carrying their hats in hand.  Many of the women are barefooted,
and the pedal extremities of others are incased in stockings of marvellous pattern; not any
are wearing shoes.  All the colors of the rainbow are represented in their respective costumes,
and each carries a large umbrella strapped at his back; they are trudging along at quite a
brisk pace, and altogether there is something weird and fascinating about the whole scene:
the chanting and the surroundings.  The variegated costumes of the women are the only bright
objects amid the gloominess of the dark green pines.  As I finally pass ahead, the unmistakable
expressions of interest on the faces of the men, and the even rows of ivories displayed by
the women, betray a diverted attention.

Near noon I arrive at the antiquated town of Dachau, and upon repairing to the gasthaus, an
individual in a last week's paper collar, and with general appearance in keeping, comes forward
and addresses me in quite excellent English, and during the dinner hour answers several questions
concerning the country and the natives so intelligently that, upon departing, I ungrudgingly
offer him the small tip customary on such occasions in Germany. "No, Whitsuntide in Bavaria.
I thank you, very muchly," he replies, smiling, and shaking his head.  "I am not an employe
of the hotel, as you doubtless think; I am a student of modern languages at the Munich University,
visiting Dauhau for the day." Several soldiers playing billiards in the room grin broadly in
recognition of the ludicrousness situation; and I must confess that for the moment I feel like
asking one of them to draw his sword and charitably prod me out of the room.  The unhappy memory
of having, in my ignorance, tendered a small tip to a student of the Munich University will
cling around me forever.  Nevertheless, I feel that after all there are extenuating circumstances
- he ought to change his paper collar occasionally.

An hour after noon I am industriously dodging loose flints on the level road leading across
the Isar River Valley toward Munich; the Tyrolese Alps loom up, shadowy and indistinct, in
the distance to the southward, their snowy peaks recalling memories of the Rockies through
which I was wheeling exactly a year ago.  While wending my way along the streets toward the
central portion of the Bavarian capital the familiar sign, "American Cigar Store," looking
like a ray of light penetrating through the gloom and mystery of the multitudinous unreadable
signs that surround it, greets my vision, and I immediately wend my footsteps thitherward.
I discover in the proprietor, Mr. Walsch, a native of Munich, who, after residing in America
for several years, has returned to dream away declining years amid the smoke of good cigars
and the quaffing of the delicious amber beer that the brewers of Munich alone know how to brew.
Then who should happen in but Mr. Charles Buscher, a thorough-going American; from Chicago,
who is studying art here at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, and who straightway volunteers
to show me Munich.

Nine o'clock next morning finds me under the pilotage of Mr. Buscher, wandering through the
splendid art galleries.  We next visit the Royal Academy of Fine Arts, a magnificent building,
being erected at a cost of 7,000,000 marks.

We repair at eleven o'clock to the royal residence, making a note by the way of a trifling
mark of King Ludwig's well-known eccentricity.  Opposite the palace is an old church, with
two of its four clocks facing the King's apartments.  The hands of these clocks are, according
to my informant, made of gold.  Some time since the King announced that the sight of these
golden hands hurt his eyesight, and ordered them painted black.  It was done, and they are
black to-day.  Among the most interesting objects in the palace are the room and bed in which
Napoleon I. slept in 1809, which has since been occupied by no other person; the "rich bed,"
a gorgeous affair of pink and scarlet satin-work, on which forty women wove, with gold thread,
daily, for ten years, until 1,600,000 marks were expended.

At one of the entrances to the royal residence, and secured with iron bars, is a large bowlder
weighing three hundred and sixty-three pounds; in the wall above it are driven three spikes,
the highest spike being twelve feet from the ground; and Bavarian historians have recorded
that Earl Christoph, a famous giant, tossed this bowlder up to the mark indicated by the highest
spike, with his foot.

After this I am kindly warned by both Messrs. Buscher and Walsch not to think of leaving the
city without visiting the Konigliche Hofbrauhaus (Royal Court Brewery) the most famous place
of its kind in all Europe. For centuries Munich has been famous for the excellent quality of
its beer, and somewhere about four centuries ago the king founded this famous brewery for the
charitable purpose of enabling his poorer subjects to quench their thirst with the best quality
of beer, at prices within their means, and from generation to generation it has remained a
favorite resort in Munich for lovers of good beer.  In spite of its remaining, as of yore,
a place of rude benches beneath equally rude, open sheds, with cobwebs festooning the rafters
and a general air of dilapidation about it; in spite of the innovation of dozens of modern
beer-gardens with waving palms, electric lights, military music, and all modern improvements,
the Konigliche Hofbrauhaus is daily and nightly thronged with thirsty visitors, who for the
trifling sum of twenty-two pfennigs (about five cents) obtain a quart tankard of the most celebrated
brew in all Bavaria.

"Munich is the greatest art-centre of the world, the true hub of the artistic universe," Mr.
Buscher enthusiastically assures me as we wander together through the sleepy old streets, and
he points out a bright bit of old frescoing, which is already partly obliterated by the elements,
and compares it with the work of recent years; calls my attention to a piece of statuary, and
anon pilots me down into a restaurant and beer hall in some ancient, underground vaults and
bids me examine the architecture and the frescoing.  The very custom-house of Munich is a glorious
old church, that would be carefully preserved as a relic of no small interest and importance
in cities less abundantly blessed with antiquities, but which is here piled with the cases
and boxes and bags of commerce.  One other conspicuous feature of Munich life must not be over-looked
ere I leave it, viz., the hackmen.  Unlike their Transatlantic brethren, they appear supremely
indifferent about whether they pick up any fares or not.  Whenever one comes to a hack-stand
it is a pretty sure thing to bet that nine drivers out of every ten are taking a quiet snooze,
reclining on their elevated boxes, entirely oblivious of their surroundings, and a timid stranger
would almost hesitate about disturbing their slumbers. But the Munich cabby has long since
got hardened to the disagreeable process of being wakened up.  Nor does this lethargy pervade
the ranks of hackdom only: at least two-thirds of the teamsters one meets on the roads, hereabouts,
are stretched out on their respective loads, contentedly sleeping while the horses or oxen
crawl leisurely along toward their goal.

Munich is visited heavily with rain during the night, and for several kilometres, next morning,
the road is a horrible waste of loose flints and mud-filled ruts, along which it is all but
impossible to ride; but after leaving the level bottom of the Isar River the road improves
sufficiently to enable me to take an occasional, admiring glance at the Bavarian and Tyrolese
Alps, towering cloudward on the southern horizon, their shadowy outlines scarcely distinguishable
in the hazy distance from the fleecy clouds their peaks aspire to invade.  While absentmindedly
taking a more lingering look than is consistent with safety when picking one's way along the
narrow edge of the roadway between the stone-strewn centre and the ditch, I run into the latter,
and am rewarded with my first Cis-atlantic header, but fortunately both myself and the bicycle
come up uninjured.  Unlike the Swabish peasantry, the natives east of Munich appear as prosy
and unpicturesque in dress as a Kansas homesteader.

Ere long there is noticeable a decided change in the character of the villages, they being
no longer clusters of gabled cottages, but usually consist of some three or four huge, rambling
bulldings, at one of which I call for a drink and observe that brewing and baking are going
on as though they were expecting a whole regiment to be quartered on them. Among other things
I mentally note this morning is that the men actually seem to be bearing the drudgery of the
farm equally with the women; but the favorable impression becomes greatly imperilled upon meeting
a woman harnessed to a small cart, heavily laboring along, while her husband - kind man - is
walking along-side, holding on to a rope, upon which he considerately pulls to assist her along
and lighten her task.  Nearing Hoag, and thence eastward, the road becomes greatly improved,
and along the Inn River Valley, from Muhldorf to Alt Oetting, where I remain for the night,
the late rain-storm has not reached, and the wheeling is superior to any I have yet had in
Germany.  Muhldorf is a curious and interesting old town.  The sidewalks of Muhldorf are beneath
long arcades from one end of the principal street to the other; not modern structures either,
but massive archways that are doubtless centuries old, and that support the front rooms of
the buildings that tower a couple of stories above them.

As toward dusk I ride into the market square of Alt Oetting, it is noticeable that nearly all
the stalls and shops remaining open display nothing but rosaries, crucifixes, and other paraphernalia
of the prevailing religion.  Through Eastern Bavaria the people seern pre-eminently devotional;
church-spires dot the landscape at every point of the compass.  At my hotel in Alt Oetting,
crucifixes, holy water, and burning tapers are situated on the different stairway landings.
I am sitting in my room, penning these lines to the music of several hundred voices chanting
in the old stone church near by, and can look out of the window and see a number of peasant
women taking turns in dragging themselves on their knees round and round a small religious
edifice in the centre of the market square, carrying on their shoulders huge, heavy wooden
crosses, the ends of which are trailing on the ground.

All down the Inn River Valley, there is many a picturesque bit of intermingled pine-copse and
grassy slopes; but admiring scenery is anything but a riskless undertaking along here, as I
quickly discover. On the Inn River I find a primitive ferry-boat operated by a, fac-simile
of the Ancient Mariner, who takes me and my wheel across for the consideration of five pfennigs-a
trifle over one cent -and when I refuse the tiny change out of a ten-pfennig piece the old
fellow touches his cap as deferentially, and favors me with a look of gratitude as profound,
as though I were bestowing a pension upon him for life.  My arrival at a broad, well-travelled
high-way at once convinces me that I have again been unwittingly wandering among the comparatively
untravelled by-ways as the result of following the kindly meant advice of people whose knowledge
of bicycling requirements is of the slimmest nature.  The Inn River a warm, rich vale; haymaking
is already in full progress, and delightful perfume is wafted on the fresh morning air from
aclows where scores of barefooted Maud Mullers are raking hay, and mowing it too, swinging
scythes side by side with the men. Some of the out-door crucifixes and shrines (small, substantial
buildings containing pictures, images, and all sorts of religious -emblems) along this valley
are really quite elaborate affairs.  All through Roman Catholic Germany these emblems of religion
are very elaborate, or the reverse, according to the locality, the chosen spot in rich and
fertile valleys generally being favored with better and more artistic affairs, and more of
them, than the comparatively unproductive uplands.  This is evidently because the inhabitants
of the latter regions are either less wealthy, and consequently cannot afford it, or otherwise
realize that they have really much less to be thankful for than their comparatively fortunate
neighbors in the more productive valleys.

At the town of Simbach I cross the Inn River again on a substantial wooden bridge, and on the
opposite side pass under an old stone archway bearing the Austrian coat-of-arms.  Here I am
conducted into the custom-house by an officer wearing the sombre uniform of Franz Josef, and
required, for the first time in Europe, to produce my passport.  After a critical and unnecessarily
long examination of this document I am graciously permitted to depart.  In an adjacent money-changer's
office I exchange what German money I have remaining for the paper currency of Austria, and
once more pursue my way toward the Orient, finding the roads rather better than the average
German ones, the Austrians, hereabouts at least, having had the goodness to omit the loose
flints so characteristic of Bavaria.  Once out of the valley of the Inn River, however, I find
the uplands intervening between it and the valley of the Danube aggravatingly hilly.

While eating my first luncheon in Austria, at the village of Altheim, the village pedagogue
informs me in good English that I am the first Briton he has ever had the pleasure of conversing
with.  He learned the language entirely from books, without a tutor, he says, learning it for
pleasure solely, never expecting to utilize the accomplishment in any practical way.  One hill
after another characterizes my route to-day; the weather, which has hitherto remained reasonably
mild, is turning hot and sultry, and, arriving at Hoag about five o'clock, I feel that I have
done sufficient hillclimbing for one day.  I have been wheeling through Austrian territory
since 10.30 this morning, and, with observant eyes the whole distance, I have yet to see the
first native, male or female, possessing in the least degree either a graceful figure or a
prepossessing face.  There has been a great horse-fair at Hoag to-day; the business of the
day is concluded, and the principal occupation of the men, apart from drinking beer and smoking,
appears to be frightening the women out of their wits by leading prancing horses as near them
as possible.

My road, on leaving Hoag, is hilly, and the snowy heights of the Nordliche Kalkalpen (North
Chalk Mountains), a range of the Austrian Alps, loom up ahead at an uncertain distance.  To-day
is what Americans call a "scorcher," and climbing hills among pine-woods, that shut out every
passing breeze, is anything but exhilarating exercise with the thermometer hovering in the
vicinity of one hundred degrees.  The peasants are abroad in their fields as usual, but a goodly
proportion are reclining beneath the trees.  Reclining is, I think, a favorite pastime with
the Austrian. The teamster, who happens to be wide awake and sees me approaching, knows instinctively
that his team is going to scare at the bicycle, yet he makes no precautionary movements whatever,
neither does he arouse himself from his lolling position until the horses or oxen begin to
swerve around. As a usual thing the teamster is filling his pipe, which has a large, ungainly-looking,
porcelain bowl, a long, straight wooden stem, and a crooked mouth-piece.  Almost every Austrian
peasant from sixteen years old upward carries one of these uncomely pipes.

The men here seem to be dull, uninteresting mortals, dressed in tight- fitting, and yet, somehow,
ill-fitting, pantaloons, usually about three sizes too short, a small apron of blue ducking-an
unbecoming garment that can only be described as a cross between a short jacket and a waistcoat
- and a narrow-rimmed, prosy-looking billycock hat.  The peasant women are the poetry of Austria,
as of any other European country, and in their short red dresses and broad-brimmed, gypsy hats,
they look picturesque and interesting in spite of homely faces and ungraceful figures.  Riding
into Lambach this morning, I am about wheeling past a horse and drag that, careless and Austrian-like,
has been left untied and unwatched in the middle of the street, when the horse suddenly scares,
swerves around just in front of me, and dashes, helter-skelter, down the street.  The horse
circles around the market square and finally stops of his own accord without doing any damage.
Runaways, other misfortunes, it seems, never come singly, and ere I have left Lambach an hour
I am the innocent cause of yet another one; this time it is a large, powerful work-dog, who
becomes excited upon meeting me along the road, and upsets things in the most lively manner.
Small carts pulled by dogs are common vehicles here and this one is met coming up an incline,
the man considerately giving the animal a lift.  A life of drudgery breaks the spirit of these
work-dogs and makes them cowardly and cringing.  At my approach this one howls, and swerves
suddenly around with a rush that upsets both man and cart, topsy-turvy, into the ditch, and
the last glimpse of the rumpus obtained, as I sweep past and down the hill beyond, is the man
pawing the air with his naked feet and the dog struggling to free himself from the entangling
harness.

Up among the hills, at the village of Strenburg, night arrives at a very opportune moment to-day,
for Strenburg proves a nice, sociable sort of village, where the doctor can speak good English
and plays the role of interpreter for me at the gasthaus.  The school-ma'am, a vivacious Italian
lady, in addition to French and German, can also speak a few words of English, though she persistently
refers to herself as the " school -master." She boards at the same gasthaus, and all the evening
long I am favored by the liveliest prattle and most charming gesticulations imaginable, while
the room is half filled with her class of young lady aspirants to linguistic accomplishments,
listening to our amusing, if not instructive, efforts to carry on a conversation. ' It is altogether
a most enjoyable evening, and on parting I am requested to write when I get around the world
and tell the Strenburgers all that I have seen and experienced.  On top of the gasthaus is
a rude observatory, and before starting I take a view of the country.  The outlook is magnificent;
the Austrian Alps are towering skyward to the southeast, rearing snow-crowned heads out from
among a billowy sea of pine-covered hills, and to the northward is the lovely valley of the
Danube, the river glistening softly through the morning haze.

On yonder height, overlooking the Danube on the one hand and the town of Molk on the other,
is the largest and most imposing edifice I have yet seen in Austria; it is a convent of the
Benedictine monks; and though Molk is a solid, substantially built town, of perhaps a thousand
inhabitants, I should think there is more material in the immense convent building than in
the whole town besides, and one naturally wonders whatever use the monks can possibly have
for a building of such enormous dimensions.  Entering a barber's shop here for a shave, I find
the barber of Molk following the example of so many of his countrymen by snoozing the mid-day
hours happily and unconsciously away.  One could easily pocket and walk off with his stock-in-trade,
for small is the danger of his awakening. Waking him up, he shuffles mechanically over to hia
razor and lathering apparatus, this latter being a soup-plate with a semicircular piece chipped
out to fit, after a fashion, the contour of the customers' throats.  Pressing this jagged edge
of queen's-ware against your windpipe, the artist alternately rubs the water and a cake of
soap therein contained about your face with his hands, the water meanwhile passing freely between
the ill-fitting' soup-plate and your throat, and running down your breast; but don't complain;
be reasonable: no reasonable-minded person could expect one soup-plate, however carefully chipped
out, to fit the throats of the entire male population of Molk, besides such travellers as happen
along.

Spending the night at Neu Lengbach, I climb hills and wabble along, over rough, lumpy roads,
toward Vienna, reaching the Austrian capital Sunday morning, and putting up at the Englischer
Eof about noon.  At Vienna I determine to make a halt of two days, and on Tuesday pay a visit
to the headquarters of the Vienna Wanderers' Bicycle Club, away out on a suburban street called
Schwimmschulenstrasse; and the club promises that if I will delay my departure another day
they will get up a small party of wheelmen to escort me seventy kilometres, to Presburg.  The
bicycle clubs of Vienna have, at the Wanderers' headquarters, constructed an excellent race-track,
three and one-third laps to the English mile, at an expense of 2,000 gulden, and this evening
several of Austria's fliers are training upon it for the approaching races.  English and American
wheelmen little understand the difficulties these Vienna cyclers have to contend with: all
the city inside the Ringstrasse, and no less than fifty streets outside, are forbidden to the
mounted cyclers, and they are required to ticket themselves with big, glaring letters, as also
their lamps at night, so that, in case of violating any of these regulations, they can by their
number be readily recognized by the police.  Self-preservation compels the clubs to exercise
every precaution against violating the police regulations, in order not to excite popular prejudice
overwhelmingly against bicycles, and ere a new rider is permitted to venture outside their
own grounds he is hauled up before a regularly organized committee, consisting of officers
from each club in Vienna, and required to go through a regular examination in mounting, dismounting,
and otherwise proving to their entire satisfaction his proficiency in managing and manoeuvring
his wheel; besides which every cycler is provided with a pamphlet containing a list of the
streets he may and may not frequent. In spite of all these harassing regulations, the Austrian
capital has already two hundred riders.  The Viennese impress themselves upon me as being possessed
of more than ordinary individuality.  Yonder comes a man, walking languidly along, and carrying
his hat in his hand, because it is warm, and just behind him comes a fellow-citizen muffled
up in an overcoat because - because of Viennese individuality.  The people seem to walk the
streets with a swaying, happy-go-anyhow sort of gait, colliding with one another and jostling
together on the sidewalk in the happiest manner imaginable.

At five o'clock on Thursday morning I am dressing, when I am notified that two cyclers are
awaiting me below.  Church-bells are clanging joyously all over Vienna as we meander toward
suburbs, and people are already streaming in the direction of the St. Stephen's Church, near
the centre of the city, for to-day is Frohnleichnam (Corpus Christi), and the Emperor and many
of the great ecclesiastical, civil, and military personages of the empire will pass in procession
with all pomp and circumstance; and the average Viennese is not the person to miss so important
an occasion. Three other wheelmen are awaiting us in the suburbs, and together we ride through
the waving barley-fields of the Danube bottom to Schwechat, for the light breakfast customary
in Austria, and thence onward to Petronelle, thirty kilometres distant, where we halt a few
minutes for a Corpus Christi procession, and drink a glass of white Hungarian wine. Near Petronelle
are the remains of an old Roman wall, extending from the Danube to a lake called the Neusiedler
See.  My companions say it was built 2,000 years ago, when the sway of the Romans extended
over such parts of Europe as were worth the trouble and expense of swaying.  The roads are
found rather rough and inferior, on account of loose stones and uneven surface, as we push
forward toward Presburg, passing through a dozen villages whose streets are carpeted with fresh-cut
grass, and converted into temporary avenues, with branches stuck in the ground, in honor of
the day they are celebrating.  At Hamburg we pass beneath an archway nine hundred years old,
and wheel on through the grass-carpeted streets between rows of Hungarian soldiers drawn up
in line, with green oak-sprigs in their hats; the villagers are swarming from the church, whose
bells are filling the air with their clangor, and on the summit of an over-shadowing cliff
are the massive ruins of an ancient castle. Near about noon we roll into Presburg, warm and
dusty, and after dinner take a stroll through the Jewish quarter of the town up to the height
upon which Presburg castle is situated, and from which a most extensive and beautiful view
of the Danube, its wooded bluffs and broad, rich bottom-lands, is obtainable.  At dinner the
waiter hands me a card, which reads: "Pardon me, but I believe you are an Englishman, in which
case I beg the privilege of drinking a glass of wine with you." The sender is an English gentleman
residing at Budapest, Hungary, who, after the requested glass of wine, tells me that he guessed
who I was when he first saw me enter the garden with the five Austrian wheelmen.

My Austrian escort rides out with me to a certain cross-road, to make sure of heading me direct
toward Budapest, and as we part they bid me good speed, with a hearty "Eljen." - the Hungarian
"Hip, hip, hurrah." After leaving Presburg and crossing over into Hungary the road-bed is of
a loose gravel that, during the dry weather this country is now experiencing, is churned up
and loosened by every passing vehicle, until one might as well think of riding over a ploughed
field.  But there is a fair proportion of ridable side-paths, so that I make reasonably good
time.  Altenburg, my objective point for the night, is the centre of a sixty-thousand-acre
estate belonging to the Archduke Albrecht, uncle of the present Emperor of Austro-Hungary,
and one of the wealthiest land-owners in the empire.  Ere I have been at the gasthaus an hour
I am honored by a visit from Professor Thallmeyer, of the Altenburg Royal Agricultural School,
who invites me over to his house to spend an hour in conversation, and in the discussion of
a bottle of Hungary's best vintage, for the learned professor can talk very good English, and
his wife is of English birth and parentage.  Although Frau Thallmeyer left England at the tender
age of two years, she calls herself an Englishwoman, speaks of England as "home," and welcomes
to her house as a countryman any wandering Briton happening along.  I am no longer in a land
of small peasant proprietors, and there is a noticeably large proportion of the land devoted
to grazing purposes, that in France or Germany would be found divided into small farms, and
every foot cultivated.  Villages are farther apart, and are invariably adjacent to large commons,
on which roam flocks of noisy geese, herds of ponies, and cattle with horns that would make
a Texan blush - the long horned roadsters of Hungary.  The costumes of the Hungarian peasants
are both picturesque and novel, the women and girls wearing top-boots and short dresses on
holiday occasions and Sundays, and at other times short dresses without any boots at all; the
men wear loose-flowing pantaloons of white, coarse linen that reach just below the knees, and
which a casual observer would unhesitatingly pronounce a short skirt, the material being so
ample.  Hungary is still practically a land of serfs and nobles, and nearly every peasant encountered
along the road touches his cap respectfully, in instinctive acknowledgment, as it were, of
his inferiority.  Long rows of women are seen hoeing in the fields with watchful overseers
standing over them - a scene not unsuggestive of plantation life in the Southern States in
the days of slavery.  If these gangs of women are not more than about two hundred yards from
the road their inquisitiveness overcomes every other consideration, and dropping everything,
the whole crowd comes helter-skelter across the field to obtain a closer view of the strange
vehicle; for it is only in the neighborhood of one or two of the principal cities of Hungary
that one ever sees a bicycle.

Gangs of gypsies are now frequently met with; they are dark-skinned, interesting people, and
altogether different-looking from those occasionally encountered in England and America, where,
although swarthy and dark-skinned, they bear no comparison in that respect to these, whose
skin is wellnigh black, and whose gleaming white teeth and brilliant, coal-black eyes stamp
them plainly as alien to the race around them.  Ragged, unwashed, happy gangs of vagabonds
these stragglers appear, and regular droves of partially or wholly naked youngsters come racing
after me, calling out "kreuzer! kreuzer! kreuzer!" and holding out hand or tattered hat in
a supplicating manner as they run along-side.  Unlike the peasantry, none of these gypsies
touch their hats; indeed, yon swarthy-faced vagabond, arrayed mainly in gewgaws, and eying
me curiously with his piercing black eyes, may be priding himself on having royal blood in
his veins; and, unregenerate chicken-lifter though he doubtless be, would scarce condescend
to touch his tattered tile even to the Emperor of Austria.  The black eyes scintillate as they
take notice of what they consider the great wealth of sterling silver about the machine I bestride.
Eastward from Altenburg the main portion of the road continues for the most part unridably
loose and heavy.

For some kilometres out of Raab the road presents a far better surface, and I ride quite a
lively race with a small Danube passenger steamer that is starting down-stream.  The steamboat
toots and forges ahead, and in answer to the waving of hats and exclamations of encouragement
from the passengers, I likewise forge ahead, and although the boat is going down-stream with
the strong current of the Danube, as long as the road continues fairly good I manage to keep
in advance; but soon the loose surface reappears, and when I arrive at Gonys, for lunch, I
find the steamer already tied up, and the passengers and officers greet my appearance with
shouts of recognition.  My route along the Danube Valley leads through broad, level wheat-fields
that recall memories of the Sacramento Valley, California.  Geese appear as the most plentiful
objects around the villages: there are geese and goslings everywhere; and this evening, in
a small village, I wheel quite over one, to the dismay of the maiden driving them homeward,
and the unconcealed delight of several small Hungarians.

At the village of Nezmely I am to-night treated to a foretaste of what is probably in store
for me at a goodly number of places ahead by being consigned to a bunch of hay and a couple
of sacks in the stable as the best sleeping accommodations the village gasthaus affords.  True,
I am assigned the place of honor in the manger, which, though uncomfortably narrow and confining,
is perhaps better accommodation, after all, than the peregrinating tinker and three other likely-looking
characters are enjoying on the bare floor.  Some of these companions, upon retiring, pray aloud
at unseemly length, and one of them, at least, keeps it up in his sleep at frequent intervals
through the night; horses and work-cattle are rattling chains and munching hay, and an uneasy
goat, with a bell around his neck, fills the stable with an incessant tinkle till dawn. Black
bread and a cheap but very good quality of white wine seem about the only refreshment obtainable
at these little villages.  One asks in vain for milch-brod, butter, kdsc, or in fact anything
acceptable to the English palate; the answer to all questions concerning these things is "nicht,
nicht, nicht." - "What have you, then?" I sometimes ask, the answer to which is almost invariably
"brod und wein." Stone-yards thronged with busy workmen, chipping stone for shipment to cities
along the Danube, are a feature of these river-side villages.  The farther one travels the
more frequently gypsies are encountered on the road.  In almost every band is a maiden, who,
by reason of real or imaginary beauty, occupies the position of pet of the camp, wears a profusion
of beads and trinkets, decorates herself with wild flowers, and is permitted to do no manner
of drudgery.  Some of these gypsy maidens are really quite beautiful in spite of their very
dark complexions.  Their eyes glisten with inborn avarice as I sweep past on my "silver" bicycle,
and in their astonishment at my strange appearance and my evidently enormous wealth they almost
forget their plaintive wail of "kreuzer! kreuzer!" a cry which readily bespeaks their origin,
and is easily recognized as an echo from the land where the cry of "backsheesh" is seldom out
of the traveller's hearing.

The roads east of Nezmely are variable, flint-strewn ways predominating; otherwise the way
would be very agreeable, since the gradients are gentle, and the dust not over two inches deep,
as against three in most of Austro- Hungary thus far traversed.  The weather is broiling hot;
but I worry along perseveringly, through rough and smooth, toward the land of the rising sun.
Nearing Budapest the roads become somewhat smoother, but at the same time hillier, the country
changing to vine-clad slopes; and all along the undulating ways I meet wagons laden with huge
wine-casks. Reaching Budapest in the afternoon, I seek out Mr. Kosztovitz, of the Budapest
Bicycle Club, and consul of the Cyclists' Touring Club, who proves a most agreeable gentleman,
and who, besides being an enthusiastic cycler, talks English perfectly.  There is more of the
sporting spirit in Budapest, perhaps, than in any other city of its size on the Continent,
and no sooner is my arrival known than I am taken in hand and practically compelled to remain
over at least one day.  Svetozar Igali, a noted cycle tourist of the village of Duna Szekeso,
now visiting the international exhibition at Budapest, volunteers to accompany me to Belgrade,
and perhaps to Constantinople.  I am rather surprised at finding so much cycling enthusiasm
in the Hungarian capital.  Mr. Kosztovitz, who lived some time in England, and was president
of a bicycle club there, had the honor of bringing the first wheel into the Austro-Hungarian
empire, in the autumn of 1879, and now Budapest alone has three clubs, aggregating nearly a
hundred riders, and a still greater number of non-riding members. Cyclers have far more liberty
accorded them in Budapest than in Vienna, being permitted to roam the city almost as untrammelled
as in London, this happy condition of affairs being partly the result of Mr. Kosztovitz's diplomacy
in presenting a ready drawn-up set of rules and regulations for the government of wheelmen
to the police authorities when the first bicycle was introduced, and partly to the police magistrate,
being himself an enthusiastic all-'round sportsman, inclined to patronize anything in the way
of athletics.  They are even experimenting in the Hungarian army with the view of organizing
a bicycle despatch service; and I am told that they already have a bicycle despatch in successful
operation in the Bavarian army.  In the evening I am the club's guest at a supper under the
shade-trees in the exhibition grounds.  Mr. Kosztovitz and another gentleman who can speak
English act as interpreters, and here, amid the merry clinking of champagne-glasses, the glare
of electric lights, with the ravishing music of an Hungarian gypsy band on our right, and a
band of swarthy Servians playing their sweet native melodies on our left, we, among other toasts,
drink to the success of my tour.  There is a cosmopolitan and exceedingly interesting crowd
of visitors at the international exhibition: natives from Bulgaria, Servia, Roumania, and Turkey,
in their national costumes; and mingled among them are Hungarian peasants from various provinces,
some of them in a remarkably picturesque dress, that I afterward learn is Croatian.  A noticeable
feature of Budapest, besides a predilection for sport among the citizens, is a larger proportion
of handsome ladies than one sees in most European cities, and there is, moreover, a certain
atmosphere about them that makes them rather agreeable company.  If one is travelling around
the world with a bicycle, it is not at all inconsistent with Budapest propriety for the wife
of the wheelman sitting opposite you to remark that she wishes she were a rose, that you might
wear her for a button-hole bouquet on your journey, and to ask whether or not, in that case,
you would throw the rose away when it faded.  Compliments, pleasant, yet withal as meaningless
as the coquettish glances and fan-play that accompany them, are given with a freedom and liberality
that put the sterner native of more western countries at his wits' end to return them.  But
the most delightful thing in all Hungary is its gypsy music.  As it is played here beneath
its own sunny skies, methinks there is nothing in the wide world to compare with it.  The music
does not suit the taste of some people, however; it is too wild and thrilling.  Budapest is
a place of many languages, one of the waiters in the exhibition cafe claiming the ability to
speak and understand no less than fourteen different languages and dialects.

Nine wheelmen accompany me some distance out of Budapest on Monday morning, and Mr. Philipovitz
and two other members continue with Igali and me to Duna Pentele, some seventy-five miles distant;
this is our first sleeping-place, the captain making his guest until our separation and departure
in different directions next morning.  During the fierce heat of mid-day we halt for about
three hours at Adony, and spend a pleasant after-dinner Lour examining the trappings and trophies
of a noted sporting gentleman, and witnessing a lively and interesting set-to with fencing
foils.  There is everything in fire-arms in his cabinet, from an English double-barrelled shot-gun
to a tiny air-pistol for shooting flies on the walls of his sitting-room; he has swords, oars,
gymnastic paraphernalia - in fact, everything but boxing gloves.  Arriving at Duna Pentele
early in the evening, before supper we swim for an hour in the waters of the Danube.  At 9.30
P.M. two of our little company board the up-stream-bound steamer for the return home, and at
ten o'clock we are proposing to retire for the night, when lo, in come a half-dozen gentlemen,
among them Mr. Ujvarii, whose private wine-cellar is celebrated all the country round, and
who now proposes that we postpone going to bed long enough to pay a short visit to his cellar
and sample the "finest wine in Hungary." This is an invitation not to be resisted by ordinary
mortals, and accordingly we accept, following the gentleman and his friends through the dark
streets of the village.  Along the dark, cool vault penetrating the hill-side Mr. Ujvarii leads
the way between long rows of wine-casks, heber* held in arm like a sword at dress parade. The
heber is first inserted into a cask of red wine, with a perfume and flavor as agreeable as
the rose it resembles in color, and carried, full, to the reception end of the vault by the
corpulent host with the stately air of a monarch bearing his sceptre.  After two rounds of
the red wine, two hebers of champagne are brought - champagne that plays a fountain of diamond
spray three inches above the glass.  The following toast is proposed by the host: "The prosperity
and welfare of England, America, and Hungary, three countries that are one in their love and
appreciation of sport and adventure." The Hungarians have all the Anglo-American love of sport
and adventure.* A glass combination of tube and flask, holding about three pints, with an orifice
at each end and the bulb or flask near the upper orifice; the wine is sucked up into the flask
with the breath, and when withdrawn from the cask the index finger is held over the lower orifice,
from which the glasses are filled by manipulations of the finger.

>From Budapest to Paks, about one hundred and twenty kilometres, the roads are superior to
anything I expected to find east of Germany; but the thermometer clings around the upper regions,
and everything is covered with dust.  Our route leads down the Danube in an almost directly
southern course.

Instead of the poplars of France, and the apples and pears of Germany, the roads are now fringed
with mulberry-trees, both raw and manufactured silk being a product of this part of Hungary.
My companion is what in England or America would be considered a "character;" he dresses in
the thinnest of racing costumes, through which the broiling sun readily penetrates, wears racing-shoes,
and a small jockey-cap with an enormous poke, beneath which glints a pair of "specs;" he has
rat-trap pedals to his wheel, and winds a long blue girdle several times around his waist,
consumes raw eggs, wine, milk, a certain Hungarian mineral water, and otherwise excites the
awe and admiration of his sport-admiring countrymen. Igali's only fault as a road companion
is his utter lack of speed, six or eight kilometres an hour being his natural pace on average
roads, besides footing it up the gentlest of gradients and over all rough stretches.  Except
for this little drawback, he is an excellent man to take the lead, for he is a genuine Magyar,
and orders the peasantry about with the authoritative manner of one born to rule and tyrannize;
sometimes, when, the surface is uneven for wheeling, making them drive their clumsy ox-wagons
almost into the road-side ditch in order to avoid any possible chance of difficulty in getting
past.  Igali knows four languages: French, German, Hungarian, and Slavonian, but Anglaise nicht,
though with what little French and German I have picked up while crossing those countries we
manage to converse and understand each other quite readily, especially as I am, from constant
practice, getting to be an accomplished pantomimist, and Igali is also a pantomimist by nature,
and gifted with a versatility that would make a Frenchman envious.  Ere we have been five minutes
at a gasthaus Igali is usually found surrounded by an admiring circle of leading citizens -
not peasants; Igali would not suffer them to gather about him - pouring into their willing
ears the account of my journey; the words, "San Francisco, Boston, London, Paris, Wien, Pesth,
Belgrade, Constantinople, Afghanistan, India, Khiva," etc., which are repeated in rotation
at wonderfully short intervals, being about all that my linguistic abilities are capable of
grasping.  The road continues hard, but south of Paks it becomes rather rough; consequently
halts under the shade of the mulberry-trees for Igali to catch up are of frequent occurrence.

The peasantry, hereabout, seem very kindly disposed and hospitable. Sometimes, while lingering
for Igali, they will wonder what I am stopping for, and motion the questions of whether I wish
anything to eat or drink; and this afternoon one of them, whose curiosity to see how I mounted
overcomes his patience, offers me a twenty-kreuzer piece to show him. At one village a number
of peasants take an old cherry-woman to task for charging me two kreuzers more for some cherries
than it appears she ought, and although two kreuzers are but a farthing they make quite a squabble
with the poor old woman about it, and will be soothed by neither her voice nor mine until I
accept another handful of cherries in lieu of the overcharged two kreuzers.

Szekszard has the reputation, hereabout, of producing the best quality of red wine in all Hungary
- no small boast, by the way - and the hotel and wine-gardens here, among them, support an
excellent gypsy band of fourteen pieces.  Mr. Garay, the leader of the band, once spent nearly
a year in America, and after supper the band plays, with all the thrilling sweetness of the
Hungarian muse, "Home, sweet Home," "Yankee Doodle," and "Sweet Violets," for my especial delectation.

A wheelman the fame of whose exploits has preceded him might as well try to wheel through hospitable
Hungary without breathing its atmosphere as without drinking its wine; it isn't possible to
taboo it as I tabooed the vin ordinaire of France, Hungarians and Frenchmen being two entirely
different people.  Notwithstanding music until 11.30 P.M., yesterday, we are on the road before
six o'clock this morning - for genuine, unadulterated Hungarian music does not prevent one
getting up bright and fresh next day - and about noon we roll into Duna Szekeso, Igali's native
town, where we have decided to halt for the remainder of the day to get our clothing washed,
one of my shoes repaired, and otherwise prepare for our journey to the Servian capital.  Duna
Szekeso is a calling-place for the Danube steamers, and this afternoon I have the opportunity
of taking observations of a gang of Danubian roustabouts at their noontide meal.  They are
a swarthy, wild-looking crowd, wearing long hair parted in the middle, or not parted at all;
to their national costume are added the jaunty trappings affected by river men in all countries.
Their food is coarse black bread and meat, and they take turns in drinking wine from a wooden
tube protruding from a two-gallon watch-shaped cask, the body of which is composed of a section
of hollow log instead of staves, lifting the cask up and drinking from the tube, as they would
from the bung-hole of a beer-keg.  Their black bread would hardly suit the palate of the Western
world; but there are doubtless a few individuals on both sides of the Atlantic who would willingly
be transformed into a Danubian roustabout long enough to make the acquaintance of yonder rude cask.

After bathing in the river we call on several of Igali's friends, among them the Greek priest
and his motherly-looking wife, Igali being of the Greek religion.  There appears to be the
greatest familiarity between the priests of these Greek churches and their people, and during
our brief visit the priest, languid-eyed, fat, and jolly, his equally fat and jolly wife, and
Igali, caress playfully, and cut up as many antics as three kittens in a bay window.  The farther
one travels southward the more amiable and affectionate in disposition the people seem to become.

Five o'clock next morning finds us wheeling out of Duna Szekeso, and during the forenoon we
pass through Baranyavar, a colony of Greek Hovacs, where the women are robed in white drapery
as scant as the statuary which the name of their religion calls to memory.  The roads to-day
are variable; there is little but what is ridable, but much that is rough and stony enough
to compel slow and careful wheeling.  Early in the evening, as we wheel over the bridge spanning
the River Drave, an important tributary of the Danube, into Eszek, the capital of Slavonia,
unmistakable rain- signs appear above the southern horizon.

CHAPTER VII.

THROUGH SLAVONIA AND SERVIA.

The editor of Der Drau, the semi-weekly official organ of the Slavonian capital, and Mr. Freund,
being the two citizens of Eszek capable of speaking English, join voices at the supper-table
in hoping it will rain enough to compel us to remain over to-morrow, that they may have the
pleasure of showing us around Eszek and of inviting us to dinner and supper; and Igali, I am
constrained to believe, retires to his couch in full sympathy with them, being possessed of
a decided weakness for stopping over and accepting invitations to dine.  Their united wish
is gratified, for when we rise in the morning it is still raining.  Eszek is a fortified city,
and has been in time past an important fortress. It has lost much of its importance since the
introduction of modern arms, for it occupies perfectly level ground, and the fortifications
consist merely of large trenches that have been excavated and walled, with a view of preventing
the city from being taken by storm - not a very overshadowing consideration in these days,
when the usual mode of procedure is to stand off and bombard a city into the conviction that
further resistance is useless.  After dinner the assistant editor of Der Drau comes around
and pilots us about the city and its pleasant environments. The worthy assistant editor is
a sprightly, versatile Slav, and, as together we promenade the parks and avenues, the number
and extent of which appear to be the chief glory of Eszek, the ceaseless flow of language and
wellnigh continuous interchange of gesticulations between himself and Igali are quite wonderful,
and both of them certainly ought to retire to-night far more enlightened individuals than they
found themselves this morning.

The Hungarian seems in a particularly happy and gracious mood to-day, as I instinctively felt
certain he would be if the fates decreed against a continuation of our journey.  When our companion'
s conversation turns on any particularly interesting subject I am graciously given the benefit
of it to the extent of some French or German word the meaning of which, Igali has discovered,
I understand.  During the afternoon we wander through the intricacies of a yew-shrub maze,
where a good-sized area of impenetrably thick vegetation has been trained and trimmed into
a bewildering net-work of arched walks that almost exclude the light, and Igali pauses to favor
me with the information that this maze is the favorite trysting place of Slavonian nymphs and
swains, and furthermore expresses his opinion that the spot must be indeed romantic and an
appropriate place to "come a-wooin' " on nights when the moonbeams, penetrating through a thousand
tiny interspaces, convert the gloomy interior into chambers of dancing light and shadow.  All
this information and these comments are embodied in the two short words, "Amour, lima" accompanied
by a few gesticulations, and is a fair sample of the manner in which conversation is carried
on between us.  It is quite astonishing how readily two persons constantly together will come
to understand each other through the medium of a few words which they know the meaning of in
common.  Scores of ladies and gentlemen, the latter chiefly military officers, are enjoying
a promenade in the rain-cooled atmosphere, and there is no mistaking the glances of interest
with which many of them favor-Igali.  His pronounced sportsmanlike make-up attracts universal
attention and causes everybody to mistake him for myself - a kindly office which I devoutly
wish he would fill until the whole journey is accomplished.  In the Casino garden a dozen bearded
musicians are playing Slavonian airs, and, by request of the assistant editor, they play and
sing the Slavonian national anthem and a popular air or two besides.  The national musical
instrument of Slavonia is the "tamborica"-a small steel-stringed instrument that is twanged
with a chip-like piece of wood.  Their singing is excellent in its way, but to the writer's
taste there is no comparison between their tamboricas and the gypsy music of Hungary.  There
are no bicycles in all Eszek save ours - though Mr. Freund, who has lately returned from Paris,
has ordered one, with which he expects to win the admiration of all his countrymen - and Igali
and myself are lionized to our hearts' content; but this evening we are quite startled and
taken aback by the reappearance of the assistant editor, excitedly announcing the arrival of
a tricycle in town.  Upon going down, in breathless anticipation of summarily losing the universal
admiration of Eszek, we find an itinerant cobbler, who has constructed a machine that would
make the rudest bone-shaker of ancient memory seem like the most elegant product of Hartford
or Coventry in comparison.  The backbone and axle-tree are roughly hewn sticks of wood, ironed
equally rough at the village blacksmith's; and as, for a twenty-kreuzer piece, the rider mounts
and wobbles all over the sidewalk for a short distance, the spectacle would make a stoic roar
with laughter, and the good people of the Lower Danubian provinces are anything but stoical.
Six o'clock next morning finds us travelling southward into the interior of Slavonia; but we
are not mounted, for the road presents an unridable surface of mud, stones, and ruts, that
causes my companion's favorite ejaculatory expletive to occur with more than its usual frequency.
For a portion of the way there is a narrow sidepath that is fairly ridable, but an uninvitingly
deep ditch runs unpleasantly near, and no amount of persuasion can induce my companion to attempt
wheeling along it.  Igali's bump of cautiousness is fully developed, and day by day, as we
journey together, I am becoming more and more convinced that he would be an invaluable companion
to have accompany one around the world; true, the journey would occupy a decade, or thereabout,
but one would be morally certain of coming out safe and sound in the end.  During our progression
southward there has been a perceptible softening in the disposition of the natives, this being
more noticeably a marked characteristic of the Slavonians; the generous southern sun, shining
on the great area of Oriental gentleness, casts a softening influence toward the sterner north,
imparting to the people amiable and genial dispositions.  It takes but comparatively small
deeds to win the admiration and applause of the natives of the Lower Danube, with their childlike
manners; and, by slowly meandering along the roadways of Southern Hungary occasionally with
his bicycle, Igali has become the pride and admiration of thousands.

For mile after mile we have to trundle our way slowly along the muddy highway as best we can,
our road leading through a flat and rather swampy area of broad, waving wheat-fields; we relieve
the tedium of the journey by whistling, alternately, "Yankee Doodle," to which Igali has taken
quite a fancy since first hearing it played by the gypsy band in the wine-garden at Szekszard
three days ago, and the Hungarian national air - this latter, of course, falling to Igali's
share of the entertainment. Having been to college in Paris, Igali is also able to contribute
the famous Marseillaise hymn, and, not to be outdone, I favor him with " God Save the Queen"
and "Britannia Rules the Waves," both of which he thinks very good tunes-the former seeming
to strike his Hungarian ear, however, as rather solemn.  In the middle of the forenoon we make
a brief halt at a rude road-side tavern for some refreshments - a thick, narrow slice of raw,
fat bacon, white with salt, and a level pint of red wine, satisfying my companion; but I substitute
for the bacon a slice of coarse, black bread, much to Igali's wonderment.  Here are congregated
several Slavonian shepherds, in their large, ill-fitting, sheepskin garments, with the long
wool turned inward-clothes that apparently serve them alike to keep out the summer's heat and
the winter's cold.  One of the peasants, with ideas a trifle befuddled with wine, perhaps,
and face all aglow with admiration for our bicycles, produces a tattered memorandum and begs
us to favor him with our autographs, an act that of itself proves him to be not without a degree
of intelligence one would scarcely look for in a sheepskin-clad shepherd of Slavonia.  Igali
gruffly bids the man "begone," and aims a careless kick at the proffered memorandum; but seeing
no harm in the request, and, moreover, being perhaps by nature a trifle more considerate of
others, I comply.  As he reads aloud, "United States, America," to his comrades, they one and
all lift their hats quite reverently and place their brown hands over their hearts, for I suppose
they recognize in my ready compliance with the simple request, in comparison with Igali's rude
rebuff-which, by the way, no doubt comes natural enough-the difference between the land of
the prince and peasant, and the land where "liberty, equality, and fraternity" is not a meaningless
motto - a land which I find every down-trodden peasant of Europe has heard of, and looks upward to.

Soon after this incident we are passing a prune-orchard, when, as though for our especial benefit,
a couple of peasants working there begin singing aloud, and with evident enthusiasm, some national
melody, and as they observe not our presence, at my suggestion we crouch behind a convenient
clump of bushes and for several minutes are favored with as fine a duet as I have heard for
many a day; but the situation becomes too ridiculous for Igali, and it finally sends him into
a roar of laughter that causes the performance to terminate abruptly, and, rising into full
view, we doubtless repay the singers by letting them see us mount and ride into their native
village, but a few hundred yards distant.  We are to-day passing through villages where a bicycle
has never been seen - this being outside the area of Igali's peregrinations - and the whole
population invariably turns out en masse, clerks, proprietors, and customers in the shops unceremoniously
dropping everything and running to the streets; there is verily a hurrying to and fro of all
the citizens; husbands hastening from magazine to dwelling to inform their wives and families,
mothers running to call their children, children their parents, and everybody scampering to
call the attention of their sisters, cousins, and aunts, ere we are vanished in the distance,
and it be everlastingly too late.

We have been worrying along at some sort of pace, with the exception of the usual noontide
halt, since six o'clock this morning, and the busy mosquito is making life interesting for
belated wayfarers, when we ride into Sarengrad and put up at the only gasthaus in the village.
Our bedroom is situated on the ground floor, the only floor in fact the gaathaus boasts, and
we are in a fair way of either being lulled to sleep or kept awake, as the case may be, by
a howling chorus of wine-bibbers in the public room adjoining; but here, again, Igali shows
up to good advantage by peremptorily ordering the singers to stop, and stop instanter.  The
amiably disposed peasants, notwithstanding the wine they have been drinking, cease their singing
and become silent and circumspect, in deference to the wishes of the two strangers with the
wonderful machines. We now make a practice of taking our bicycles into our bedroom with us
at night, otherwise every right hand in the whole village would busy itself pinching the "gum-elastic"
tires and pedal-rubbers, twirling the pedals, feeling spokes, backbone, and forks, and critically
examining and commenting upon every visible portion of the mechanism; and who knows but that
the latent cupidity of some easy-conscienced villager might be aroused at the unusual sight
of so much "silver" standing around loose (the natives hereabout don't even ask whether the
nickelled parts of the bicycle are silver or not; they take it for granted to be so), and surreptitiously
attempt to chisel off enough to purchase an embroidered coat for Sundays.  From what I can
understand of their comments among themselves, it is perfectly consistent with their ideas
of the average Englishman that he should bestride a bicycle of solid silver, and if their vocabulary
embraced no word corresponding to our "millionnaire," and they desired to use one, they would
probably pick upon the word "Englander" as the most appropriate.  While we are making our toilets
in the morning eager faces are peering inquisitively through the bedroom windows; a murmur
of voices, criticizing us and our strange vehicles, greets our waking moments, and our privacy
is often invaded, in spite of Igali's inconsiderate treatment of them whenever they happen
to cross his path.

Many of the inhabitants of this part of Slavonia are Croatians - people who are noted for their
fondness of finery; and, as on this sunny Sunday morning we wheel through their villages, the
crowds of peasantry who gather about us in all the bravery of their best clothes present, indeed,
an appearance gay and picturesque beyond anything hitherto encountered. The garments of the
men are covered with braid-work and silk embroidery wherever such ornamentation is thought
to be an embellishment, and, to the Croatian mind, that means pretty much everywhere; and the
girls and women are arrayed in the gayest of colors; those displaying the brightest hues and
the greatest contrasts seem to go tripping along conscious of being irresistible.  Many of
the Croatian peasants are fine, strapping fellows, and very handsome women are observed in
the villages - women with great, dreamy eyes, and faces with an expression of languor that
bespeaks their owners to be gentleness personified.  Igali shows evidence of more susceptibility
to female charms than I should naturally have given him credit for, and shows a decided inclination
to linger in these beauty-blessed villages longer than is necessary, and as one dark-eyed damsel
after another gathers around us, I usually take the initiative in mounting and clearing out.

Were a man to go suddenly flapping his way through the streets of London on the long-anticipated
flying-machine, the average Cockney would scarce betray the unfeigned astonishment that is
depicted on the countenances of these Croatian villagers as we nde into their midst and dismount.

This afternoon my bicycle causes the first runaway since the trifling affair at Lembach, Austria.
A brown-faced peasant woman and a little girl, driving a small, shaggy pony harnessed to a
basket-work, four-wheeled vehicle, are approaching; their humble-looking steed betrays no evidence
of restiveness until just as I am turning out to pass him, when, without warning, he gives
a swift, sudden bound to the right, nearly upsetting the vehicle, and without more ado bolts
down a considerable embankment and goes helter-skelter across a field of standing grain.  The
old lady pluckily hangs on to the reins, and finally succeeds in bringing the runaway around
into the road again without damaging anything save the corn.  It might have ended much less
satisfactorily, however, and the incident illustrates one possible source of trouble to a 'cycler
travelling alone through countries where the people neither understand, nor can be expected
to understand, a wheelman's position; the situation would, of course, be aggravated in a country
village where, not speaking the language, one could not make himself understood in his own
defence.  These people here, if not wise as serpents, are at least harmless as doves; but,
in case of the bicycle frightening a team and causing a runaway with the unpleasant sequel
of broken limbs, or injured horse, they would scarce know what to do in the premises, since
they would have no precedent to govern them, and, in the absence of any intelligent guidance,
might conclude to wreak summary vengeance on the bicycle.  In such a case, would a wheelman
be justified in using his revolver to defend his bicycle ?

Such is the reverie into which I fall while reclining beneath a spreading mulberry-tree waiting
for Igali to catch up; for he has promised that I shall see the Slavonian national dance sometime
to-day, and a village is now visible in the distance.  At the Danube-side village of Hamenitz
an hour's halt is decided upon to give me the promised opportunity of witnessing the dance
in its native land.  It is a novel and interesting sight.  A round hundred young gallants and
maidens are rigged out in finery such as no other people save the Croatian and Slavonian peasants
ever wear - the young men braided and embroidered, and the damsels having their hair entwined
with a profusion of natural flowers in addition to their costumes of all possible hues.  Forming
themselves into a large ring, distributed so that the sexes alternate, the young men extend
and join their hands in front of the maidens, and the latter join hands behind their partners;
the steel-strung tamboricas strike up a lively twanging air, to which the circle of dancers
endeavor to shuffle time with their feet, while at the same time moving around in a circle
Livelier and faster twang the tamboricas, and more and more animated becomes the scene as the
dancing, shuffling ring endeavors to keep pace with it.  As the fun progresses into the fast
and furious stages the youths' hats have a knack of getting into a jaunty position on the side
of their heads, and the wearers' faces assume a reckless, flushed appearance, like men half
intoxicated while the maidens' bright eyes and beaming faces betoken unutterable happiness;
finally the music and the shuffling of feet terminate with a rapid flourish, everybody kisses
everybody - save, of course, mere luckless onlookers like Igali and myself - and the Slavonian
national dance is ended.

