'At first; but either he could not bear to see Meta's piano profaned, or he thought it too
strong when they got to the sacred line, for he bolted, and is gone home.'

'There's Harry dancing with Fanny Anderson.  He has not got Miss Ward all this time.'

'Nor will,' said Aubrey.  'Tom had put her in such a rage that she did not choose to dance
with that cousin of hers, Sam Axworthy, so she was obliged to refuse every one else; and I
had to put up with that child!'

'Sam Axworthy!  He does not belong to our corps.  How does he come here?'

'Oh! the old man has some houses in the borough, and an omnium gatherum like this was a good
time to do the civil thing to him. There he is; peep into the card-room, and you'll see his
great porpoise back, the same old man that Harry in his benevolence assisted to a chair.  He
shook hands with Leonard, and told him there was a snug desk at the Vintry Mill for him.'

'I dare say!'

'And when Leonard thanked him, and said he hoped to get off to Cambridge, he laughed that horrid
fat laugh, and told him learning would never put him in good case.  Where shall I find you
a place to sit down?  Pug and her tail have taken up all the room,' whispered Aubrey, as by
the chief of the glittering tables in the hall, he saw Mrs. Pugh, drinking tea, surrounded
by her attendant gentlemen, and with her aunt and Ella Ward, like satellites, a little way
from her.

'Here is a coign of vantage,' said Ethel, seating herself on a step a little way up the staircase.
'How those people have taken possession of that child all day!'

'I fancy Leonard is come to reclaim her,' said Aubrey, 'don't you see him trying to work through
and get at her! and Miss Ward told me she was going home early, to put the children to bed.
Ha! what's the row? There's Leonard flaring up in a regular rage!  Only look at his eyes--and
Henry just like Gertrude's Java sparrow in a taking--'

'It must not be,' cried Ethel, starting up to attempt she knew not what, as she heard Leonard's
words, 'Say it was a mistake, Henry! You cannot be so base as to persist!'

There it became evident that Ethel and Aubrey were seen over the balusters; Leonard's colour
deepened, but his eye did not flinch; though Henry quailed and backed, and the widow gave a
disconcerted laugh; then Leonard pounced on his little sister and carried her off to the cloak-room.
'What treason could it have been?' muttered Aubrey; 'we shall get it all from Ward;' but when
Leonard re-appeared it was with his sister cloaked and bonneted on his arm, each leading a
little one; he took them to the entrance and was seen no more.

Nor was the true history of that explosion ever revealed in the May family, though it had grave
consequences at Bankside.

Rumour had long declared at Stoneborough that the member's little daughter was carefully secluded
on account of some deformity, and Mrs. Pugh had been one of many ladies who had hoped to satisfy
their curiosity on this head upon the present occasion.  She had asked Henry Ward whether it
were so, and he had replied with pique that he had no means of judging, he had never been called
in at the Grange. By way of salve to his feelings, the sympathizing lady had suggested that
the preference for London advice might be from the desire of secrecy, and improbable as he
knew this to be, his vanity had forbidden him to argue against it.  When no little Miss Rivers
appeared, the notion of her affliction gained ground, and Leonard, whose gray back was undistinguishable
from other gray backs, heard Mrs. Pugh citing his brother as an authority for the misfortune
which Mr. and Mrs. Rivers so carefully concealed as to employ no surgeon from their own neighbourhood.

Falsehood, slander, cruelty, ingratitude, breach of hospitality, were the imputations that
fired the hot brain of Leonard, and writhed his lips, as he started round, confronted the lady,
and assured her it was a--a--a gross mistake.  His father had always attended the child, and
she must have misunderstood his brother.  Then, seeing Henry at a little distance, Leonard
summoned him to contradict the allegation; but at that moment the sudden appearance of the
two Mays put the whole conclave to silence.

Not aware that Mrs. Pugh had confounded together his intelligence and her surmise, and made
him responsible for both, Henry was shocked and grieved at his brother's insulting and violent
demeanour, and exhausted himself in apologies and denunciations; while the kind-hearted lady
interceded, for the boy, declaring that she doted on his generous spirit, but not confessing
the piece of female embroidery which had embroiled the matter; probably not even aware of it,
though sincerely and kindly desirous to avert the brother's anger.  Her amiability, therefore,
only strengthened Henry's sense of his brothers outrage, and his resolve to call him to account.

It was impossible that night, for Leonard had gone home with the sisters, and was in bed long
before his brother returned.  But at breakfast Henry found the forces drawn up against him,
and his first attempt to remonstrate was retorted by the demand what he could mean by spreading
such an abominable report--cruel--unfounded--ungrateful--spiteful--

Averil indeed divined that it was Mrs. Pugh's invention; but Henry was not inclined to give
up Mrs. Pugh, and continued in the belief that Leonard's fiery imagination had fabricated the
sentence, and then most improperly charged it on the lady, and on himself.  Had it been as
Leonard stated, said Henry, his conduct was shameful and required an apology, whereupon Leonard
burst out in passion at being disbelieved, and Averil was no less indignant.  The storm raged
till the business of the day interrupted it; and in Henry's absence, Averil and her brother
worked up their wrath again, at the atrocity of the assertion regarding the child of their
entertainers, the granddaughter of their truest, kindest friend.

Averil would have rushed to Mary with the whole story, but for Leonard's solemn asseveration
that if ever it came to the ears of any one of the Mays, he should send back his rifle to Mr.
Ernescliffe, and work his way out to one of the colonies rather than again look any of the
family in the face.

Henry divided his opponents next time, asking Leonard, in his sister's absence, whether he
had come to his senses and would apologize? Leonard hoped Henry had come to his!  On the whole,
the dispute had lost some asperity by the absence of Averil, and though Leonard held his ground,
and maintained that he had every right to deny the statement, and that it was Henry's duty
to make Mrs. Pugh contradict it everywhere, yet the two approached nearer together, and there
was less misunderstanding, fewer personalities.

But Averil could not forget or forgive.  She persisted in manifesting her displeasure, and
recurred to the subject till her pertinacity wore out Leonard himself.

'Nonsense, Ave,' he said at last, 'it was a foolish woman's gossip that Henry ought to have
quashed; but that is no reason you should treat them like toads.'

'Would you have me sanction vile slander?'

'As if you were sanctioning slander by being decently civil!  Is not it an intolerable thing
that we three should never sit down to a meal in peace together?'

'O, Leonard, don't you think I feel the misery?'

Put an end to it then, and don't pit those poor children one against the other.  Just fancy
Minna's saying to me, "I love you and sister, but Ella loves Mrs. Pugh and Henry."'

'Yes, they have set Ella against me.  She always appeals to Henry, and I can do nothing with her.'

Leonard looked out of the window and whistled, then said, as if he had made a discovery, 'I'll
tell you what, Ave, something must be done to set things to rights between us, and I believe
the best thing will be to call on Mrs. Pugh.'

'Not to apologize!  O, Leonard!'

'Stuff and nonsense!  Only to show we don't bear malice.  Henry had been at you to call ever
so long before this, had he not?'

'I can't see any reason for intimacy.'

'I declare, Ave, you are too bad!  I only want you just to keep the peace with your own brother.
You have led him the life of a dog these three days, and now when I want you to be a little
obliging, you talk of intimacy!'

'Only because I know how it will be.  If I give that woman an inch, she will take an ell.'

'Let her then.  It would be much better than always living at daggers-drawn with one's brother.'
Then, after waiting for her to say something, he added, 'If you won't go with me, I shall go
alone.'

Averil rose, subdued but not convinced, reverencing her brother, but afraid of his concessions.

However, the call turned out well.  Mrs. Pugh had a talent for making herself agreeable, and
probably had liked the boy for his outburst. She would not let Mab be excluded, loaded her
with admiration, and was extremely interested in the volunteer practice, so that both the young
people were subjugated for the time by her pleasant manners, and went away ashamed of their
own rancour against one so friendly and good-natured, and considerably relieved of their burden
of animosity.

Their greeting to their brother was so cordial that he perceived their good-will, and was sorry
that the dread of an evening of warfare had induced him to accept an invitation to dine at
the Swan with Sam Axworthy and a party of his friends.

CHAPTER X

  This night is my departing night,
    For here nae longer must I stay;
  There's neither friend nor foe of mine
    But wishes me away.
  What I have done through lack of wit,
    I never, never can recall:
  I hope ye're all my friends as yet.
    Good night, and joy be with you all.
                               Armstrong's Good Night

The storm had blown over, but heavy flakes of cloud still cumbered the air, and gusts of wind
portended that it might gather again.

Henry Ward took this opportunity of giving his first dinner party. He said it was a necessary
return for the civilities they had received; and to Averil's representation that it transgressed
the system of rigid economy that so much tormented her, he replied by referring her to Mrs.
Pugh for lessons in the combination of style and inexpensiveness.

Averil had almost refused, but the lady herself proffered her instructions, and reluctance
was of no avail; nothing but demonstrations from which her conscience shrank, could have served
to defend her from the officious interference so eagerly and thankfully encouraged by the master
of the house.  Vainly did she protest against pretension, and quote the example of the Grange;
she found herself compelled to sacrifice the children's lessons to learn of Mrs. Pugh to make
the paper flowers that, with bonbons and sweetmeats, were to save the expense of good food
on the dinner-table, and which she feared would be despised by Miss May, nay, perhaps laughed
over with 'Mr. Tom!'

She hated the whole concern, even the invitation to Dr. and Miss May, knowing that it was sent
in formal vanity, accepted in pure good-nature, would bring them into society they did not
like, and expose her brother's bad taste.  Only one thing could have added to her dislike,
namely--that which all Stoneborough perceived excepting herself and Leonard--that this dinner
was intended as a step in Henry's courtship, and possibly as an encouragement of Harvey Anderson's
liking for herself.  Averil held her head so high, and was so little popular, that no one of
less assurance than Mrs. Ledwich herself would have dared approach her with personal gossip;
and even Mrs. Ledwich was silent here; so that Averil, too young and innocent to connect second
marriages with recent widowhood, drew no conclusions from Henry's restless eagerness that his
household should present the most imposing appearance.

While the bill of fare was worrying Averil, Leonard was told by Aubrey, that his father had
brought home a fossil Tower of Babel, dug up with some earth out of a new well, three miles
off, with tidings of other unheard-of treasures, and a walk was projected in quest of them,
in which Leonard was invited to join.  He gladly came to the early dinner, where he met reduced
numbers--the Ernescliffes being at Maplewood, Tom at Cambridge, and Harry in the Channel fleet;
and as usual, he felt the difference between the perfect understanding and friendship in the
one home, and the dread of dangerous subjects in the other.  The expedition had all the charms
of the Coombe times; and the geological discoveries were so numerous and precious, that the
load became sufficient to break down the finders, and Ethel engaged a market-woman to bring
the baskets in her cart the next morning.

That morning a note from Richard begged Ethel to come early to Cocksmoor to see Granny Hall,
who was dying.  Thus left to their own devices, Aubrey and Gertrude conscientiously went through
some of their studies; then proceeded to unpack their treasury of fossils, and endeavour to
sort out Leonard's share, as to which doubts arose. Daisy proposed to carry the specimens at
once to Bankside, where she wanted to see Leonard's prime echinus; and Aubrey readily agreed,
neither of the young heads having learnt the undesirableness of a morning visit in a house
preparing for a dinner-party too big for it.

However, Leonard made them extremely welcome.  It was too foggy a day for rifle practice, and
all the best plate and china were in the school-room, his only place of refuge; Ave was fluttering
about in hopes of getting everything done before Mrs. Pugh could take it out of her hands,
and the energies of the household were spent on laying out the dining-table.  It was clearly
impossible to take Gertrude anywhere but into the drawing-room, which was in demi-toilette
state, the lustres released from their veils, the gayer cushions taken out of their hiding-places,
and the brown holland covers half off.  This was the only tranquil spot, and so poor little
Mab thought, forbidden ground though it was.  Even in her own home, the school-room, a strange
man had twice trod upon her toes; so no wonder, when she saw her own master and his friends
in the drawing-room, that she ventured in, and leaping on a velvet cushion she had never seen
before, and had never been ordered off, she there curled herself up and went to sleep, unseen
by Leonard, who was in eager controversy upon the specimens, which Gertrude, as she unpacked,
set down on floor, chair, or ottoman, unaware of the offence she was committing.  So, unmolested,
the young geologists talked, named, and sorted the specimens, till the clock striking the half-hour,
warned the Mays that they must return; and Leonard let them out at the window, and crossed
the lawn to the side gate with them to save the distance.

He had just returned, and was kneeling on the floor hastily collecting the fossils, when the
door opened, and Henry Ward, coming home to inspect the preparations, beheld the drawing-room
bestrewn with the rough stones that he had proscribed, and Mab, not only in the room, but reposing
in the centre of the most magnificent cushion in the house!

His first movement of indignation was to seize the dog with no gentle hand.  She whined loudly;
and Leonard, whom he had not seen, shouted angrily, 'Let her alone;' then, at another cry from
her, finding his advance to her rescue impeded by a barricade of the crowded and disarranged
furniture, he grew mad with passion, and launched the stone in his hand, a long sharp-pointed
belemnite.  It did not strike Henry, but a sound proclaimed the mischief, as it fell back from
the surface of the mirror, making a huge star of cracks, unmarked by Leonard, who, pushing
sofa and ottoman to the right and left, thundered up to his brother, and with uplifted hand
demanded what he meant by his cruelty.

'Is--is this defiance?' stammered Henry, pointing to the disordered room.

'Look here, Averil,' as she appeared at the sounds, 'do you defend this boy now he has very
nearly killed me?'

'Killed you!' and Leonard laughed angrily; but when Henry held up the elf-bolt, and he saw
its sharp point, he was shocked, and he saw horror in Averil's face.

'I see,' he said gravely.  'It was a mercy I did not!' and he paused. 'I did not know what
I was about when you were misusing my dog, Henry. Shake hands; I am sorry for it.'

But Henry had been very much frightened as well as angered, and thought, perhaps, it was a
moment to pursue his advantage.

'You treat things lightly,' he said, not accepting the hand.

'See what you have done.'

'I am glad it was not your head,' said Leonard.  'What does it cost? I'll pay.'

'More than your keep for a year,' moaned Henry, as he sighed over the long limbs of the starfish-like
fracture.

'Well, I will give up anything you like, if you will only not be sulky about it, Henry.  It
was unlucky, and I'm sorry for it; I can't say more!'

'But I can,' said Henry with angry dignity, re-inforced by the sight of the seamed reflection
of his visage in the shivered glass.  'I tell you, Leonard, there's no having you in the house;
you defy my authority, you insult my friends, you waste and destroy more than you are worth,
and you are absolutely dangerous.  I would as soon have a wild beast about the place.  If you
don't get the Randall next week, and get off to the University, to old Axworthy's office you
go at once.'

'Very well, I will,' said Leonard, turning to collect the fossils, as if he had done with the
subject.

'Henry, Henry, what are you saying?' cried the sister.

'Not a word, Ave,' said Leonard.  'I had rather break stones on the road than live where my
keep is grudged, and there's not spirit enough to get over a moment's fright.'

'It is not any one individual thing,' began Henry, in a tone of annoyance, 'but your whole
course--'

There he paused, perceiving that Leonard paid no attention to his words, continuing quietly
to replace the furniture and collect the fossils, as it no one else were in the room, after
which he carried the basket up-stairs.

Averil hurried after him.  'Leonard! oh, why don't you explain?  Why don't you tell him how
the stones came there?'

Leonard shook his head sternly.

'Don't you mean to do anything?'

'Nothing.'

'But you wanted another year before trying for the scholarship.'

'Yes; I have no chance there.'

'He will not do it!  He cannot mean it!'

'I do then.  I will get my own living, and not be a burthen, where my brother cannot forgive
a broken glass or a moment's fright,' said Leonard; and she felt that his calm resentment was
worse than his violence.

'He will be cooler, and then--'

'I will have no more said to him.  It is plain that we cannot live together, and there's an
end of it.  Don't cry, or you won't be fit to be seen.'

'I won't come down to dinner.'

'Yes, you will.  Let us have no more about it.  Some one wants you.'

'Please, ma'am, the fish is come.'

'Sister, sister, come and see how I have done up the macaroons in green leaves.'

'Sister, sister, do come and reach me down some calycanthus out of the greenhouse!'

'I will,' said Leonard, descending; and for the rest of the day he was an efficient assistant
in the decorations, and the past adventure was only apparent in the shattered glass, and the
stern ceremonious courtesy of the younger brother towards the elder.

Averil hurried about, devoid of all her former interest in so doing things for herself as to
save interference; and when Mrs. Ledwich and Mrs. Pugh walked in, overflowing with suggestions,
she let them have their way, and toiled under them with the sensation of being like 'dumb driven
cattle.'  If Leonard were to be an exile, what mattered it to her who ruled, or what appearance
things made?

Only when she went to her own room to dress, had she a moment to realize the catastrophe, its
consequences, and the means of averting them.  So appalled was she, that she sat with her hair
on her shoulders as if spell-bound, till the first ring at the door aroused her to speed and
consternation, perhaps a little lessened by one of her sisters rushing in to say that it was
Mrs. Ledwich and Mrs. Pugh, and that Henry was still in the cellar, decanting the wine.

Long before the hosts were ready, Dr. May and Ethel had likewise arrived, and became cognizant
of the fracture of the mirror, for, though the nucleus was concealed by a large photograph
stuck into the frame, one long crack extended even to the opposite corner.  The two ladies
were not slow to relate all that they knew; and while the aunt dismayed Ethel by her story,
the niece, with much anxiety, asked Dr. May how it was that these dear, nice, superior young
people should have such unfortunate tempers--was it from any error in management? So earnest
was her manner, so inquiring her look, that Dr. May suspected that she was feeling for his
opinion on personal grounds, and tried to avert the danger by talking of the excellence of
the parents, but he was recalled from his eulogium on poor Mrs. Ward.

'Oh yes! one felt for them so very much, and they are so religious, so well principled, and
all that one could wish; but family dissension is so dreadful.  I am very little used to young
men or boys, and I never knew anything like this.'

'The lads are too nearly of an age,' said the Doctor.

'And would such things be likely to happen among any brothers?'

'I should trust not!' said the Doctor emphatically.

'I should so like to know in confidence which you think likely to be most to blame.'

Never was the Doctor more glad that Averil made her appearance!  He carefully avoided getting
near Mrs. Pugh for the rest of the evening, but he could not help observing that she was less
gracious than usual to the master of the house; while she summoned Leonard to her side to ask
about the volunteer proceedings, and formed her immediate court of Harvey Anderson and Mr.
Scudamour.

The dinner went on fairly, though heavily.  Averil, in her one great trouble, lost the sense
of the minor offences that would have distressed her pride and her taste had she been able
to attend to them, and forgot the dulness of the scene in her anxiety to seek sympathy and
counsel in the only quarter where she cared for it.  She went mechanically through her duties
as lady of the house, talking commonplace subjects dreamily to Dr. May, and scarcely even giving
herself the trouble to be brief with Mr. Anderson, who was on her other side at dinner.

In the drawing-room, she left the other ladies to their own devices in her eagerness to secure
a few minutes with Ethel May, and disabuse her of whatever Mrs. Ledwich or Mrs. Pugh might
have said.  Ethel had been more hopeful before she heard the true version; she had hitherto
allowed much for Mrs. Ledwich's embellishments; and she was shocked and took shame to her own
guiltless head for Gertrude's thoughtlessness.

'Oh no!' said Averil, 'there was nothing that any one need have minded, if Henry had waited
for explanation!  And now, will you get Dr. May to speak to him?  If he only knew how people
would think of his treating Leonard so, I am sure he would not do it.'

'He cannot!' said Ethel.  'Don't you know what he thinks of it himself? He said to papa last
year that your father would as soon have sent Leonard to the hulks as to the Vintry Mill.'

'Oh, I am so glad some one heard him. Meanwhile Mr. Grant has finished his calculations below.
He has found for a result that the ship is among the Maldive reefs.

He is certain there must be some error in his work, and he sets himself
to revise his figures.

But the breeze sweeps into the cabin with a faint command from the upper air--"Back the main-yard!"--and
he shrewdly guesses that his calculations are correct.

The captain is everywhere at once, urging and aiding.

He sees the whole canvas aback, and yet the Chrysolite drifts on. He cannot 'bout his ship nor back
her.

The reef is quite within appreciable distance now. The hands can do nothing more, so they gaze
at the dancing line of phosphorescent atoms, and curse tremendously--though
these may be their last moments.

"All hands wear ship!" comes sharply from Anderson.

"--you and your orders!" cries some one. "To the boats, to the boats!"

Although the Chrysolite carried five boats, no less than four of them
were unseaworthy.

In those days the examination of an outward-bound ship was slurred over, with the natural
consequence that the marine law was more frequently broken than observed. The only boat on board the
Chrysolite worth launching was the life-boat, which stood bottom upward between the main and mizzen
masts. At the cry "To the boats!" there was a rush for her. But Anderson is first. He carries in
his hand a small axe, meant for clearing away light wreckage.

With a vigorous blow the life-boat is stove in. The men stop short, daunted. He turns about and faces
them, looking like an angry Titan.

"Now then, you hell-hounds, wear
the ship or sink!" They see he means to be master to the end.

It
is too late even for imprecation. The men literally spring to their
work, with an alacrity begot of desperation. Every moment is of the
utmost value, for the reef is very close and the horrible breakers
are in all ears.

Anderson himself holds the wheel. He has put the
helm up, and soon the great ship, with swelling sails, breaks out
of the current. Aubrey, whom she desired to bring him in after the rifle
drill, reported that he pronounced himself sorry to refuse, but too busy to come in, and he
seemed to be cramming with fiery vehemence for the mere chance of success.

The chance was small.  The only hope lay in the possibility of some hindrance preventing the
return of either Forder or Folliot; and in the meantime the Mays anxiously thought over Leonard's
prospects. His remaining at home was evidently too great a trial for both brothers, and without
a scholarship he could not go to the University.  The evils of the alternative offered by his
brother were duly weighed by the Doctor and Ethel with an attempt to be impartial.

Mr. Axworthy, though the mill was the centre of his business, was in fact a corn merchant of
considerable wealth, and with opportunities of extending his connection much farther.  Had
his personal character been otherwise, Dr. May thought a young man could not have a better
opening than a seat in his office, and the future power of taking shares in his trade; there
need be no loss of position, and there was great likelihood both of prosperity and the means
of extensive usefulness.

Ethel sighed at the thought of the higher aspirations that she had fostered till her own mind
was set on them.

'Nay,' said the Doctor, 'depend upon it, the desk is admirable training for good soldiers of
the Church.  See the fearful evil that befalls great schemes intrusted to people who cannot
deal with money matters; and see, on the other hand, what our merchants and men of business
have done for the Church, and do not scorn "the receipt of custom."'

'But the man, papa!'

'Yes, there lies the hitch!  If Leonard fails, I can lay things before Henry, such as perhaps
he may be too young to know, and which must change his purpose.'

Mr. Axworthy's career during his youth and early manhood was guessed at rather than known,
but even since his return and occupation of the Vintry Mill, his vicious habits had scandalized
the neighbourhood, and though the more flagrant of these had been discontinued as he advanced
in age, there was no reason to hope that he had so much 'left off his sins, as that his sins
had left him off.'  His great-nephew, who lived with him and assisted in his business, was
a dashing sporting young man of no good character, known to be often intoxicated, and concerned
in much low dissipation, and as dangerous an associate as could be conceived for a high-spirited
lad like Leonard.  Dr. May could not believe that any provocation of temper, any motive of
economy, any desire to be rid of encumbrances to his courtship, could induce a man with so
much good in him, as there certainly was in Henry Ward, to expose his orphan brother to such
temptations; and he only reserved his remonstrance in the trust that it would not be needed,
and the desire to offer some better alternative of present relief.

One of the examiners was Norman's old school and college friend, Charles Cheviot, now a clergyman
and an under-master at one of the great schools recently opened for the middle classes, where
he was meeting with great success, and was considered a capital judge of boys' characters.
He was the guest of the Mays during the examination; and though his shy formal manner, and
convulsive efforts at young lady talk, greatly affronted Gertrude, the brothers liked him.

He was in consternation at the decline of Stoneborough school since Mr. Wilmot had ceased to
be an under-master; the whole tone of the school had degenerated, and it was no wonder that
the Government inquiries were ominously directed in that quarter.  Scholarship was at a low
ebb, Dr. Hoxton seemed to have lost what power of teaching he had ever possessed, and as Dr.
May observed, the poor old school was going to the dogs.  But even in the present state of
things, Leonard had no chance of excelling his competitors.  His study, like theirs, had been
mere task-work, and though he showed more native power than the rest, yet perhaps this had
made the mere learning by rote even more difficult to an active mind full of inquiry.  He was
a whole year younger than any other who touched the foremost ranks, two years younger than
several; and though he now and then showed a feverish spark of genius, reminding Mr. Cheviot
of Norman in his famous examination, it was not sustained--there were will and force, but not
scholarship--and besides, there was a wide blurred spot in his memory, as though all the brain-work
of the quarter before his illness had been confused, and had not yet become clear.  There was
every likelihood that a few years would make him superior to the chosen Randall scholar, but
at present his utmost efforts did not even place him among the seven whose names appeared honourably
in the newspaper.  It was a failure; but Mr. Cheviot had become much interested in the boy
for his own sake, as well as from what he heard from the Mays, and he strongly advised that
Leonard should at Easter obtain employment for a couple of years at the school in which he
himself was concerned.  He would thus be maintaining himself, and pursuing his own studies
under good direction, so as to have every probability of success in getting an open scholarship
at one of the Universities.

Nothing could be better, and there was a perfect jubilee among the Mays at the proposal.  Aubrey
was despatched as soon as breakfast was over to bring Leonard to talk it over, and Dr. May
undertook to propound it to Henry on meeting him at the hospital; but Aubrey came back looking
very blank--Leonard had started of his own accord that morning to announce to his uncle his
acceptance of a clerk's desk at the Vintry Mill!

Averil followed upon Aubrey's footsteps, and arrived while the schoolroom was ringing with
notes of vexation and consternation.  She was all upon the defensive.  She said that not a
word had passed on the subject since the dinner-party, and there had not been a shadow of a
dispute between the brothers; in fact, she evidently was delighted with Leonard's dignified
position and strength of determination, and thought this expedition to the Vintry Mill a signal
victory.

When she heard what the Mays had to propose, she was enchanted, she had no doubt of Henry's
willing consent, and felt that Leonard's triumph and independence were secured without the
sacrifice of prospects, which she had begun to regard as a considerable price for his dignity.

But Dr. May was not so successful with Henry Ward.  He did not want to disoblige his uncle,
who had taken a fancy to Leonard, and might do much for the family; he thought his father would
have changed his views of the uncle and nephew had he known them better, he would not accept
the opinion of a stranger against people of his own family, and he had always understood the
position of an usher to be most wretched, nor would he perceive the vast difference between
the staff of the middle school and of the private commercial academy.  He evidently was pleased
to stand upon his rights, to disappoint Dr. May, and perhaps to gratify his jealousy by denying
his brother a superior education.

Yet in spite of this ebullition, which had greatly exasperated Dr. May, there was every probability
that Henry's consent might be wrung out or dispensed with, and plans of attack were being arranged
at the tea-table, when a new obstacle in the shape of a note from Leonard himself.

'My Dear Aubrey,

'I am very much obliged to Dr. May and Mr. Cheviot for their kind intentions; but I have quite
settled with Mr. Axworthy, and I enter on my new duties next week.  I am sorry to leave our
corps, but it is too far off, and I must enter the Whitford one.

                                      'Yours,
                                          'L. A. Ward.'

'The boy is mad with pride and temper,' said the Doctor.

'And his sister has made him so,' added Ethel.

'Shall I run down to Bankside and tell him it is all bosh?' said Aubrey, jumping up.

'I don't think that is quite possible under Henry's very nose,' said Ethel.  'Perhaps they
will all be tamer by to-morrow, now they have blown their trumpets; but I am very much vexed.'

'And really,' added Mr. Cheviot, 'if he is so wrong-headed, I begin to doubt if I could recommend
him.'

'You do not know how he has been galled and irritated,' said the general voice.

'I wonder what Mrs. Pugh thinks of it,' presently observed the Doctor.

'Ah!' said Ethel, 'Mrs. Pugh is reading "John of Anjou".'

'Indeed!' said the Doctor; 'I suspected the wind was getting into that quarter.  Master Henry
does not know his own interest: she was sure to take part with a handsome lad.'

'Why have you never got Mrs. Pugh to speak for him?' said Mary.  'I am sure she would.'

'O, Mary! simple Mary, you to be Ave's friend, and not know that her interposition is the only
thing wanting to complete the frenzy of the other two!'

Ethel said little more that evening, she was too much grieved and too anxious.  She was extremely
disappointed in Leonard, and almost hopeless as to his future.  She saw but one chance of preventing
his seeking this place of temptation, and that was in the exertion of her personal influence. Back
she sags, gathered into her doom by the whitening waters; until at length, thus lifted along,
her keel rests athwart the bank, and she heels over. Her sailing days are done. As the consecutive
seas sweep up the reef, she lifts her head and drops it again and again, like a poor recumbent
brute in its death-hour. But the wind must sometime cease, and the
waves forget their anger.

Then will she take a long repose, leaning on her shattered side--the very type of a picturesque
wreck.

About this time Messrs. Ruin & Ruin were more than usually interested in the shipping news,
and one morning they saw, under the heading of "Wrecks and Casualties,"
this:

"MINICOY (MALDIVE ISLANDS).--The ship Chrysolite, of London,
went ashore yesterday night on the southern reefs, and is now a total
wreck.

'No,' thought Ethel; 'people blow sparks without thinking they may burn a house down.'

Ave conducted her to the summer-house, where Leonard was packing up his fossils.  He met them
with a face resolutely bent on brightness. 'I am to take all my household gods,' he said, as
he shook hands with Ethel.

'I see,' said Ethel, gravely; and as Averil was already falling out of hearing, she added,
'I thought you were entirely breaking with your old life.'

'No, indeed,' said Leonard, turning to walk with her in the paths; 'I am leaving the place
where it is most impossible to live in.'

'This has been a place of great, over-great trial, I know,' said Ethel, 'but I do not ask you
to stay in it.'

'My word is my word,' said Leonard, snapping little boughs off the laurels as he walked.

'A hasty word ought not to be kept.'

His face looked rigid, and he answered not.

'Leonard,' she said, 'I have been very unhappy about you, for I see you doing wilfully wrong,
and entering a place of temptation in a dangerous spirit.'

'I have given my word,' repeated Leonard.

'O, Leonard, it is pride that is speaking, not the love of truth and constancy.'

'I never defend myself,' said Leonard.

Ethel felt deeply the obduracy and pride of these answers; her eyes filled with tears, and
her hopes failed.

Perhaps Leonard saw the pain he was giving, for he softened, and said, 'Miss May, I have thought
it over, and I cannot go back.  I know I was carried away by passion at the first moment, and
I was willing to make amends.  I was rejected, as you know.  Was it fit that we should go on
living together?'

'I do not ask you to live together.'

'When he reproached me with the cost of my maintenance, and threatened me with the mill if
I lost the scholarship, which he knew I could not get, I said I would abide by those words.
I do abide by them.'

'There is no reason that you should.  Why should you give up all your best and highest hopes,
because you cannot forgive your brother?'

'Miss May, if I lived with you and the Doctor, I could have such aims. Henry has taken care
to make them sacrilege for me.  I shall never be fit now, and there's an end of it.'

'You might--'

'No, no, no!  A school, indeed!  I should be dismissed for licking the boys before a week was
out!  Besides, I want the readiest way to get on in the world; I must take care of my sisters;
I don't trust one moment to Henry's affection for any of them.  This is no home for me, and
it soon may be no home for them!' and the boy's eyes were full of tears, though his voice struggled
for firmness and indifference.

'I am very sorry for you, Leonard,' said Ethel, much more affectionately, as she felt herself
nearer her friend of Coombe. 'I am glad you have some better motives, but I do not see how
you will be more able to help them in this way.'

'I shall be near them,' said Leonard; 'I can watch over them.  And if--if--it is true what
they say about Henry and Mrs. Pugh--then they could have a cottage near the mill, and I could
live with them. Don't you see, Miss May?'

'Yes; but I question whether, on further acquaintance, you will wish for your sisters to be
with their relations there.  The other course would put you in the way of a better atmosphere
for them.'

