7. The man who is fullest of good works, he is fittest to live and fittest to die: 'I am now,'
at any time, 'ready to be offered,' saith fruitful Paul (2 Tim 4:6). Whereas he that is barren,
he is neither fit to live, nor fit to die: to die, he himself is convinced he is not fit, and
to live God himself saith he is not fit; 'cut him down, why doth he cumber the ground?' (Luke 8:7).

Lastly, Consider, to provoke thee to good works, thou shalt have of God when thou comest to
glory, a reward for everything thou dost for him on earth. Little do the people of God consider,
how richly God will reward, what from a right principle and to a right end, is done for him
here; not a bit of bread to the poor, not a draught of water to the meanest of them that belong
to Christ, or the loss of a hair of your head, shall in that day go without its reward (Luke
14:13, 14; Matt 10:42). I tell thee, Christian, be but rich in good works, and thou shalt have
more than salvation; thy salvation thou hast freely by grace through Christ, without works
(Eph 2:8-10), but now being justified and saved, and as the fruits hereof, renewed by the Holy
Ghost; after this, I say, thou shalt be rewarded for every work that proved good; 'For God
is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love, which ye have showed toward his
name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister' (Heb 6:10; 1 Cor 3:14). Moses
counted the reward that he was to have, for a short suffering with the people of God, of greater
worth than the treasures of Egypt, the smiles of the king, or the honour of his kingdom (Heb
11:25-27). In a word, let the disappointments that do, and shall most surely befall the fruitless
professors, provoke thee to look with all diligence to thy standing. For,

1. Such a one is but deceived and disappointed touching the work of grace he supposeth to be
in his heart; he thinks he is a Christian, and hath grace, as faith, hope, and the like, in
his soul, yet no fruits of these things manifest themselves in him; indeed his tongue is tipt
with a talk and tattle of religion. Poor man, poor empty man! Faith without works is dead;
thy hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost; thy gifts with which thy soul is possessed,
are but such as are common to reprobates; thou art therefore disappointed; God reputes thee
still but wicked, though thou comest and goest to the place of the Holy (James 2:19, 20; Job
11:20; 1 Cor 13:1-3).

2. Therefore all thy joy and comfort must needs fall short of saving comfort, and so leave
thee in the suds notwithstanding; thy joy is the joy of the Pharisees (John 5:35), and thy
gladness as that of Herod (Mark 6:20), and the longest time it can last, it is but a Scripture-moment
(Job 20:5). Alas! in all thy gladness and content with thy religion, thou art but like the
boy that plays with brass instead of gold; and with counters instead of that which will go
for current coin. Thus, 'if a man think himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceiveth
[or disappoints] himself' (Gal 6:3).

3. This is not all, but look thou certainly for an eternal disappointment in the day of God;
for it must be; thy lamp will out at the first sound the trump of God shall make in thine ears;
thou canst not hold up at the appearance of the Son of God in his glory; his very looks will
be to thy profession as a strong wind is to a blinking candle, and thou shalt be left only
to smoke.

Oh the alteration that will befal a foolish virgin! She thought she was happy, and that she
should have received happiness with those that were right at the heart; but behold the contrary,
her lamp is going out, she is now to seek for saving grace, when the time of grace is over?
Her heaven she thought of, is proved a hell, and her god is proved a devil. God hath cast her
out of his presence, and claps the door upon her. She pleads her profession, and the like,
and she hath for her answer repulses from heaven.

Object. But what shall I do, who am so cold, slothful, and heartless, that I cannot find any
heart to do any work for God in this world? Indeed time was when his dew rested all night upon
my branches, and when I could with desire, with earnest desire, be doing and working for God;
but, alas! now it is otherwise.

Answer.

If this be true, thy case is sad, thou art to be pitied; the Lord pity thee. And for thy recovery
out of this condition, I would give thee no other counsel than was given to Ephesus when she
had lost her first love.

1.

Mark: Thy first work is to enter into a serious considering, and remembrance from whence thou
art fallen. Remember that thou hast left thy God, the stay of thy soul, and him without whom
there is no stay, comfort, or strength, for thee either to do or suffer anything in this world:
'Without me,' saith he, 'ye can do nothing' (John 15:5). A sad condition; the remembrance of
this, for certain, is the first step to the recovering a backsliding heart; for the right remembrance
of this doth bring to mind what loss that soul hath sustained that is in this condition, how
it hath lost its former visits, smiles, and consolations of God. When thy conscience was suppled
with the blood of thy Saviour; when every step thou tookest was, as it were, in honey and butter;
and when thy heart could meditate terror with comfort (Job 29:2-6; Isa 33:14-19). Instead of
which, thou feelest darkness, hardness of heart, and the thoughts of God are terrible to thee
(Psa 77:3). Now God never visits thee; or if he doth, it is but as a wayfaring man, that tarrieth
but for a night (Jer 14:8, 9).

This also brings to mind how the case is altered with thee, touching thy confidence in God
for thy future happiness, how uncertain thou now art of thy hopes for heaven, how much this
life doth hang in doubt before thee (Deu 28:65, 66).

2. 'Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent.' These are words well put together;
for a solid considering of what I have lost in my declining, will provoke in my heart a sorrow,
and godly heaviness, whereby I shall be forced to bemoan my condition, and say, 'I will go
and return to my first husband, for then was it better with me than now' (Hos 2:7). And believe
it, the reason of God's standing off from giving the comfortable communion with himself, it
is that thou mightest first see the difference between sticking close to God, and forsaking
of him; and next, that thou mightest indeed acknowledge thy offence, and seek his face (Hos
5:15). He taketh no pleasure in thy forlorn condition; he had rather thou shouldest have him
in thy bosom, only he will have it in his own way. 'He looketh upon men, and if any say, I
have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; [then] he will deliver
his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the light' (Job 33:27, 28).

3. 'Remember from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works.'

As there should be a remembering and a repenting so there should be a hearty doing our first
works; a believing as before, a laying hold of the things of heaven and glory, as at the first;
for now is God returned to thee, as before (Zech 1:16). And though thou mayest, through the
loss of thy locks, with Samson, be weak at the first, yet, in short time, thy hair will grow
again; that is, thy former experience will in short space be as long, large, and strong, as
in the former times. Indeed at the first thou wilt find all the wheels of thy soul rusty, and
all the strings of thine heart out of tune; as also when thou first beginnest to stir, the
dust and filth of thy heart will, like smoke, trouble thee from that clear beholding the grace
of thy God, and his love to thy soul; but yet wait, and go on, and though thou findest thyself
as unable to do anything as thou formerly couldest; yet I say, up, and be doing, and the Lord
will be with thee; for he hath not despised the day of thy small things (1 Chron 22:16; Zech 4:10).

I know thou wilt be afflicted with a thousand temptations to drive thee to despair, that thy
faith may be faint, &c. But against all them set thou the word of God, the promise of grace,
the blood of Christ, and the examples of God's goodness to the great backsliders that are for
thy encouragement recorded in the scriptures of truth; and remember, that turning to God after
backsliding, is the greatest piece of service thou canst do for him, and the greatest honour
thou canst bring to the blood of Christ; and know farther, that God, to show his willing reception
of so unworthy a creature, saith, there shall be joy in heaven at thy conversion to him again
(Luke 15:7, 10).

TO CONCLUDE.

If thou yet, notwithstanding what hath been said, dost remain a backslider:

1. Then remember that thou must die; and remember also, that when the terrors of God, of death,
and a backslidden heart, meet together, there will be sad work in that soul; this is the man
that hangeth tilting over the mouth of hell, while death is cutting the thread of his life.

2. Remember, that though God doth sometimes, yea, often, receive backsliders, yet it is not
always so. Some draw back into perdition; for, because they have flung up God, and would none
of him, he in justice flings up them and their souls for ever (Prov 1:24-28).

I have observed, that sometimes God, as it were in revenge for injury done him, doth snatch
away souls in the very nick of their backsliding, as he served Lot's wife, when he turned her
into a pillar of salt, even while she was looking over her shoulder to Sodom (Gen 19:26). An
example that every backslider should remember with astonishment (Luke 17:32).

Thus have I, in few words, written to you, before I die, a word to provoke you to faith and
holiness, because I desire that you may have the life that is laid up for all them that believe
in the Lord Jesus, and love one another, when I am deceased. Though there I shall rest from
my labours, and be in paradise, as through grace I comfortably believe, yet it is not there,
but here, I must do you good. Wherefore, I not knowing the shortness of my life, nor the hindrance
that hereafter I may have of serving my God and you, I have taken this opportunity to present
these few lines unto you for your edification.

Consider what hath been said; and the Lord give you understanding in all things. Farewell.

FOOTNOTES

1 Hermotimus of Lucian. During one of these wanderings his wife thought him dead, and his body
was burnt. Whether the poor soul, thus suddenly ejected, obtained another habitation is not
narrated.

2 'Of their relations,' related or belonging to themselves. Ed.

3 Also where the gardener hath set them, there they stand, and quarrel not one with another.
Pilgrim, part 2. Interpreter's House, vol. 3. 186; see also vol. 2. 570. Ed.

4 'Where the great red dragon Satan had his seat.'Dr. Gill's Commentary. See also Revelation 12 Ed.

5 This manly, bold, and upright statement of truth, was published in 1674, only two years afer
the author's deliverance from twelve years and a half's incarceration in a damp, miserable
jail, for nonconformity! None but those whose close communion with God inspires them with the
confessor's courage, can understand the spirit which dictated such language. Had all dissenters
used such faithful words, the church would long ago have been emancipated from persecution
in this country. Ed.

6 This is a very extensive and awful delusion. To mistake the 'outward and visible sign' for
the 'inward and spiritual grace' is a very general and fatal error. Of it's sad effects all
religious parties have warned their members. It has done infinite mischief to the souls of men. Ed.

7 The queen of Sheba was as much or more delighted with the order, harmony, and happiness of
Solomon's household than she was with all his splendour and magnificence. It is to this Bunyan
refers in this quotation. Ed.

8 'Though the words of the wise--are as nails fastened by the master of assemblies (Eccl. 12:11)
yet sure their examples are the hammer to drive them in to take the deeper hold. A father that
whipt his son for swearing, and swore himself while he whipt him, did more harm by his example
than good by his correction.'Fuller's Holy State, p. 11. Ed.

9 How exceedingly admirable are all these scriptural directions, warnings, and cautions. Happy
are those parents and their children where such wisdom is manifested in that painful duty of
administering counsel and correction. Ed. 10 One of the Saxon laws was, that if a serf or villain
work on Sunday by his lord's command, he shall be a free man. Spelman's Concilia, An. 692. Ed.

11 The rust of money in the rich man's purse, unjustly detained from the labourer, will poison
and infect his whole estate. Fuller's Holy State, p. 16. Ed.

12 The apostle Peter, in his solemn injunctions to married persons, commences with the wife.
Fuller observes upon this, 'And sure it was fitting that women should first have their lesson
given them, because it is harder to be learned, and therefore they need have the more time
to con it.' Holy State, p. 1. Ed.

13 'In her husband's absence she is wife and deputy husband, which makes her double the files
of her diligence. At his return he finds all things so well, that he wonders to see himself
at home when he was abroad.'Fuller's Holy State, p. 2. Ed.

14 'She never crosseth her husband in the spring-tide of his anger, but stays till it be ebbing
water.'Fuller's Maxims. Ed.

15 Bunyan's words are 'to show pity,' probably taken from the word 'goodness' in the margin
of the Bible; but lest it might be a typographical error, the usual rendering is given in this
quotation. Ed.

16 'What is the child but a piece of the parents wrapped up in another skin.'Flavel.
    On seeing a Mother with her Infant asleep in her Arms.
    'Thine is the morn of life,
    All laughing, unconscious of the evening with her anxious cares,
    Thy mother filled with the purest happiness and bliss
    Which an indulgent Heaven bestows upon a lower world,
    Watches and protects her dearest life, now sleeping in her arms.'
        German Poem. Ed.

17 Bunyan's silence, in all his writings, concerning the state of his parents as to godliness,
may lead us to fear that this fervent ejaculation had often been poured forth by his own soul
on behalf of his father and mother. All that we know of them is, that they were poor, but gave
their children the best education their means afforded; as to their piety he is silent. Ed.

18 'To the Greeks.' Bunyan in this follows the Puritan translation. The word 'Greeks' is in
the margin of the authorized Bible. Ed.

19 This is a most beautiful passage, unequalled by any ancient or modern author. Such a view
of church fellowship does honour to the head and heart of the prince of allegorists. It is
worthy to be printed in letters of gold, and presented to every candidate for church fellowship
among all Christian societies of every denomination. See p. 550, and note. Ed.

20 To 'hold the head' is to make a very prominent profession of religion. Ed.

21 'Of unbelief' see margin of the Bible. Ed.

***

A CAUTION TO STIR UP TO WATCH AGAINST SIN

BY J. BUNYAN

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

This faithful and affectionate appeal to conscience, was originally published on a half-sheet
of copy paper, and being only printed on one side of the leaf was called a broadside; probably
intended to hang up in the house, or to be pasted inside the cover of the family bible.

Charles Doe gives the date 1685; but a copy of this rare sheet, clean and perfect as when first
printed, was lately discovered in the Stowe Library, among a great number of single-sheet poems,
songs, and proclamations; a memorandum on it, in the writing of Narcissus Luttrel, shews that
he bought it for one penny, on the 8th of April, 1684. By the liberal permission of Mr. Pickering,
of Piccadilly, the present owner of that extraordinary collection, I have been able accurately
to correct the very numerous alterations and errors which abound in all the later editions.

Reader, whoever thou art, but especially the young, this unassuming poem is most worthy of
being committed to memory. It is a striking detection of the devil's sophistry. Strive, as
you value your peace and happiness, to escape the depths of moral degradation and misery, by
avoiding the FIRST overtures of sin.--GEO. OFFOR. For if you give it entrance at the door,
It will come in, and may go out no more.

II. Sin, rather than 'twill out of action be, Will pray to stay, though but a while with thee;
One night, one hour, one moment, will it cry, Embrace me in thy bosom, else I die: Time to
repent [saith it] I will allow, And help, if to repent thou know'st not how. But if you give
it entrance at the door, It will come in, and may go out no more.

III. If begging doth not do, sin promise will Rewards to those that shall its lusts fulfill:
Penny in hand, yea pounds 'twill offer thee, If at its beck and motion thou wilt be. 'Twill
seem heaven to out-bid, and all to gain Thy love, and win thee it to entertain. But give it
not admittance at thy door, Lest it comes in, and so goes out no more.

IV. If begging and promising will not do, 'Twill by its wiles attempt to flatter you. I'm harmless,
mean no ill, be not so shy Will ev'ry soul-destroying motion cry. 'Twill hide its sting, 'twill
change its native hue, Vile 'twill not, but a beauty seem to you. But if you give it entrance
at the door, Its sting will in, and may come out no more.

V. Rather than fail, sin will itself divide, Bid thee do this, and lay the rest aside. Take
little ones ('twill say) throw great ones by, (As if for little sins men should not die.) Yea
SIN with SIN a quarrel will maintain, On purpose that thou by it might'st be slain. Beware
the cheat then, keep it out of door, It would come in, and would go out no more.

VI. Sin, if you will believe it, will accuse, What is not hurtful and itself excuse: 'Twill
make a vice of virtue, and 'twill say Good is destructive, doth men's souls betray; 'Twill
make a law, where God has made man free, And break those laws by which men bounded be. Look
to thyself then, keep it out of door, Thee 'twould entangle, and enlarge thy score.

VII. SIN is that beastly thing that will defile Soul, body, name, and fame in little while;
'Twill make him, who some time God's image was, Look like the devil, love, and plead his cause;
Like to the plague, poison, or leprosy Defile 'twill, and infect contagiously. Wherefore beware,
against it shut the door; If not, it will defile thee more and more.

VIII. SIN, once possessed of the heart, will play The tyrant, force its vassal to obey: 'Twill
make thee thine own happiness oppose And offer open violence to those That love thee best;
yea make thee to defy The law and counsel of the deity. Beware then, keep this tyrant out of
door, Lest thou be his, and so thy own no more.

IX. SIN harden can the heart against its God, Make it abuse his grace, despise his rod, 'Twill
make one run upon the very pikes, Judgments foreseen bring such to no dislikes Of sinful hazards;
no, they venture shall For one base lust, their soul, and heav'n and all. Take heed then, hold
it, crush it at the door, It comes to rob thee, and to make thee poor.

X. SIN is a prison, hath its bolts and chains, Brings into bondage who it entertains; Hangs
shackles on them, bends them to its will, Holds them, as Samson grinded at the mill, 'Twill
blind them, make them deaf; yea, 'twill them gag, And ride them as the devil rides his hag.
Wherefore look to it, keep it out of door, If once its slave, thou may'st be free no more.

XI. Though SIN at first its rage dissemble may, 'Twill soon upon thee as a lion prey; 'Twill
roar, 'twill rend, 'twill tear, 'twill kill out- right, Its living death will gnaw thee day
and night: Thy pleasures now to paws and teeth it turns, In thee its tickling lusts, like brimstone
burns. Wherefore beware, and keep it out of door, Lest it should on thee as a lion roar.

XII. SIN will accuse, will stare thee in the face, Will for its witnesses quote time and place
Where thou committedst it; and so appeal To conscience, who thy facts will not conceal; But
on thee as a judge such sentence pass, As will to thy sweet bits prove bitter sauce. Wherefore
beware, against it shut thy door, Repent what's past, believe and sin no more.

XIII. SIN is the worm of hell, the lasting fire, Hell would soon lose its heat, could SIN expire;
Better sinless, in hell, than to be where Heav'n is, and to be found a sinner there. One sinless,
with infernals might do well, But SIN would make a very heav'n a hell. Look to thyself then,
to keep it out of door, Lest it gets in, and never leaves thee more.

XIV. No match hast sin save God in all the world, Men, angels it has from their stations hurl'd:
Holds them in chains, as captives, in despite Of all that here below is called Might. Release,
help, freedom from it none can give, But he by whom we also breathe and live. Watch therefore,
keep this giant out of door Lest if once in, thou get him out no more.

XV. Fools make a mock at SIN, will not believe, It carries such a dagger in its sleeve; How
can it be (say they) that such a thing, So full of sweet, should ever wear a sting: They know
not that it is the very SPELL Of SIN, to make men laugh themselves to hell. Look to thyself
then, deal with SIN no more, Lest he that saves, against thee shuts the door.

XVI. Now let the God that is above, That hath for sinners so much love; These lines so help
thee to improve, That towards him thy heart may move. Keep thee from enemies external, Help
thee to fight with those internal: Deliver thee from them infernal, And bring thee safe to
life eternal.--AMEN.

London: Printed for N. Ponder at the Peacock in the  Poultrey.

FOOTNOTE:

1. This same sentiment is well expressed in Bunyan's verses at the conclusion of the Pilgrim,
part First.

BY JOHN BUNYAN, OF BEDFORD.

'Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honour dwelleth.'--Psalm
26:8

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

Beautiful in its simplicity is this treatise on the Church of Christ, by John Bunyan. He opens,
with profound knowledge and eminent skill, all those portions of sacred writ which illustrate
the nature, excellency, and government of the house of God, with the personal and relative
duties of its inhabitants. It was originally published in a pocket volume of sixty-three pages,
by G. Larkin, 1688, and is now for the first time reprinted. We are deeply indebted to the
unknown owner of this rare volume, and to Mr. Creasy, bookseller, Sleaford, through whom the
copy was borrowed to enrich this edition.

What is the church? is a question upon which all the subtilty of jesuitic schoolmen and casuists
has been exhausted, to mystify and mislead the honest inquirer in every age. The Jews, Papists,
Greeks, English, have each claimed the divine favour as being exclusively limited to their
respective sects. Apostolic descent has been considered to depend upon human ceremonies, instead
of its consisting in a similarity of mind and conduct to that of the apostles, through the
powerful influences of the Holy Spirit upon the heart. Judging from this latter mode, we conclude
that Bunyan the brazier was very nearly related to, and descended from, Paul the tentmaker,
and the other apostles. But we form a very different judgment as to the descent of Bonner and
other persecuting bishops.

A visible church of Christ is a congregation of the faithful, who having personally and individually
given themselves to the Saviour, unite together to promote each other's spiritual happiness.
Such were the churches to whom the epistles in the New Testament were addressed. The instructions
given to this spiritual community, in the following treatise, are drawn solely from the sacred
volume, and are full of peace and righteousness--tending purely to its happiness and prosperity.
If these directions were strictly and constantly followed, our churches, notwithstanding the
liability of the members to err, would each present 'a little heaven below.'

The officers in these communities are--I. Bishops, or preaching elders, to dispense the word
and ordinances; a plurality in every church, to supply the services of such as suffered under
affliction of body, or were imprisoned for conscience-sake. II. Ruling elders, to assist the
preachers--to admit the serious inquirer, or shut out the profane backslider, and to re-admit
the penitent--to watch over the members, that they be diligent in their worldly callings, that
there be no drones or idlers--to heal offences--to feed the church with admonitions, and to
visit and comfort the sick. III. Deacons, to manage the temporal affairs--provide for the Lord's
table and for that of the bishops and elders--and to distribute the alms to the infirm and
needy. IV. Female deacons, to nurse the sick, and direct their attention to that home where
there shall be no more sorrow; and generally to aid the deacons and elders.

The duty of the private members is to walk humbly with God, and to be devoted to each other's
happiness. In all these particulars Dr. John Cotton of New England, in his 'True Constitution
of a Visible Church,'[1] fully concurs with Bunyan, as does also Dr. John Owen, in his 'Nature
of a Gospel Church,' excepting that he is silent as to female deacons. Let every church be
thus affectionately and scripturally governed, and in their works of faith and labours of love
they will become terrible to the enemy 'as an army with banners' (Cant 6:4).

At the present day, great laxity of discipline has crept in. Some offices have been discontinued,
others altered, and it becomes us most solemnly to judge ourselves by the unerring word of
the living God, whether we have deviated from the order recorded by the Holy Ghost, and if
so, to repent and return to the scriptural model.--GEO. OFFOR

A DISCOURSE OF THE BUILDING, &c., OF THE HOUSE OF GOD.

I.

BY WHOM THIS HOUSE IS BUILT.

The builder's God, materials his Elect; His Son's the rock on which it is erect; The Scripture
is his rule, plummet, or line, Which gives proportion to this house divine, His working-tools
his ordinances are, By them he doth his stones and timber square, Affections knit in love,
the couplings are; Good doctrine like to mortar doth cement The whole together, schism to prevent:
His compass, his decree; his hand's the Spirit By which he frames, what he means to inherit,
A holy temple, which shall far excel That very place, where now the angels dwell.

Call this a temple or a house of prayer, A palace, oracle, or spouse most fair; Or what you
will: God's love is here displayed, And here his treasure safely up is laid; For his own darling
none can find a place, Where he, as here, is wont to show his face.

What though some slight it, it a cottage call, Give't the reproachful name of beggar's hall;
Yea, what though to some it an eyesore is, What though they count it base, and at it hiss,
Call it an alms-house, builded for the poor; Yet kings of old have begged at the door.

II.

OF THE BEAUTY OF THE CHURCH.

Lo her foundations laid with sapphires are; Her goodly windows made of agates fair, Her gates
are carbuncles, or pearls; nor one Of all her borders but's a precious stone; None common,
nor o' th' baser sort are here, Nor rough, but squar'd and polish'd everywhere; Her beams are
cedars, fir her rafters be, Her terraces are of the algum-tree; The thorn or crab-tree here
are not of us; Who thinks them here utensils, puts abuse Upon the place, yea, on the builder
too; Would they be thus controll'd in what they do? With carved-work of lily, and palm-tree,
With cherubims and chains adorned be The doors, the walls, and pillars of this place; Forbidden
beasts here must not show their face. With grace like gold, as with fine painting, he Will
have this house within enriched be; Fig-leaves nor rags, must here keep out no cold, This builder
covers all with cloth of gold, Of needle-work prick'd more than once or twice (The oft'ner
prick'd, still of the higher price) Wrought by his SON, put on her by his merit, Applied by
faith, revealed by the Spirit.

III.

OF THE CONVENIENCES OF THIS HOUSE.

Within these walls the builder did devise That there the householders might sacrifice; Here
is an altar, and a laver too, And priests abundance, temple work to do; Nor want they living
offerings, nor yet fire, Nor holy garments; what divine desire Commands, it has bestowed on
this place; Here be the censors, here's the throne of grace; None of the householders need
go elsewhere, To offer incense, or good news to hear.

A throne for judgment he did here erect, Virtue to cherish, folly to detect; Statutes and laws,
unto this house he gave, To teach who to condemn, and who to save: By things thus wholesome
taught is every brother To fear his God, and to love one another.

And now for pleasure, solace, recreation, Here's such as helpeth forward man's salvation. Equal
to these none can be found elsewhere, All else turn to profuseness, sin, and care. So situate
it is, so roomy, fair, So warm, so blessed, with such wholesome air, That 'tis enticing: whoso
wishes well To his soul's health, should covet here to dwell. Here's necessaries, and what
will delight The godly ear, the palate, with the sight Of each degree and sex; here's everything
To please a beggar, and delight a king. Chambers and galleries, he did invent, Both for a prospect
and a retirement. For such as unto music do incline, Here are both harps and psalteries divine:
Her cellars and banqueting-house have been, In former days, a palace for a queen. O house!
what title to thee can be given, So fit as that which men do give to heaven!

IV.

OF THE STRENGTH AND DEFENCE OF THIS HOUSE.

This house, you may be sure, will always stand; She's builded on a rock, not on the sand; Storms,
rain, yea floods have oft upon her beat, Yet stands she, here's a proof she is no cheat; Fear
not therefore in her for to abide, She keeps her ground, come weather, wind or tide. Her corner-stone
has many times been try'd, But never could the scorn, or rage, or pride, Of all her foes, by
what force they could make, Destroy her battlements, or ground-work shake. Here's God the Lord
encamping round about His dwelling place; nor ought we once to doubt But that he as a watchman
succour will Those that do dwell upon his holy hill. A wall of fire about her I will be, And
glory in the midst of her, and she Shall be the place where I my name record; Here I will come
and bless you, saith the Lord.

The holy watchers at her gates do stand, With their destroying weapons in their hand, Those
to defend, that in this house do dwell, From all her enemies in earth and hell; Safety! where
is it, if it is not here? God dwelleth in her, doth for her appear, To help her early, and
her foes confound, And unto her will make his grace abound; Safety is here, and also that advance,[2]
Will make a beggar sing, a cripple dance.

V.

THE DELICATENESS OF THE SITUATION OF THIS HOUSE.

As her foundation and her beauty's much; Conveniences, and her defences such As none can parallel,
so doth the field About her richest, rarest dainties yield. Moriah, where Isaac was offered,
Where David from his sin was ransomed; Where Solomon the temple did erect, Compar'd with this
is worthy no respect. Under the very threshold of this place Arise those goodly springs of
lasting grace, Whose crystal streams minister like to those That here of love to her, make
their repose. Sweet is her aid, (as one may well infer) 'Cause 'tis the breathings of the comforter.
The pomegranates at all her gates do grow, Mandrakes and vines, with other dainties mo;[3]
Her gardens yield the chief, the richest spice, Surpassing them of Adam's paradise: Here be
sweet ointments, and the best of gums; Here runs the milk, here drops the honey-combs. Here
are perfumes most pleasant to the sense, Here grows the goodly trees of frankincense; Her arbours,
walks, fountains, and pleasant springs, Delightful formerly have been to kings.

Such mountains round about this house do stand As one from thence may see the holy land. Her
fields are fertile, do abound with corn; The lilies fair, her vallies do adorn. The birds that
do come hither every spring, For birds, they are the very best that sing. Her friends, her
neighbours too, do call her blest; Angels do here go by, turn in and rest.

VI.

THE WAY OF RECEIVING THOSE THAT WOULD HERE INHABIT.

And wouldst thou know the customs of this place, How men are here admitted to this grace; And
consequently whether thou mayst be Made one of this most blest fraternity? Come hither then,
unto me lend an ear; And what is doubtful to thee, I will clear.

1. This place, as mercy's arms, stands ope to those That their own happiness us'd to oppose;
Those under hedges, high-way men, or they That would not God, nor yet good men obey; Those
that among the bushes us'd to browse, Or under hedges us'd themselves to louze. The vilest
men, of sinners who are chief, A fornicator, liar, or a thief, May turn in hither, here take
up and dwell With those who ransom'd are from death and hell.

2. This place, as hospitals, will entertain, Those which the lofty of this world disdain: The
poor, the lame, the maimed, halt and blind, The leprous, and possessed too, may find Free welcome
here, as also such relief As ease them will of trouble, pain and grief.

3. This place, as David's heart, with free consent Opens to th' distressed, and the discontent;
Who is in debt, that has not wherewithal To quit his scores, may here be free from thrall:
That man that fears the bailiff, or the jail, May find one here that will become his bail.

4. Art thou bound over to the great assize, For heark'ning to the devil and his lies; Art thou
afraid thereat to shew thy head, For fear thou then be sent unto the dead? Thou may'st come
hither, here is room and place, For such as willingly would live by grace.

5. This place, as father's house in former days, Is a receptacle for runaways;[4] He that,
like to the ox,[5] backslidden is, Forfeited hath for sin his share of bliss; May yet come
hither, here is room and rest; Of old such have come hither and been blest. Had this been false,
O woe had been to David! Nor Peter had, nor Magdalen, been saved. Nor Jonah, nor Manasseh,
nor the rest; No runaway from God could been blest With kind reception at his hands; return
Would here come too late, if nought but burn Had been the lot of the backsliding man: But we
are told there's no rebellion can Prevent, or hinder him from being saved, That mercy heartily
of God hath crav'd. She that went from her God to play the whore, Returning may be as she was
before: He that refuses to his God to turn, That is resolved in hell fire to burn; If he bethinks
himself, and turns again, May find them here that will him entertain.

6.

OF THE GOVERNORS OF THIS HOUSE.

The governors that here in office are, Such be as service do with love and care; Not swerving
from the rule, nor yet intrude Upon each other's work, nor are they rude In managing their
own: but to their trust They labour to be honest, faithful, just. 1. The chief is he who is
the Lord of all, The Saviour; some him physician call. He's cloth'd in shining raiment to the
ground, A golden girdle doth begirt him round; His head and hairs are white as any snow, His
eyes are like a flame of fire also; His feet are like fine brass, as if they burn'd Within
a furnace, or to fire were turn'd; His voice doth like to many waters sound; In his right hand,
seven glittering stars are found. Out of his mouth goes a two-edged sword, Sharper than any
('tis his holy word)

And for his countenance, 'tis as the sun Which shineth in its strength, till day is done. His
name is call'd holy, The WORD OF GOD; The wine-press of his father's wrath he trod; At all
the power of sin he doth deride, The keys of hell and death hang at his side. This is our governor,
this is the chief, From this physician comes our soul's relief. He is the tree of life and
hidden manna; 'Tis he to whom the children sing hosanna. The white stone he doth give with
a new name; In heaven and earth he is of worthy fame. This man hath death destroy'd and slain
the devil, And doth secure all his from damning evil. He is the prince of life, the prince
of peace; He doth us from the bonds of death release. His work is properly his own; nor may,
In what he doth, another say him nay.

'Tis he who pays our hospitalian scores, He's here to search, supple, and bind up sores; He
is our plaster-maker, he applies Them to our wounds, he wipes our wetted eyes. 'Tis he that
gives us cups of consolation, 'Tis he renews the hopes of our salvation. He'll take our parts,
oft times to us unknown, And make as if our failings were his own; He'll plead with God his
name and doings too, And save us will, from those would us undo.

His name is as an ointment poured forth; 'Tis sweet from east to west, from south to north.
He's white and ruddy; yea of all the chief; His golden head is rich beyond belief. His eyes
are like the doves which waters wet, Well wash'd with milk, and also fitly set, His cheeks
as beds of spices, and sweet flowers. He us'd to water with those crystal showers, Which often
flowed from his cloudy eyes; Better by far than what comes from the skies. His lips like lilies,
drop sweet-smelling myrrh, Scenting as do those of the comforter. His hands are as gold rings
set with the beryls; By them we are delivered out of perils; His legs like marble, stand in
boots of gold, His countenance is ex'lent to behold. His mouth, it is of all a mouth most sweet,
O kiss me then, Lord, every time we meet! Thy sugar'd lips, Lord, let them sweeten mine, With
the most blessed scent of things divine.

2. This is one Governor; and next in place, One call'd the Ghost, in Honour and in Grace No
whit inferior to him; and HE Will also in this house our helper be, He 'twas who did at first
brood the creation; And he's the cause of man's regeneration. 'Tis he by whom the heavens were
garnished, With all their host they then abroad did spread (Like spangles, pearls, diamonds
or richest gems) Far richer than the fairest diadems. 'Twas he who with his cloven tongues
of fire Made all those wise ones of the world admire, Who heard his breathing in unlearned
men. O blessed ruler! now the same as then! His work our mind is to illuminate With things
divine, and to accommodate Us with those graces, which will us adorn, And make us look like
men indeed new-born. For our inheritance he makes us meet; He makes us also in this world discreet.
Prudent and wise in what we take in hand, To do and suffer at our Lord's command. 'Tis he that
leads us to the tomb and cross, Where Jesus crucified and buried was; He shews us also, that
he did revive, And doth assure us that he is alive; And doth improve the merit of his blood,
At grace's throne for our eternal good. Dark riddles he doth here to us unfold, Yea, makes
us things invisible behold. He sheds abroad God's love in every heart, Where he doth dwell,
yea to them doth impart, Such tokens of a future happiness, That's past the tongue of angels
to express. 'Tis he which helpeth us, that to perform, Whether becalm'd, or whether in a storm,
Which God commands: without him we do nought That's good, either in deed, or word, or thought.

'Tis he that doth with jewels us bedeck, 'Tis he puts chains of gold about our neck; 'Tis he
that doth us with fine linen gird, That maketh us ofttimes live as a bird. That cureth us of
all our doubts and fears, Puts bracelets on our hands, rings on our ears; He sanctifies our
persons, he perfumes Our spirits also; he our lust consumes; Our stinking breath he sweetens,
so that we To God and all good men sweet-scented be; He sets God's mark upon us, and doth seal
Us unto life, and life to us reveal.

VIII.

UNDER OFFICERS.

3. Another sort of officers here are, But such as must not with these first compare; They're
under-officers, but serviceable, Not only here to rule, but wait at table. Those clothed are
with linen, fine and white, They glitter as the stars of darksome night. They have Saint Peter's
keys, and Aaron's rod; They ope and shut, they bind and loose for God. The chief of these are
watchmen, they have power To mount on high and to ascend the tower Of this brave fabric, and
from thence to see Who keeps their ground, and who the stragglers be. These have their trumpet,
when they do it sound The mountains echo, yea it shakes the ground. With it they also sound
out an alarm, When they perceive the least mischief or harm Is coming, so they do this house
secure There from, or else prepare it to endure Most manfully the cross, and so attain The
crown which for the victor doth remain.

This officer is call'd a steward too, 'Cause with his master's cash he has to do, And has authority
it to disburse To those that want, or for that treasure thirst. The distributor of the word
of grace He is, and at his mouth, when he's in place, They seek the law, he also bids them
do it; He shews them sin, and learns them to eschew it. By this example too he shews them how
To keep their garments clean, their knees to bow Before the king, when he comes into place;
And when they do him supplicate for grace.

Another bade this officer doth wear, Is that of overseer; because the care Of the whole house
is with him, he's to see They nothing want, nor yet abused be By false intruders, doctrines,
or (perchance) By the misplacing of an ordinance.[7] These also are to see they wander not
From place or duty, lest they get a blot To their profession, or bring some disease Upon the
whole, or get a trick to lease, Or lie unto their God, by doing what By sacred statutes he
commanded not. Call them your cooks, they're skill'd in dressing food To nourish weak, and
strong, and cleanse the blood: They've milk for babes, strong meat for men of age; Food fit
for who are simple, who are sage, When the great pot goes on, as oft it doth, They put not
coloquintida[8] in broth, As do those younglings, fondlings of their skill, Who make not what's
so apt to cure as kill.

They are your sub-physicians, and know What sickness you are incident unto; Let them but feel
your pulse, and they will tell You quickly whether you are sick or well. Have you the staggers?
They can help you there; Or if the falling-sickness, or do fear A lethargy, a fever, or the
gout, God blessing of their skill, you need not doubt A cure, for long experience has made
These officers the masters of their trade.[9] Their physic works by purge and vomit too, Fear
not, nor full nor fasting but 'twill do, Have but a care, and see you catch no cold, And with
their physic then you may be bold.

You may them Prophets call, for they can tell Of things to come, yea, here they do excel. For
him that would eternal life attain, Yet will not part with all, that life to gain, But keepeth
some thing close, he should forsake, Or slips the time, in which he should awake; Or saith
he lets go all, yet keepeth some Of what will make him lose the world to come. These prophets
can tell such a man his state, And what at last will surely be his fate. Art one of those whose
fears do go beyond Their faith? when thou should'st hope, dost thou despond? Dost keep thine
eye upon what thou hast done, And yet hast licence to look on the sun? Dost thou so covet more,
as not to be Affected with the grace bestowed on thee? Art like to him, that needs must step
a mile At every stride, or think it not worth while To follow Christ? These prophets they can
tell To cure this thy disease, and make thee well.

This officer is also call'd a guide, Nor should the people but keep by his side; Or tread his
steps in all the paths they walk, By his example they should do and talk. Here's tempting apples,
here are baited hooks, With turning, twisting, cramping, tangling crooks Close by the way;
woe then to them betide, That dare to venture here without a guide. Here haunt the fairies
with their chanting voice; Fiends like to angels, to bewitch our choices; Baits for the flesh
lie here on every side: Who dares set here one foot without a guide Master delusion dwelleth
by our walks, Who with confusion, sings and prays and talks; He says the straight path's his,
and ours the wide: What then can we do here without a guide Let God then give our leaders always
eyes; Yea, let him make them holy, bold, and wise; And help us fast by them for to abide, And
suffer not the blind to be our guide.[10]

4. Here are of rulers, yet another sort, Such as direct our manners to comport With our professed
faith, that we to view, May let beholders know that we are new. These are our conversations
to inspect, And us in our employments to direct, That we in faith and love do every thing,
That reacheth from the peasant to the king. That there may be no scandal in our ways, Nor yet
in our profession all our days. These should after our busy-bodies look, Tale-bearers also,
they have undertook To keep in order, also they must see None that can work among us idle be;
Jars, discords, frauds, with grievances and wrongs, These they're to regulate; to them belongs
The judgment of all matters of this kind, And happy is the house thus disciplined.

5. Another sort of officers we have, Deacons we call them 'cause their work's to save And distribute
those crumbs of charity Unto the poor, for their subsistency, That contributed is for their
relief, Which of their bus'ness is indeed the chief. These must be grave, not of a double tongue,
Not given to wine, not apt to do a wrong Unto the poor, through love to lucre. (Just In this
their office, faithful to their trust) The wife must answer here as face doth face; The husband's
fitness to his work and place, That ground of scandal or of jealousy Obstructs not proof that
he most zealously Performs his office well, for then shall he Be bold in faith, and get a good
degree Of credit with the church; yea what is more, He shall possess the blessings of the poor.
His wisdom teach him will, to find out who Is poor of idleness, and who comes to A low estate
by sickness, age, or 'cause The want of limbs, or sight, or work it was That brought them to
it; or such destiny As sometimes maketh low, who once were high. They must remember too, that
some there are Who halt before they're lame, while others care Not to make known their want,
they'll rather die, Than charge the churches with their poverty. This done, they must bestow
as they see cause; Making the word the rule, and want the laws By which they act, and then
they need not pause. The table of the Lord, he also must Provide for, 'tis his duty and his
trust. The teacher too should have his table spread By him; thus should his house be clad and
fed; Thus he serves tables with the church's stock, And so becomes a blessing to the flock.[11]

I read of widows also that should be Employed here for further decency; I dare not say they
are in office, though A service here they are appointed to: They must be very aged, trusty,
meek, Such who have done much good, that do not seek Themselves; they must be humble, pitiful,
Or they will make their service void and null. These are to teach the younger women what Is
proper to their sex and state, what not: To be discreet, keepers at home, and chaste; To love
their husbands, to be good; shamefac'd: Children to bear, to love them, and to fly What to
the gospel would be infamy. I think those to the sick should look also, A work unfit for younger
ones to do. Wherefore he saith, The younger ones refuse; Perhaps because their weakness would
abuse Them, and subject them unto great disgrace, When such a one as Amnon is in place. And
since the good old woman this must do 'Tis fit she should be fed and clothed too, Out of the
deacon's purse, let it so be; And let this be her service constantly.[12]

IX.

THE ORDER AND MANNER OF THE GOVERNMENT HERE.

As I have shew'd you who in office are, So I will tell you how, and with what care Those here
intrusted with the government, Keep to the statutes made to that intent. By rules divine this
house is governed; Not sanguinary ones, nor taught nor fed By human precepts: for the scripture
saith, The word's our ghostly food; food for our faith. Nor are all forced to the same degree
In things divine, tho' all exhorted be To the most absolute proficiency That law or duty can
to them descry.

Alas! here's children, here are great with young; Here are the sick and weak, as well as strong.
Here are the cedar, shrub, and bruised reed; Yea, here are such who wounded are, and bleed.
As here are some who in their grammar be, So here are others in their A, B, C. Some apt to
teach, and others hard to learn; Some see far off, others can scarce discern That which is
set before them in the glass; Others forgetful are, and so let pass, Or slip out of their mind
what they did hear But now; so great our differences appear Wherefore our Jacob's must have
special care They drive their flocks, but as their flocks can bear; For if they be o'erdriven,
presently They will be sick, or cast their young, or die. The laws therefore are more and less
of force, According as they bring us to the source, Or head, or fountain, or are more remote
To what at first we should ourselves devote. Be we then wise in handling of the laws, Not making
a confused noise like daws In chambers, yea let us seek to excel, To each man's profit; this
is ruling well. With fundamentals then let us begin, For they strike at the very root of sin.
So the foundation being strongly laid, Let us go on, as the wise builder said, For I don't
mean, we should at all disdain Those that are less, we always should maintain That due respect
to either which is meet; This is the way to sit at Jesus' feet.

Repent I must, or I am cast away; Believe I must, or nothing I obey: Love God I must, or nothing
I can do, That's worth so much as loosing of my shoe. If I do not, bear after Christ, my cross;
If love to holiness is at a loss; If I my lusts seek not to mortify; If to myself, my flesh,
I do not die; What law, should I observe't, can do me good? In little duties life hath never stood.

One reads, he prays, he catechises too; But doth he nothing else, what doth he do? I read to
know my duty, I do pray To God to help me do it day by day; If this be not my end in what I
do, I am a sot, an hypocrite also. I am baptiz'd, what then? unless I die To sin, I cover folly
with a lie. At the Lord's table, I do eat; what though? There some have eat their own damnation
too.

I will suppose, I hear, I sing, I pray, And that I am baptiz'd without delay, I will suppose
I do much knowledge get, And will also suppose that I am fit To be a preacher, yet nought profits
me If to the first, poor I a stranger be: They are more weighty therefore; in compare These
unto them, but mint and anise are.

Not that I would the least of duty slight, Because the least command, of divine right, Requires
that I myself subject thereto; Willful resisters do themselves undo. But let's keep order,
let the first be first; Repent, believe, and love; and then I trust I have that right, which
is divine, to all That is enjoined; be they great or small. Only I must as cautionary speak,
In one word more, a little to the weak; Thou must not suffer men so to enclose Thee in their
judgments, as to discompose Thee in that faith and peace thou hast with him; This would be
like the losing of a limb; Or like to him who thinks he doth not well, Unless he lose the kernel
for the shell. Thou art no captive, but a child and free; Thou wast not made for laws, but
laws for thee; And thou must use them as thy light will bear it; They that say otherwise, do
rend and tear it, More like to wicked tyrants, who are cruel, And add unto a little fire, more
fuel. But those who are true shepherds of the sheep, To quench such burnings would most gladly
weep. But I am yet but upon generals; Particulars our legislator calls For at our hands, and
that in order to Consummate what we have begun to do.

1. My brother I must love, in very deed. I'm taught of God to do it: let me heed This divine
duty, and perform it well, Who loves his brother, God in him doth dwell; The argument which
on me this imposes, Smells like to ointment, or the sweetest roses. Shall God love, shall he
keep his faith to me? And shall not I? shall I unfaithful be? Shall God love me a sinner? and
shall I Not love a saint? Yea, shall my Jesus die To reconcile me to my God? and shall I hate
his child, nor hear his wants that call For my little assisting of him? fie On such a spirit,
on such cruelty; Fie on the thought that would me alienate, Or tempt me my worst enemy to hate.[13]

2. He that dwells here, must also be a sharer In others' griefs; must be a burden-bearer Among
his brethren, or he cannot do That which the blessed gospel calls him to. In order hereunto,
humility Must be put on, it is our livery, We must be clothed with it, if we will The law obey,
our master's mind fulfil. If this be so, then what should they do here, Who in their antic
pranks of pride appear? Let lofty men among you bear no sway, The Lord beholds the proud man
far away. It is not fit that he inhabit there Where humbleness of mind should have the chair.
Can pride be where a soul for mercy craves? Shall pride be found among redeemed slaves? Shall
he who mercy from the gallows brought, Look high, or strut, or entertain a thought That tends
to tempt him to forget that fate, To which for sin he destin'd was of late, And could not then
at all delivered be, But by another's death and misery? Pride is the unbecoming'st thing of
all: Besides, 'tis the forerunner of a fall. He that is proud, soon in the dirt will lie, But
honour followeth humility. Let each then count his brother as his better, Let each esteem himself
another's debtor. Christ bids us learn of him, humble to be, Profession's beauty is humility.

3. Forgive, is here another statute law; To be revenged is not worth a straw, He that forgives
shall also be forgiven, Who doth not so, must lose his part in heaven; Nor must thou weary
of this duty be 'Cause God's not weary of forgiving thee.

Thou livest by forgiveness; should a stop Be put thereto one moment, thou wouldst drop Into
the mouth of hell. Then let this move Thee thy dear brother to forgive in love.

And we are bid in our forgivenesses To do as God doth in forgiving his. If any have a quarrel
against any, (As quarrels we have oft against a many) Why then, as God, for Christ's sake,
pardons you, For Christ's sake, pardon thou thy brother too. We say, What freely comes, doth
freely go; Then let all our forgivenesses be so. I'm sure God heartily forgiveth thee, My loving
brother, prithee forgive me; But then in thy forgiveness be upright; Do't with thine heart,
or thou'rt an hypocrite.

4. As we forgive, so we must watch and pray; For enemies we have, that night and day, Should
we not watch, would soon our graces spoil, Should we not pray, would our poor souls defile.
Without a watch, resist a foe who can? Who prays not, is not like to play the man? Complaint
that he is overcome, he may; But who would win the field, must watch and pray. Who watches,
should know who and who's together: Know we not friends from foes, how know we whether Of them
to fight, or which to entertain? Some have instead of foes, familiars slain. Sometimes a lust
will get into the place, Or work, or office, of some worthy grace; Till it has brought our
souls to great decay. Unless we diligently watch and pray, Our pride will our humility precede:
By th' nose, our unbelief our faith will lead. Self-love will be where self-denial should;
And passion heat, what patience sometime cool'd. And thus it will be with us night and day,
Unless we diligently watch and pray.

Besides what these domestics do, there are Abroad such foes as wait us to ensnare; Yea, they
against us stand in battle-'ray, And will us spoil, unless we watch and pray. There is the
world with all its vanities, There is the devil with a thousand lies; There are false brethren
with their fair collusions, Also false doctrines with their strong delusions; These will us
take, yea carry us away From what is good, unless we watch and pray. Long life to many, is
a fearful snare; Of sudden death we also need beware; The smiles and frowns of men, temptations
be; And there's a bait in all we hear and see. Let them who can, to any shew a way, How they
should live, that cannot watch and pray.

Nor is't enough to keep all well within, Nor yet to keep all out that would be sin, If entertained;
I must myself concern With my dear brother, as I do discern Him tempted, or a wand'ring from
the way; Else as I should, I do not watch and pray. Pray then, and watch, be thou no drowsy
sleeper, Grudge, nor refuse, to be thy brother's keeper, Seest thou thy brother's graces at
an ebb? Is his heel taken in the spider's web? Pray for thy brother; if that will not do, To
him, and warn him of the present woe That is upon him; if he shall thee hear Thou wilt a saviour
unto him appear.[14]

5. Sincerity, to that we are enjoined, For I do in our blessed law-book find, That duties,
how well done soe'er they seem, With our great God, are but of small esteem If not sincerely
done; then have a care For hypocrites are hateful everywhere. Things we may do, yea, and may
let men see Us do them too, design but honestly; Vain-gloriously let us not seek for praise,
Vain-glory's nothing worth in gospel days. Sincerity seeks not an open place, To do, tho' it
does all with open face; It loves no guises, nor disfigurations. 'Tis plain, 'tis simple, hates
equivocations. Sincerity's that grace by which we poise, And keep our duties even: nor but
toys Are all we do, if no sincerity Attend our works, lift it up ne'er so high. Sincerity makes
heav'n upon us smile, Lo, here's a man in whom there is no guile! Nathaniel, an Israelite indeed!'
With duties he sincerely doth proceed; Under the fig-tree heav'n saw him at prayer, There is
but few do their devotions there. Sincerity! Grace is thereto entailed, The man that was sincere,
God never fail'd. One tear that falleth from sincerity, Is worth ten thousand from hypocrisy.

6. Meekness is also here imposed by law, A froward spirit is not worth a straw. A froward spirit
is a bane to rest, They find it so, who lodge it in their breast. A froward spirit suits with
self-denial, With taking up the cross, and ev'ry trial, As cats and dogs, together by the ears;
As scornful men do suit with frumps[15] and jeers. Meek as a lamb, mute as a fish, is brave,
When anger boils, and passions vent do crave. The meek, God will in paths of judgment guide;
Good shall the meek eat, and be satisfied; The Lord will lift the meek to highest station;
Will beautify the meek with his salvation. The meek are blest, the earth they shall inherit:
The meek is better than the proud in spirit. Meekness will make you quiet, hardy, strong, To
bear a burden, and to put up wrong. Meekness, though divers troubles you are in, Will bridle
passion, be a curb to sin. Thus God sets forth the meek before our eyes; A meek and quiet spirit
God doth prize.

7. Temp'rance also, is on this house imposed, And whoso has it not, is greatly nosed[16] By
standers by, for greedy, lustful men: Nor can all we can say, excuse us, when Intemp'rance
any where to them shall be Apparent; though we other vices flee. Temperance, the mother is
of moderation, The beauty also of our conversation. Temperance will our affections moderate,
And keep us from being inordinate In our embraces, or in our salutes Of what we have, also
in our pursuits Of more, and in a sedate settlement Of mind, will make's in all states be content.
Nor want we here an argument to prove That who, inordinate is, in his love Of worldly things,
doth better things defy, And slight salvation for the butterfly.

What argument can any man produce, Why we should be intemperate in the use Of any worldly good?
Do we not see That all these things from us a fleeting be? What can we hold? What can we keep
from flying From us? Is not each thing we have a dying? My house, my wife, my child, they all
grow old, Nor am I e'er the younger for my gold; Here's none abiding, all things fade away,
Poor I at best am but a clod of clay.

If that be true, man doth not live by bread, He that has nothing else, must needs be dead;
Take bread for what can in this world be found, Yet all that therein is, is but a sound, An
empty sound, there is no life at all, It cannot save a sparrow from her fall. Let us then use
this world as we are bid, And as in olden times, the godly did. Who buy, should be as if they
did possess None of their purchase, or themselves did bless In what they have; and he that
doth rejoice In what he hath, should rather out of choice, Withdraw his mind from what he hath
below, And set his heart on whither he must go. For those that weep under their heavy crosses,
Or that are broken with the sense of losses, Let them remember, all things here are fading,
And as to nature, of a self-degrading And wasting temper; yea, both we and they Shall waste,
and waste, until we waste away. Let temperance then, with moderation be As bounds to our affections,
when we see, Or feel, or taste, or any ways enjoy Things pleasing to the flesh, lest we destroy
Ourselves therewith, or bring ourselves thereby To surfeits, guilt, or Satan's slavery.

8. Patience, another duty, as we find In holy writ, is on this house enjoined; Her state, while
here, is such, that she must have This grace abounding in her, or a slave She'll quickly be
unto their lusts and will, That seek the mind of Satan to fulfil. He who must bear all wrongs
without resistance, And that with gladness too, must have assistance Continually from patience,
thereunto, Or he will find such work too hard to do. Who meets with taunts, with mocks, with
flouts and squibs, With raileries, reproaches, checks, and snibs; Yea, he who for well-doing
is abused, Robb'd, spoiled, and goal'd, and ev'ry way misused; Has he not patience soon will
be offended, Yea his profession too will soon be ended. A Christian for religion must not fight,
But put up wrongs, though he be in the right; He must be merciful, loving, and meek, When they
smite one, must turn the other cheek. He must not render railing for reviling Nor murmur when
he sees himself a spoiling, When they shall curse, he must be sure to bless, And thus with
patience must his soul possess. I doubt our frampered[17] Christians will not down With what
I say, yet I dare pawn my gown, Do but compare my notes with sacred story, And you will find
patience the way to glory. Patience under the cross, a duty is, Whoso possess it, belongs to
bliss; If it is present work accomplisheth; If it holds out, and still abideth with The Truth;
then may we look for that reward, Promised at the coming of the Lord.

9. To entertain good men let's not forget Some by so doing have had benefit; Yea for to recompense
this act of theirs, Angels have lodged with them unawares. Yea to encourage such a work as
this, The Lord himself makes it a note of his, When hungry or when thirsty I have been, Or
when a stranger, you did take me in. Strangers should not to strangers but be kind Specially
if conferring notes, they find Themselves, though strangers here, one brotherhood, And heirs,
joint heirs, of everlasting good; These should as mother's sons, when they do meet In a strange
country, one another greet With welcome; come in, brother, how dost do? Whither art wand'ring?
Prithee let me know Thy state? Dost want or meat, or drink, or cloth? Art weary? Let me wash
thy feet, I'm loth Thou shouldst depart, abide with me all night; Pursue thy journey with the
morning light.

X.

THE WAY OF REDUCING WHAT'S AMISS, INTO ORDER HERE.

Although this house thus honourable is, Yet 'tis not sinless, many things amiss Do happen here,
wherefore them to redress, We must keep to our rules of righteousness; Nor must we think it
strange, if sin shall be Where virtue is; don't all men plainly see That in the holy temple
there was dust, That to our very gold, there cleaveth rust? In Abraham's family was a derider
I' th' palace of a king will be the spider. Who saith, we have no sin, doth also say We have
no need at all to watch and pray; To live by faith, the flesh to mortify, Or of more of the
spirit to sanctify Our nature. All this wholly needless is With him, who as to this, has nought
amiss. But we confess, 'cause we would not be liars, That we still feel the motions and desires
Of sin within us, and should fall away, Did not Christ intercede and for us pray. We therefore
do conclude that sin is here, But that it may not to our shame appear, We have our rules, thereby
with it to deal, And plaisters too, our deadly wounds to heal. And seeing idleness gives great
occasions To th' flesh, to make its rude and bold invasions Upon good orders, 'tis ordained
we see, That none dwell here, but such as workers be: So plain's the law for this, and so complete,
It bids who will not work, forbear to eat; Let then each one be diligent to do What grace or
nature doth oblige them to. Who have no need to work for meat or clothes, Should work for those
that want. Not that the sloth Of idleness should be encouraged, But that those, poor indeed,
be clad and fed. Dorcas did thus, and 'tis to sacred story Committed for her praise and lasting
glory.

This house then is no nurse to idleness; Fig-trees are here to keep, and vines to dress; Here's
work for all; yea, work that must be done; Yet work, like that, to playing in the sun; The
toil's a pleasure, and the labour sweet, Like that of David's dancing in the street; The work
is short, the wages are for ever, The work like me, the wages like the giver

No drone must hide himself under those eaves; Who sows not, will in harvest reap no sheaves.
The slothful man himself, may plainly see, That honey's gotten by the working bee. But here's
no work for life, that's freely given; Meat, drink, and cloths, and life, we have from heav'n;
Work's here enjoined, 'cause it is a pleasure, Vice to suppress, and augment heavenly treasure
Moreover, 'tis to shew, if men profess The faith, and yet abide in idleness, Their faith is
vain, no man can ever prove He's right, but by the faith that works by love. If this good counsel
is by thee rejected; If work and labour is by thee neglected; If thou, like David, lollest
on thy bed; Or art like to a horse, pamper'd and fed With what will fire thy lusts, and so
lay snares For thine own soul, when thou shalt be i' th' wars: Then take what follows, sin
must be detected, And thou without repentance quite rejected.

This is the house of God, his dwelling-place, 'Tis here that we behold his lovely face; But
if it should polluted be with sin, And so abide, he quickly will begin To leave it desolate,
and then woe to it, Sin and his absence quickly will undo it.

And since sin is, of things the worst of all, And watcheth like a serpent on a wall, Or flyeth
like an eagle in the air, Or runs as desperate ships, void of all care, Or, (as great Solomon
hath wisely said) Is as the way of wantons with a maid, Who tick, and toy, and with a tempting
giggle Provoke to lust, and by degrees, so wriggle Them into their affections, that they go
The way to death, so do themselves undo: As it is said, this mischief to prevent, Let all men
watch, yea, and be diligent Observers of its motions, and then fly, This is the way to live,
and not to die. He that would never fall, must never slip, Who would obey the call, must fear
the whip. God would also that every stander by That in the grass doth see the adder lie, Should
cry as he did, death is in the pot, That many by its poison perish not. But if that beastly
thing shall hold its hold, And make the man possessed basely bold In pleading for it, or shall
it deny, Or it shall seek to cover with a lie; Then take more aid, and make a fresh assault
At it again, diminish not the fault, But charge it home. If yet he will not fear, But still
unto his wickedness adhere, Then tell the house thereof. But if he still Persist in his abomination
will, Then fly him, 'cause he is a leprous man, Count him with heathens and the publican. But
if he falls before thee at the first, Then be thou to him faithful, loving, just. Forgive his
sin, tell it not to a brother, Lest thou thyself be served so by another.

If he falls not, but in the second charge, Spread not his wickedness abroad at large. But,
if thou think his sorrow to be sound, Forgive his sin, and hide it under ground. If he shall
stand the first and second shot; If he before the church, repenteth not, Deal with him as the
matter shall require, Let not the house for him be set on fire. If after all, he shall repent
and turn To God, and you, you must not let him burn For ever under sense of sin and shame,
You must his sin forgive in Christ his name.

Confirm your love to him in Christ, you must, By all such ways as honest are, and just. Shy
be not of him, carry't not aloof, But rather give him of your love such proof, That he may
gather thence, ye do believe To mercy Christ again doth him receive.

Two things, monish you, as to this, I would; The first, to shew the church wherein she should
In all her actions so herself behave, As to convince the fault, she would save His soul; and
that 'tis for this very thing, She doth him unto open judgment bring. Then would I shew the
person they reject, What will, without repentance, be th' effect Of this tremendous censure,
so conclude; Leaving my judgment to the multitude Of those who sober and judicious be, Begging
of each of them a prayer for me.

1. This house, in order to this work, must be Affected with the sin and misery, Of this poor
creature, yea, must mourn and weep, To think such tares, in your neglect, or sleep, Should
spring up here, nor must they once invent To think, till he's cast out, you're innocent.

2. Thus leaven, the whole lump has leavened; Israel was guilty of what Achan did; And so must
stand, until they purged are, Till Achan doth, for sin, his burden bear. The reason is, Achan
a member was Of that great body, and by nature's laws, The hand, foot, eye, tongue, ear, or
one of these, May taint the whole with Achan's foul disease. The church must too be sensible
of this, Some lep'rous stones make all the house amiss: And as the stones must thence removed
be, In order to the house's sanctity, So it must purged be (in any wise) Before 'tis counted
clean (by sacrifice).

3. Next have a care, lest sin, which you should purge Becomes not unto you a farther scourge,
The which it will, if such shall judges be, Which from its spots and freckles are not free;
Pluck thou the beam first out of thine own eye, Else the condemned will thee vilify And say,
let not the pot the kettle judge; If otherwise, it will beget a grudge, A great one 'twixt
the church and him that sinned, Nor by such means, can ever such be winned To a renew'd embrace
of holiness; More like be tempted further to transgress.

4. Again, let those that loud against it cry, See they don't entertain it inwardly; Sin, like
to pitch, will to the fingers cleave, Look to it then, let none himself deceive; 'Tis catching;
make resistances afresh, Abhor the garment spotted by the flesh. Some at the dimness of the
candle puff, Who yet can daub their fingers with the snuff.

5. Beware, likewise, lest rancour should appear Against the person, do in all things fear:
Bewail the man, while you abhor his sin; Pity his soul; the flesh you still are in; Thyself
consider thou may'st tempted be, Hast thou no pity, who will pity thee?

6. See that the ground be good on which you go: Sin, but not virtue show dislike unto. Take
heed of hypocritical intentions, And quarrel not at various apprehensions About some smaller
matter, lest it breed Needless debates, and lest that filthy seed Contention, should o'errun
your holy ground, And lest not love, but nettles there are found.

7. You must likewise allow each man his grains, For that none perfect are, sin yet remains,
And human frailties do attend the best; To bear and forbear here, will tend to rest. Vain jangling,
jars, and strifes will there abound, Where moles are mountains made, or fault is found, With
every little, trivial, petty thing; This spirit snib, or 'twill much mischief bring Into this
house, and 'tis for want of love, 'Tis entertain'd: it is not of the dove.

8. For those that have private opinions too We must make room, or shall the church undo: Provided
they be such as don't impair Faith, holiness, nor with good conscience jar: Provided also those
that hold them shall Such faith hold to themselves, and not let fall Their fruitless notions
in their brother's way, Do this, and faith and love will not decay.

9. We must also in these our dealings shew We put a difference 'twixt those sins that do Clash
with the light of nature, and what we Perceive against the faith of Christ to be. Those against
nature, nature will detect; Those against faith, faith from them must direct The judgment,
conscience, understanding too, Or there will be no cure, whate'er you do. When men are caught
in immoralities, Nature will start, the conscience will arise To judgment; and if impudence
doth recoil, Yet guilt, and self-condemnings will embroil The wretch concerned, in such unquietness
Or shame, as will induce him to confess His fault, and pardon crave of God and man, Such men
with ease therefore we conquer can.

But 'tis not thus with such as swerve in faith With them, who, as our wise Apostle saith, Entangled
are at unawares, with those Cunning to trap, to snare, and to impose By falsifyings, their
prevarications: No, these are slyly taken from their stations, Unknown to nature; yea, in judgment
they Think they have well done to forsake the way. Their understanding, and their judgment
too Doth like, or well approve of what they do. These are, poor souls, beyond their art and
skill, Ta'en captive by the devil, at his will, Here therefore you must patience exercise,
And suffer long, ye must not tyrannize It over such, but must all meekness shew; Still dropping
of good doctrine as the dew, Against their error; so its churlishness You conquer will, and
may their fault redress.

The reason why we must not exercise That roughness here, as where conviction lies In nature,
is because those thus ensnared Want nature's light and help to be repair'd. A spirit hath them
taken, they are gone, Delusions supernat'ral they're on The wing of; They are out o' th' reach
of man Nothing but God, and gospel reach them can. Now since we cannot give these people eyes,
Nor regulate their judgment, wherein lies, Our work with them, if not, as has been said, In
exercising patience. While display'd The holy word before their faces is, By which alone they
must see what's amiss With their poor souls, and so convert again, To him with whom salvation
doth remain.

Obj. But they are turbulent, they would confound The truth, and all in their perdition drown'd.

Ans. If turbulent and mischievous they are, Imposing their opinions without care Who they offend,
or do destroy thereby. Then must the church deal with them presently, Lest tainted be the whole
with their delusion, And brought into disorder and confusion.

XI.

THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THOSE THUS DEALT WITH.

The man that worthily rejected is, And cast out of this house, his part in bliss Is lost for
ever, turns he not again, True faith and holiness to entertain. Nor is it boot, for who are
thus cast out, Themselves to flatter, or to go about To shift the censure; nothing here will
do, Except a new conversion thou come to. He that is bound on earth, is bound in heaven, Nor
is his loosing, but the sin forgiven; Repentance too, forgiveness must precede, Or thou must
still abide among the dead.

XII.

AN EXPOSTULATION WITH SUCH TO RETURN.

O shame! Is't not a shame for men to be For sin, spu'd out from good society! For man enlightened
to be so base! To turn his back upon the God of grace! For one who for his sins has mourn'd
and cry'd, To slight him, who for sin hath bled and died! What fool would sell his part in
paradise, That has a soul, and that of such a price? What parallel can suit with such so well,
As those, for sin cast down from heaven to hell! But let me tell thee, here is aggravation;
The angels, though they did fall from their station Had not the caution thou hast had; they
fell; This thou hast seen, and seeing, didst rebel. One would a thought, the noise of this
their fall, A warning; yea, a warning, and a call, Should unto thee have been, to have a care
Of falling too: O how then didst thou dare, Since God did not spare them, thus to presume To
tempt him in his wrath, thee to consume. Nor did the angels from a Jesus fall, Redeemed they
were not, from a state of thrall; But thou! as one redeem'd, and that by blood, Redemption
hast despised; and the mud Or mire of thine own filth again embracest: A dying bleeding Jesus
thou disgracest! What wilt thou do? see's not how thou hast trod Under thy foot, the very Son
of God? O fearful hand of God! And fearful will Thy doom be, when his wrath thy soul shall kill.

Yea, with a signal these must hear their sin, This dirty sow from mire has washed been, Yet
there did wallow, after wash'd she was; So to procure a lust, obtain'd this loss. O shame!
is't not a shame for man to be, So much averse to his felicity, That none can make him leave
to play the fool, Till to the devil he be put to school, To learn his own salvation to prize?
O fool! must now the devil make thee wise? O sot! that will in wickedness remain, Unless the
devil drives thee back again.

Hast quite forgot how thou wast wont to pray, And cry out for forgiveness night and day? Or
dost thou count they were but painted fears Which from thine eyes did squeeze so many tears?
Remember man, thy prayers and tears will cry Thee down to hell, for thine apostacy. Who will
not have what he has prayed for, Must die the death, his prayer shall him abhor. Hast thou
forgotten that most solemn vow Thou mad'st to God, when thou didst crave he bow His ear unto
thee would, and give thee grace, And would thee also in his arms embrace? That vow, I say,
whereby thou then didst bind Thyself to him, that now thy roving mind Recoil against him should,
and fling away From him, and his commandments disobey. What has he done? wherein has he offended?
Thou actest now, as if thou wast intended To prove him guilty of unrighteousness, Of breach
of promise, or that from distress He could, or would not save thee, or that thou Hast found
a better good than he; but how Thou wilt come off, or how thou wilt excuse Thyself, 'cause
thou art gone, and did refuse To wait upon him that consider well; Thou art as yet alive, on
this side hell. Is't not a shame, a stinking shame to be Cast forth God's vineyard as a barren
tree? To be thrown o'er the pales, and there to lie, Or be pick'd up by th' next that passeth by?

Well, thou hast turn'd away, return again; Bethink thyself, thy foot from sin refrain; Hark!
thou art call'd upon, stop not thine ear: Return, backsliding children, come, draw near Unto
your God; repent, and he will heal Your base backslidings, to you will reveal That grace and
peace which with him doth remain, For them that turn away, and turn again.

Take with thee words, come to the throne of grace There supplicate thy God, and seek his face;
Like to the prodigal, confess thy sin, Tell him where, and how vicious thou hast been. Suppose
he shall against thee shut the door, Knock thou the louder, and cry out the more; What if he
makes thee there to stand a while? Or makes as if he would not reconcile To thee again? Yet
take thee no denial, Count all such carriages but as a trial Whether thou art in earnest in
thy suit, As one truly forlorn and destitute; But hide thou nought of all that thou hast done,
Open thy bosom, make confession Of all thy wickedness, tell every whit; Hast thou a secret
sin? don't cover it; Confess, thyself judge, if thou wouldst not die; Who doth himself judge,
God doth justify.

To sin, and stand in't, is the highest evil; This makes a man most like unto the devil; This
bids defiance unto God and grace; This man resists him spitteth in his face, Scorns at his
justice, mocketh at his power, Tempts him, provokes him, grieves him every hour: When he ariseth,
he will recompense This sturdy rebel for his impenitence: Be not incorrigible then, come back
again, There's hope, beg mercy while life doth remain.

Obj. But I fear I am lost and cast away, Sentence is past, and who reverse it may?

Ans. The sentence past, admitteth or reprieve; Yea, of a pardon, canst thou but believe. TURN
AGAIN SINNER, NEVER MAKE A DOUBT, COME, THE LORD JESUS WILL NOT CAST THEE OUT.

FOOTNOTES:

1. 4to, London, 1642. In the editor's library.

2. 'That advance,' preferment, or progress towards perfection.--Ed.

3. 'Mo,' a usual contraction for more in former times, now obsolete.--Ed.

4. Probably referring to the parable of the prodigal son, Luke 15.--Ed.

5. This may refer to the Levitical law, Exodus 21:28-36. The ox that had gored any one to death,
'shall be surely stoned' without possibility of escape, but the backslider or manslayer, although
he lie equally under the sentence of death, yet may escape to the city of refuge.--Ed.

6. These stanzas afford an excellent illustration to the meaning of Bunyan in his Pilgrim's
Progress, where Christian, before the cross, receives the roll or certificate--loses it for
a season in the arbour on the hill Difficulty, when loitering and sleeping on his way to the
Interpreter's house, but regains it by repentance and prayers, and eventually, having crossed
the river, gives it in at the gate of the Celestial City, and is admitted.--Ed.

7. Bunyan considered that baptism is to follow belief, and that christening a child was a misplacing
the ordinance. So also with he Lord's Supper--that it was to be a public showing forth the
death of the Saviour, and if administered in private, or with any other view, it was misplaced.--Ed.

8. It is a rare thing for Bunyan to use a foreign word; but all pious persons in his time were
familiar with, and generally used, the Puritan or Genevan Bible, vulgarly called the Breeches
Bible, an extremely valuable book; in the marginal notes of which, on this passage is the following
explanation, '"wilde gourdes," which the apoticaries call coloquintida, and is most vehement
and dangerous in purging.'--Ed.

9. The university or college in which Bunyan so highly graduated, is the only one where ministers
can be instructed in this spiritual physic. It is Christ's college or school, neither at Oxford
or Cambridge, but in the Bible. There, and there only, under the teaching of the Holy Spirit,
can the Christian bishop or under shepherd receive instruction in the precious remedies against
Satan's devices, or in specifics to cure spiritual maladies.--Ed.

10. Then thought I with myself, who that goeth on pilgrimage, but would have one of these maps
about him, that he may look when he is at a stand which is the way he must take.'--Pilgrim's
Progress, Part Second.

11. These hints to deacons are invaluable. They must have been the result of long intimacy
and enlightened watchfulness over the conduct of the poor. To distinguish between the noisy
beggar and the unobtrusive sufferer--to administer relief in just proportions, 'the word the
rule, and want the law,' in spite of all that influence which is constantly brought to bear
upon those who distribute any common charity fund. It requires much of the fear of God in the
heart, and a solemn sense of responsibility at the great day. The terms, 'crumbs of charity,'
are beautifully expressive of the general poverty of Christian churches.--Ed.

12. Bunyan's idea of this scriptural order of female deacons is very striking, and worthy the
solemn consideration of all Christian churches. They are to be chosen from such as are 'widows
indeed, who trust in God, and continue in supplications and prayers night and day,' 1 Timothy
5:5. They are to devote themselves to the sick--to be patterns of good works--and, if needful,
to be fed and clothed at the expense of the church, verse 16. If to this were added to examine
and educate the children, they might be most eminently useful.--Ed.

13. These instructions are like 'apples of gold in pictures of silver.' Thrice happy are those
churches whose members act in conformity with these scriptural rules. But is there a member
who dares to violate them? Poor wretched creature, the Lord have mercy on thee.--Ed.

14. Happy is that Christian, who, in obedience to his Lord's command, is so humble as to seek
out the brother who has offended him; 'Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone,'
is the divine command. Is it not at the peril of our souls wilfully to violate this self-humiliating
but imperative law?--Ed.

15. To 'frump,' to mock or browbeat.--Ed.

16. 'Greatly nosed,' taken by the nose, ridiculed.--Ed.

17. 'Frampered' or frampold, peevish, crossgrained, rugged; now obsolete.--Ed.

***

JOHN BUNYAN ON THE TERMS OF COMMUNION AND FELLOWSHIP OF CHRISTIANS AT THE TABLE OF THE LORD;

COMPRISING

I. HIS CONFESSION OF FAITH, AND REASON OF HIS PRACTICE; II. DIFFERENCES ABOUT WATER BAPTISM
NO BAR TO COMMUNION; AND III. PEACEABLE PRINCIPLES AND TRUE[1]

ADVERTISEMENT BY THE EDITOR.

Reader, these are extraordinary productions that will well repay an attentive perusal. It is
the confession of faith of a Christian who had suffered nearly twelve years' imprisonment,
under persecution for conscience sake. Shut up with his Bible, you have here the result of
a prayerful study of those holy oracles. It produced a difference in practice from his fellow
Christians of ALL denominations, the reasons for which are added to this confession; with a
defence of his principles and practice, proving them to be peaceable and true. In all this
an unlettered man displays the acumen of a thoroughly educated polemical theologian. The author
was driven to these publications to defend himself from the slanders which were showered down
upon him, by all parties, for nearly eighteen years, and by the attempts which were made to
take away his members, injure the peace of his congregation, and alienate him from the church
to which he was tenderly attached. His first inquiry is, Who are to be admitted to the Lord's
table; and his reply is, Those whom God has received: they have become his children, and are
entitled to sit at their Father's table: such only as have examined themselves, and by their
conduct lead the church to hope that they have passed from death unto life. The practice of
those who admit ungodly persons because they have submitted to some outward ceremonies, he
severely condemns. The mixture of the church and the world he deems to be spiritual adultery,
the prolific source of sin, and one of the causes of the deluge. The Lord's table is scripturally
fenced around: 'Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers'; 'what communion hath
light with darkness; Christ with Belial; the temple of God with idols? be ye separate, touch
not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.' 'Receive ye one another, as Christ also received
us to the glory of God, not to doubtful disputations.' 'Withdraw from them that walk disorderly,
working not; but busy bodies; unless with quietness they work and eat their own bread. If any
are proud, doting about questions and strifes of words, evil surmisings, perverse disputings,
supposing that gain is godliness; from such withdraw.' Bunyan rests all upon the word,--the
characters are described who are to be excluded from the Lord's table; but in no instance is
it upon record that any one was excluded because he had not been baptized in water. And who
will dare to make any addition to holy writ?

The practice of making the mode in which water baptism was administered a term of communion,
existed among the Independents long before Bunyan's time. Crosby, in his History of the Baptists,
makes some long extracts from a book entitled, 'The sin and danger of admitting Anabaptists
to continue in the congregational churches, and the inconsistency of such a practice with the
principles of both.' In America, Cotton and the Independents severely persecuted their Baptist
brethren, even to deportation. As the Baptists increased in numbers, they refused to admit
any to the Lord's table, even to occasional communion, who had not been baptized in water upon
a profession of faith: in fact, the difference between those who consider baptism to be a relative
duty to be performed by parents in having their infants sprinkled, and those who deem it a
personal duty to be immersed in water, as a public putting on of Christ, is so great, as to
require the utmost powers of charity to preserve peace. Thus it was in the primitive churches,
where great differences prevailed even as to the duty of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles;
the keeping of days probably extending to the Jewish sabbath, and to the abstaining from certain
meats, with other ordinances of the Jewish law.

Bunyan saw all the difficulties of this question: he was satisfied that baptism is a personal
duty, in respect to which every individual must be satisfied in his own mind, and over which
no church had any control; and that the only inquiry as to the fitness of a candidate for church
fellowship should be, whether the regenerating powers of the Holy Ghost had baptized the spirit
of the proposed member into newness of life. This is the only livery by which a Christian can
be known. Bunyan very justly condemns the idea of water baptism being either the Christian's
livery or his marriage to the Saviour.

We do well, in our examinations into this subject, to note carefully the various applications
of the word baptize, and not always attach the use of water to the term. There is a being baptized
in a cloud, and in the sea, to protect God's Israel from their deadly foes; a baptism in sufferings;
a baptism in water unto repentance; a baptism in fire, or the Holy Ghost; a baptism into the
doctrine of the Trinity (Matt 28:19). Bunyan had no doubt upon this subject; he deemed water
baptism an important personal duty; and that a death to sin, and resurrection to newness of
life--a different tint, or dye, given to the character--was best figured by immersion in water:
still he left it to every individual to be satisfied in his own mind as to this outward sign
of the invisible grace. 'Strange,' he says, 'take two Christians equal on all points but this;
nay, let one go far beyond the other for grace and holiness; yet this circumstance of water
shall drown and sweep away all his excellencies; not counting him worthy of that reception
that with hand and heart shall be given to a novice in religion, because he consents to water.'

For these catholic principles he was most roughly handled. Deune, in a pamphlet in the Editor's
possession, called him a devil; and likened him to Timri, who slew his master. The most learned
of the Baptist ministers entered upon the controversy. They invited him to a grand religious
tournament, where he would have stood one against a legion. A great meeting was appointed,
in London, for a public disputation--as was common among the puritans--and in which the poor
country mechanic was to be overwhelmed with scholastic learning and violence; but Bunyan wisely
avoided a collision which could have answered no valuable purpose, and which bid fair to excite
angry feelings. He had appealed to the press as the calmest and best mode of controversy; and
to that mode of appeal he adhered. Three learned men undertook the cause against Bunyan: these
were, D'Anvers, W. Kiffin, and T. Paul. When these lettered, able, and distinguished disputants
published their joint answer, it contained much scurrilous abuse. Their brother, Bunyan, was
in prison, and they visited him with gall and wormwood. He closes his reply with these remarkable
words, 'Thine to serve thee, Christians, so long as I can look out at those eyes that have
had so much dirt thrown at them by many.'

The late Mr. Robert Hall, in his controversy upon this subject with Mr. Kinghorn, in which--having
demolished Kinghorn's castle in a few pages--he, in order to make a book, amused the public
by kicking the ruins about, thus adverts to these treatises: 'The most virulent reproaches
were cast upon the admirable Bunyan, during his own time, for presuming to break the yoke;
and whoever impartially examines the spirit of Mr. Booth's Apology, will perceive that its
venerable author regards him, together with his successors, much in the light of rebels and
insurgents, or, to use the mildest terms, as contumacious despisers of legitimate authority.'[2]

We cannot have a more decided proof of Bunyan's great powers, and of his being much in advance
of his times, than by the opinions of which he was the Christian pioneer having spread so extensively
through the Baptist denomination. In this his predictions were fully verified. It is surprising
that pious dissenters should ever have made uniformity in outward ceremonies of more importance
than inward holiness, as a term of communion. Such sentiments naturally attach to state churches;
and ought to be found only with those bodies which exist merely for political purposes, and
for it are rewarded with earthly power, pomp, and wealth. I close these observations by quoting
the words of Bunyan's learned antagonists, published within a few years of this controversy,
and during his lifetime. his sentiments appear to have had a hallowed effect even upon their
minds, and produced an apology for their conduct. It is in the appendix to the Baptist confession
of faith, republished in 1677: 'We would not be misconstrued, as if the discharge of our consciences
did any way disoblige or alienate our affections or conversations from any others that fear
the Lord: earnestly desiring to approve ourselves to be such as follow after peace with holiness.
We continue our practice, not out of obstinacy, but we do therein according to the best of
our understandings, in that method which we take to be most agreeable to the scriptures. The
christening of infants, we find by church history, to have been a very ancient practice; still
we leave every one to give an account of himself to God. And if in any case debates between
Christians are not plainly determinable by the scriptures, we leave it to the second coming
of Christ.' In 1689, the year after Bunyan's death, this appendix was omitted from the Baptist
confession of faith.

May the time soon arrive when water shall not quench love, but when all the churches militant
shall form one army, with one object,--that of extending the Redeemer's kingdom.--GEO. OFFOR.

A CONFESSION OF MY FAITH, AND A REASON OF MY PRACTICE; OR, WITH WHO, AND WHO NOT, I CAN HOLD
CHURCH FELLOWSHIP, OR THE COMMUNION OF SAINTS.

SHEWING, BY DIVERSE ARGUMENTS, THAT THOUGH I DARE NOT COMMUNICATE WITH THE OPENLY PROFANE,
YET I CAN WITH THOSE VISIBLE SAINTS THAT DIFFER ABOUT WATER-BAPTISM. WHEREIN IS ALSO DISCOURSED,
WHETHER THAT BE THE ENTERING ORDINANCE INTO FELLOWSHIP, OR NO.

'I believed, therefore have I spoken.'--Psalm 116:10

TO THE READER.

Sir,

I marvel not that both you and others do think my long imprisonment strange, (or rather strangely
of me for the sake of that) for verily I should also have done it myself, had not the Holy
Ghost long since forbidden me (1 Peter 4:12; 1 John 3:13). Nay, verily, that notwithstanding,
had the adversary but fastened the supposition of guilt upon me, my long trials might by this
time have put it beyond dispute; for I have not hitherto been so sordid, as to stand to a doctrine
right or wrong; much less when so weighty an argument as above eleven years' imprisonment,
is continually dogging of me to weigh and pause, and pause again, the grounds and foundation
of those principles, for which I thus have suffered;[3] but having not only at my trial asserted
them, but also since, even all this tedious tract of time, in cool blood, a thousand times,
by the word of God, examined them, and found them good; I cannot, I dare not now revolt or
deny the same, on pain of eternal damnation.

And that my principles and practice may be open to the view and judgment of all men, though
they stand and fall to none but the word of God alone, I have in this small treatise presented
to this generation, 'A Confession of my Faith, and a Reason of my Practice in the Worship of
God'; by which, although it be brief, candid Christians may, I hope, without a violation to
faith or love, judge [that] I may have the root of the matter found in me.

Neither have I in this relation abusively presented my reader, with other doctrines or practices,
than what I held, professed, and preached when apprehended, and cast in prison. Nor did I then
or now retain a doctrine besides, or which is not thereon grounded. What shall I say, let mine
enemies themselves be judges, if anything in these following doctrines, or if ought that any
man hath heard me preach, doth [savour], or hath according to the true intent of my words,
savoured either of heresy or rebellion. Indeed my principles are such, as lead me to a denial
to communicate in the things of the kingdom of Christ, with the ungodly and openly profane;
neither can I in or by the superstitious inventions of this world, consent that my soul should
be governed in any of my approaches to God, because commanded to the contrary, and commended
for so refusing. Wherefore excepting this one thing, for which I ought not to be rebuked; I
shall, I trust, in despite of slander and falsehood, discover myself at all times a peaceable
and an obedient subject. 'Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon, which cometh from the rock
of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be forsaken?' (Jer
18:14). 'Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods?' (Jer 2:11). 'For all people
will walk every one in the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the LORD our God
for ever and ever' (Micah 4:5).

Touching my practice as to communion with visible saints, although not baptized with water;
I say it is my present judgment so to do, and am willing to render a farther reason thereof,
shall I see the leading hand of God thereto.

Thine in bonds for the gospel,

JOHN BUNYAN.

A CONFESSION OF MY FAITH, AND A REASON OF MY PRACTICE, ETC.

'Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is
in you with meekness and fear: having a good conscience; that whereas they speak evil of you,
as of evil-doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in Christ.'--1
Peter 3:15, 16.

1. I believe, that there is but one only true God, and there is none other but he. 'To us there
is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things' (1 Cor 8:6). 'And this is life eternal,
that they might know thee the only true God' &c. (John 17:3, see also Mark 12:32; Acts 17:24).

2. I believe, that this God is almighty, eternal, invisible, incomprehensible, &c. 'I am the
Almighty God; walk before me, and be thou perfect' (Gen 17:1). 'The eternal God is thy refuge'
(Deut 33:27).

3. I believe, that this God is unspeakably perfect in all his attributes of power, wisdom,
justice, truth, holiness, mercy, love, &c. his power is said to be eternal (Rom 1:20), his
understanding and wisdom infinite (Psa 147:5); he is called the just Lord in opposition to
all things (Zeph 3:5). He is said to be truth itself and the God thereof (2 Thess 2:10; Deut
32:4). There is none holy as the Lord. 'God is love.' 'Canst thou by searching find out God?
canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection?' (Job 11:7).

4. I believe, that in the Godhead, there are three persons or subsistances. 'There are three
that bear record in heaven: the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost' (1 John 5:7, see also
Gen 1:26, 3:22, 11:7; Isa 6:8).

5. I believe, that these three are in nature, essence, and eternity, equally one. 'These three
are one' (1 John 5:7).

6. I believe, [that] there is 'a world to come' (Heb 2:5, 6:5).

7. I believe, that there shall be 'a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust'
(Acts 24:15).

8.

9. I believe, that those that die impenitent, shall be tormented with the devil and his angels,
and shall be cast with them into 'the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone' (Rev 21:8).
'Where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched' (Mark 9:43,48, see also Matt 25:41,46;
John 5:29).

10. I believe, that because God is naturally holy and just, even, as he is good and merciful;
therefore, all having sinned, none can be saved, without the means of a redeemer. 'Then he
is gracious unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have found a ransom'
(Job 33:24). 'We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins' (Col 1:14).
For which 'without shedding of blood, is no remission' (Heb 9:22).

11. I believe that Jesus Christ our Lord himself is the redeemer.

12. I believe, that the great reason why the Lord, the second person in the Godhead, did clothe
himself with our flesh and blood, was that he might be capable of obtaining the redemption,
that before the world, was intended for us.

13. I believe, that the time when he clothed himself with our flesh, was in the days of the
reign of Caesar Augustus; then, I say, and not till then, was the Word 'made flesh,' or clothed
with our nature (John 1:14; 1 Tim 3:16). 'And it came to pass in those days, that there went
out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. And so it was, that,
while they were there, the days were accomplished that she should be delivered' (Luke 2:1,4-6).
This child was he of whom godly Simeon was told by the Holy Ghost, when he said, That he should
not see death until he had seen the Lord's Christ (vv 25-27).

14. I believe, therefore, that this very child, as afore is testified, is both God and man;
the Christ of the living God. 'And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room for them in the inn.
And this shall be a sign unto you; ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes lying
in a manger' (Luke 2:7-12). And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shalt call his name JESUS:
for he shall save his people from their sins.

15. I believe, therefore, that the righteousness, and redemption, by which we that believe,
stand just before God, as saved from the curse of the law, is the righteousness, and redemption,
that consists in the personal acts and performances of this child Jesus; this God-man the Lord's
Christ: it consisteth, I say, in his personal fulfilling the law for us, to the utmost requirement
of the justice of God. 'Think not [saith he] that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets:
I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil' (Matt 5:17). By which means he became 'the end of
the law for righteousness to every one that believeth' (Rom 10:4). So finishing transgressions,
and making an end of sins, and making reconciliation for iniquity, He brought in everlasting
righteousness (1 John 3:8; 2 Tim 1:9; Heb 10:5-10; Dan 9:24).

16. The Godhead which gave virtue to all the acts of the human nature, was then in perfect
union with it, when he hanged upon the cross for our sins (Acts 10:36; John 20:28; Rom 1:4).

17. I believe then, that the righteousness that saveth the sinner from the wrath to come, is
properly and personally Christ's, and ours but as we have union with him; God by grace imputing
it to us. I believe, that God, as the reward of Christ's undertakings for us, hath exalted
him to his own right-hand, as our mediator, and given him a name above every name; and hath
made him Lord of all, and judge of quick and dead: and all this that we who believe might take
courage to believe, and hope in God (Eph 1:17-22). 'And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself--unto death, even the death of the cross, [where he died for our sins].

19. I believe, that being at the right hand of God in heaven, he doth there effectually exercise
the offices of his excellent priesthood, and mediatorship, presenting himself continually before
God, in the righteousness which is accomplished for us, when he was in the world. For by the
efficacy of his blood, he not only went into the holy place, but being there, and having by
it obtained eternal redemption for us; now, as receiving the worth and merit thereof from the
Father; doth bestow upon us grace, repentance, faith, and the remission of sins: yea he also
received for us, the Holy Ghost to be sent unto us, to ascertain[4] us of our adoption and
glory: 'For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest' (Heb 8:4). I believe, that being
there, he shall so continue till the restitution of all things, and then he shall come again
in glory, and shall sit in judgment upon all flesh. And I believe, that according to his sentence
so shall their judgment be. For 'this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall
so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heave' (Acts 1:11).

21. I believe that when he comes, his saints shall have a reward of grace, for all their work
and labour of love which they showed to his name in the world. 'And then shall every man have
praise of God' (4:5).

How Christ is made ours; or by what means this or that man, hath that benefit by him, as to
stand just before God now, and in the day of judgment.

Of Justification.

1. I believe, we being sinful creatures in ourselves, that no good thing done by us, can procure
of God the imputation of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. But that the imputation thereof
is an act of grace, a free gift without our deserving.

2. I believe also, That the power of imputing righteousness resideth only in God by Christ:
1. Sin being the transgression of the law. 2. The soul that hath sinned being his creature,
and the righteousness also his, and his only. Hence therefore it is said again, That men 'shall
abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness' (Psa
145:7). 'For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion. So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him
that runneth, but of God that showeth mercy' (Rom 9:15,16).

3. I believe, that the offer of this righteousness, as tendered in the gospel, is to be received
by faith; we still in the very act of receiving it, judging ourselves sinners in ourselves.
The gospel is preached in all nations for the obedience of faith.

4. I believe, that this faith, as it respecteth the imputation of this righteousness, for justification
before God, doth put forth itself in such acts, as purely respect the offer of a gift. It receiveth,
accepteth of, embraceth, or trusteth to it. 'As many as received him to them gave he power
to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name' (John 1:12). I believe therefore,
that as to my justification from the curse of the law, I am, as I stand in myself, ungodly,
to receive, accept of, embrace, and trust to the righteousness, that is already provided by,
and wrapt up in the personal doings and sufferings of Christ; it being faith in that, and that
only, that can justify a sinner in the sight of God.[6]

5. I believe, that the faith that so doth, is not to be found with any but those, in whom the
Spirit of God by mighty power doth work it: all others being fearful and incredulous, dare
not venture their souls and eternity upon it. And hence it is called the faith that is wrought
by the exceeding great and mighty power of God; the faith of the operation of God. And hence
it is that others are said to be fearful, and so unbelieving. These with other ungodly sinners
must have their part in the lake of fire (Eph 1:18,19; Col 2:12; Eph 2:8; Phil 1:19; Rev 21:8).

6. I believe, that this faith is effectually wrought in none, but those which before the world
were appointed unto glory. 'And as many as were ordained unto eternal life believed' (Acts
13:48). 'That he might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he
had afore prepared unto glory' (Rom 9:23). But of the rest he saith, 'ye believe not because
ye are not of my sheep, as I said' (John 10:26), which latter words relate to the 16th verse,
which respecteth the election of God.

Of Election.

1. I believe that election is free and permanent, being founded in grace, and the unchangeable
will of God. But if it be of works, then is it no more of grace: otherwise work is no more
work' (Rom 11:5,6). 'In whom also we have obtained an inheritance, being predestinated according
to the purpose of him who worketh all things after the counsel of his own will' (Eph 1:11).

2. I believe, that this decree, choice or election, was before the foundation of the world;
and so before the elect themselves, had being in themselves: For 'God who quickeneth the dead,
and calleth those things which be not as though they were' (Rom 4:17), stays not for the being
of things, to determine his eternal purpose by; but having all things present to him, in his
wisdom, he made his choice before the world was (Eph 1:4; 2 Tim 1:9).

3. I believe, that the decree of election is so far off from making works in us foreseen, the
ground or cause of the choice: that it containeth in the bowels of it, not only the persons,
but the graces that accompany their salvation. And hence it is, that it is said; we are predestinated
'to be conformed to the image of his Son' (Rom 8:29); not because we are, but 'that we SHOULD
be holy and without blame before him in love' (Eph 1:4). He blessed us according as he chose
us in Christ.

4. I believe that Christ Jesus is he in whom the elect are always considered, and that without
him there is neither election, grace, nor salvation. 'Neither is there salvation in any other:
for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved' (Acts 4:12).

5. I believe, that there is not any impediment attending the election of God, that can hinder
their conversion, and eternal salvation. It is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth?'
&c. (Rom 8:30-35). 'What then? 'Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name
before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel' (Acts 9:12,15).

6. I believe that no man can know his election, but by his calling. The vessels of mercy, which
God afore prepared unto glory, do thus claim a share therein: 'Even us, [say they,] whom he
hath called, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles?

7. I believe therefore, that election doth not forestal or prevent the means which are of God
appointed to bring us to Christ, to grace and glory; but rather putteth a necessity upon the
use and effect thereof; because they are chosen to be brought to heaven that way: that is,
by the faith of Jesus Christ, which is the end of effectual calling. 'Wherefore the rather,
brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election sure' (2 Peter 1:10; 2 Thess 2:13;
1 Peter 1:12).

Of Calling.

I believe, that to effectual calling, the Holy Ghost must accompany the word of the gospel,
and that with mighty power: I mean that calling, which of God is made to be the fruit of electing
love. Otherwise men will not, cannot, hear and turn. Samuel was called four times, before he
knew the voice of him that spake from heaven (1 Sam 3:-610). It is said of them in Hosea, That
as the prophets called them so they went from them; and instead of turning to them, 'sacrificed
to Baalim, and burned incense to graven images' (Hosea 11:2). Understand, therefore, that effectual
calling is like that word of Christ that raised Lazarus from the dead; a word attended with
an arm that was omnipotent. 'Lazarus, come forth' (John 11:43). It was a word to the dead;
but not only so: it was a word for the dead; a word that raised him from the dead; a word that
outwent all opposition; and that brought him forth of the grave, though bound hand and foot
therein (Gal 1:15). And hence it is, that calling is sometimes expressed by quickening (Eph
2:1,2), awakening, illuminating, or bringing them forth of darkness to light, that amazeth
and astonisheth them (Heb 10:32; Acts 9:6). For as it is a strange thing for a man that lay
long dead, or never saw the light with his eyes, to be raised out of the grave, or to be made
to see that which he could not so much as once think of before, so it is with effectual calling.
Hence it is that Paul, when called, stood 'trembling and was astonished': and that Peter saith,
'he hath called us out of darkness into his marvellous light' (1 Peter 2:9; Eph 4:24; Acts
9:6). In effectual calling the voice of God is heard, and the gates of heaven are opened:[7]
when God called Abraham, he appeared to him in glory. That of Ananias to Saul is experienced
but by few. 'The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, [saith he,] that thou shouldest know
his will, and see that just one, and shouldest hear the voice of his mouth' (Acts 22:14). True,
Saul's call was out of the ordinary way, but yet as to the matter, and truth of the work, it
was no other than all the chosen have, viz.

(1.) An effectual awakening about the evil of sin; and especially of unbelief (John 16:9).
And therefore when the Lord God called Adam, he also made unto him an effectual discovery of
sin; insomuch that he stript him of all his righteousness (Gen 3). Thus he also served the
gaoler (Acts 16:29,30). Yea it is such an awakening, as by it, he sees he was without Christ,
without hope, and a stranger to the commonwealth of Israel, 'and without God in the world'
(Eph 2:12). Oh the dread and amazement that the guilt of sin brings with it, when it is revealed
by the God of heaven; and like to it is the sight of mercy, when it pleaseth God, who calleth
us by his grace, to reveal his Son in us.

(2.) In effectual calling there is great awakenings about the world to come, and the glory
of unseen things; the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment; the salvation that God
hath prepared for them that love him; with the blessedness that will attend us, and be upon
us, at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, are great things in the soul that is under the
awakening calls of God. And hence we are said to be called to glory (1 Thess 2:12).

(3.) In effectual calling there is also a sanctifying virtue; and hence we are said to be called
with an holy calling (1 Thess 4:7), with an 'heavenly calling' (Heb 3:1). Called to glory and
virtue. Yea, effectual calling hath annexed to it, as its inseparable companion, the promise
of thorough sanctification. 'Faithful is he that calleth you, who also will do it' (1 Thess 5:24).

Of Faith.

I believe, that effectual calling doth therefore produce, 1. FAITH; and therefore it is said,
that 'faith cometh by hearing' (Rom 10:17); by hearing the word that calleth us 'unto the grace
of Christ' (Gal 1:6). For by the word that calleth us, is Jesus Christ held forth to us; and
offered to be our righteousness; and therefore the apostle saith again, that God hath called
us 'unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ' (1 Cor 1:9); that is, to be made partakers
of the riches of grace, and the righteousness that is in him. 2. It produceth hope. It giveth
a ground to hope; and therefore hope is said to be the hope of our calling (Eph 1:18). And
again, 'Even as ye are called in one hope of your calling' (Eph 4:4). Now the godly wise know,
whoso misseth of effectual calling, misseth of eternal life; because God justifieth none but
them whom he calleth; and glorifies none but those whom he justifies: and therefore it is that
Peter said before, 'Make your calling, and [so] your election sure': make it sure, that is,
prove your calling right, by the word of God. For whoso staggereth at the certainty of his
calling, cannot comfortably hope for a share in eternal life. My soul fainteth for thy salvation,
but I hope in thy word' (Psa 119:49,81). 3. It produceth repentance; for when a man hath heaven
and hell before his eyes (as he will have if he be under the power of effectual calling) or
when a man hath a revelation of the mercy and justice of God, with an heart-drawing invitation
to lay hold on the tender forgiveness of sins; and being made also to behold the goodly beauty
of holiness; it must needs be, that repentance appears, and puts forth itself, unto self-revenging
acts, for all its wickedness which in the days of ignorance it delighted in. And hence is that
saying, 'I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance' (Mark 2:17). For the
effecting of which, the preaching of the word of the kingdom, is most proper: 'Repent: for
the kingdom of heaven is at hand' (Matt 4:17).

Of Repentance.

Repentance is a turning the heart to God in Christ: a turning of it from sin, and the devil,
and darkness; to the goodness, and grace, and holiness that is in him. Wherefore, they that
of old are said to repent, are said to loath and abhor themselves, for all their abominations.
'I abhor myself,' [said Job,] 'and repent in dust and ashes' (Job 42:6, see also Eze 6:9, 20:43,
36:31, 42:6, 16:63).

Godly repentance doth not only affect the soul with the loathsome nature of sin that is past;
but filleth the heart with godly hatred of sins that yet may come. When Moses feared that through
his being overburthened with the care of the children of Israel, some unruly or sinful passions
might show themselves in him, what saith he? 'Kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have
found favour in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness' (Num 11:15).

Of Love.

It [effectual calling] produceth also love: wherefore Paul, when he had put the church in remembrance
that they were called of God, adds, That concerning brotherly love, they had no need that he
should write unto them (1 Thess 4:9). As who should say, If God be so kind to us, to forgive
us our sins, to save our souls, and to give us the kingdom of heaven; let these be motives
beyond all other to provoke us to love again. Farther, if we that are thus beloved of God,
are made members of one man's body, all partakers of his grace, clothed all, with his glorious
righteousness, and are together appointed to be the children of the next world; why should
we not love one another? 'Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another' (1
John 4:11). And truly so we shall, if the true grace of God be upon us; because we also see
them to be the called of Jesus. Travellers, that are of the same country, love and take pleasure
one in another, when they meet in a strange land.[8] Why, we sojourn here in a strange country,
with them that are heirs together with us of the promised kingdom and glory (Heb 11:9). Now,
as I said, this holy love worketh by love: mark, love in God and Christ when discovered, constraineth
us to love [one another] (2 Cor 5:14).

The name, therefore, and word, and truth of God in Christ, together with the sincerity of grace,
of faith, and holiness in us, are the delightful objects of this love (Psa 119:47,127,132,159,
5:11, 69:36, 101:6). For it embraceth with delight and complacency, but as it discerneth the
image of God, and of Christ in the soul, his presence in the ministry, and a suitableness in
our worship to the word and mind of Christ (Psa 26:8, 27:4, 84:1-4; 1 Thess 5:13; Phil 1:3-7;
Eph 4:32).

Love also hath a blessed faculty, and heavenly, in bearing and suffering afflictions, putting
up wrongs, overlooking the infirmities of the brethren, and in serving in all Christian offices
the necessities of the saints. In a word, it designeth a holy conversation in this world; that
God, and Christ, and the word of Christ, 'may be glorified thereby' (2 Cor 11:10-12; 1 Peter
1:12, 3:16).

Of the Scriptures.

Touching which word of God I thus believe and confess, 1. That all the holy scriptures are
the words of God. 'All scripture is given by inspiration of God' (2 Tim 3:16). For the prophecy
[of the scripture] came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost (2 Peter 1:21). 2. I believe that the holy scriptures, of themselves,
without the addition of human inventions, are able to make the man of God perfect in all things;
and 'thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works.' They are able 'to make thee wise unto
salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus' (2 Tim 3:15). And to instruct thee in all
other things, that either respect the worship of God, or thy walking before all men (2 Tim
3:17; 2 Peter 1:19-21). 3. I believe the great end why God committed the scriptures to writing
was; that we might be instructed to Christ, taught how to believe (1 John 5:13), [and be] encouraged
to patience and hope, for the grace that is to be brought unto us at the revelation of Jesus
Christ (John 20:31; Rom 15:4). Also that we might understand what is sin, and how to avoid
the commission thereof. 4. I believe that they cannot be broken, but will certainly be fulfilled
in all the prophecies, threatenings, and promises, either to the salvation or damnation of
men. They are like that flying roll, that will go over all the earth to cut off and curse (Ze
5:2-4). In them is contained also the blessing, they preach to us also the way of salvation
(Gal 3:8). 'Beware, therefore, lest that come upon you, which is spoken of in the prophets;
Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish:[9] for I work a work in your days, a work which
ye shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you' (Acts 13:40,41, see also John
10:35, 12:37-41, 3:17-19). 5. I believe that Jesus Christ, by the word of the scriptures, will
judge all men at the day of doom; for that is the book of the law of the Lord, according to
Paul's gospel (John 12:44-50; Rom 2:16). 6. Also, that after the time of the making thereof,
he disposed of it to the children of men, with a reserve thereof for the children of God, that
should in all ages be born thereunto.

Of Magistracy.

I believe, that magistracy is God's ordinance, which he hath appointed for the government of
the whole world; and that it is a judgment of God, to be without those ministers of God, which
he hath ordained to put wickedness to shame (Ju 18:7). 'Whosoever therefore resisteth the power,
resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.
For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou not then be afraid of
the power? do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same: for he is the minister
of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the
sword in vain: for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth
evil. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.
For this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are God's ministers, attending continually upon
this very thing' (Rom 13:2-6). Many are the mercies we receive, by a well qualified magistrate,
and if any shall at any time be otherwise inclined, let us shew our Christianity in a patient
suffering, for well doing, what it shall please God to inflict by them.[10]

A REASON OF MY PRACTICE IN WORSHIP.

Having thus made confession of my faith, I now come to shew you my practice in worship, with
the reasons thereof. The which I shall have occasion to touch, under two distinct heads.

I. With whom I dare not hold communion.

II. With whom I dare.

Only, first, note, that by the word communion, I mean fellowship in the things of the kingdom
of Christ, or that which is commonly called church communion, the communion of saints. For
in civil affairs, and in things of this world that are honest, I am not altogether tied up
from the fornicators thereof (1 Cor 5:9,10); wherefore in my following discourse understand
me in the first sense:--Now, then,

FIRST, I dare not have communion with them that profess not faith and holiness; or that are
not visible saints by calling: but note, that by this assertion, I meddle not with the elect;
but as he is a visible saint by calling; neither do I exclude the secret hypocrite, if he be
hid from me by visible saintship. Wherefore I dare not have communion with men from a single
supposition, that they may be elect, neither dare I exclude the other from a single supposing
that he may be a secret hypocrite. I meddle not here with these things; I only exclude him
that is not a visible saint. Now he that is visibly or openly profane, cannot be then a visible
saint; for he that is a visible saint must profess faith, and repentance, and consequently
holiness of life: and with none else dare I communicate.

First, Because God himself hath so strictly put the difference, both by word and deed; for
from the beginning, he did not only put a difference between the seed of the woman and the
children of the wicked (Gen 3:15), only the instinct of grace and change of the mind is his
own, but did cast out from his presence the father of all the ungodly, even cursed Cain, when
he shewed himself openly profane, and banished him to go into the land of the runnagate, or
vagabond, where from God's face, and so the privileges of the communion of saints, he was ever
after hid (Gen 4:8-16).

Besides, when after this, through the policy of Satan, the children of Cain, and the seed of
Seth, did commix themselves in worship, and by that means had corrupted the way of God: what
followed, but first, God judged it wickedness, raised up Noah to preach against it, and after
that, because they would not be reclaimed, he brought the flood upon the whole world of these
ungodly; and saved only Noah alive, and his because he had kept himself righteous (Gen 6:1-13)[11].
Here I could enlarge abundantly, and add many more instances of a like nature, but I am here
only for a touch upon things.

Second, Because it is so often commanded in the scriptures, That all the congregation should
be holy. 'I am the Lord your God: ye shall therefore sanctify yourselves, and ye shall be holy;
for I am holy' (Lev 11:44). 'Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy' (19:2). 'Sanctify
yourselves therefore, and be ye holy: for I am the Lord your God' (20:7; 1 Peter 1:15,16).
Besides, 1. The gates of the temple were to be shut against all other. 'This gate of the Lord,
into which the righteous shall enter' (Psa 118:20). 2. Because the things of worship are holy;
'Be ye clean that bear the vessels of the Lord' (Isa 52:11). 3. Because all the limits and
bounds of communion are holy.

Third, I dare not have communion with them; because the example of New Testament churches before
us, have been a community of visible saints. Paul, to the Romans, writes thus: 'To all that
be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints' (1:7). 'To the saints which are at Ephesus,
and to the faithful in Christ Jesus' (Eph 1:1). 'To all the saints which are at Philippi, with
the bishops and deacons' (Phil 1:1). 'To the saints and faithful brethren in Christ which are
at Colosse' (Col 1:2). Besides, the members of such churches go under such characters as these.

(1.) 'The called of Christ Jesus' (Rom 1:6). (2.) Men that have drank into the Spirit of Jesus
Christ (1 Cor 12:13). (3.) Persons in whom was God the Father (Eph 4:6). (4.) They were all
made partakers of the joy of the gospel (Phil 1:7). (5.) Persons that were circumcised inwardly
(Col 2:11). (6.) Persons that turned from idols to serve the living and true God (1 Thess 1:9).
(7.) Those that were the body of Christ, and members in particular, that is, those that were
visibly such; because they made profession of faith, of holiness, of repentance, of love to
Christ, and of self-denial, at their receiving into fellowship.

Fourth, I dare not hold communion with the open profane.

(1.) Because it is promised to the church, that she shall dwell by herself; that is, as she
is a church, and spiritual; Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among
the nations (Num 23:9). (2.) Because this is their privilege. (4.) Because this is the commandment:
'Save yourselves from this untoward generation' (Acts 2:40). (5.) Because with such it is not
possible we should have true and spiritual communion.

Fifth, I dare not hold communion with the open profane. Because

(1.) This would be ploughing with an ox, and an ass together (Deut 22:10): heavenly persons
suit best for communion in heavenly matters. (2.) It subjecteth not the nature of our discipline,
which is not forced, but free,[13] in a professed subjection to the will and commandment of
Christ: others being excluded by God's own prohibition (Lev 1:3; Rom 6:17; 2 Cor 8:12, 9:7,13,
8:5).

Sixth, In a word, to hold communion with the open profane, is most pernicious and destructive.
(1.) 'Twas the wicked multitude that fell a lusting, and that tempted Christ in the desert
(Num 11:4). (2.) It was the profane heathen, of whom Israel learned to worship idols. They
'were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And served their idols; which were
a snare unto them' (Psa 106:35,36). (3.) It is the mingled people that God hath threatened
to plague with those deadly punishments of his, with which he hath threatened to punish Babylon
itself; saying, When a sword is upon her liars, her mighty, her chariots, and treasures; a
sword also shall be upon the mingled people that are in the midst of her.

And no marvel: for, (1.) Mixed communion polluteth the ordinances of God. (2.) It violateth
he law. (3.) It profaneth the holiness of God. (4.) It defileth the truly gracious. 'Know ye
not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?' (1 Cor 5:6). Look diligently therefore,
'lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled' (Heb 12:15).

Lastly, To conclude, it provoketh God to punish with severe judgments: And therefore heed well.
(1.) As I said before, The drowning of the whole world was occasioned by the sons of God commixing
themselves with the daughters of men; and the corruption of worship that followed thereupon
(Gen 6, 7). Hear how Paul handleth the point; 'But I say, that the things which the Gentiles
[or openly profane] sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; and I would not that
ye should have fellowship with devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of
devils: Ye cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord, and of the table of devils. Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?' (1 Cor 10:20-22). I conclude, that
therefore it is an evil, and a dangerous thing to hold church communion with the openly profane
and ungodly. It polluteth his ordinances: it violateth his law: it profaneth his holiness:
it defileth his people; and provoketh the Lord to severe and terrible judgments.

Object. But we can prove in all ages [that] there have been the open profane in the church of God.

Ans. In many ages indeed it hath been so: but mark, they appeared not such, when first they
were received unto communion (Exo 12:48), neither were they with God's liking, as such, to
be retained among them, but in order to their admonition, repentance and amendment of life:
of which, if they failed, God presently threatened the church; and either cut them off from
the church, as he did the idolators, fornicators, murmurers, tempters, sabbath breakers; with
Korah, Dathan, Achan, and others (2 Cor 6; 1 Cor 5; Exo 32:25; Num 25:1-9, 21:5,6, 14:37, 16,
15:32-36; Josh 7; 2 Kings 17; Eze 22, 23) or else cut off them with the church and all, as
he served the ten tribes at one time, and the two tribes at another. 'My God will cast them
away, because they did not hearken unto him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations'
(Hosea 9:17). I might here greatly enlarge, but I intend brevity; yet let me tell you, that
when Nehemiah understood by the book of the law of the Lord, that the Ammonite and the Moabite
should not come into the congregation of God: 'They separated from Israel all the mixed multitude'
(Neh 13:1-3). Many have pleaded for the profane, that they should abide in the church of God;
but such hath not considered, that God's wrath at all times hath with great indignation been
shewed against such offenders and their conceits. Indeed they like not for to plead for them
under that notion, but rather as Korah, and his company: 'All the congregation are holy every
one of them' (Num 16:3). But it maketh no matter by what name they are called; if by their
deeds they shew themselves openly wicked: for names and notions sanctify not the heart and
nature; they make not virtues of vice, neither can it save such advocates from the heavy curse
both of God and men (Prov 17:15, 24:24).

SECOND, Thus have I shewed you with whom I dare not have communion: and now to shew you with
whom I dare. But in order thereto, I desire you

First, To take notice; That touching shadowish, or figurative ordinances; I believe that Christ
hath ordained but two in his church, viz., Water baptism and the supper of the Lord: both which
are of excellent use to the church in this world; they being to us representations of the death
and resurrection of Christ; and are, as God shall make them, helps to our faith therein. But
I count them not the fundamentals of our Christianity, nor grounds or rule to communion with
saints: servants they are, and our mystical ministers, to teach and instruct us in the most
weighty matters of the kingdom of God: I therefore here declare my reverent esteem of them;
yet dare not remove them, as some do, from the place and end, where by God they are set and
appointed; nor ascribe unto them more than they were ordered to have in their first and primitive
institution. It is possible to commit idolatry even with God's own appointments: but I pass
this, and come to the thing propounded. Now in order to the discovery of this faith and holiness,
and so to fellowship in church communion: I hold it requisite that a faithful relation be made
thereof by the party thus to be received; yea, if need be, by witnesses also, for the satisfaction
of the church, that she may receive in faith and judgment, such as best shall suit her holy
profession (Acts 9:26-28; 1 Cor 16:10; 2 Cor 8:23). Observe it; these texts do respect extraordinary
officers; and yet see, that in order to their reception by the church, there was made to them
a faithful relation of the faith and holiness of those very persons; for no man may intrude
himself upon, or thrust himself upon, or thrust himself into a church of Christ; without the
church have first the knowledge and liking of the person to be received: if otherwise, there
is a door opened for all the heretics in the world; yea, for devils also if they appear in
human shapes. And so concerning Timothy: 'If Timotheus come, [saith he,] see that he may be
with you without fear: for he worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do' (1 Cor 16:10). Also,
when Paul supposed that Titus might be suspected by some; see how he pleads for him: If 'any
do enquire of Titus, he is my partner and fellow-helper concerning you: or our brethren be
enquired of, they are the messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ' (2 Cor 8:23).
Phebe also, when she was to be received by the church at Rome; see how he speaketh in her behalf:
'I commend unto you Phebe our sister, which is a servant of the church which is sat Cenchrea:
that ye receive her in the Lord, as becometh saints, and that ye assist her in whatsoever business
she hath need of you; for she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also' (Rom 16:1,2).
Yea, when the apostles and brethren sent their epistles from Jerusalem to Antioch; under what
characters do those go, that were the messengers to them? 'It seemed good unto [the Holy Ghost
and to] us,--to send chosen men unto you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, men that have
hazarded their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,' &c. (Acts 15:25-27). Now though
the occasions upon which these commendations were written were not simply, or only, in order
to church relation, but also for other causes; yet because the persons concerned were of the
churches to be received as faithful, and such who would partake of church privileges with them,
they have, therefore, their faith and faithfulness related to the churches, as those that were
particularly embodied there. Besides Timothy and Titus being extraordinary officers, stood
as members and officers in every church where they were received. Likewise Barnabas and Saul,
Judas and Silas, abode as members and officers where they were sent. It was requisite, therefore,
that the letters of recommendation should be in substance the same with that relation that
ought to be made to the church, by or for the person that is to be embodied there. But to return,
I DARE HAVE COMMUNION, CHURCH COMMUNION, WITH THOSE THAT ARE VISIBLE SAINTS BY CALLING.

Quest. But by what rule would you receive them into fellowship with yourselves?

Ans. Even by a discovery of their faith and holiness, and their declaration of willingness
to subject themselves to the laws and government of Christ in his church.

Quest. But do you not count that by water baptism, and not otherwise, that being the initiating
and entering ordinance; they ought to be received into fellowship?

Ans. No; But tarry, and take my sense with my word. For herein lies the mistake, To think that
because in time past baptism was administered upon conversion, that therefore it is the initiating
and entering ordinance into church communion: when by the word no such thing is testified of
it. Besides, that it is not so will be manifest, if we consider the nature and power of such
an ordinance.

That ordinance then, that is, the initiating or entering ordinance [as before] doth give to
them that partake thereof a right to, and a being of, membership with that particular church
by which it is administered. I say, a right to, and a being of, membership, without the addition
of another church act. This is evident by the law of circumcision, which was the initiating
law of old; for by the administration of that very ordinance, the partaker thereof was forthwith
a member of that congregation, without the addition of another church act (Gen 17). This is
declared in its first institution, and therefore it is called the token of the covenant. The
token or sign of righteousness, of Abraham's faith, and of the visible membership of those
that joined themselves to the church with him; the very inlet into church communion that gave
a being of membership among them. And thus Moses himself expounds it; 'every man's servant,
that is bought for money, when thou hast circumcised him, then shall eat' of the passover (Exo
12:44), without the addition of another church act, to empower him thereunto; his circumcision
hath already given him a being there, and so a right to, and privilege in church relation:
'A foreigner and an hired servant shall not eat thereof, [because not circumcised]. And when
a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the passover to the LORD, let all his males
be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it; [For then he is one of the church]
and he shall be as one born in the land: for no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof' (Exo
12:48). Neither could any other thing, according to the law of circumcision, give the devoutest
person that breathed a being of membership with them. 'He that is born in thy house, and he
that is bought with thy money, must needs be circumcised:--and the uncircumcised man child,
whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people'
(Gen 17:13,14). Note then, that that which is the initiating ordinance admitteth none into
church communion but these that first partake thereof. The angel sought to kill Moses himself,
for attempting to make his child a member without it (Exo 4:24-26). Note again, that as it
admitteth of none to membership without it; so as I said, the very act of circumcising them,
without the addition of another church act, gave them a being of membership with that very
church, by whom they were circumcised. But none of this can be said of baptism. First, there
is none debarred or threatened to be cut off from the church, if they be not first baptized.
Secondly, Neither doth it give to the person baptized a being of membership with this or that
church, by whose members he hath been baptized. John gathered no particular church, yet was
he the first and great baptizer with water; he preached Christ to come, and baptized with the
baptism of repentance, and left his disciples to be gathered by him (Acts 19:3-5). 'And unto
him shall the gathering of the people be' (Gen 49:10). Besides, after Christ's ascension, Philip
baptized the eunuch, but made him by that no member of any particular church,. We only read,
that Philip was caught away from him, and that the eunuch saw him no more, but went on his
way rejoicing to his master and country of Ethiopia (Acts 8:35-40). Neither was Cornelius made
a member of the church at Jerusalem, by his being baptized at Peter's command at Cesarea (Acts
10, 11). Neither were they that were converted at Antioch, by them that were scattered from
the church at Jerusalem, by their baptism, if they were baptized [in water] at all, joined
to the church at Jerusalem (Acts 11:19). No, they were after gathered and embodied among themselves
by other church acts (Acts 16). What shall I say? into what particular church was Lydia baptized
by Paul, or those first converts at Philippi? Yea even in the second of the Acts, baptizing
and adding to the church appear to be acts distinct: but if baptism were the initiating ordinance,
then was he that was baptized made a member; made a member of a particular church, by the very
act of water baptism. Neither ought any by God's ordinance to have baptized any, but with respect
to the admitting them by that act to a being of membership in this particular church. For if
it be the initiating ordinance, it entereth them into the church: What church? Into a visible
church. Now there is no church visible but that which is particular; the universal being utterly
invisible, and known to none but God. The person then that is baptized stands by that a member
of no church at all, neither of the visible, nor yet of the invisible. A visible saint he is,
but not made so by baptism; for he must be a visible saint before, else he ought not to be
baptized (Acts 8:37, 9:17, 16:33).

Take it again; Baptism [in water] makes thee no member of the church, neither particular nor
universal: neither doth it make thee a visible saint: It therefore gives thee neither right
to nor being of membership at all.

Quest. But why then were they baptized?

Ans. That their own faith by that figure might be strengthened in the death and resurrection
of Christ. And that themselves might see, that they have professed themselves dead, and buried,
and risen with him to newness of life (Col 2:12; Rom 6:4). It did not seal to the church that
they were so (their satisfaction as to that arose from better arguments) but taught the party
himself that he ought so to be. Farther, it confirmed to his own conscience the forgiveness
of sins, if by unfeigned faith he laid hold upon Jesus Christ (Gal 3:26; 1 Cor 15:29; Acts
2:38, 22:16; 1 Peter 3:21). Now then, if baptism be not the initiating ordinance, we must seek
for entering some other way, by some other appointment of Christ, unless we will say that without
rule, without order, and without an appointment of Christ, we may enter into his visible kingdom.
The church under the law had its initiating and entering ordinance: it must not therefore be,
unless we should think that Moses was more punctual and exact than Christ, but that also our
Lord hath his entering appointment. Now that which by Christ is made the door of entrance into
the church, by that we may doubtless enter; and seeing baptism is not that ordinance, we ought
not to seek to enter thereby, but may with good conscience enter without it.

Quest. But by what rule then would you gather persons into church communion?

Ans. Even by that rule by which they are discovered to the church to be visible saints; and
willing to be gathered into their body and fellowship. By that word of God therefore, by which
their faith, experience and conversation, being examined, is found good; by that the church
should receive them into fellowship with them. Mark; not as they practice things that are circumstantial,
but as their faith is commended by a word of faith, and their conversation by a moral precept.
Wherefore that is observable, that after Paul had declared himself sound of faith, he falls
down to the body of the law: 'Receive us, [saith he,] we have wronged no man, we have corrupted
no man, we have defrauded no man.' He saith not, I am baptized, but I have wronged no man,
&c. (2 Cor 7:2, see also 5:18-21). And if churches after the confession of faith made more
use of the ten commandments, to judge of the fitness of persons by; they might not exceed by
this seeming strictness, Christian tenderness towards them they receive to communion.

I will say therefore, that by the word of faith, and of good works, moral duties gospelized,
we ought to judge of the fitness of members by, by which we ought also to receive them to fellowship:
For he that in these things proveth sound, he hath the antitype of circumcision, which was
before the entering ordinance. Now a confession of this by word and life, makes this inward
circumcision visible; when you know him therefore to be thus circumcised, you ought to admit
him to the Lord's passover: he, if any, hath a share not only in church communion, but a visible
right to the kingdom of heaven. Again, 'For the kingdom of God, [or our service to Christ]
is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. For he that in these
things serveth Christ, is acceptable to God, and approved of men' (Rom 14:17,18; Deut 28:47).
By which word Righteousness, he meaneth as James doth, the royal law, the perfect law, which
is the moral precept evangelized, or delivered to us by the hand of Christ (John 2:8.9). The
law was given twice on Sinai: the last time it was given with a proclamation of grace and mercy
of God, and of the pardon of sins going before (Exo 19, 34:1-10). The second giving is here
intended; for so it cometh after faith, which first receiveth the proclamation of forgiveness;
hence we are said to do this righteousness in the joy and peace of the Holy Ghost. Now he that
in these things serveth Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men. For who is he that
can justly find fault with him, that fulfilleth the royal law from a principle of faith and
love. 'If ye fulfil the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself, ye do well'; ye are approved of men. Again, he that hath loved another hath fulfilled
the law, for love is the fulfilling of the law. He then that serveth Christ according to the
royal law, from faith and love going before, he is a fit person for church communion; God accepteth
him, men approve him. Now that the royal law is the moral precept, read the place (John 2:8-12).
It is also called the law of liberty, because the bondage is taken away by forgiveness going
before; and this is it by which we are judged, as is said, meet or unmeet for church communion, &c.

Therefore I say, the rule by which we receive church-members, it is the word of the faith of
Christ, and of the moral precept evangelized, as I said before, I am 'under the law to Christ,'
saith Paul (1 Cor 9:21). So when he forbiddeth us communion with men, they be such as are destitute
of the faith of Christ, and live in the transgression of a moral precept: 'I have written unto
you, [saith he,] not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator,
or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one
no not to eat' (1 Cor 5:11). He saith not, if any man be not baptized [in water], have not
hands laid on him, or join with the unbaptized, these are fictious, scriptureless notions.
The word of faith, and the moral precept, is that which Paul enjoins the Galatians and Philippians,
still avoiding outward circumstances: hence therefore when he had to the Galatians treated
of faith, he falls point blank upon moral duties. 'For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision
availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature. And as many as walk according to
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God' (Gal 6:15,16). As many
as walk according to this rule: What rule? The rule by which men are proved new creatures:
The word of faith, and the moral precept. Why, 'the former conversation,' which is 'corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts'; lying, anger, sin, giving place to the devil, corrupt communication,
all bitterness, wrath, clamour, evil-speaking, with all malice. And that they would 'put on
the new man.' What is that? That which is 'created in righteousness and true holiness'; a being
'renewed in the spirit' of their mind, and a putting away all these things (Eph 4). 'For in
Christ Jesus'; these words are put in, on purpose to shew us the nature of New Testament administrations,
and how they differ from the old. In Moses an outward conformity to an outward and carnal ordinance,
was sufficient to give (they subjecting themselves thereto) a being of membership with the
Jews; but in Christ Jesus it is not so; of Abraham's flesh was the national Jewish congregation;
but it is Abraham's faith that makes New Testament churches: They that are of faith, are the
children of faithful Abraham. They that are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham
(Gal 3:7-9). So then the seed being now spiritual, the rule must needs be spiritual also, viz.
The word of faith and holiness. This is the gospel concision knife, sharper than any two-edged
sword; and that by which New Testament saints are circumcised in heart, ears, and lips. 'For
in Christ Jesus,' [is] no outward and circumstantial thing, but the new creature; none are
subjects of the visible kingdom of Christ but visible saints by calling: now that which manifesteth
a person to be a visible saint, must be conformity to the word of faith and holiness. Hearken
how delightfully Paul handleth the point: The new creatures are the Israel of God. The new
creature hath a rule by himself to walk by; and as many as walk according to this rule, peace
be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Paul to the Philippians commandeth as much;
where treating of his own practice in the doctrine of faith and holiness, requireth them to
walk by the same rule, to mind the same thing. I desire to be found in Christ, saith he, I
reach forward toward the things that are before; my conversation is in heaven, and flatly opposite
to them whose God is their belly, who glory in their shame, and who mind earthly things. Brethren,
saith he, 'be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so' (Phil 3:17). Mark them;
for what? For persons that are to be received into fellowship, and the choicest communion of
saints. And indeed this is the safest way to judge of the meetness of persons by: for take
away the confession of faith and holiness; and what can distinguish a Christian from a Turk?
He that indeed receiveth faith, and that squareth his life by the royal, perfect, moral precept;
and that walketh therein, in the joy and peace of the Holy Ghost, no man can reject him; he
cannot be a man if he object against him; not a man in Christ; not a man in understanding.
'The law is not made for a righteous man'; neither to debar him the communion of saints if
he desire it, nor to cast him out if he were in. Paul also, when he would leave an everlasting
conviction upon the Ephesians, concerning his faith and holiness, treating first of the sufficiency
of Christ's blood, and the grace of God to save us; he adds, 'I have coveted no man's silver,
or gold, or apparel,' he bringeth them to the moral precept, to prove the sincerity of his
good conversation by (Acts 20:33). And when men have juggled what they can, and made never
such a prattle about religion; yet if their greatest excellency, as to the visibility of their
saintship, lieth in an outward conformity to an outward circumstance in religion, their profession
is not worth two mites. 'Let us walk honestly, as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness,
not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying. And it is observable, that after
the apostle had in the 9th and 10th verses of this chapter told us, that the moral precept
is the rule of a good conversation, and exhorted us to make no provision for the flesh; he
adds, these things provided, we may receive any that believe in Christ Jesus unto communion
with us; how weak soever and dark in circumstantials; and chiefly designs the proof thereof
in the remaining part of his epistle. For he that is of sound faith, and of conversation honest
in the world; no man, however he may fail in circumstantials, may lightly reproach or vilify
him. And indeed such persons are the honour of Christian congregations. Indeed he is prejudiced,
for want of light in these things about which he is dark, as of baptism, or the like; but seeing
that is not the initiating ordinance, or the visible character of a saint; yea, seeing it maketh
no breach in a good and holy life: nor intrencheth upon any man's right but his own; and seeing
his faith may be effectual without it, and his life approved by the worst of his enemies; why
should his friends, while he keeps the law, dishonour God by breaking of the same? 'Speak not
evil one of another, brethren. He that speaketh evil of his brother, and judgeth his brother,
speaketh evil of the law, and judgeth the law: But if thou judge the law, thou art not a doer
of the law, but a judge' (James 4:11). He that is judged, must needs fail somewhere in the
apprehension of him that judgeth him, else why is he judged. But he must fail in substance,
for then he is worthy to be judged (1 Cor 5:12). His failure is then in a circumstance, for
which he ought not to be judged.

Object. But notwithstanding all that you have said, water baptism ought to go before the church-membership;
shew me one in all the New Testament, that was received into fellowship without it.

Ans. 1. That water baptism hath formerly gone first is granted: but that it ought of necessity
so to do, I never saw proof. 2. None ever received it without light going before, unless they
did play the hypocrite: and besides no marvel though in the primitive times it was so generally
practised first, for the unconverted themselves know, it belonged to the disciples of Jesus
Christ (John 1:24-27). Yet that all that were received into fellowship were even then baptized
first, would strain a weak man's wit to prove it, if arguments were closely made upon these
three texts of holy scripture (1 Cor 1:14-16; Gal 3:27; Rom 6:3). But I pass them, and say,
If you can shew me the Christian, that in the primitive times remained dark about it, I will
shew you the Christian that was received without it. But should I grant more than can be proved,
viz. That baptism was the initiating ordinance; and that it once did, as circumcision of old,
give a being of membership to the partakers; yea set the case that men were forbidden then
to enter into fellowship without it: yet the case may so be, that these things notwithstanding,
men might be received into fellowship without it. All these things intailed to circumcision;
that was the initiating ordinance; that gave being of membership; that was it without which
it was positively commanded none should be received into fellowship (Josh 5). Yet for all this
more than six hundred thousand were received into the church without it, yea received, and
also retained there, and that by Moses and Joshua, even those to whom the land was promised,
when the uncircumcised were cut off. But why then were they not circumcised? Doubtless there
was a reason; either they wanted time, or opportunity, or instruments, or something. But they
could not render a bigger reason than this, I have no light therein: which is the cause at
this day that many a faithful man denieth to take up the ordinance of baptism: but I say whatever
the hindrance was, it mattereth not; our brethren have a manifest one, an invincible one, one
that all the men on earth, nor angels in heaven can remove: For it is God that createth light;
and for them to do it without light would but prove them unfaithful to themselves, and make
them sinners against God; 'For whatsoever is not of faith is sin' (Rom 14:23). If therefore
Moses and Joshua thought fit to communicate with six hundred thousand uncircumcised persons;
when by the law not one such ought to have been received among them; why may not I have communion,
the closest communion with visible saints as afore described, although they want light in,
and so cannot submit to that, which of God was never made the wall of division betwixt us.
I shall therefore hold communion with such.

First, Because the true visible saint hath already [been] subjected to that which is better;
even to the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ; by which he stands just
before God; he also hath made the most exact and strict rule under heaven, that whereby he
squares his life before men. He hath like precious faith with the best of saints, and a conversation
according to light received, becoming the gospel of Christ. He is therefore to be received,
received I say, not by THY light, not for that in circumstances he jumpeth with thy opinion;
but according to his own faith which he ought to keep to himself before God. 'Conscience, I
say, not thine own, but of the other; for why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience'
(1 Cor 10:29). Some indeed do object, that what the apostles wrote, they wrote to gathered
churches, and so to such as were baptized. And therefore the arguments that are in the epistles
about things circumstantial, respect not the case in hand. But I will tell such, that as to
the first part of their objection, they are utterly under a mistake. The first to the Corinthians,
the epistle of James, both them of Peter, and the first epistle of John, were expressly written
to all the godly, as well as particular churches. Again; if water baptism, as the circumstances
with which the churches were pestered of old, trouble their peace, wound the consciences of
the godly, dismember and break their fellowship; it is, although an ordinance, for the present
to be prudently shunned; for the edification of the church, as I shall shew anon, is to be
preferred before it.

Second, and observe it; 'One Spirit,--one hope,--one Lord, one faith, one baptism [not of water,
for by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body] one God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all' (Eph 4:1-6). This is a sufficient rule for us to hold
communion by, and also to endeavour the maintaining that communion, and to keep it in unity,
within the bond of peace against all attempts whatsoever (1 Cor 12:16).

Third, I am bold therefore to have communion with such (Heb 6:1,2). Because they also have
the doctrine of baptism: I say the doctrine of them. For here you must note, I distinguish
between the doctrine and practice of water baptism; The doctrine being that which by the outward
sign is presented to us, or which by the outward circumstance of the act is preached to the
believer: viz. THE DEATH OF CHRIST; MY DEATH WITH CHRIST; also his resurrection from the dead,
and mine with him to newness of life. This is the doctrine which baptism preacheth, or that
which by the outward action is signified to the believing receiver. Now I say, he that believeth
in Jesus Christ hath richer and better than that [of baptism in water], viz. is dead to sin,
and that lives to God by him, he hath the HEART, POWER and DOCTRINE of baptism: all then that
he wanteth, is but the sign, the shadow, or the outward circumstances thereof. Nor yet is THAT
despised but forborne for want of light. The best of baptisms he hath; he is baptized by that
one Spirit; he hath the heart of water baptism, he wanteth only the outward shew, which if
he had would not prove him a truly visible saint; it would not tell me he had grace in his
heart. It is no characteristical note to another, of my sonship with God. Indeed it is a sign
to the person baptized, and an help to his own faith. He should know by that circumstance,
that he hath received remission of sins; if his faith be as true, as his being baptized is
felt by him. But if for want of light, he partake not of that sign, his faith can see it in
other things, exceeding great and precious promises. Yea, as I also have hinted already, if
he appear not a brother before, he appeareth not a brother by that: And those that shall content
themselves to make that the note of visible church-membership; I doubt make things not much
better, the note of their sonship with God.

Fourth, I am bold to hold communion with visible saints as afore [described]; because God hath
communion with them; whose examples in the case, we are straitly commanded to follow. 'Receive
ye one another as Christ also received us [saith Paul,] to the glory of God' (Rom 15:1-7).
Yea, though they be saints of opinions contrary to you; though it goeth against the mind of
them that are strong. 'We then that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to please ourselves' (Rom 15:1). What infirmities? Those that are natural are incident
to all, they are infirmities then that are sinful, that cause a man, for want of light, to
err in circumstantials; And the reason upon which he grounds this admonition is, that 'Christ
pleased not himself; but, as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee, fell
on me.' You say, to have communion with such weak brethren, reproacheth your opinions, and
practice. Grant it, your dulness and deadness, and imperfections also reproach the holiness
of God; if you say no, for Christ hath borne our sins; the answer is still the same, Their
sins also are fallen upon Christ; he then that hath taken away thy sins from before the throne
of God; hath taken away their shortness in conformity to an outward circumstance in religion.
Both your infirmities are fallen upon Christ; yea, if notwithstanding thy great sins, thou
standest by Christ complete before the throne of God; why may not thy brother, notwithstanding
his little ones, stand complete before thee in the church.

Vain man! think not by the straitness of thine order, in outward and bodily conformity, to
outward and shadowish circumstances, that thy peace is maintained with God, for peace with
God is by faith in the blood of his cross; who hath borne the reproaches of you both. Wherefore
he that hath communion with God for Christ's sake, is as good and as worthy of the communion
of saints as thyself. He erreth in A CIRCUMSTANCE, thou errest in A SUBSTANCE; who must bear
these errors? Upon whom must these reproaches fall? (Phil 1:10). Some of the things of God
that are excellent, have not been approved by some of the saints: What then? must these for
this be cast out of the church? No, these reproaches by which the wisdom of heaven is reproached
have fallen upon me, saith Christ. But to return; GOD HATH RECEIVED HIM, Christ hath received
him, therefore do you receive him. There is more solidity in this argument, than if all the
churches of God had received him. This receiving then, because it is set as an example to the
church, is such as must needs be visible to them; and is best described by that word which
discovereth the visible saint. Whoso, therefore, you can by the word, judge a visible saint,
one that walketh with God; you may judge by the selfsame word that God hath received him. Now
him that God receiveth and holdeth communion with, him you should receive and hold communion
with. Will any say we cannot believe that God hath received any but such as are baptized [in
water]? I will not suppose a brother so stupefied; and therefore to that I will not answer.

Receive him 'TO THE GLORY OF GOD.' To the glory of God, is put in on purpose, to show what
dishonour they bring to God, who despise to have communion with them; who yet they know have
communion with God. For how doth this man, or that church, glorify God, or count the wisdom
and holiness of heaven beyond them, when they refuse communion with them, concerning whom,
they are by the word convinced, that they have communion with God. 'Now the God of patience
and consolation grant you to be like minded one towards another according to Christ Jesus'
(Rom 15:5). By this word patience, Paul insinuateth how many imperfections, the choicest Christians
do mingle their best performances with. And by this of consolation, how readily God overlooks,
passeth by them, and comforteth you notwithstanding. Now that this mind should be in Christians
one to another, is manifest; because Paul prays that it might be so. But this is an heavenly
gift, and therefore must be fetched from thence. But let the patience of God, and the willingness
of Christ, to bear the reproaches of the weak; and the consolations that they have in God,
notwithstanding, moderate your passions, and put you upon prayer, to be minded like Jesus Christ.

Fifth, Because a failure in such a circumstance as water, doth not unchristian us. This must
needs be granted, not only from what was said before; but for that thousands of thousands that
could not consent thereto as we have, more gloriously than we are like to do, acquitted themselves
and their christianity before men, and are now with the innumerable company of angels and the
spirits of just men made perfect. What is said of eating, or the contrary, may as to this be
said of water baptism. Neither if I be baptized, am I the better, neither if I be not, am I
the worse: not the better before God: not the worse before men: still meaning as Paul doth,
provided I walk according to my light with God: otherwise it is false; for if a man that seeth
it to be his duty shall despisingly neglect it; or if he that hath no faith therein shall foolishly
take it up; both these are for this the worse, being convicted in themselves for transgressors.
He therefore that doth it according to his light, doth well, and he that doth it not, or dare
not do it for want of light, doth not ill; for he approveth his heart to be sincere with God;
he dare not do any thing but by light in the word. If therefore he be not by grace a partaker
of light, in that circumstance which thou professest; yet he is a partaker of that liberty
and mercy by which thou standest. He hath liberty to call God father, as thou: and to believe
he shall be saved by Jesus: his faith, as thine, hath purified his heart: he is tender of the
glory of God as thou art: and can claim by grace an interest in heaven; which thou must not
do because of water: ye are both then Christians before God and men without it: he that can,
let him preach to himself by that: he that cannot, let him preach to himself by the promises;
but yet let us rejoice in God together: let us exalt his name together. Indeed the baptized
can thank God for that, for which another cannot; but may not he that is unbaptized thank God
for that which the baptized cannot? Wouldest thou be content that I should judge thee, because
thou canst not for my light give thanks with me? why then should he judge me, for that I cannot
give thanks with him for his? 'Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumblingblock or an occasion to fall in his brother's way' (Rom
14:13). And seeing the things wherein we exceed each other, are such as neither make nor mar
Christianity; let us love one another and walk together by that glorious rule above specified,
leaving each other in all such circumstances to our own master, to our own faith.

Sixth, I am therefore for holding communion thus, because the edification of souls in the faith
and holiness of the gospel, is of greater concernment than an agreement in outward things;[16]
I say, it is of greater concernment with us, and of far more profit to our brother; than our
agreeing in, or contesting for the business of water baptism (John 16:13; 1 Cor 14:26; 2 Cor
10:8, 12:19; Eph 4:12; 2 Tim 3:17; 1 Cor 8:1, 13:1-4). That the edification of the soul, is
of the greatest concern, is out of measure evident because heaven and eternal happiness are
so immediately concerned therein. Besides, this is that for which Christ died, for which the
Holy Ghost was given, yea for which the scriptures and the gifts of all the godly are given
to the church; yea, and if gifts are not bent to this very work, the persons are said to be
proud or uncharitable that have them; and stand but for cyphers or worse among the churches
of God. Farther, edification is that that cherisheth all grace, and maketh the Christians quick
and lively, and maketh sin lean and dwindling, and filleth the mouth with thanksgiving to God.
But to contest with gracious men, with men that walk with God; to shut such out of the churches;
because they will not sin against their souls, rendereth thee uncharitable (Rom 14:15,20).
Thou seekest to destroy the word of God; thou begettest contentions, janglings, murmurings,
and evil surmisings, thou ministerest occasion for whisperings, backbitings, slanders and the
like, rather than godly edifying; contrary to the whole current of the scriptures and peace
of all communities. Let us therefore leave off these contentions, 'and follow after the things
that make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another' (Rom 14:19). And know that
the edification of the church of God dependeth not upon, neither is tied to this or that circumstance.
Especially when there are in the hearts of the godly, different persuasions about it; then
it becometh them in the wisdom of God, to take more care for their peace and unity; than to
widen or make large their uncomfortable differences.

Although Aaron transgressed the law, because he ate not the sin-offering of the people; yet
seeing he could not do it with satisfaction to his own conscience, Moses was content that he
left it undone (Lev 10:16-20). Joshua was so zealous against Eldad and Medad, for prophesying
in the camp, without first going to the Lord to the door of the tabernacle, as they were commanded,
that he desired Moses to forbid them (Num 11:27,28). But Moses calls his zeal envy, and prays
to God for more such prophets; knowing that although they failed in a circumstance, they were
right in that which was better. The edification of the people in the camp was that which pleased
Moses.

In Hezekiah's time, though the people came to the passover in an undue manner, and 'did eat
it otherwise than it was written'; yet the wise king would not forbid them, but rather admitted
it, knowing that their edification was of greater concern, than to hold them to a circumstance
or two (2 Chron 30:13-27). Yea, God himself did like the wisdom of the king, and healed, that
is, forgave, the people at the prayer of Hezekiah. And observe it, notwithstanding this disorder,
as to circumstances, the feast was kept with great gladness; and the Levites and the priests
praised the Lord day by day, singing with loud instruments unto the Lord; yea, there was not
the like joy in Jerusalem from the time of Solomon unto that same time. What shall we say,
all things must give place to the profit of the people of God. Yea, sometimes laws themselves,
for their outward preservation, much more for godly edifying. When Christ's disciples plucked
the ears of corn on the sabbath, no doubt for very hunger, and were rebuked by the Pharisees
for it, as for that which was unlawful; how did their Lord succour them? By excusing them,
and rebuking their adversaries. 'Have ye not read,' said he, 'what David did when he was an
hungered, and they that were with him; how he entered into the house of God, and did eat the
shew bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but
only for the priests? Or have ye not read in the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests
in the temple profaned the sabbath, and are blameless?' (Matt 12:1-5). Why blameless? because
they did it in order to the edification of the people. If laws and ordinances of old have been
broken, and the breach of them borne with, when yet the observance of outward things was more
strictly commanded than now, when the profit and edification of the people came in competition,
how much more may not we have communion, church communion, where no law is transgressed thereby.

Seventh, Therefore I am for holding communion thus, because love, which above all things we
are commanded to put on, is of much more worth than to break about baptism; Love is also more
discovered when it receiveth for the sake of Christ and grace, than when it refuseth for want
of water: and observe it, as I have also said before, this exhortation to love is grounded
upon the putting on of the new creature; which new creature hath swallowed up all distinctions,
that have before been common among the churches. As I am a Jew, you are a Greek; I am circumcised,
you are not: I am free, you are bound. Because Christ was all in all these, 'Put on therefore,'
saith he, 'as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering,' that is, with reference to the infirmities of the weak, 'forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: even as Christ
forgave you, so also do ye: and above all these things put on charity, which is the bond of
perfectness' (Col 3:12-14). Which forbearing and forgiving respecteth not only private and
personal injuries, but also errors in judgment about inclinations and distinctions tending
to divisions, and separating upon the grounds laid down in verse 11 which how little soever
they now seem to us, who are beyond them, were strong, and of weight to them who in that day
were entangled with them. Some saints then were not free to preach to any but the Jews: denying
the word of life to the Gentiles, and contending with them who preferred it to them: which
was a greater error than this of baptism (Acts 11:1-19). But what should we do with such kind
of saints? Why love them still, forgive them, bear with them, and maintain church communion
with them. Why? because they are new creatures, because they are Christ's: for this swallows
up all distinctions. Farther, because they are elect and beloved of God. Divisions and distinctions
are of shorter date than election; let not them therefore that are but momentary, and hatched
in darkness, break that bond that is from everlasting. It is love, not baptism, that discovereth
us to the world to be Christ's disciples. It is love, that is the undoubted character of our
interest in, and sonship with God: I mean when we love as saints, and desire communion with
others, because they have fellowship one with another, in their fellowship with God the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ (1 John 1:3). And now though the truth and sincerity of our love to
God, be then discovered when we keep his commandments, in love to his name; yet we should remember
again, that the two head and chief commandments, are faith in Jesus, and love to the brethren
(1 John 3:23). So then he that pretendeth to love, and yet seeks not the profit of his brother
in chief; he loveth, but they are his own opinions and froward notions (James 4:11; Rom 14:21).
'Love is the fulfilling of the law'; but he fulfils it not who judgeth and setteth at nought
his brother; that stumbleth, offendeth, and maketh weak his brother; and all for the sake of
a circumstance, that to which he cannot consent, except he sin against his own soul, or Papist
like, live by an implicit faith.[17] Love therefore is sometimes more seen and showed, in forbearing
to urge and press what we know, than in publishing and imposing. The apostle considered not
only the knowledge that he had in the mysteries of Christ; but the temper, the growth, and
strength of the churches, and accordingly kept back, or communicated to them, what might be
for their profit (Acts 20:18-20). So Christ, 'I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now' (John 16:12). It may be some will count these old and threadbare texts;
but such must know, that the word of the Lord must stand for ever (Isa 40:8). And I should
dare to say to such, if the best of thy new shifts, be to slight, and abuse old scriptures;
it shews thou art more fond of thy unwarrantable opinion, than swift to hear, and ready to
yield to the authority that is infallible.

But to conclude this, when we attempt to force our brother beyond his light, or to break his
heart with grief; to thrust him beyond his faith, or to bar him from his privilege: how can
we say, I love? What shall I say? To have fellowship one with another for the sake of an outward
circumstance, or to make that the door to fellowship which God hath not; yea to make that the
including, excluding charter; the bounds, bar, and rule of communion; when by the word of the
everlasting testament there is no warrant for it; to speak charitably, if it be not for want
of love, it is for want of knowledge in the mysteries of the kingdom of Christ.

Eighth. But for God's people to divide into parties, or to shut each other from church communion;
though from greater points, and upon higher pretences, than this of water baptism; hath heretofore
been counted carnal, and the actors herein babyish Christians. Paul and Apollos, Cephas and
Christ, were doubtless higher things than those about which we contend: yet when they made
divisions for them; how sharply are they rebuked? Are ye not CARNAL, CARNAL, CARNAL? For whereas
there are among you, envyings, strife, divisions, or factions: 'are ye not carnal' (1 Cor 1:11,12,
3:1-4). While one saith, I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? See
therefore from whence arise all they endeavours, zeal, and labour, to accomplish divisions
among the godly: let Paul or Cephas, or Christ himself, be the burthen of thy song, yet the
heart from whence they flow is carnal; and thy actions, discoveries of childishness. But, doubtless
when these contentions were among the Corinthians, and one man was vilified, that another might
be promoted; a lift with a carnal brother, was thought great wisdom to widen the breach. But
why should HE be rebuked, that said he was for Christ? Because he was for him in opposition
to his holy apostles. Hence he saith, 'Is Christ divided,' or separate from his servants? Note
therefore that these divisions are deserted by the persons the divisions were made about; neither
Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, nor Christ is here. Let the cry be never so loud, Christ, order,
the rule, the command, or the like; carnality is but the bottom, and they are but babes that
do it; their zeal is but a puff (1 Cor 4:6). And observe it, the great division at Corinth,
was helped forward by water baptism: this the apostle intimates by, 'Were ye baptized in the
name of Paul?' Ah, brethren! Carnal Christians with outward circumstances, will, if they be
let alone, make sad work in the churches of Christ, against the spiritual growth of the same.
But 'I thank God,' saith Paul, 'that I baptized none of you,' &c. Not but that it was then
an ordinance of God, but they abused it, in making parties thereby. 'I baptized none of you,
but Crispus and Gaius,--and the household of Stephanus': men of note among the brethren, men
of good judgment, and reverenced by the rest; they can tell you I intended not to make a party
to myself thereby. 'Besides, I know not whether I baptized any other.' By this negligent relating,
who were baptized by him; he showeth that he made no such matter of baptism, as some in these
days do; nay, that he made no matter at all thereof, with respect to church communion; for
if he did not heed who himself had baptized; he much less heeded, who were baptized by others;
but if baptism had been the initiating, or entering ordinance, and so appointed of God; no
doubt he had made more conscience thereof, than so lightly to pass it over. 'For Christ sent
me not to baptize, but to preach the gospel.' The gospel then may be effectually preached,
and yet baptism neither administered nor mentioned. The gospel being good tidings to sinners,
upon the account of free grace through Christ; but baptism with things of like nature, are
duties enjoined such a people who received the gospel before. I speak not this, because I would
teach men to break the least of the commandments of God; but to persuade my brethren of the
baptized way, not to hold too much thereupon, not to make it an essential of the gospel of
Christ, nor yet of communion of saints.

