This singular habit was the cause of a disaster to the Chimney-pot Wolf-hounds, and a corresponding
advantage to the Coyotes in the war. Jake had laid a line of poison baits on the western bluffs.
Tito knew what they were, and spurned them as usual; but finding more later, she gathered up
three or four and crossed the Little Missouri toward the ranch-house. This she circled at a
safe distance; but when something made the pack of Dogs break out into clamour, Tito dropped
the baits, and next day, when the Dogs were taken out for exercise they found and devoured
these scraps of meat, so that in ten minutes, there were four hundred dollars' worth of Greyhounds
lying dead. This led to an edict against poisoning in that district, and thus was a great boon
to the Coyotes.

Tito quickly learned that not only each kind of game must be hunted in a special way, but different
ones of each kind may require quite different treatment. The Prairie-dog with the outlying
den was really an easy prey, but the town was quite compact now that he was gone. Near the
centre of it was a fine, big, fat Prairie-dog, a perfect alderman, that she had made several
vain attempts to capture. On one occasion she had crawled almost within leaping distance, when
the angry bizz of a Rattlesnake just ahead warned her that she was in danger. Not that the
Ratler cared anything about the Prairie-dog, but he did not wish to be disturbed; and Tito,
who had an instinctive fear of the Snake, was forced to abandon the hunt. The open stalk proved
an utter, failure with the Alderman, for the situation of his den made every Dog in the town
his sentinel; but he was too good to lose, and Tito waited until circumstances made a new plan.

All Coyotes have a trick of watching from a high look-out whatever passes along the roads.
After it has passed they go down and examine its track. Tito had this habit, except that she
was always careful to keep out of sight herself.

One day a wagon passed from the town to the southward. Tito lay low and watched it. Something
dropped on the road. When the wagon was out of sight Tito sneaked down, first to smell the
trail as a matter of habit, second to see what it was that had dropped. The object was really
an apple, but Tito saw only an unattractive round green thing like a cactus-leaf without spines,
and of a peculiar smell. She snuffed it, spurned it, and was about to pass on; but the sun
shone on it so brightly, and it rolled so curiously when she pawed, that she picked it up in
a mechanical way and trotted back over the rise, where are found herself at the Dog-town. Just
then two great Prairie-hawks came skimming like pirates over the plain. As soon as they were
in sight the Prairie- dogs all barked, jerking their tails at each bark, and hid below. When
all were gone Tito walked on toward the hole of the big fat fellow whose body she coveted,
and dropping the apple on the ground a couple of feet from the rim of the crater that formed
his home, she put her nose down to enjoy the delicious smell of Dog-fat. Even his den smelled
more fragrant than those of the rest. Then she went quietly behind a greasewood bush, in a
lower place some twenty yards away, and lay flat. After a few seconds some venturesome Prairie-dog
looked out, and seeing nothing, gave the "all's well" bark. One by one they came out, and in
twenty minutes the town was alive as before. One of the last to come out was the fat old Alderman.
He always took good care of his own precious self. He peered out cautiously a few times, then
climbed to the top of his look-out. A Prairie-dog hole is shaped like a funnel, going straight
down. Around the top of this is built a high ridge which serves as a look-out, and also makes
sure that, no matter how they may slip in their hurry, they are certain to drop into the funnel
and be swallowed up by the all-protecting earth. On the outside the ground slopes away gently
from the funnel. Now, when the Alderman saw that strange round thing at his threshold he was
afraid. Second inspection led him to believe that it was not dangerous, but was probably interesting.
He went cautiously toward it, smelled it, and tried to nibble it; but the apple rolled away,
for it was round, and the ground was smooth as well as sloping. The Prairie-dog followed and
gave it a nip which satisfied him that the strange object would make good eating. But each
time he nibbled, it rolled farther away. The coast seemed clear, all the other Prairie-dogs
were out, so the fat Alderman did not hesitate to follow up the dodging, shifting apple.

This way and that it wriggled, and he followed. Of course it worked toward the low place where
grew the greasewood bush. The little tastes of apple that he got only whetted his appetite.
The Alderman was more and more interested. Foot by foot he was led from his hole toward that
old, familiar bush and had no thought of anything but the joy of eating. And Tito curled herself
and braced her sinewy legs, and measured the distance between, until it dwindled to not more
than three good jumps; then up and like an arrow she went, and grabbed and bore him off at last.

It will never be known whether it was accident or design that led to the placing of that apple,
but it proved important, and if such a thing were to happen once or twice to a smart Coyote,--and
it is usually clever ones that get such chances,--it might easily grow into a new trick of hunting.

After a hearty meal Tito buried the rest in a cold place, not to get rid of it, but to hide
it for future use; and a little later, when she was too weak to hunt much, her various hoards
of this sort came in very useful. True, the meat had turned very strong; but Tito was not critical,
and she had no fears or theories of microbes, so suffered no ill effects.

VIII.

The lovely Hiawathan spring was touching all things in the fairy Badlands. Oh, why are they
called Badlands? If Nature sat down deliberately on the eighth day of creation and said, "Now
work is done, let's play; let's make a place that shall combine everything that is finished
and wonderful and beautiful--a paradise for man and bird and beast," it was surely then that
she made these wild, fantastic hills, teeming with life, radiant with gayest flowers, varied
with sylvan groves, bright with prairie sweeps and brimming lakes and streams. In foreground,
offing, and distant hills that change at every step, we find some proof that Nature squandered
here the riches that in other lands she used as sparingly as gold, with colourful sky above
and colourful land below, and the distance blocked by sculptured buttes that are built of precious
stones and ores, and tinged as by a lasting and unspeakable sunset. And yet, for all this ten
tunes gorgeous wonderland enchanted, blind man has found no better name than one which says,
the road to it is hard.

The little hollow west of Chimney Butte was freshly grassed. The dangerous-looking Spanish
bayonets, that through the bygone winter had waged war with all things, now sent out their
contribution to the peaceful triumph of the spring, in flowers that have stirred even the chilly
scientists to name them Gloriosa; and the cactus, poisonous, most reptilian of herbs, surprised
the world with a splendid bloom as little like itself as the pearl is like its mother shell-fish.
The sage and the greasewood lent their gold, and the sand-anemone tinged the Badland hills
like bluish snow; and in the air and earth and hills on every hand was felt the fecund promise
of the spring. This was the end of the winter famine, the beginning of the summer feast, and
this I was the time by the All-mother, ordained when first the little Coyotes should see the
light of day.

A mother does not have to learn to love her helpless, squirming brood. They bring the love
with them--not much or little, not measurable, but perfect love. And in that dimly lighted
warm abode she fondled them and licked them and cuddled them with heartful warmth of tenderness,
that was as much a new epoch in her life as in theirs.

But the pleasure of loving them was measured in the same measure as anxiety for their safety.
In bygone days her care had been mainly for herself. All she had learned in her strange puppyhood,
all she had picked up since, was bent to the main idea of self-preservation. Now she was ousted
from her own affections by her brood. Her chief care was to keep their home concealed, and
this was not very hard at first, for she left them only when she must, to supply her own wants.

She came and went with great care, and only after spying well the land
so that none should see and find the place of her treasure. If it were
possible for the little ones' idea of their mother and the cow-boys'
idea to be set side by side they would be found to have nothing in
common, though both were right in their point of view. The ranchmen
 knew the Coyote only as a pair
of despicable, cruel jaws, borne around on tireless legs, steered by
incredible cunning, and leaving behind a track of destruction. The
little ones knew her as a loving, gentle, all-powerful guardian. For
them her breast was soft and warm and infinitely tender. She fed and
warmed them, she was their wise and watchful keeper. She was always at
hand with food when they hungered, with wisdom to foil the cunning of
their foes, and with a heart of courage tried to crown her well-laid
plans for them with uniform success.

A baby Coyote is a shapeless, senseless, wriggling, and--to every one but its mother--a most
uninteresting little lump. But after its eyes are open, after it has developed its legs, after
it has learned to play in the sun with its brothers, or run at the gentle call of its mother
when she brings home game for it to feed on, the baby Coyote becomes one of the cutest, dearest
little rascals on earth. And when the nine that made up Coyotito's brood had reached this stage,
it did not require the glamour of motherhood to make them objects of the greatest interest.

The summer was now on. The little ones were beginning to eat flesh-meat, and Tito, with some
assistance from Saddleback, was kept busy to supply both themselves and the brood. Sometimes
she brought them a Prairie-dog, at other times she would come home with a whole bunch of Gophers
and Mice in her jaws; and once or twice, by the clever trick of relay-chasing, she succeeded
in getting one of the big Northern Jack-rabbits for the little folks at home.

After they had feasted they would lie around in the sun for a time. Tito would mount guard
on a bank and scan the earth and air with her keen, brassy eye, lest any dangerous foe should
find their happy valley; and the merry pups played little games of tag, or chased the Butterflies,
or had apparently desperate encounters with each other, or tore and worried the bones and feathers
that now lay about the threshold of the home. One, the least, for there is usually a runt,
stayed near the mother and climbed on her back or pulled at her tail. They made a lovely picture
as they played, and the wrestling group in the middle seemed the focus of it all at first;
but a keener, later look would have rested on the mother, quiet, watchful, not without anxiety,
but, above all, with a face full of motherly tenderness. Oh, she was so proud and happy, and
she would sit there and watch them and silently love them till it was time to go home, or until
some sign of distant danger showed. Then, with a low growl, she gave the signal, and all disappeared
from sight in a twinkling, after which she would set off to meet and turn the danger, or go
on a fresh hunt for food.

IX.

Oliver Jake had several plans for making a fortune, but each in turn was abandoned as soon
as he found that it meant work. At one time or other most men of this kind see the chance of
their lives in a poultry-farm. They cherish the idea that somehow the poultry do all the work.
And without troubling himself about the details, Jake devoted an unexpected windfall to the
purchase of a dozen Turkeys for his latest scheme. The Turkeys were duly housed in one end
of Jake's shanty, so as to be well guarded, and for a couple of days were the object of absorbing
interest, and had the best of care--too much, really. But Jake's ardour waned about the third
day; then the recurrent necessity for long celebrations at Medora, and the ancient allurements
of idle hours spent lying on the tops of sunny buttes and of days spent sponging on the hospitality
of distant ranches, swept away the last pretence of attention to his poultry-farm. The Turkeys
were utterly neglected--left to forage for themselves; and each time that Jake returned to
his uninviting shanty, after a few days' absence, he found fewer birds, till at last none but
the old Gobbler was left.

Jake cared little about the loss, but was filled with indignation against the thief.

He was now installed as wolver to the Broadarrow outfit. That is, he was supplied with poison,
traps, and Horses, and was also entitled to all he could make out of Wolf bounties. A reliable
man would have gotten pay in addition, for the ranchmen are generous, but Jake was not reliable.

Every wolver knows, of course, that his business naturally drops into several well-marked periods.

In the late whiter and early spring--the love-season--the Hounds will not hunt a She-wolf.
They will quit the trail of a He-wolf at this time --to take up that of a She-wolf, but when
they do overtake her, they, for some sentimental reason, invariably let her go in peace. In
August and September the young Coyotes and Wolves are just beginning to run alone, and they
are then easily trapped and poisoned. A month or so later the survivors have learned how to
take care of themselves, but in the early summer the wolver knows that there are dens full
of little ones all through the hills. Each den has from five to fifteen pups, and the only
difficulty is to know the whereabouts of these family homes.

One way of finding the dens is to watch from some tall butte for a Coyote carrying food to
its brood. As this kind of wolving involved much lying still, it suited Jake very well. So,
equipped with a Broadarrow arrow Horse and the boss's field-glasses, he put in week after week
at den-hunting--that is, lying asleep in some possible look-out, with an occasional glance
over the country when it seemed easier to do that than to lie still.

The Coyotes had learned to avoid the open. They generally went homeward along the sheltered
hollows; but this was not always possible, and one day, while exercising his arduous profession
in the country west of Chimney Butte, Jake's glasses and glance fell by chance on a dark spot
which moved along an open hillside. It was grey, and it looked like this: and even Jake knew
that that meant Coyote. If it had been a grey Wolf it would have been so: with tail up. A Fox
would have looked so: the large ears and tail and the yellow colour would have marked it. And
a Deer would have looked so: That dark shade from the front end meant something in his mouth--probably
something being carried home--and that would mean a den of little ones.

He made careful note of the place, and returned there next day to watch, selecting a high butte
near where he had seen the Coyote carrying the food. But all day passed, and he saw nothing.
Next day, however, he descried a dark Coyote, old Saddleback, carrying a large Bird, and by
the help of the glasses he made out that it was a Turkey, and then he knew that the yard at
home was quite empty, and he also knew where the rest of them had gone, and vowed terrible
vengeance when he should find the den. He followed Saddleback with his eyes as far as possible,
and that was no great way, then went to the place to see if he could track him any farther;
but he found no guiding signs, and he did not chance on the little hollow the was the playground
of Tito's brood.

Meanwhile Saddleback came to the little hollow and gave the low call that always conjured from
the earth the unruly procession of the nine riotous little pups, and they dashed at the Turkey
and pulled and worried till it was torn up, and each that got a piece ran to one side alone
and silently proceeded to eat, seizing his portion in his jaws when another came near, and
growling his tiny growl as he showed the brownish whites of his eyes in his effort to watch
the intruder. Those that got the softer parts to feed on were well fed. But the three that
did not turned all then energies on the frame of the Gobbler, and over that there waged a battle
royal. This way and that they tugged and tussled, getting off occasional scraps, but really
hindering each other feeding, till Tito glided in and deftly cut the Turkey into three or four,
when each dashed off with a prize, over which he sat and chewed and smacked his lips and jammed
his head down sideways to bring the backmost teeth to bear, while the baby runt scrambled into
the home den, carrying in triumph his share--the Gobbler's grotesque head and neck.

X.

Jake felt that he had been grievously wronged, indeed ruined, by that Coyote that stole his
Turkeys. He vowed he would skin them alive when he found the pups, and took pleasure in thinking
about how he would do it. His attempt to follow Saddleback by trailing was a failure, and all
his searching for the den was useless, but he had come prepared for any emergency. In case
he found the den he had brought a pick and shovel; in case he did not he had brought a living
white Hen.

The Hen he now took to a broad open place near where he had seen Saddle-back, and there he
tethered her to a stick of wood that she could barely drag. Then he made himself comfortable
on a look-out that was near, and lay still to watch. The Hen, of course, ran to the end of
the string, and then lay on the ground flopping stupidly. Presently the log gave enough to
ease the strain, she turned by mere chance in another direction, and so, for a time, stood
up to look around.

The day went slowly by, and Jake lazily stretched himself on the blanket in his spying-place.
Toward evening Tito came by on a hunt. This was not surprising, for the den was only half a
mile away. Tito had learned, among other rules, this, "Never show yourself on the sky-line."
In former days the Coyotes used to trot along the tops of the ridges for the sake of the chance
to watch both sides. But men and guns had taught Tito that in this way you are sure to be seen.
She therefore made a practice of running along near the top, and once in a while peeping over.

This was what she did that evening as she went out to hunt for the children's supper, and her
keen eyes fell on the white Hen, stupidly stalking about and turning up its eyes in a wise
way each time a harmless Turkey-buzzard came in sight against a huge white cloud.

Tito was puzzled. This was something new. It looked like game, but she feared to take any chances.
She circled all around without showing herself, then decided that, whatever it might be, it
was better let alone. As she passed on, a fault whiff of smoke caught her attention. She followed
cautiously, and under a butte far from the Hen she found Jake's camp. His bed was there, his
Horse was picketed, and on the remains of the fire was a pot which gave out a smell which she
well knew about men's camps--the smell of coffee. Tito felt uneasy at this proof that a man
was staying so near her home, but she went off quietly on her hunt, keeping out of sight, and
Jake knew nothing of her visit.

About sundown he took in his decoy Hen, as Owls were abundant, and went back to his camp.

XI.

Next day the Hen was again put out, and late that afternoon Saddleback came trotting by. As
soon as his eye fell on the white Hen he stopped short, his head on one side, and gazed. Then
he circled to get the wind, and went cautiously sneaking nearer, very cautiously, somewhat
puzzled, till he got a whiff that reminded him of the place where he had found those Turkeys.
The Hen took alarm, and tried to run away; but Saddleback made a rush, seized the Hen so fiercely
that the string was broken, and away he dashed toward the home valley.

Jake had fallen asleep, but the squawk of the Hen happened to awaken him, and he sat up in
time to see her borne away in old Saddleback's jaws.

As soon as they were out of sight Jake took up the white-feather trail. At first it was easily
followed, for the Hen had shed plenty of plumes in her struggles; but once she was dead in
Saddleback's jaws, very few feathers were dropped except where she was carried through the
brush. But Jake was following quietly and certainly, for Saddleback had gone nearly in a straight
line home to the little ones with the dangerous tell-tale prize. Once or twice there was a
puzzling delay when the Coyote had changed his course or gone over an open place; but one white
feather was good for fifty yards, and when the daylight was gone, Jake was not two hundred
yards from the hollow, in which at that very moment were the nine little pups, having a perfectly
delightful time with the Hen, pulling it to pieces, feasting and growling, sneezing the white
feathers from their noses or coughing them from their throats.

If a puff of wind had now blown from them toward Jake, it might have carried a flurry of snowy
plumes or even the merry cries of the little revellers, and the den would have been discovered
at once. But, as luck would have it, the evening lull was on, and all distant sounds were hidden
by the crashing that Jake made in trying to trace his feather guides through the last thicket.

About this time Tito was returning home with a Magpie that she had captured by watching till
it went to feed within the ribs of a dead Horse, when she ran across Jake's trail. Now, a man
on foot is always a suspicious character in this country. She followed the trail for a little
to see where he was going, and that she knew at once from the scent. How it tells her no one
can say, yet all hunters know that it does. And Tito marked that it was going straight toward
her home. Thrilled with new fear, she hid the bird she was carrying, then followed the trail
of the man. Within a few minutes she could hear him in the thicket, and Tito realized the terrible
danger that was threatening. She went swiftly, quietly around to the den hollow, came on the
heedless little roisterers, after giving the signal-call, which prevented them taking alarm
at her approach; but she must have had a shock when she saw how marked the hollow and the den
were now, all drifted over with feathers white as snow. Then she gave the danger-call that
sent them all to earth, and the little glade was still.

Her own nose was so thoroughly and always her guide that it was not likely she thought of the
white-feathers being the telltale. But now she realized that a man, one she knew of old as
a treacherous character, one whose scent had always meant mischief to her, that had been associated
with all her own troubles and the cause of nearly all her desperate danger, was close to her
darlings; was tracking them down, in a few minutes would surely have them in his merciless power.

Oh, the wrench to the mother's heart at the thought of what she could foresee! But the warmth
of the mother-love lent life to the mother-wit. Having sent her little ones out of sight, and
by a sign conveyed to Saddleback her alarm, she swiftly came back to the man, then she crossed
before him, thinking, in her half-reasoning way, that the man must be following a foot-scent
just as she herself would do, but would, of course, take the stronger line of tracks she was
now laying. She did not realize that the failing daylight made any difference. Then she trotted
to one side, and to make doubly sure of being followed, she uttered the fiercest challenge
she could, just as many a time she had done to make the Dogs pursue her:

Grrr-wow-wow-wa-a-a-a-h,

and stood still; then ran a little nearer and did it again, and then again much nearer, and
repeated her bark, she was so determined that the wolver should follow her.

Of course the wolver could see nothing of the Coyote, for the shades were falling. He had to
give up the hunt anyway. His understanding of the details was as different as possible from
that the Mother Coyote had, and yet it came to the same thing. He recognized that the Coyote's
bark was the voice of the distressed mother trying to call him away. So he knew the brood must
be close at hand, and all he now had to do was return in the morning and complete his search.
So he made his way back to his camp.

XII.

Saddleback thought they had won the victory. He felt secure, because the foot-scent that he
might have supposed the man to be following would be stale by morning. Tito did not feel so
safe. That two-legged beast was close to her home and her little ones; had barely been turned
aside; might come back yet.

The wolver watered and repicketed his Horse, kindled the fire anew, made his coffee and ate
his evening meal, then smoked awhile before lying down to sleep, thinking occasionally of the
little woolly scalps he expected to gather in the morning.

He was about to roll up in his blanket when, out of the dark distance, there sounded the evening
cry of the Coyote, the rolling challenge of more than one voice. Jake grinned in fiendish glee,
and said: "There you are all right. Howl some more. I'll see you in the morning."

It was the ordinary, or rather one of the ordinary, camp-calls of the Coyote. It was sounded
once, and then all was still. Jake soon forgot it in his loggish slumber.

The callers were Tito and Saddleback. The challenge was not an empty bluff. It had a distinct
purpose behind it--to know for sure whether the enemy had any dogs with him; and because there
was no responsive bark Tito knew that he had none.

Then Tito waited for an hour or so till the flickering fire had gone dead, and the only sound
of life about the camp was the cropping of the grass by the picketed Horse. Tito crept near
softly, so softly that the Horse did not see her till she was within twenty feet; then he gave
a start that swung the tightened picket-rope up into the air, and snorted gently. Tito went
quietly forward, and opening her wide gape, took the rope in, almost under her ears, between
the great scissor-like back teeth, then chewed it for a few seconds. The fibres quickly frayed,
and, aided by the strain the nervous Horse still kept up, the last of the strands gave way,
and the Horse was free. He was not much alarmed; he knew the smell of Coyote; and after jumping
three steps and walking six, he stopped.

The sounding thumps of his hoofs on the ground awoke the sleeper. He looked up, but, seeing
the Horse standing there, he went calmly off to sleep again, supposing that all went well.

Tito had sneaked away, but she now returned like a shadow, avoided the sleeper, but came around,
sniffed doubtfully at the coffee, and then puzzled over a tin can, while Saddleback examined
the frying-pan full of "camp-sinkers" and then defiled both cakes and pan with dirt. The bridle
hung on a low bush; the Coyotes did not know what it was, but just for luck they cut it into
several pieces, then, taking the sacks that held Jake's bacon and flour, they carried them
far away and buried them in the sand.

Having done all the mischief she could, Tito, followed by her mate, now set off for a wooded
gully some miles away, where was a hole that had been made first by a Chipmunk, but enlarged
by several other animals, including a Fox that had tried to dig out its occupants. Tito stopped
and looked at many possible places before she settled on this. Then she set to work to dig.
Saddleback had followed in a half-comprehending way, till he saw what she was doing. Then when
she, tired with digging, came out, he went into the hole, and after snuffing about went on
with the work, throwing out the earth between his hind legs; and when it was piled up behind
he would come out and push it yet farther away.

And so they worked for hours, not a word said and yet with a sufficient comprehension of the
object in view to work in relief of each other. And by the time the morning came they had a
den big enough to do for their home, in case they must move, though it would not compare with
the one in the grassy hollow.

XIII.

It was nearly sunrise before the wolver awoke. With the true instinct of a plainsman he turned
to look for his Horse. It was gone. What his ship is to the sailor, what wings are to the Bird,
what money is to the merchant, the Horse is to the plainsman. Without it he is helpless, lost
at sea, wing broken, crippled in business. Afoot on the plains is the sum of earthly terrors.
Even Jake realized this, and ere his foggy wits had fully felt the shock he sighted the steed
afar on a flat, grazing and stepping ever farther from the camp. At a second glance Jake noticed
that the Horse was trailing the rope. If the rope had been left behind Jake would have known
that it was hopeless to try to catch him; he would have finished his den-hunt and found the
little Coyotes. But, with the trailing rope, there was a good chance of catching the Horse;
so Jake set out to try.

Of all the maddening things there is nothing worse than to be almost, but not quite, able to
catch your Horse. Do what he might, Jake could not get quite near enough to seize that short
rope, and the Horse led him on and on, until at last they were well on the homeward trail.

Now Jake was afoot anyhow, so seeing no better plan, he set out to follow that Horse right
back to the Ranch.

But when about seven miles were covered Jake succeeded in catching him. He rigged up a rough
jaquima with the rope and rode barebacked in fifteen minutes over the three miles that lay
between him and the Sheep-ranch, giving vent all the way to his pent-up feelings in cruel abuse
of that Horse. Of course it did not do any good, and he knew that, but he considered it was
heaps of satisfaction. Here Jake got a meal and borrowed a saddle and a mongrel Hound that
could run a trail, and returned late in the afternoon to finish his den-hunt. Had he known
it, he now could have found it without the aid of the cur, for it was really close at hand
when he took up the feather-trail where he last had left it. Within one hundred yards he rose
to the top of the little ridge; then just over it, almost face to face, he came on a Coyote,
carrying in its mouth a large Rabbit. The Coyote leaped just at the same moment that Jake fired
his revolver, and the Dog broke into a fierce yelling and dashed off in pursuit, while Jake
blazed and blazed away, without effect, and wondered why the Coyote should still hang on to
that Rabbit as she ran for her life with the Dog yelling at her heels. Jake followed as far
as he could and fired at each chance, but scored no hit. So when they had vanished among the
buttes he left the Dog to follow or come back as he pleased, while he returned to the den,
which, of course, was plain enough now. Jake knew that the pups were there yet. Had he not
seen the mother bringing a Rabbit for them?

So he set to work with pick and shovel all the rest of that day. There were plenty of signs
that the den had inhabitants, and, duly encouraged, he dug on, and after several hours of the
hardest work he had ever done, he came to the end of the den--only to find it empty. After
cursing his luck at the first shock of disgust, he put on his strong leather glove and groped
about in the nest. He felt something firm and drew it out. It was the head and neck of his
own Turkey Gobbler, and that was all he got for his pains.

XIV.

Tito had not been idle during the time that the enemy was Horse-hunting. Whatever Saddleback
might have done, Tito would live in no fool's paradise. Having finished the new den, she trotted
back to the little valley of feathers, and the first young one that came to meet her at the
door of this home was a broad-headed one much like herself. She seized him by the neck and
set off, carrying him across country toward the new den, a couple of miles away. Every little
while she had to put her offspring down to rest and give it a chance to breathe. This made
the moving slow, and the labour of transporting the pups occupied all that day, for Saddleback
was not allowed to carry any of them, probably because he was too rough. Beginning with the
biggest and brightest, they were carried away one at a time, and late in the afternoon only
the runt was left. Tito had not only worked at digging all night, she had also trotted over
thirty miles, half of it with a heavy baby to carry. But she did not rest. She was just coming
out of the den, carrying her youngest in her mouth, when over the very edge of this hollow
appeared the mongrel Hound, and a little way behind him Wolver Jake.

Away went Tito, holding the baby tight, and away went the Dog behind her.

Bang! bang! bang! said the revolver.

But not a shot touched her. Then over the ridge they dashed, where the revolver could not reach
her, and sped across a flat, the tired Coyote and her baby, and the big fierce Hound behind
her, bounding his hardest. Had she been fresh and unweighted she could soon have left the clumsy
cur that now was barking furiously on her track and rather gaining than losing in the race.
But she put forth all her strength, careered along a slope, where she gained a little, then
down across a brushy flat where the cruel bushes robbed her of all she had gained. But again
into the open they came, and the wolver, labouring far behind, got sight of them and fired
again and again with his revolver, and only stirred the dust, but still it made her dodge and
lose time, and it also spurred the Dog. The hunter saw the Coyote, his old acquaintance of
the bobtail, carrying still, as he thought, the Jack-rabbit she had been bringing to her brood,
and wondered at her strange persistence.

"Why doesn't she drop that weight when flying for her life?" But on she went and gamely bore
her load over the hills, the man cursing his luck that he had not brought his Horse, and the
mongrel bounding in deadly earnest but thirty feet behind her. Then suddenly in front of Tito
yawned a little cut-bank gully. Tired and weighted, she dared not try the leap; she skirted
around. But the Dog was fresh; he cleared it easily, and the mother's start was cut down by
half. But on she went, straining to hold the little one high above the scratching brush and
the dangerous bayonet-spikes; but straining too much, for the helpless cub was choking in his
mother's grip. She must lay him down or strangle him; with such a weight she could not much
longer keep out of reach. She tried to give the howl for help, but her voice was muffled by
the cub, now struggling for breath, and as she tried to ease her grip on him a sudden wrench
jerked him from her mouth into the grass--into the power of the merciless Hound. Tito was far
smaller than the Dog; ordinarily she would have held him in fear; but her  little one, her
baby, was the only thought now, and as the brute sprang forward to tear it in his wicked jaws,
she leaped between and stood facing him with all her mane erect, her teeth exposed, and plainly
showed her resolve to save her young one at any price. The Dog was not brave, only confident
that he was bigger and had the man behind him. But the man was far away, and balked in his
first rush at the trembling little Coyote, that tried to hide in the grass, the cur hesitated
a moment, and Tito howled the long howl for help--the muster-call:

Yap-yap-yap-yah-yah-yah-h-h-h-h Yap-yap-yap-yah-yah-yah-h-h-h-h,

and made the buttes around re-echo so that Jake could not tell where it came from; but someone
else there was that heard and did know whence it came. The Dog's courage revived on hearing
something like a far-away shout. Again he sprang at the little one, but again the mother balked
him with her own body, and then they closed in deadly struggle. "Oh, if Saddleback would only
come!" But no one came, and now she had no further chance to call. Weight is everything in
a closing fight, and Tito soon went down, bravely fighting to the last, but clearly worsted;
and the Hound's courage grew with the sight of victory, and all he thought of now was to finish
her and then kill her helpless baby in its turn. He had no ears or eyes for any other thing,
till out of the nearest sage there flashed a streak of grey, and in a trice the big-voiced
coward was hurled back by a foe almost as heavy as himself--hurled back with a crippled shoulder.
Dash, chop, and staunch old Saddleback sprang on him again. Tito struggled to her feet, and
they closed on him together. His courage fled at once when he saw the odds, and all he wanted
now was safe escape--escape from Saddleback, whose speed was like the wind, escape from Tito,
whose baby's life was at stake. Not twenty jumps away did he get; not breath enough had he
to howl for help to his master in the distant hills; not fifteen yards away from her little
one that he meant to tear, they tore him all to bits.

And Tito lifted the rescued young one, and travelling as slowly as she wished, they reached
the new-made den. There the family safely reunited, far away from danger of further attack
by Wolver Jake or his kind.

And there they lived in peace till their mother had finished their training, and every one
of them grew up wise in the ancient learning of the plains, wise in the later wisdom that the
ranchers' war has forced upon them, and not only they, but their children's children, too.
The Buffalo herds have gone; they have succumbed to the rifles of the hunters. The Antelope
droves are nearly gone; Hound and lead were too much for them. The Blacktail bands have dwindled
before axe and fence. The ancient dwellers of the Badlands have faded like snow under the new
conditions, but the Coyotes are no more in fear of extinction. Their morning and evening song
still sounds from the level buttes, as it did long years ago when every plain was a teeming
land of game. They have learned the deadly secrets of traps and poisons, they know how to baffle
the gunner and Hound, they have matched their wits with the hunter's wits. They have learned
how to prosper in a land of man-made plenty, in spite of the worst that man can do, and it
was Tito that taught them how.

WHY THE CHICKADEE GOES CRAZY ONCE A YEAR

Published September, 1893, in "Our Animal Friends," the organ of the American Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals

