DISCOVERERS AND EXPLORERS

BY

EDWARD R. SHAW Dean of the School of Pedagogy New York University

NEW YORK :: CINCINNATI :: CHICAGO AMERICAN BOOK COMPANY

Copyright 1900 By EDWARD R. SHAW.

PREFACE.

The practice of beginning the study of geography with the locality in which the pupil lives,
in order that his first ideas of geographical conceptions may be gained from observation directed
upon the real conditions existing about him, has been steadily gaining adherence during the
past few years as a rational method of entering upon the study of geography.

After the pupil has finished an elementary study of the locality, he is ready to pass to an
elementary consideration of the world as a whole, to get his first conception of the planet
on which he lives. His knowledge of the forms of land and water, his knowledge of rain and
wind, of heat and cold, as agents, and of the easily traced effects resulting from the interaction
of these agents, have been acquired by observation and inference upon conditions actually at
hand; in other words, his knowledge has been gained in a presentative manner. 

This he did by getting successively various situations in service. In one of these he stole, so he
tells us, a piece of ribbon, which was soon found in his possession. He said a maid-servant,
naming her, gave it to him. The two were confronted with each other.


In passing from the geography of the locality to that of the world as a whole, the pupil is
to deal broadly with the land masses and their general characteristics. The continents and
oceans, their relative situations, form, and size, are then to be treated, but the treatment
is always to be kept easily within the pupil's capabilities--the end being merely an elementary
world-view.

During the time the pupil is acquiring this elementary knowledge of the world as a whole, certain
facts of history may be interrelated with the geographical study.

According to the plan already suggested, it will be seen that the pupil is carried out from
a study of the limited area of land and water about him to an idea of the world as a sphere,
with its great distribution of land and water. In this transference he soon comes to perceive
how small a part his hitherto known world forms of the great earth-sphere itself.

Something analogous to this transition on the part of the pupil to a larger view seems to be
found in the history of the western nations of Europe. It is the gradual change in the conception
of the world held during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries to the enlarged conception
of the world as a sphere which the remarkable discoveries and explorations of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries brought about.

The analogy serves pedagogically to point out an interesting and valuable interrelation of
certain facts of history with certain phases of geographical study.

This book has been prepared for the purpose of affording material for such an interrelation.
The plan of interrelation is simple. As the study of the world as a whole, in the manner already
sketched, progresses, the appropriate chapters are read, discussed, and reproduced, and the
routes of the various discoverers and explorers traced. No further word seems to the writer
necessary in regard to the interrelation.

DRESDEN, July 15, 1899.

CONTENTS.

                                                  PAGE
BELIEFS AS TO THE WORLD FOUR HUNDRED YEARS AGO . .   9
MARCO POLO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
COLUMBUS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
VASCO DA GAMA  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  40
JOHN AND SEBASTIAN CABOT'S VOYAGES . . . . . . . .  44
AMERIGO VESPUCCI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  48
PONCE DE LEON  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  54
BALBOA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  56
MAGELLAN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  62
HERNANDO CORTES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  68
FRANCISCO PIZARRO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  78
FERDINAND DE SOTO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  84
THE GREAT RIVER AMAZON, AND EL DORADO  . . . . . .  92
VERRAZZANO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102
THE FAMOUS VOYAGE OF SIR FRANCIS DRAKE--1577 . . . 108
HENRY HUDSON . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114

DISCOVERERS AND EXPLORERS.

BELIEFS AS TO THE WORLD FOUR HUNDRED YEARS AGO.

Four hundred years ago most of the people who lived in Europe thought that the earth was flat.
They knew only the land that was near them. They knew the continent of Europe, a small part
of Asia, and a strip along the northern shore of Africa. 

28, p. 155.

Now and then a physician might frown on his fellows for reading such
literature and prescribing such remedies, but he was in a minority.
Colonial doctors, by and large, had no qualms about employing the
packaged medicines.

Other seafaring men believed that if they should sail too far out upon this water their vessels
would be lost in a fog, or that they would suddenly begin to slide downhill, and would never
be able to return. Wind gods and storm gods, too, were supposed to dwell upon this mysterious
sea. Men believed that these wind and storm gods would be very angry with any one who dared
to enter their domain, and that in their wrath they would hurl the ships over the edge of the
earth, or keep them wandering round and round in a circle, in the mist and fog.

It is no wonder that the name "Sea of Darkness" was given to this great body of water, which
we now know to be the Atlantic Ocean; nor is it surprising that the sailors feared to venture
far out upon it.

These sailors had no dread at all of a sea called the Mediterranean, upon which they made voyages
without fear of danger. This sea was named the Mediterranean because it was supposed to be
in the middle of the land that was then known. On this body of water the sailors were very
bold, fighting, robbing, and plundering strangers and foes, without any thought of fear.

They sailed through this sea eastward to Constantinople, their ships being loaded with metals,
woods, and pitch. These they traded for silks, cashmeres, dyewoods, spices, perfumes, precious
stones, ivory, and pearls. All of these things were brought by caravan from the far Eastern
countries, as India, China, and Japan, to the cities on the east coast of the Mediterranean.

This caravan journey was a very long and tiresome one. Worse than this, the Turks, through
whose country the caravans passed, began to see how valuable this trade was, and they sent
bands of robbers to prevent the caravans from reaching the coast.

As time went on, these land journeys grew more difficult and more dangerous, until the traders
saw that the day would soon come when they would be entirely cut off from traffic with India
and the rich Eastern countries. The Turks would secure all their profitable business. So the
men of that time tried to think of some other way of reaching the East.

Among those who wished to find a short route to India was Prince Henry of Portugal, a bold
navigator as well as a studious and thoughtful man. He was desirous of securing the rich Indian
trade for his own country. So he established a school for navigators at Lisbon, and gathered
around him many men who wanted to study about the sea.

Here they made maps and charts, and talked with one another about the strange lands which they
thought might be found far out in that mysterious body of water which they so dreaded and feared.
It is probable that they had heard some accounts of the voyages of other navigators on this
wonderful sea, and the beliefs about land beyond.

There was Eric the Red, a bold navigator of Iceland, who had sailed west to Greenland, and
planted there a colony that grew and thrived. There was also Eric's son Leif, a venturesome
young viking who had made a voyage south from Greenland, and reached a strange country with
wooded shores and fragrant vines. This country he called Vinland because of the abundance of
wild grapes. When he returned to Greenland, he took a load of timber back with him.

Some of the people of Greenland had tried to make a settlement along this shore which Leif
discovered, but it is thought that the Indians drove them away. He was a sentimentalist instead
of a thinker. One illustration of the divorce that he decreed for himself, or rather--for we have
used too positive a form of expression--that he allowed to subsist,
between sentiment and conduct, will suffice.

It was presently to be his fortune, as author of a tract on education (the "Émile"), to change
the habit of a nation in the matter of nurture for babes.

French mothers of the higher social class in Rousseau's time almost universally gave up their
infants to be nursed at alien bosoms.

All this time the bold Portuguese sailors were venturing farther and farther down the coast
of Africa. They hoped to be able to sail around that continent and up the other side to India.
But they dared not go beyond the equator, because they did not know the stars in the southern
hemisphere and therefore had no guide. They also believed that beyond the equator there was
a frightful region of intense heat, where the sun scorched the earth and where the waters boiled.

Many marvelous stories were told about the islands which the sailors said they saw in the distance.
Scarcely a vessel returned from a voyage without some new story of signs of land seen by the crew.

The people who lived on the Canary Islands said that an island with high mountains on it could
be seen to the west on clear days, but no one ever found it.

Some thought these islands existed only in the imagination of the sailors. Others thought they
were floating islands, as they were seen in many different places. Every one was anxious to
find them, for they were said to be rich in gold and spices.

You can easily understand how excited many people were in regard to new lands, and how they
wished to find out whether the earth was round or not. There was but one way to find out, and
that was to try to sail around it.

For a long time no one was brave enough to venture to do so. To start out and sail away from
land on this unknown water was to the people of that day as dangerous and foolhardy a journey
as to try to cross the ocean in a balloon is to us at the present time.

MARCO POLO.

In the middle of the thirteenth century, about two hundred years before the time of Columbus,
a boy named Marco Polo lived in the city of Venice.

Marco Polo belonged to a rich and noble family, and had all the advantages of study that the
city afforded. He studied at one of the finest schools in the city of Venice. This city was
then famous for its schools, and was the seat of culture and learning for the known world.

When Marco Polo started for school in the morning, he did not step out into a street, as you
do. Instead, he stepped from his front doorstep into a boat called a gondola; for Venice is
built upon a cluster of small islands, and the streets are water ways and are called canals.

The gondolier, as the man who rows the gondola is called, took Marco wherever he wished to
go. Sometimes, as they glided along, the gondolier would sing old Venetian songs; and as Marco
Polo lay back against the soft cushions and listened and looked about him, he wondered if anywhere
else on earth there was so beautiful a city as Venice. For the sky was very blue, and often
its color was reflected in the water; the buildings were graceful and beautiful, the sun was
warm and bright, and the air was balmy.

