There is an old ecclesiastical prejudice in favor of the poor and against the rich. In days
when men acted by ecclesiastical rules these prejudices produced waste of capital, and helped
mightily to replunge Europe into barbarism. The prejudices are not yet dead, but they survive
in our society as ludicrous contradictions and inconsistencies. One thing must be granted to
the rich: they are good-natured. Perhaps they do not recognize themselves, for a rich man is
even harder to define than a poor one. It is not uncommon to hear a clergyman utter from the
pulpit all the old prejudice in favor of the poor and against the rich, while asking the rich
to do something for the poor; and the rich comply, without apparently having their feelings
hurt at all by the invidious comparison. We all agree that he is a good member of society who
works his way up from poverty to wealth, but as soon as he has worked his way up we begin to
regard him with suspicion, as a dangerous member of society. A newspaper starts the silly fallacy
that "the rich are rich because the poor are industrious," and it is copied from one end of
the country to the other as if it were a brilliant apothegm. "Capital" is denounced by writers
and speakers who have never taken the trouble to find out what capital is, and who use the
word in two or three different senses in as many pages. Labor organizations are formed, not
to employ combined effort for a common object, but to indulge in declamation and denunciation,
and especially to furnish an easy living to some officers who do not want to work. People who
have rejected dogmatic religion, and retained only a residuum of religious sentimentalism,
find a special field in the discussion of the rights of the poor and the duties of the rich.
We have denunciations of banks, corporations, and monopolies, which denunciations encourage
only helpless rage and animosity, because they are not controlled by any definitions or limitations,
or by any distinctions between what is indispensably necessary and what is abuse, between what
is established in the order of nature and what is legislative error. Think, for instance, of
a journal which makes it its special business to denounce monopolies, yet favors a protective
tariff, and has not a word to say against trades-unions or patents! Think of public teachers
who say that the farmer is ruined by the cost of transportation, when they mean that he cannot
make any profits because his farm is too far from the market, and who denounce the railroad
because it does not correct for the farmer, at the expense of its stockholders, the disadvantage
which lies in the physical situation of the farm! Her hair had fallen back over her shoulders and
lay dark on her pure white shiny dress; there was a look in her eyes which Hugh had never noticed
before, as if she could see a long way off. Hugh looked at her earnestly.

"Jeanne,"
he said, "you're a perfect puzzle.

Undoubtedly there are, in connection with each of these things, cases of fraud, swindling,
and other financial crimes; that is to say, the greed and selfishness of men are perpetual.
They put on new phases, they adjust themselves to new forms of business, and constantly devise
new methods of fraud and robbery, just as burglars devise new artifices to circumvent every
new precaution of the lock-makers. The criminal law needs to be improved to meet new forms
of crime, but to denounce financial devices which are useful and legitimate because use is
made of them for fraud, is ridiculous and unworthy of the age in which we live. Fifty years
ago good old English Tories used to denounce all joint-stock companies in the same way, and
for similar reasons.

