Angelo Poliziano, who was certainly the chief scholar of his age in the new learning, and no
less certainly one of its truest poets in the vulgar language, lived as tutor to Lorenzo's
children in the palace of the Medici at Florence. Benozzo Gozzoli introduced his portrait,
together with the portraits of his noble pupils, in a fresco of the Pisan Campo Santo. This
prince of humanists recommended Michelangelo to treat in bas-relief an antique fable, involving
the strife of young heroes for some woman's person. Probably he was also able to point out
classical examples by which the boyish sculptor might be guided in the undertaking. The subject
made enormous demands upon his knowledge of the nude. Adult and youthful figures, in attitudes
of vehement attack and resistance, had to be modelled; and the conditions of the myth required
that one at least of them should be brought into harmony with equine forms. Michelangelo wrestled
vigorously with these difficulties. He produced a work which, though it is imperfect and immature,
brings to light the specific qualities of his inherent art-capacity. The bas-relief, still
preserved in the Casa Buonarroti at Florence, is, so to speak, in fermentation with powerful
half-realised conceptions, audacities of foreshortening, attempts at intricate grouping, violent
dramatic action and expression. No previous tradition, unless it was the genius of Greek or
Greco-Roman antiquity, supplied Michelangelo with the motive force for this prentice-piece
in sculpture. Donatello and other Florentines worked under different sympathies for form, affecting
angularity in their treatment of the nude, adhering to literal transcripts from the model or
to conventional stylistic schemes. Michelangelo discarded these limitations, and showed himself
an ardent student of reality in the service of some lofty intellectual ideal. Following and
closely observing Nature, he was also sensitive to the light and guidance of the classic genius.
Yet, at the same time, he violated the aesthetic laws obeyed by that genius, displaying his
Tuscan proclivities by violent dramatic suggestions, and in loaded, overcomplicated composition.
Thus, in this highly interesting essay, the horoscope of the mightiest Florentine artist was
already cast. Sisters and brothers bound by so strong a bond of family love as the Gilberts are
even more closely united by affliction. No day passed without its tribute of affectionate remembrance
from absent members of the family. Her eldest brother, Mr. Wintle, always spent the afternoon
of Sunday with her, when she was able to receive him. The Vicar of Heversham, the beloved "Tom" of her
youth, saw her in London whenever it was possible. Married sisters visited and wrote to her, and
a whole cloud of nephews and nieces hovered around her.

She valued highly the friendship as well as the skill of Mr. Sibley, the surgeon who for many
years attended her. She depended upon him for almost daily visits.

Very little could be done to arrest the progress of her malady; nothing to save her from much inevitable
suffering. Alleviation, not cure, was all that could be looked for, and he was always ready to attempt,
and often able to effect, some mitigation of the ills she had to endure.

Among many others who were kind and helpful, ready to aid her work and so to give her almost the
only pleasure she could receive, were the Duke of Westminster, Lord and Lady Selborne, Madame
Antoinette Sterling, who would sometimes sing to her, and the old and dear friends of the
family, Dean and Mrs. Hook. No word can here be said of the two sisters,
whose whole life was given up to her; none would be adequate. They
knew, and they were known. That is enough. We may not lift the veil
under which they passed so many years with Bessie in her long agony. It is also
interesting for the realistic introduction of a Tuscan cottage staircase into the background.
This bas-relief was presented to Cosimo de' Medici, first Grand Duke of Tuscany, by Michelangelo's
nephew Lionardo. It afterwards came back into the possession of the Buonarroti family, and
forms at present an ornament of their house at Florence.

VII

We are accustomed to think of Michelangelo as a self-withdrawn and solitary worker, living
for his art, avoiding the conflict of society, immersed in sublime imaginings. On the whole,
this is a correct conception of the man. Many passages of his biography will show how little
he actively shared the passions and contentions of the stirring times through which he moved.
Yet his temperament exposed him to sudden outbursts of scorn and anger, which brought him now
and then into violent collision with his neighbours. An incident of this sort happened while
he was studying under the patronage of Lorenzo de' Medici, and its consequences marked him
physically for life. The young artists whom the Magnificent gathered round him used to practise
drawing in the Brancacci Chapel of the Carmine. There Masaccio and his followers bequeathed
to us noble examples of the grand style upon the frescoed panels of the chapel walls. It was
the custom of industrious lads to make transcripts from those broad designs, some of which
Raphael deigned in his latest years to repeat, with altered manner, for the Stanze of the Vatican
and the Cartoons. Michelangelo went one day into the Carmine with Piero Torrigiano and other
comrades. What ensued may best be reported in the narration which Torrigiano at a later time
made to Benvenuto Cellini.

"This Buonarroti and I used, when we were boys, to go into the Church of the Carmine to learn
drawing from the chapel of Masaccio. It was Buonarroti's habit to banter all who were drawing
there; and one day, when he was annoying me, I got more angry than usual, and, clenching my
fist, I gave him such a blow on the nose that I felt bone and cartilage go down like biscuit
beneath my knuckles; and this mark of mine he will carry with him to the grave." The portraits
of Michelangelo prove that Torrigiano's boast was not a vain one. They show a nose broken in
the bridge. But Torrigiano, for this act of violence, came to be regarded by the youth of Florence
with aversion, as one who had laid sacrilegious hands upon the sacred ark. Cellini himself
would have wiped out the insult with blood. Still Cellini knew that personal violence was not
in the line of Michelangelo's character; for Michelangelo, according to his friend and best
biographer, Condivi, was by nature, "as is usual with men of sedentary and contemplative habits,
rather timorous than otherwise, except when he is roused by righteous anger to resent unjust
injuries or wrongs done to himself or others, in which case he plucks up more spirit than those
who are esteemed brave; but, for the rest, he is most patient and enduring." Cellini, then,
knowing the quality of Michelangelo's temper, and respecting him as a deity of art, adds to
his report of Torrigiano's conversation: "These words begat in me such hatred of the man, since
I was always gazing at the masterpieces of the divine Michelangelo, that, although I felt a
wish to go with him to England, I now could never bear the sight of him."

VIII

The years Michelangelo spent in the Casa Medici were probably the blithest and most joyous
of his lifetime. The men of wit and learning who surrounded the Magnificent were not remarkable
for piety or moral austerity. Lorenzo himself found it politically useful "to occupy the Florentines
with shows and festivals, in order that they might think of their own pastimes and not of his
designs, and, growing unused to the conduct of the commonwealth, might leave the reins of government
in his hands." Accordingly he devised those Carnival triumphs and processions which filled
the sombre streets of Florence with Bacchanalian revellers, and the ears of her grave citizens
with ill-disguised obscenity. Lorenzo took part in them himself, and composed several choruses
of high literary merit to be sung by the masqueraders. One of these carries a refrain which
might be chosen as a motto for the spirit of that age upon the brink of ruin:--

  Youths and maids, enjoy to-day:
  Naught ye know about to-morrow!

He caused the triumphs to be carefully prepared by the best artists, the dresses of the masquers
to be accurately studied, and their chariots to be adorned with illustrative paintings. Michelangelo's
old friend Granacci dedicated his talents to these shows, which also employed the wayward fancy
of Piero di Cosimo and Pontormo's power as a colourist. "It was their wont," says Il Lasca,
"to go forth after dinner; and often the processions paraded through the streets till three
or four hours into the night, with a multitude of masked men on horseback following, richly
dressed, exceeding sometimes three hundred in number, and as many on foot with lighted torches.
Thus they traversed the city, singing to the accompaniment of music arranged for four, eight,
twelve, or even fifteen voices, and supported by various instruments." Lorenzo represented
the worst as well as the best qualities of his age. If he knew how to enslave Florence, it
was because his own temperament inclined him to share the amusements of the crowd, while his
genius enabled him to invest corruption with charm. His friend Poliziano entered with the zest
of a poet and a pleasure-seeker into these diversions. He helped Lorenzo to revive the Tuscan
Mayday games, and wrote exquisite lyrics to be sung by girls in summer evenings on the public
squares. He found nothing' easier than to throw aside his professor's mantle and to improvise
ballate for women to chant as they danced their rounds upon the Piazza di S. Trinità. The frontispiece
to an old edition of such lyrics represents Lorenzo surrounded with masquers in quaint dresses,
leading the revel beneath the walls of the Palazzo. Another woodcut shows an angle of the Casa
Medici in Via Larga, girls dancing the carola upon the street below, one with a wreath and
thyrsus kneeling, another presenting the Magnificent with a book of loveditties. The burden
of all this poetry was: "Gather ye roses while ye may, cast prudence to the winds, obey your
instincts." There is little doubt that Michelangelo took part in these pastimes; for we know
that he was devoted to poetry, not always of the gravest kind. An anecdote related by Cellini
may here be introduced, since it illustrates the Florentine customs I have been describing.
"Luigi Pulci was a young man who possessed extraordinary gifts for poetry, together with sound
Latin scholarship. He wrote well, was graceful in manners, and of surpassing personal beauty.
While he was yet a lad and living in Florence, it was the habit of folk in certain places of
the city to meet together during the nights of summer on the open streets, and he, ranking
among the best of the improvisatori, sang there. His recitations were so admirable that the
divine Michelangelo, that prince of sculptors and of painters, went, wherever he heard that
he would be, with the greatest eagerness and delight to listen to him. There was a man called
Piloto, a goldsmith, very able in his art, who, together with myself, joined Buonarroti upon
these occasions." In like manner, the young Michelangelo probably attended those nocturnal
gatherings upon the steps of the Duomo which have been so graphically described by Doni: "The
Florentines seem to me to take more pleasure in summer airings than any other folk; for they
have, in the square of S. Liberata, between the antique temple of Mars, now the Baptistery,
and that marvellous work of modern architecture, the Duomo: they have, I say, certain steps
of marble, rising to a broad flat space, upon which the youth of the city come and lay themselves
full length during the season of extreme heat. The place is fitted for its purpose, because
a fresh breeze is always blowing, with the blandest of all air, and the flags of white marble
usually retain a certain coolness. There then I seek my chiefest solace, when, taking my aërial
flights, I sail invisibly above them; see and hear their doings and discourses: and forasmuch
as they are endowed with keen and elevated understanding, they always have a thousand charming
things to relate; as novels, intrigues, fables; they discuss duels, practical jokes, old stories,
tricks played off by men and women on each other: things, each and all, rare, witty, noble,
decent and in proper taste. I can swear that during all the hours I spent in listening to their
nightly dialogues, I never heard a word that was not comely and of good repute. Indeed, it
seemed to me very remarkable, among such crowds of young men, to overhear nothing but virtuous
conversation."

At the same period, Michelangelo fell under very different influences; and these left a far
more lasting impression on his character than the gay festivals and witty word-combats of the
lords of Florence. In 1491 Savonarola, the terrible prophet of coming woes, the searcher of
men's hearts, and the remorseless denouncer of pleasant vices, began that Florentine career
which ended with his martyrdom in 1498. He had preached in Florence eight years earlier, but
on that occasion he passed unnoticed through the crowd. Now he took the whole city by storm.
Obeying the magic of his eloquence and the magnetism of his personality, her citizens accepted
this Dominican friar as their political leader and moral reformer, when events brought about
the expulsion of the Medici in 1494. Michelangelo was one of his constant listeners at S. Marco
and in the Duomo. He witnessed those stormy scenes of religious revival and passionate fanaticism
which contemporaries have impressively described. The shorthand-writer to whom we owe the text
of Savonarola's sermons at times breaks off with words like these: "Here I was so overcome
with weeping that I could not go on." Pico della Mirandola tells that the mere sound of the
monk's voice, startling the stillness of the Duomo, thronged through all its space with people,
was like a clap of doom; a cold shiver ran through the marrow of his bones the hairs of his
head stood on end while he listened. Another witness reports: "Those sermons caused such terror,
alarm, sobbing, and tears, that every one passed through the streets without speaking, more
dead than alive."

One of the earliest extant letters of Michelangelo, written from Rome in 1497 to his brother
Buonarroto, reveals a vivid interest in Savonarola. He relates the evil rumours spread about
the city regarding his heretical opinions, and alludes to the hostility of Fra Mariano da Genezzano;
adding this ironical sentence: "Therefore he ought by all means to come and prophesy a little
in Rome, when afterwards he will be canonised; and so let all his party be of good cheer."
In later years, it is said that the great sculptor read and meditated Savonarola's writings
together with the Bible. The apocalyptic thunderings and voices of the Sistine Chapel owe much
of their soul-thrilling impressiveness to those studies. Michelet says, not without justice,
that the spirit of Savonarola lives again in the frescoes of that vault.

On the 8th of April 1492, Michelangelo lost his friend and patron. Lorenzo died in his villa
at Careggi, aged little more than forty-four years. Guicciardini implies that his health and
strength had been prematurely broken by sensual indulgences. About the circumstances of his
last hours there are some doubts and difficulties; but it seems clear that he expired as a
Christian, after a final interview with Savonarola. His death cast a gloom over Italy. Princes
and people were growing uneasy with the presentiment of impending disaster; and now the only
man who by his diplomatical sagacity could maintain the balance of power had been taken from
them. To his friends and dependants in Florence the loss appeared irreparable. Poliziano poured
forth his sorrow in a Latin threnody of touching and simple beauty. Two years later both he
and Pico della Mirandola followed their master to the grave. Marsilio Ficino passed away in
1499; and a friend of his asserted that the sage's ghost appeared to him. The atmosphere was
full of rumours, portents, strange premonitions of revolution and doom. The true golden age
of the Italian Renaissance may almost be said to have ended with Lorenzo de' Medici's life.

CHAPTER II

I

After the death of Lorenzo de' Medici, Michelangelo returned to his father's home, and began
to work upon a statue of Hercules, which is now lost. It used to stand in the Strozzi Palace
until the siege of Florence in 1530, when Giovanni Battista della Palla bought it from the
steward of Filippo Strozzi, and sent it into France as a present to the king.

The Magnificent left seven children by his wife Clarice, of the princely Roman house of the
Orsini. The eldest, Piero, was married to Alfonsina, of the same illustrious family. Giovanni,
the second, had already received a cardinal's hat from his kinsman, Innocent VIII. Guiliano,
the third, was destined to play a considerable part in Florentine history under the title of
Duke of Nemours. One daughter was married to a Salviati, another to a Ridolfi, a third to the
Pope's son, Franceschetto Cybò. The fourth, Luisa, had been betrothed to her distant cousin,
Giovanni de' Medici; but the match was broken off, and she remained unmarried.

Piero now occupied that position of eminence and semi-despotic authority in Florence which
his father and grandfather had held; but he was made of different stuff, both mentally and
physically. The Orsini blood, which he inherited from his mother, mixed but ill in his veins
with that of Florentine citizens and bankers. Following the proud and insolent traditions of
his maternal ancestors, he began to discard the mask of civil urbanity with which Cosimo and
Lorenzo had concealed their despotism. He treated the republic as though it were his own property,
and prepared for the coming disasters of his race by the overbearing arrogance of his behaviour.
Physically, he was powerful, tall, and active; fond of field-sports, and one of the best pallone-players
of his time in Italy. Though he had been a pupil of Poliziano, he displayed but little of his
father's interest in learning, art, and literature. Chance brought Michelangelo into personal
relations with this man. On the 20th of January 1494 there was a heavy fall of snow in Florence,
and Piero sent for the young sculptor to model a colossal snow-man in the courtyard of his
palace. Critics have treated this as an insult to the great artist, and a sign of Piero's want
of taste; but nothing was more natural than that a previous inmate of the Medicean household
should use his talents for the recreation of the family who lived there. Piero upon this occasion
begged Michelangelo to return and occupy the room he used to call his own during Lorenzo's
lifetime. Go home, and tell Dyce to give you some catnip tea, and tie you to a chair," laughed Mr.
Churchill.

"You'll laugh t'other side of your mouth, Mars Alfred, when you see that awful sight up yonder.
Ole Marster has come back, to clare the name of his grandchile, for
he and his murderer is a wrastling, and it ain't no 'oman, it's a man!

A tall, pretty man, with beard on his face."

Mr. Dunbar struck a bell at his side, and a clerk came promptly
from the rear room. He had a friend, the Prior
of S. Spirito, for whom he carved a wooden crucifix of nearly life-size. This liberal-minded
churchman put a room at his disposal, and allowed him to dissect dead bodies. Condivi tells
us that the practice of anatomy was a passion with his master. "His prolonged habits of dissection
injured his stomach to such an extent that he lost the power of eating or drinking to any profit.
It is true, however, that he became so learned in this branch of knowledge that he has often
entertained the idea of composing a work for sculptors and painters, which should treat exhaustively
of all the movements of the human body, the external aspect of the limbs, the bones, and so
forth, adding an ingenious discourse upon the truths discovered by him through the investigations
of many years. He would have done this if he had not mistrusted his own power of treating such
a subject with the dignity and style of a practised rhetorician. I know well that when he reads
Albert Dürer's book, it seems to him of no great value; his own conception being so far fuller
and more useful. Truth to tell, Dürer only treats of the measurements and varied aspects of
the human form, making his figures straight as stakes; and, what is more important, he says
nothing about the attitudes and gestures of the body. Inasmuch as Michelangelo is now advanced
in years, and does not count on bringing his ideas to light through composition, he has disclosed
to me his theories in their minutest details. He also began to discourse upon the same topic
with Messer Realdo Colombo, an anatomist and surgeon of the highest eminence. For the furtherance
of such studies this good friend of ours sent him the corpse of a Moor, a young man of incomparable
beauty, and admirably adapted for our purpose. It was placed at S. Agata, where I dwelt and
still dwell, as being a quarter removed from public observation.

"On this corpse Michelangelo demonstrated to me many rare and abstruse things, which perhaps
have never yet been fully understood, and all of which I noted down, hoping one day, by the
help of some learned man, to give them to the public. Of Michelangelo's studies in anatomy
we have one grim but interesting record in a pen-drawing by his hand at Oxford. A corpse is
stretched upon a plank and trestles. Two men are bending over it with knives in their hands;
and, for light to guide them in their labours, a candle is stuck into the belly of the subject."

