INDIAN HEROES AND GREAT CHIEFTAINS

By Charles A. Eastman (Ohiyesa)

     CONTENTS

      1.  RED CLOUD
      2.  SPOTTED TAIL
      3.  LITTLE CROW
      4.  TAMAHAY
      5.  GALL
      6.  CRAZY HORSE
      7.  SITTING BULL
      8.  RAIN-IN-THE-FACE
      9.  TWO STRIKE
     10.  AMERICAN HORSE
     11.  DULL KNIFE
     12.  ROMAN NOSE
     13.  CHIEF JOSEPH
     14.  LITTLE WOLF
     15.  HOLE-IN-THE-DAY

INDIAN HEROES AND GREAT CHIEFTAINS

RED CLOUD

EVERY age, every race, has its leaders and heroes. There were over sixty distinct tribes of
Indians on this continent, each of which boasted its notable men. The names and deeds of some
of these men will live in American history, yet in the true sense they are unknown, because
misunderstood. I should like to present some of the greatest chiefs of modern times in the
light of the native character and ideals, believing that the American people will gladly do
them tardy justice.

It is matter of history that the Sioux nation, to which I belong, was originally friendly to
the Caucasian peoples which it met in succession-first, to the south the Spaniards; then the
French, on the Mississippi River and along the Great Lakes; later the English, and finally
the Americans. This powerful tribe then roamed over the whole extent of the Mississippi valley,
between that river and the Rockies. Their usages and government united the various bands more
closely than was the case with many of the neighboring tribes.

During the early part of the nineteenth century, chiefs such as Wabashaw, Redwing, and Little
Six among the eastern Sioux, Conquering Bear, Man-Afraid-of-His-Horse, and Hump of the western
bands, were the last of the old type. After these, we have a coterie of new leaders, products
of the new conditions brought about by close contact with the conquering race.

This distinction must be borne in mind--that while the early chiefs were spokesmen and leaders
in the simplest sense, possessing no real authority, those who headed their tribes during the
transition period were more or less rulers and more or less politicians. It is a singular fact
that many of the "chiefs", well known as such to the American public, were not chiefs at all
according to the accepted usages of their tribesmen. Their prominence was simply the result
of an abnormal situation, in which representatives of the United States Government made use
of them for a definite purpose. In a few cases, where a chief met with a violent death, some
ambitious man has taken advantage of the confusion to thrust himself upon the tribe and, perhaps
with outside help, has succeeded in usurping the leadership.

Red Cloud was born about 1820 near the forks of the Platte River. He was one of a family of
nine children whose father, an able and respected warrior, reared his son under the old Spartan
regime. The young Red Cloud is said to have been a fine horseman, able to swim across the Missouri
and Yellowstone rivers, of high bearing and unquestionable courage, yet invariably gentle and
courteous in everyday life. This last trait, together with a singularly musical and agreeable
voice, has always been characteristic of the man.

When he was about six years old, his father gave him a spirited colt, and said to him:

"My son, when you are able to sit quietly upon the back of this colt without saddle or bridle,
I shall be glad, for the boy who can win a wild creature and learn to use it will as a man
be able to win and rule men."

The little fellow, instead of going for advice and help to his grandfather, as most Indian
boys would have done, began quietly to practice throwing the lariat. In a little while he was
able to lasso the colt. He was dragged off his feet at once, but hung on, and finally managed
to picket him near the teepee. When the big boys drove the herd of ponies to water, he drove
his colt with the rest. Presently the pony became used to him and allowed himself to be handled.
The boy began to ride him bareback; he was thrown many times, but persisted until he could
ride without even a lariat, sitting with arms folded and guiding the animal by the movements
of his body. From that time on he told me that he broke all his own ponies, and before long
his father's as well.

The old men, his contemporaries, have often related to me how Red Cloud was always successful
in the hunt because his horses were so well broken. At the age of nine, he began to ride his
father's pack pony upon the buffalo hunt. He was twelve years old, he told me, when he was
first permitted to take part in the chase, and found to his great mortification that none of
his arrows penetrated more than a few inches. Excited to recklessness, he whipped his horse
nearer the fleeing buffalo, and before his father knew what he was about, he had seized one
of the protruding arrows and tried to push it deeper. The furious animal tossed his massive
head sidewise, and boy and horse were whirled into the air. Fortunately, the boy was thrown
on the farther side of his pony, which received the full force of the second attack. The thundering
hoofs of the stampeded herd soon passed them by, but the wounded and maddened buffalo refused
to move, and some critical moments passed before Red Cloud's father succeeded in attracting
its attention so that the boy might spring to his feet and run for his life.

I once asked Red Cloud if he could recall having ever been afraid, and in reply he told me
this story. He was about sixteen years old and had already been once or twice upon the warpath,
when one fall his people were hunting in the Big Horn country, where they might expect trouble
at any moment with the hostile Crows or Shoshones. Red Cloud had followed a single buffalo
bull into the Bad Lands and was out of sight and hearing of his companions. When he had brought
down his game, he noted carefully every feature of his surroundings so that he might at once
detect anything unusual, and tied his horse with a long lariat to the horn of the dead bison,
while skinning and cutting up the meat so as to pack it to camp. Every few minutes he paused
in his work to scrutinize the landscape, for he had a feeling that danger was not far off.

Suddenly, almost over his head, as it seemed, he heard a tremendous war whoop, and glancing
sidewise, thought he beheld the charge of an overwhelming number of warriors. He tried desperately
to give the usual undaunted war whoop in reply, but instead a yell of terror burst from his
lips, his legs gave way under him, and he fell in a heap. When he realized, the next instant,
that the war whoop was merely the sudden loud whinnying of his own horse, and the charging
army a band of fleeing elk, he was so ashamed of himself that he never forgot the incident,
although up to that time he had never mentioned it. His subsequent career would indicate that
the lesson was well learned.

The future leader was still a very young man when he joined a war party against the Utes. Having
pushed eagerly forward on the trail, he found himself far in advance of his companions as night
came on, and at the same time rain began to fall heavily. Among the scattered scrub pines,
the lone warrior found a natural cave, and after a hasty examination, he decided to shelter
there for the night.

Scarcely had he rolled himself in his blanket when he heard a slight rustling at the entrance,
as if some creature were preparing to share his retreat. It was pitch dark. He could see nothing,
but judged that it must be either a man or a grizzly. There was not room to draw a bow. It
must be between knife and knife, or between knife and claws, he said to himself.

The intruder made no search but quietly lay down in the opposite corner of the cave. Red Cloud
remained perfectly still, scarcely breathing, his hand upon his knife. Hour after hour he lay
broad awake, while many thoughts passed through his brain. Suddenly, without warning, he sneezed,
and instantly a strong man sprang to a sitting posture opposite. The first gray of morning
was creeping into their rocky den, and behold! a Ute hunter sat before him.

Desperate as the situation appeared, it was not without a grim humor. Neither could afford
to take his eyes from the other's; the tension was great, till at last a smile wavered over
the expressionless face of the Ute. Red Cloud answered the smile, and in that instant a treaty
of peace was born between them.

"Put your knife in its sheath. I shall do so also, and we will smoke together," signed Red
Cloud. The other assented gladly, and they ratified thus the truce which assured to each a
safe return to his friends. Having finished their smoke, they shook hands and separated. Neither
had given the other any information. Red Cloud returned to his party and told his story, adding
that he had divulged nothing and had nothing to report. Some were inclined to censure him for
not fighting, but he was sustained by a majority of the warriors, who commended his self-restraint.
In a day or two they discovered the main camp of the enemy and fought a remarkable battle,
in which Red Cloud especially distinguished himself

The Sioux were now entering upon the most stormy period of their history. The old things were
fast giving place to new. The young men, for the first time engaging in serious and destructive
warfare with the neighboring tribes, armed with the deadly weapons furnished by the white man,
began to realize that they must soon enter upon a desperate struggle for their ancestral hunting
grounds. The old men had been innocently cultivating the friendship of the stranger, saying
among themselves, "Surely there is land enough for all!"

Red Cloud was a modest and little known man of about twenty-eight years, when General Harney
called all the western bands of Sioux together at Fort Laramie, Wyoming, for the purpose of
securing an agreement and right of way through their territory. The Ogallalas held aloof from
this proposal, but Bear Bull, an Ogallala chief, after having been plied with whisky, undertook
to dictate submission to the rest of the clan. Enraged by failure, he fired upon a group of
his own tribesmen, and Red Cloud's father and brother fell dead. According to Indian custom,
it fell to him to avenge the deed. Calmly, without uttering a word, he faced old Bear Bull
and his son, who attempted to defend his father, and shot them both. He did what he believed
to be his duty, and the whole band sustained him. Indeed, the tragedy gave the young man at
once a certain standing, as one who not only defended his people against enemies from without,
but against injustice and aggression within the tribe. From this time on he was a recognized
leader.

Man-Afraid-of-His-Horse, then head chief of the Ogallalas, took council with Red Cloud in all
important matters, and the young warrior rapidly advanced in authority and influence. In 1854,
when he was barely thirty-five years old, the various bands were again encamped near Fort Laramie.
A Mormon emigrant train, moving westward, left a footsore cow behind, and the young men killed
her for food. The next day, to their astonishment, an officer with thirty men appeared at the
Indian camp and demanded of old Conquering Bear that they be given up. The chief in vain protested
that it was all a mistake and offered to make reparation. It would seem that either the officer
was under the influence of liquor, or else had a mind to bully the Indians, for he would accept
neither explanation nor payment, but demanded point-blank that the young men who had killed
the cow be delivered up to summary punishment. The old chief refused to be intimidated and
was shot dead on the spot. Not one soldier ever reached the gate of Fort Laramie! Here Red
Cloud led the young Ogallalas, and so intense was the feeling that they even killed the half-breed
interpreter.

Curiously enough, there was no attempt at retaliation on the part of the army, and no serious
break until 1860, when the Sioux were involved in troubles with the Cheyennes and Arapahoes.
In 1862, a grave outbreak was precipitated by the eastern Sioux in Minnesota under Little Crow,
in which the western bands took no part. Yet this event ushered in a new period for their race.
The surveyors of the Union Pacific were laying out the proposed road through the heart of the
southern buffalo country, the rendezvous of Ogallalas, Brules, Arapahoes, Comanches, and Pawnees,
who followed the buffalo as a means of livelihood. To be sure, most of these tribes were at
war with one another, yet during the summer months they met often to proclaim a truce and hold
joint councils and festivities, which were now largely turned into discussions of the common
enemy. It became evident, however, that some of the smaller and weaker tribes were inclined
to welcome the new order of things, recognizing that it was the policy of the government to
put an end to tribal warfare.

Red Cloud's position was uncompromisingly against submission. He made some noted speeches in
this line, one of which was repeated to me by an old man who had heard and remembered it with
the remarkable verbal memory of an Indian.

"Friends," said Red Cloud, "it has been our misfortune to welcome the white man. We have been
deceived. He brought with him some shining things that pleased our eyes; he brought weapons
more effective than our own: above all, he brought the spirit water that makes one forget for
a time old age, weakness, and sorrow. But I wish to say to you that if you would possess these
things for yourselves, you must begin anew and put away the wisdom of your fathers. You must
lay up food, and forget the hungry. When your house is built, your storeroom filled, then look
around for a neighbor whom you can take at a disadvantage, and seize all that he has! Give
away only what you do not want; or rather, do not part with any of your possessions unless
in exchange for another's.

"My countrymen, shall the glittering trinkets of this rich man, his deceitful drink that overcomes
the mind, shall these things tempt us to give up our homes, our hunting grounds, and the honorable
teaching of our old men? Shall we permit ourselves to be driven to and fro--to be herded like
the cattle of the white man?"

His next speech that has been remembered was made in 1866, just before the attack on Fort Phil
Kearny. The tension of feeling against the invaders had now reached its height. There was no
dissenting voice in the council upon the Powder River, when it was decided to oppose to the
uttermost the evident purpose of the government. Red Cloud was not altogether ignorant of the
numerical strength and the resourcefulness of the white man, but he was determined to face
any odds rather than submit.

"Hear ye, Dakotas!" he exclaimed. "When the Great Father at Washington sent us his chief soldier
[General Harney] to ask for a path through our hunting grounds, a way for his iron road to
the mountains and the western sea, we were told that they wished merely to pass through our
country, not to tarry among us, but to seek for gold in the far west. Our old chiefs thought
to show their friendship and good will, when they allowed this dangerous snake in our midst.
They promised to protect the wayfarers.

"Yet before the ashes of the council fire are cold, the Great Father is building his forts
among us. You have heard the sound of the white soldier's ax upon the Little Piney. His presence
here is an insult and a threat. It is an insult to the spirits of our ancestors. Are we then
to give up their sacred graves to be plowed for corn? Dakotas, I am for war!"

In less than a week after this speech, the Sioux advanced upon Fort Phil Kearny, the new sentinel
that had just taken her place upon the farthest frontier, guarding the Oregon Trail. Every
detail of the attack had been planned with care, though not without heated discussion, and
nearly every well-known Sioux chief had agreed in striking the blow. The brilliant young war
leader, Crazy Horse, was appointed to lead the charge. His lieutenants were Sword, Hump, and
Dull Knife, with Little Chief of the Cheyennes, while the older men acted as councilors. Their
success was instantaneous. In less than half an hour, they had cut down nearly a hundred men
under Captain Fetterman, whom they drew out of the fort by a ruse and then annihilated.

Instead of sending troops to punish, the government sent a commission to treat with the Sioux.
The result was the famous treaty of 1868, which Red Cloud was the last to sign, having refused
to do so until all of the forts within their territory should be vacated. And in my gardenership
the goddess Ishtar loved me...."

19. Whatever his origin and however he came by the royal power, Sargon was a great monarch. It is
said that he undertook successful expeditions into Syria, and a campaign
into Elam; that with captives of the conquered races he partly peopled
his new capital, Agadê, where he built a palace and a magnificent
temple; that on one occasion he was absent three years, during which
time he advanced to the very shores of the Mediterranean, which he
calls "the sea of the setting sun," and where he left memorial records
of his deeds, and returned home in triumph, bringing with him immense
spoils.

The inscription contains only the following very moderate mention of his military career:
"For forty-five years the kingdom I have ruled. And the black-head race (Accadian) I have governed.
In multitudes of bronze chariots I rode over rugged lands. I governed the upper countries. Three
times to the coast of the (Persian) sea I advanced...."[AJ]

20. This Sharrukin must not be confounded with another king of the same name, who reigned also in
Agadê, some 1800 years later (about 2000 B.C.), and in whose time was completed and brought into
definite shape a vast religious reform which had been slowly working itself out ever since
the Semitic and Accadian elements began to mix in matters of spiritual speculation and worship.
What was the result of the amalgamation will form the subject of
the next chapter.

Suffice it here to say that the religion of Chaldea in the form which it assumed under the second
Sharrukin remained fixed forever, and when Babylonian religion is spoken of, it is that which
is understood by that name. The great theological work demanded a literary undertaking no less great.
The incantations and magic forms of the first, purely Turanian, period had to be collected
and put in order, as well as the hymns and prayers of the second
period, composed under the influence of a higher and more spiritual
religious feeling.

But all this literature was in the language of the older population, while the ruling class--the
royal houses and the priesthood--were becoming almost exclusively Semitic. It was necessary,
therefore, that they should study the old language and learn it so thoroughly as not only
to understand and read it, but to be able to use it, in speaking and writing. For that purpose
Sargon not only ordered the ancient texts, when collected and sorted, to be copied on clay tablets
with the translation--either between the lines, or on opposite columns--into the now generally
used modern Semitic language, which we may as well begin to call by its usual name, Assyrian, but
gave directions for the compilation of grammars and vocabularies,--the
very works which have enabled the scholars of the present day to arrive
at the understanding of that prodigiously ancient tongue which, without
such assistance, must have remained a sealed book forever.

21. Such is the origin of the great collection in three books and two hundred tablets, the contents
of which made the subject of the preceding chapter. To this must be added another great work,
in seventy tablets, in Assyrian, on astrology, i.e., the supposed
influence of the heavenly bodies, according to their positions and
conjunctions, on the fate of nations and individuals and on the course
of things on earth generally--an influence which was firmly believed
in; and probably yet a third work, on omens, prodigies and divination.

To carry out these extensive literary labors, to treasure the results worthily and safely, Sargon
II. either founded or greatly enlarged the library of the priestly college at Urukh (Erech),
so that this city came to be called "the City of Books." This repository became the most important
one in all Chaldea, and when, fourteen centuries later, the Assyrian
Asshurbanipal sent his scribes all over the country, to collect copies
of the ancient, sacred and scientific texts for his own royal library
at Nineveh, it was at Erech that they gathered their most abundant
harvest, being specially favored there by the priests, who were on
excellent terms with the king after he had brought back from Shushan
and restored to them the statue of their goddess Nana.

Agadê thus became the headquarters, as it were, of the Semitic influence and reform, which spread
thence towards the South, forming a counter-current to the culture of Shumir, which had steadily
progressed from the Gulf northward.

22. It is just possible that Sargon's collection may have also comprised literature of a lighter
nature than those ponderous works on magic and astrology.

At least, a work on agriculture has been found, which is thought to have been compiled for
the same king's library,[AK] and which contains bits of popular poetry (maxims, riddles, short
peasant songs) of the kind that is now called "folk-lore." Of the correctness of the supposition
there is, as yet, no absolute proof, but as some of these fragments, of which unfortunately
but few could be recovered, are very interesting and pretty in their way, this is perhaps the
best place to insert them. The following four may be called "Maxims,"
and the first is singularly pithy and powerfully expressed.

1. Like an oven that is old Against thy foes be hard and strong.

2. May he suffer vengeance, May it be returned to him, Who gives the provocation.

3. If evil thou doest, To the everlasting sea Thou shalt surely go.

4. Thou wentest, thou spoiledst The land of the foe, For the foe came and spoiled Thy land,
even thine.

23. It will be noticed that No. 3 alone expresses moral feeling of a high standard, and is distinctively
Semitic in spirit, the same spirit which is expressed in a loftier and purely religious vein, and
a more poetical form in one of the "Penitential Psalms," where it says:

Whoso fears not his god--will be cut off even like a reed. Whoso honors not the goddess--his bodily
strength shall waste away; Like a star of heaven, his light shall wane; like waters of the night
he shall disappear.

Some fragments can be well imagined as being sung by the peasant at work to his ploughing team,
in whose person he sometimes speaks:

5.

A heifer am I,--to the cow I am yoked; The plough handle is strong--lift it up! lift it up!

6. My knees are marching--my feet are not resting; With no wealth of thy own--grain thou makest
for me.[AL]

24. A great deal of additional interest in the elder Sargon of Agadê has lately been excited by
an extraordinary discovery connected with him, which produced a startling revolution in the
hitherto accepted Chaldean chronology. This question of dates is always a most intricate and
puzzling one in dealing with ancient Oriental nations, because they did not date their years from some
particular event, as we do, and as did the Mohammedans, the Greeks and the Romans. In the inscriptions
things are said to have happened in the year so-and-so of such a king's reign. Where to place
that king is the next question--unanswerable, unless, as fortunately is mostly the case, some
clue is supplied, to borrow a legal term, by circumstantial evidence. Thus, if an eclipse is mentioned,
the time can easily be determined by the help of astronomy, which
can calculate backward as well as forward.

Or else, an event or a person belonging to another country is alluded to, and if they are known to
us from other sources, that is a great help. Such a coincidence (which is called a SYNCHRONISM)
is most valuable, and dates established by synchronisms are generally reliable. Then, luckily
for us, Assyrian and Babylonian kings of a late period, whose dates are fixed and proved beyond
a doubt, were much in the habit, in their historical inscriptions, of mentioning events that
had taken place before their time and specifying the number of years
elapsed, often also the king under whose reign the event, whatever
it was, had taken place.

This is the most precious clue of all, as it is infallible, and besides ascertaining one point,
gives a firm foothold, whereby to arrive at many others. The famous memorandum of Asshurbanipal,
already so often referred to, about the carrying away of the goddess Nana, (i.e., her statue)
from her temple at Erech is evidence of this kind. Any dates suggested without any of these clues
as basis are of necessity untrustworthy, and no true scholar dreams of offering any such date,
except as a temporary suggestion, awaiting confirmation or abolition from subsequent researches.
So it was with Sargon I. of Agadê. There was no positive indication of the time at which he
lived, except that he could not possibly have lived later than 2000
B.C. Scholars therefore agreed to assign that date to him, approximatively--a
little more or less--thinking they could not go very far wrong in
so doing.

Great therefore was the commotion produced by the discovery of a cylinder of Nabonidus, the last
king of Babylon (whose date is 550 B.C.), wherein he speaks of repairs he made in the great
Sun-temple at Sippar, and declares having dug deep in its foundations for the cylinders of
the founder, thus describing his success: "Shamash (the Sun-god), the great lord ... suffered
me to behold the foundation-cylinder of NARAM-SIN, the son of Sharrukin, which for thrice
thousand and twice hundred years none of the kings that lived before me had seen." The simple
addition 3200 + 550 gives 3750 B.C. as the date of Naram-Sin, and 3800 as that of his father
Sargon, allowing for the latter's long reign!

A scene-shifting of 1800 years at one slide seemed something so startling that there was much hesitation
in accepting the evidence, unanswerable as it seemed, and the possibility of an error of the
engraver was seriously considered. Some other documents, however, were found independently
of each other and in different places, corroborating the statement on Nabonidus' cylinder,
and the tremendously ancient date of 3800 B.C. is now generally accepted the elder Sargon of Agadê--perhaps
the remotest authentic date yet arrived at in history.

25.

When we survey and attempt to grasp and classify the materials we have for an early "History
of Chaldea," it appears almost presumptuous to grace so necessarily
lame an attempt with so ambitious a name.

The landmarks are so few and far between, so unconnected as yet, and there is so much uncertainty
about them, especially about placing them. The experience with Sargon of Agadê has not been encouraging
to conjectural chronology; yet with such we must in many cases be content until more lucky
finds turn up to set us right. What, for instance, is the proper place of GUDÊA, the patesi
of SIR-BURLA (also read SIR-GULLA or SIRTILLA, and, lately, ZIRLABA),
whose magnificent statues Mr. de Sarzec found in the principal hall
of the temple of which the bricks bear his stamp?

(See p. 217.) The title of patesi, (not "king"), points to great antiquity, and he is pretty generally
understood to have lived somewhere between 4000 and 3000 B.C. That he was not a Semite, but an Accadian
prince, is to be concluded not only from the language of his inscriptions and the writing, which
is of the most archaic--i.e., ancient and old-fashioned--character, but from the fact that the
head, which was found with the statues, is strikingly Turanian in
form and features, shaved, too, and turbaned after a fashion still
used in Central Asia.

Altogether it might easily be taken for that of a modern Mongolian or Tatar.[AM] The discovery
of this builder and patron of art has greatly eclipsed the glory of a somewhat later ruler,
UR-ÊA, King of Ur,[AN] who had long enjoyed the reputation of being the earliest known temple-builder.
He remains at all events the first powerful monarch we read of in Southern Chaldea, of which
Ur appears to have been in some measure the capital, at least in so far as to have a certain supremacy
over the other great cities of Shumir.

26. Of these Shumir had many, even more venerable for their age and holiness than those of Accad.
For the South was the home of the old race and most ancient culture, and thence both had advanced
northward.

Hence it was that the old stock was hardier there and endured longer in its language, religion
and nationality, and was slower in yielding to the Semitic counter-current of race and culture,
which, as a natural consequence, obtained an earlier and stronger hold in the North, and from
there radiated over the whole of Mesopotamia. There was ERIDHU, by the sea "at the mouth of the
Rivers," the immemorial sanctuary of Êa; there was SIR-GULLA, so lately unknown, now the most
promising mine for research; there was LARSAM, famous with the glories of its "House of the Sun"
(Ê-Babbara in the old language), the rival of Ur, the city of the Moon-god, whose kings UR-ÊA
and his son DUNGI were, it appears, the first to take the ambitious
title of "Kings of Shumir and Accad" and "Kings of the Four Regions."

As for Babylon, proud Babylon, which we have so long been accustomed to think of as the very
beginning of state life and political rule in Chaldea, it was perhaps not yet built at all, or only
modestly beginning its existence under its Accadian name of TIN-TIR-KI ("the Place of Life"), or,
somewhat later, KA-DIMIRRA ("Gate of God"), when already the above named cities, and several more,
had each its famous temple with ministering college of priests, and,
probably, library, and each its king.

But political power was for a long time centred at Ur. The first kings of Ur authentically known
to us are Ur-êa and his son Dungi, who have left abundant traces of their existence in the numerous
temples they built, not in Ur alone, but in most other cities too.

Their bricks have been identified at Larsam (Senkereh), and, it appears, at Sir-burla (Tel-Loh),
at Nipur (Niffer) and at Urukh (Erech, Warka), and as the two latter cities belonged to Accad,
they seem to have ruled at least part of that country and thus to have been justified in assuming
their high-sounding title.

27. It has been noticed that the bricks bearing the name of Ur-êa "are found in a lower position
than any others, at the very foundation of buildings;" that "they
are of a rude and coarse make, of many sizes and ill-fitted together;"
that baked bricks are rare among them; that they are held together
by the oldest substitutes for mortar--mud and bitumen--and that the
writing upon them is curiously rude and imperfect.[AO] But whatever
King Ur-êa's architectural efforts may lack in perfection, they certainly
make up in size and number.

Those that he did not complete, his son Dungi continued after him. It is remarkable that these
great builders seem to have devoted their energies exclusively to religious purposes; also that,
while their names are Shumiro-Accadian, and their inscriptions are often in that language,
the temples they constructed were dedicated to various deities of the new, or rather reformed
religion. When we see the princes of the South, according to an ingenious remark of Mr. Lenormant,
thus begin a sort of practical preaching of the Semitized religion,
we may take it as a sign of the times, as an unmistakable proof of
the influence of the North, political as well as religious.

A very curious relic of King Ur-êa was found--his own signet cylinder--which was lost by an accident,
then turned up again and is now in the British Museum. It represents the Moon-god seated on
a throne,--as is but meet for the king of the Moon-god's special city--with priests presenting worshippers.
No definite date is of course assignable to Ur-êa and the important epoch of Chaldean history which
he represents. But a very probable approximative one can be arrived at, thanks to a clue supplied
by the same Nabonidus, last King of Babylon, who settled the Sargon question for us so unexpectedly.
That monarch was as zealous a repairer of temples as his predecessors had been zealous builders.
He had reasons of his own to court popularity, and could think of nothing better than to restore
the time-honored sanctuaries of the land. Among others he repaired the Sun-temple (Ê-Babbara)
at Larsam, whereof we are duly informed by a special cylinder. In it he tells posterity that he
found a cylinder of King Hammurabi intact in its chamber under the
corner-stone, which cylinder states that the temple was founded 700
years before Hammurabi's time; as Ur-êa was the founder, it only remains
to determine the latter king's date in order to know that of the earlier
one.[AP] Here unfortunately scholars differ, not having as yet any
decisive authority to build upon.

Some place Hammurabi before 2000 B.C., others a little later. It is perhaps safest, therefore,
to assume that Ur-êa can scarcely have lived much earlier than 2800 or much later than 2500 B.C.
At all events, he must necessarily have lived somewhat before 2300 B.C., for about this latter
year took place the Elamite invasion recorded by Asshurbanipal, an invasion which, as this King expressly
mentions, laid waste the land of Accad and desecrated its temples--evidently the same ones which
Ur-êa and Dungi so piously constructed. Nor was this a passing inroad or raid of booty-seeking
mountaineers. It was a real conquest. Khudur-Nankhundi and his successors remained in Southern Chaldea,
called themselves kings of the country, and reigned, several of them in succession, so that
this series of foreign rulers has become known in history as "the Elamite dynasty." There was
no room then for a powerful and temple-building national dynasty like that of the kings of Ur.

28.
This is the first time we meet authentic monumental records of a country which was destined through
the next sixteen centuries to be in continual contact, mostly hostile, with both Babylonia and her
northern rival Assyria, until its final annihilation by the latter.

Its capital was SHUSHAN, (afterwards pronounced by foreigners "Susa"), and its own original
name SHUSHINAK. Its people were of Turanian stock, its language was nearly akin to that of Shumir
and Accad. But at some time or other Semites came and settled in
Shushinak.

Though too few in number to change the country's language or customs, the superiority of their
race asserted itself. They became the nobility of the land, the ruling aristocracy from which the
kings were taken, the generals and the high functionaries. That the Turanian mass of the population
was kept in subjection and looked down upon, and that the Semitic nobility avoided intermarrying
with them is highly probable; and it would be difficult otherwise to explain the difference of
type between the two classes, as shown in the representations of
captives and warriors belonging to both on the Assyrian sculptures.

The common herd of prisoners employed on public labor and driven by overseers brandishing sticks
have an unmistakably Turanian type of features--high cheek-bones, broad, flattened face, etc.,
while the generals, ministers and nobles have all the dignity and beauty of the handsomest Jewish
type. "Elam," the name under which the country is best known both from the Bible and later monuments,
is a Turanian word, which means, like "Accad," "Highlands." It is the only name under which
the historian of Chap.

X. of Genesis admits it into his list of nations, and, consistently following out his system of ignoring
all members of the great yellow race, he takes into consideration only the Semitic aristocracy,
and makes of Elam a son of Shem, a brother of Asshur and Arphakhshad. (Gen. x. 22.)

29. One of Khudur-Nankhundi's next successors, KHUDUR-LAGAMAR, was not content with the addition
of Chaldea to his kingdom of Elam. He had the ambition of a born conqueror and the generalship
of one. The Chap.

XIV. of Genesis--which calls him Chedorlaomer--is the only document we have descriptive of
this king's warlike career, and a very striking picture it gives of it, sufficient to show us
that we have to do with a very remarkable character. Supported by three allied and probably
tributary kings, that of Shumir (Shineâr), of Larsam, (Ellassar) and of the GOÏM, (in the unrevised
translation of the Bible "king of nations") i.e., the nomadic tribes which roamed on the outskirts
and in the yet unsettled, more distant portions of Chaldea, Khudur-Lagamar
marched an army 1200 miles across the desert into the fertile, wealthy
and populous valleys of the Jordan and the lake or sea of Siddim,
afterwards called the Dead Sea, where five great cities--Sodom, Gomorrah,
and three others--were governed by as many kings.

Not only did he subdue these kings and impose his rule on them, but contrived, even after he returned
to the Persian Gulf, to keep on them so firm a hand, that for twelve years they "served" him,
i.e., paid him tribute regularly, and only in the thirteenth year, encouraged by his prolonged
absence, ventured to rebel. But they had underrated Khudur-Lagamar's vigilance and activity. The
very next year he was among them again, together with his three faithful allies, encountered
them in the vale of Siddim and beat them, so that they all fled. This was the battle of the "four
kings with five." As to the treatment to which the victor subjected the conquered country it is
very briefly but clearly described: "And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
all their victuals, and went their way."

30. Now there dwelt in Sodom a man of foreign race and great wealth, Lot, the nephew of Abraham.
For Abraham and his tribe no longer lived at Chaldean Ur. The change of masters, and very probably
the harsher rule, if not positive oppression, consequent on the Elamite conquest, had driven
them thence.

It was then they went forth into the land of Canaan, led by Terah and his son Abraham, and
when Terah died, Abraham became the patriarch and chief of the tribe, which from this time
begins to be called in the Bible "Hebrews," from an eponymous ancestor, Heber or Eber, whose
name alludes to the passing of the Euphrates, or, perhaps, in a wider sense, to the passage
of the tribe through the land of Chaldea.[AQ] For years the tribe travelled without dividing,
from pasture to pasture, over the vast land where dwelt the Canaanites, well seen and even favored
of them, into Egypt and out of it again, until the quarrel occurred between Abraham's herdsmen
and Lot's, (see Genesis, Chap.
 His real
name was Taoyateduta, His Red People.

As far back as Minnesota history goes, a band of the Sioux called Kaposia (Light Weight, because
they were said to travel light) inhabited the Mille Lacs region. Later they dwelt about St.
Croix Falls, and still later near St. Paul. In 1840, Cetanwakuwa was still living in what is
now West St. Paul, but he was soon after killed by the accidental discharge of his gun.

It was during a period of demoralization for the Kaposias that Little Crow became the leader
of his people. His father, a well-known chief, had three wives, all from different bands of
the Sioux. He was the only son of the first wife, a Leaf Dweller. There were two sons of the
second and two of the third wife, and the second set of brothers conspired to kill their half-brother
in order to keep the chieftainship in the family.

Two kegs of whisky were bought, and all the men of the tribe invited to a feast. It was planned
to pick some sort of quarrel when all were drunk, and in the confusion Little Crow was to be
murdered. The plot went smoothly until the last instant, when a young brave saved the intended
victim by knocking the gun aside with his hatchet, so that the shot went wild. However, it
broke his right arm, which remained crooked all his life. The friends of the young chieftain
hastily withdrew, avoiding a general fight; and later the council of the Kaposias condemned
the two brothers, both of whom were executed, leaving him in undisputed possession.

Such was the opening of a stormy career. Little Crow's mother had been a chief's daughter,
celebrated for her beauty and spirit, and it is said that she used to plunge him into the lake
through a hole in the ice, rubbing him afterward with snow, to strengthen his nerves, and that
she would remain with him alone in the deep woods for days at a time, so that he might know
that solitude is good, and not fear to be alone with nature.

"My son," she would say, "if you are to be a leader of men, you must listen in silence to the
mystery, the spirit."

At a very early age she made a feast for her boy and announced that he would fast two days.
This is what might be called a formal presentation to the spirit or God. She greatly desired
him to become a worthy leader according to the ideas of her people. It appears that she left
her husband when he took a second wife, and lived with her own band till her death. She did
not marry again.

Little Crow was an intensely ambitious man and without physical fear. He was always in perfect
training and early acquired the art of warfare of the Indian type. It is told of him that when
he was about ten years old, he engaged with other boys in a sham battle on the shore of a lake
near St. Paul. Both sides were encamped at a little distance from one another, and the rule
was that the enemy must be surprised, otherwise the attack would be considered a failure. One
must come within so many paces undiscovered in order to be counted successful. Our hero had
a favorite dog which, at his earnest request, was allowed to take part in the game, and as
a scout he entered the enemy camp unseen, by the help of his dog.

When he was twelve, he saved the life of a companion who had broken through the ice by tying
the end of a pack line to a log, then at great risk to himself carrying it to the edge of the
hole where his comrade went down. It is said that he also broke in, but both boys saved themselves
by means of the line.

As a young man, Little Crow was always ready to serve his people as a messenger to other tribes,
a duty involving much danger and hardship. He was also known as one of the best hunters in
his band. Although still young, he had already a war record when he became chief of the Kaposias,
at a time when the Sioux were facing the greatest and most far-reaching changes that had ever
come to them.

At this juncture in the history of the northwest and its native inhabitants, the various fur
companies had paramount influence. They did not hesitate to impress the Indians with the idea
that they were the authorized representatives of the white races or peoples, and they were
quick to realize the desirability of controlling the natives through their most influential
chiefs. Little Crow became quite popular with post traders and factors. He was an orator as
well as a diplomat, and one of the first of his nation to indulge in politics and promote unstable
schemes to the detriment of his people.

When the United States Government went into the business of acquiring territory from the Indians
so that the flood of western settlement might not be checked, commissions were sent out to
negotiate treaties, and in case of failure it often happened that a delegation of leading men
of the tribe were invited to Washington. At that period, these visiting chiefs, attired in
all the splendor of their costumes of ceremony, were treated like ambassadors from foreign
countries.

One winter in the late eighteen-fifties, a major general of the army gave a dinner to the Indian
chiefs then in the city, and on this occasion Little Crow was appointed toastmaster. There
were present a number of Senators and members of Congress, as well as judges of the Supreme
Court, cabinet officers, and other distinguished citizens. When all the guests were seated,
the Sioux arose and addressed them with much dignity as follows:

"Warriors and friends: I am informed that the great white war chief who of his generosity and
comradeship has given us this feast, has expressed the wish that we may follow to-night the
usages and customs of my people. In other words, this is a warriors' feast, a braves' meal.
I call upon the Ojibway chief, the Hole-in-the-Day, to give the lone wolf's hunger call, after
which we will join him in our usual manner."

The tall and handsome Ojibway now rose and straightened his superb form to utter one of the
clearest and longest wolf howls that was ever heard in Washington, and at its close came a
tremendous burst of war whoops that fairly rent the air, and no doubt electrified the officials
there present.

On one occasion Little Crow was invited by the commander of Fort Ridgeley, Minnesota, to call
at the fort. On his way back, in company with a half-breed named Ross and the interpreter Mitchell,
he was ambushed by a party of Ojibways, and again wounded in the same arm that had been broken
in his attempted assassination. His companion Ross was killed, but he managed to hold the war
party at bay until help came and thus saved his life.

More and more as time passed, this naturally brave and ambitious man became a prey to the selfish
interests of the traders and politicians. The immediate causes of the Sioux outbreak of 1862
came in quick succession to inflame to desperate action an outraged people. The two bands on
the so-called "lower reservations" in Minnesota were Indians for whom nature had provided most
abundantly in their free existence. After one hundred and fifty years of friendly intercourse
first with the French, then the English, and finally the Americans, they found themselves cut
off from every natural resource, on a tract of land twenty miles by thirty, which to them was
virtual imprisonment. By treaty stipulation with the government, they were to be fed and clothed,
houses were to be built for them, the men taught agriculture, and schools provided for the
children. In addition to this, a trust fund of a million and a half was to be set aside for
them, at five per cent interest, the interest to be paid annually per capita. They had signed
the treaty under pressure, believing in these promises on the faith of a great nation.

However, on entering the new life, the resources so rosily described to them failed to materialize.
Many families faced starvation every winter, their only support the store of the Indian trader,
who was baiting his trap for their destruction. Very gradually they awoke to the facts. At
last it was planned to secure from them the north half of their reservation for ninety-eight
thousand dollars, but it was not explained to the Indians that the traders were to receive
all the money. Little Crow made the greatest mistake of his life when he signed this agreement.

Meanwhile, to make matters worse, the cash annuities were not paid for nearly two years. Civil
War had begun. When it was learned that the traders had taken all of the ninety-eight thousand
dollars "on account", there was very bitter feeling. In fact, the heads of the leading stores
were afraid to go about as usual, and most of them stayed in St. Paul. Little Crow was justly
held in part responsible for the deceit, and his life was not safe.

The murder of a white family near Acton, Minnesota, by a party of Indian duck hunters in August,
1862, precipitated the break. Messengers were sent to every village with the news, and at the
villages of Little Crow and Little Six the war council was red-hot. It was proposed to take
advantage of the fact that north and south were at war to wipe out the white settlers and to
regain their freedom. A few men stood out against such a desperate step, but the conflagration
had gone beyond their control.

There were many mixed bloods among these Sioux, and some of the Indians held that these were
accomplices of the white people in robbing them of their possessions, therefore their lives
should not be spared. My father, Many Lightnings, who was practically the leader of the Mankato
band (for Mankato, the chief, was a weak man), fought desperately for the lives of the half-breeds
and the missionaries. The chiefs had great confidence in my father, yet they would not commit
themselves, since their braves were clamoring for blood. Little Crow had been accused of all
the misfortunes of his tribe, and he now hoped by leading them against the whites to regain
his prestige with his people, and a part at least of their lost domain.

There were moments when the pacifists were in grave peril. It was almost daybreak when my father
saw that the approaching calamity could not be prevented. He and two others said to Little
Crow: "If you want war, you must personally lead your men to-morrow. We will not murder women
and children, but we will fight the soldiers when they come." They then left the council and
hastened to warn my brother-in-law, Faribault, and others who were in danger.

Little Crow declared he would be seen in the front of every battle, and it is true that he
was foremost in all the succeeding bloodshed, urging his warriors to spare none. He ordered
his war leader, Many Hail, to fire the first shot, killing the trader James Lynd, in the door
of his store.

After a year of fighting in which he had met with defeat, the discredited chief retreated to
Fort Garry, now Winnipeg, Manitoba, where, together with Standing Buffalo, he undertook secret
negotiations with his old friends the Indian traders. There was now a price upon his head,
but he planned to reach St. Paul undetected and there surrender himself to his friends, who
he hoped would protect him in return for past favors. It is true that he had helped them to
secure perhaps the finest country held by any Indian nation for a mere song.

He left Canada with a few trusted friends, including his youngest and favorite son. When within
two or three days' journey of St. Paul, he told the others to return, keeping with him only
his son, Wowinape, who was but fifteen years of age. He meant to steal into the city by night
and go straight to Governor Ramsey, who was his personal friend. He was very hungry and was
obliged to keep to the shelter of the deep woods. The next morning, as he was picking and eating
wild raspberries, he was seen by a wood-chopper named Lamson. The man did not know who he was.
He only knew that he was an Indian, and that was enough for him, so he lifted his rifle to
his shoulder and fired, then ran at his best pace. The brilliant but misguided chief, who had
made that part of the country unsafe for any white man to live in, sank to the ground and died
without a struggle. The boy took his father's gun and made some effort to find the assassin,
but as he did not even know in which direction to look for him, he soon gave up the attempt
and went back to his friends.

Meanwhile Lamson reached home breathless and made his report. The body of the chief was found
and identified, in part by the twice broken arm, and this arm and his scalp may be seen to-day
in the collection of the Minnesota Historical Society.

TAMAHAY

There was once a Sioux brave who declared that he would die young, yet not by his own hand.
Tamahay was of heroic proportions, herculean in strength, a superb runner; in fact, he had
all the physical qualities of an athlete or a typical Indian. In his scanty dress, he was beautiful
as an antique statue in living bronze. When a mere youth, seventeen years of age, he met with
an accident which determined his career. It was the loss of an eye, a fatal injury to the sensitive
and high-spirited Indian. He announced his purpose in these words:

"The 'Great Mystery' has decreed that I must be disgraced. There will be no pleasure for me
now, and I shall be ridiculed even by my enemies. It will be well for me to enter soon into
Paradise, for I shall be happy in spending my youth there. But I will sell my life dearly.
Hereafter my name shall be spoken in the traditions of our race." With this speech Tamahay
began his career.

He now sought glory and defied danger with even more than the ordinary Indian recklessness.
He accepted a personal friend, which was a custom among the Sioux, where each man chose a companion
for life and death. The tie was stronger than one of blood relationship, a friendship sealed
by solemn vow and covenant. Tamahay's intimate was fortunately almost his equal in physical
powers, and the pair became the terror of neighboring tribes, with whom the Dakotas were continually
at war. They made frequent raids upon their enemies and were usually successful, although not
without thrilling experiences and almost miraculous escapes.

Upon one of these occasions the two friends went north into the country of the Ojibways. After
many days' journey, they discovered a small village of the foe. The wicked Tamahay proposed
to his associate that they should arrange their toilets after the fashion of the Ojibways,
and go among them; "and perhaps," he added, "we will indulge in a little flirtation with their
pretty maids, and when we have had enough of the fun we can take the scalp of a brave or two
and retreat!" His friend construed his daring proposition to be a test of courage, which it
would not become him, as a brave, to decline; therefore he assented with a show of cheerfulness.

The handsome strangers were well received by the Ojibway girls, but their perilous amusement
was brought to an untimely close. A young maiden prematurely discovered their true characters,
and her cry of alarm brought instantly to her side a jealous youth, who had been watching them
from his place of concealment. With him Tamahay had a single-handed contest, and before a general
alarm was given he had dispatched the foe and fled with his scalp.

The unfortunate brave had been a favorite and a leader among the tribe; therefore the maddened
Ojibways were soon in hot pursuit. The Sioux braves were fine runners, yet they were finally
driven out upon the peninsula of a lake. As they became separated in their retreat, Tamahay
shouted, "I'll meet you at the mouth of the St. Croix River, or in the spirit land!" Both managed
to swim the lake, and so made good their escape.

The exploits of this man were not all of a warlike nature. He was a great traveler and an expert
scout, and he had some wonderful experiences with wild animals. He was once sent, with his
intimate friend, on a scout for game. They were on ponies.

They located a herd of buffaloes, and on their return to the camp espied a lonely buffalo.
Tamahay suggested that they should chase it in order to take some fresh meat, as the law of
the tribe allowed in the case of a single animal. His pony stumbled and threw him, after they
had wounded the bison, and the latter attacked the dismounted man viciously. But he, as usual,
was on the alert. He "took the bull by the horns", as the saying is, and cleverly straddled
him on the neck. The buffalo had no means of harming his enemy, but pawed the earth and struggled
until his strength was exhausted, when the Indian used his knife on the animal's throat. On
account of this feat he received the name "Held-the-Bull-by-the-Horns."

The origin of his name "Tamahay" is related as follows. When he was a young man he accompanied
the chief Wabashaw to Mackinaw, Michigan, together with some other warriors. He was out with
his friend one day, viewing the wonderful sights in the "white man's country", when they came
upon a sow with her numerous pink little progeny. He was greatly amused and picked up one of
the young pigs, but as soon as it squealed the mother ran furiously after them. He kept the
pig and fled with it, still laughing; but his friend was soon compelled to run up the conveniently
inclined trunk of a fallen tree, while our hero reached the shore of a lake near by, and plunged
into the water. He swam and dived as long as he could, but the beast continued to threaten
him with her sharp teeth, till, almost exhausted, he swam again to shore, where his friend
came up and dispatched the vicious animal with a club. On account of this watery adventure
he was at once called Tamahay, meaning Pike. He earned many other names, but preferred this
one, because it was the name borne by a great friend of his, Lieutenant Pike, the first officer
of the United States Army who came to Minnesota for the purpose of exploring the sources of
the Mississippi River and of making peace with the natives. Tamahay assisted this officer in
obtaining land from the Sioux upon which to build Fort Snelling. He appears in history under
the name of "Tahamie" or the "One-Eyed Sioux."

Always ready to brave danger and unpopularity, Tamahay was the only Sioux who sided with the
United States in her struggle with Great Britain in 1819. For having espoused the cause of
the Americans, he was ill-treated by the British officers and free traders, who for a long
time controlled the northwest, even after peace had been effected between the two nations.
At one time he was confined in a fort called McKay, where now stands the town of Prairie du
Chien, Wisconsin. He had just returned from St. Louis, and was suspected of exciting his people
to rebel against British subjects. His life was even threatened, but to this Tamahay merely
replied that he was ready to die. A few months later, this fort was restored to the United
States, and upon leaving it the British set the buildings on fire, though the United States
flag floated above them. Some Indians who were present shouted to Tamahay, "Your friends',
the Americans', fort is on fire!" He responded with a war whoop, rushed into the blazing fort,
and brought out the flag. For this brave act he was rewarded with a present of a flag and medal.
He was never tired of displaying this medal and his recommendation papers, and even preserved
to the end of his life an old colonial stovepipe hat, which he wore upon state occasions.

The Sioux long referred to the president of the United States as "Tamahay's father."

The following story is told of him in his later days. He attempted one day to cross the first
bridge over the Mississippi River, but was not recognized by the sentinel, who would not allow
him to pass until he paid the toll. Tamahay, who was a privileged character, explained as best
he could, with gestures and broken English, that he was always permitted to pass free; but
as the sentinel still refused, and even threatened him with his bayonet, the old Indian silently
seized the musket, threw it down into the waters of the Mississippi and went home. Later in
the day a company of soldiers appeared in the Indian village, and escorted our hero to a sort
of court-martial at the fort. When he was questioned by the Colonel, he simply replied: "If
you were threatened by any one with a weapon, you would, in self-defense, either disable the
man or get rid of the weapon. I did the latter, thinking that you would need the man more than
the gun."

Finally the officer said to them, "I see you are both partly wrong. Some one must be responsible
for the loss of the gun; therefore, you two will wrestle, and the man who is downed must dive
for the weapon to the bottom of the river."

Scarcely was this speech ended when Tamahay was upon the soldier, who was surprised both by
the order and by the unexpected readiness of the wily old Indian, so that he was not prepared,
and the Sioux had the vantage hold. In a moment the bluecoat was down, amid shouts and peals
of laughter from his comrades. Having thrown his man, the other turned and went home without
a word.

Sad to say, he acquired a great appetite for "minne-wakan", or "mysterious water", as the Sioux
call it, which proved a source of trouble to him in his old age. It is told of him that he
was treated one winter's day to a drink of whisky in a trader's store. He afterwards went home;
but even the severe blizzard which soon arose did not prevent him from returning in the night
to the friendly trader. He awoke that worthy from sleep about twelve o'clock by singing his
death dirge upon the roof of the log cabin. In another moment he had jumped down the mud chimney,
and into the blazing embers of a fire. The trader had to pour out to him some whisky in a tin
pail, after which he begged the old man to "be good and go home." On the eve of the so-called
"Minnesota Massacre" by the Sioux in 1862, Tamahay, although he was then very old and had almost
lost the use of his remaining eye, made a famous speech at the meeting of the conspirators.
These are some of his words, as reported to me by persons who were present.

"What! What! is this Little Crow? Is that Little Six? You, too, White Dog, are you here? I
cannot see well now, but I can see with my mind's eye the stream of blood you are about to
pour upon the bosom of this mother of ours" (meaning the earth). "I stand before you on three
legs, but the third leg has brought me wisdom" [referring to the staff with which he supported
himself]. "I have traveled much, I have visited among the people whom you think to defy. This
means the total surrender of our beautiful land, the land of a thousand lakes and streams.
Methinks you are about to commit an act like that of the porcupine, who climbs a tree, balances
himself upon a springy bough, and then gnaws off the very bough upon which he is sitting; hence,
when it gives way, he falls upon the sharp rocks below. Behold the great Pontiac, whose grave
I saw near St. Louis; he was murdered while an exile from his country! Think of the brave Black
Hawk! Methinks his spirit is still wailing through Wisconsin and Illinois for his lost people!
I do not say you have no cause to complain, but to resist is self-destruction. I am done."

It is supposed that this speech was his last, and it was made, though vainly, in defense of
the Americans whom he had loved. He died at Fort Pierre, South Dakota, in 1864. His people
say that he died a natural death, of old age. And yet his exploits are not forgotten. Thus
lived and departed a most active and fearless Sioux, Tamahay, who desired to die young!

GALL

Chief Gall was one of the most aggressive leaders of the Sioux nation in their last stand for
freedom.

The westward pressure of civilization during the past three centuries has been tremendous.
When our hemisphere was "discovered", it had been inhabited by the natives for untold ages,
but it was held undiscovered because the original owners did not chart or advertise it. Yet
some of them at least had developed ideals of life which included real liberty and equality
to all men, and they did not recognize individual ownership in land or other property beyond
actual necessity. It was a soul development leading to essential manhood. Under this system
they brought forth some striking characters.

Gall was considered by both Indians and whites to be a most impressive type of physical manhood.
From his picture you can judge of this for yourself.

Let us follow his trail. He was no tenderfoot. He never asked a soft place for himself. He
always played the game according to the rules and to a finish. To be sure, like every other
man, he made some mistakes, but he was an Indian and never acted the coward.

The earliest stories told of his life and doings indicate the spirit of the man in that of the boy.

When he was only about three years old, the Blackfoot band of Sioux were on their usual roving
hunt, following the buffalo while living their natural happy life upon the wonderful wide prairies
of the Dakotas.

It was the way of every Sioux mother to adjust her household effects on such dogs and pack
ponies as she could muster from day to day, often lending one or two to accommodate some other
woman whose horse or dog had died, or perhaps had been among those stampeded and carried away
by a raiding band of Crow warriors. On this particular occasion, the mother of our young Sioux
brave, Matohinshda, or Bear-Shedding-His-Hair (Gall's childhood name), intrusted her boy to
an old Eskimo pack dog, experienced and reliable, except perhaps when unduly excited or very
thirsty.

On the day of removing camp the caravan made its morning march up the Powder River. Upon the
wide table-land the women were busily digging teepsinna (an edible sweetish root, much used
by them) as the moving village slowly progressed. As usual at such times, the trail was wide.
An old jack rabbit had waited too long in hiding. Now, finding himself almost surrounded by
the mighty plains people, he sprang up suddenly, his feathery ears conspicuously erect, a dangerous
challenge to the dogs and the people.

A whoop went up. Every dog accepted the challenge. Forgotten were the bundles, the kits, even
the babies they were drawing or carrying. The chase was on, and the screams of the women reechoed
from the opposite cliffs of the Powder, mingled with the yelps of dogs and the neighing of
horses. The hand of every man was against the daring warrior, the lone Jack, and the confusion
was great.

When the fleeing one cleared the mass of his enemies, he emerged with a swiftness that commanded
respect and gave promise of a determined chase. Behind him, his pursuers stretched out in a
thin line, first the speedy, unburdened dogs and then the travois dogs headed by the old Eskimo
with his precious freight. The youthful Gall was in a travois, a basket mounted on trailing
poles and harnessed to the sides of the animal.

"Hey! hey! they are gaining on him!" a warrior shouted. At this juncture two of the canines
had almost nabbed their furry prey by the back. But he was too cunning for them. He dropped
instantly and sent both dogs over his head, rolling and spinning, then made another flight
at right angles to the first. This gave the Eskimo a chance to cut the triangle. He gained
fifty yards, but being heavily handicapped, two unladen dogs passed him. The same trick was
repeated by the Jack, and this time he saved himself from instant death by a double loop and
was now running directly toward the crowd, followed by a dozen or more dogs. He was losing
speed, but likewise his pursuers were dropping off steadily. Only the sturdy Eskimo dog held
to his even gait, and behind him in the frail travois leaned forward the little Matohinshda,
nude save a breech clout, his left hand holding fast the convenient tail of his dog, the right
grasping firmly one of the poles of the travois. His black eyes were bulging almost out of
their sockets; his long hair flowed out behind like a stream of dark water.

The Jack now ran directly toward the howling spectators, but his marvelous speed and alertness
were on the wane; while on the other hand his foremost pursuer, who had taken part in hundreds
of similar events, had every confidence in his own endurance. Each leap brought him nearer,
fiercer and more determined. The last effort of the Jack was to lose himself in the crowd,
like a fish in muddy water; but the big dog made the one needed leap with unerring aim and
his teeth flashed as he caught the rabbit in viselike jaws and held him limp in air, a victor!

The people rushed up to him as he laid the victim down, and foremost among them was the frantic
mother of Matohinshda, or Gall. "Michinkshe! michinkshe!" (My son! my son!) she screamed as
she drew near. The boy seemed to be none the worse for his experience. "Mother!" he cried,
"my dog is brave: he got the rabbit!" She snatched him off the travois, but he struggled out
of her arms to look upon his dog lovingly and admiringly. Old men and boys crowded about the
hero of the day, the dog, and the thoughtful grandmother of Matohinshda unharnessed him and
poured some water from a parfleche water bag into a basin. "Here, my grandson, give your friend
something to drink."

"How, hechetu," pronounced an old warrior no longer in active service. "This may be only an
accident, an ordinary affair; but such things sometimes indicate a career. The boy has had
a wonderful ride. I prophesy that he will one day hold the attention of all the people with
his doings."

This is the first remembered story of the famous chief, but other boyish exploits foretold
the man he was destined to be. He fought many sham battles, some successful and others not;
but he was always a fierce fighter and a good loser.

Once he was engaged in a battle with snowballs. There were probably nearly a hundred boys on
each side, and the rule was that every fair hit made the receiver officially dead. He must
not participate further, but must remain just where he was struck.

Gall's side was fast losing, and the battle was growing hotter every minute when the youthful
warrior worked toward an old water hole and took up his position there. His side was soon annihilated
and there were eleven men left to fight him. He was pressed close in the wash-out, and as he
dodged under cover before a volley of snowballs, there suddenly emerged in his stead a huge
gray wolf. His opponents fled in every direction in superstitious terror, for they thought
he had been transformed into the animal. To their astonishment he came out on the farther side
and ran to the line of safety, a winner!

It happened that the wolf's den had been partly covered with snow so that no one had noticed
it until the yells of the boys aroused the inmate, and he beat a hasty retreat. The boys always
looked upon this incident as an omen.

Gall had an amiable disposition but was quick to resent insult or injustice. This sometimes
involved him in difficulties, but he seldom fought without good cause and was popular with
his associates. One of his characteristics was his ability to organize, and this was a large
factor in his leadership when he became a man. He was tried in many ways, and never was known
to hesitate when it was a question of physical courage and endurance. He entered the public
service early in life, but not until he had proved himself competent and passed all tests.

When a mere boy, he was once scouting for game in midwinter, far from camp, and was overtaken
by a three days' blizzard. He was forced to abandon his horse and lie under the snow for that
length of time. He afterward said he was not particularly hungry; it was thirst and stiffness
from which he suffered most. One reason the Indian so loved his horse or dog was that at such
times the animal would stay by him like a brother. On this occasion Gall's pony was not more
than a stone's throw away when the storm subsided and the sun shone. There was a herd of buffalo
in plain sight, and the young hunter was not long in procuring a meal.

This chief's contemporaries still recall his wrestling match with the equally powerful Cheyenne
boy, Roman Nose, who afterward became a chief well known to American history. It was a custom
of the northwestern Indians, when two friendly tribes camped together, to establish the physical
and athletic supremacy of the youth of the respective camps.

The "Che-hoo-hoo" is a wrestling game in which there may be any number on a side, but the numbers
are equal. All the boys of each camp are called together by a leader chosen for the purpose
and draw themselves up in line of battle; then each at a given signal attacks his opponent.

In this memorable contest, Matohinshda, or Gall, was placed opposite Roman Nose. The whole
people turned out as spectators of the struggle, and the battlefield was a plateau between
the two camps, in the midst of picturesque Bad Lands. There were many athletic youths present,
but these two were really the Apollos of the two tribes.

In this kind of sport it is not allowed to strike with the hand, nor catch around the neck,
nor kick, nor pull by the hair. One may break away and run a few yards to get a fresh start,
or clinch, or catch as catch can. When a boy is thrown and held to the ground, he is counted
out. If a boy has met his superior, he may drop to the ground to escape rough handling, but
it is very seldom one gives up without a full trial of strength.

It seemed almost like a real battle, so great was the enthusiasm, as the shouts of sympathizers
on both sides went up in a mighty chorus. At last all were either conquerors or subdued except
Gall and Roman Nose. The pair seemed equally matched. Both were stripped to the breech clout,
now tugging like two young buffalo or elk in mating time, again writhing and twisting like
serpents. At times they fought like two wild stallions, straining every muscle of arms, legs,
and back in the struggle. Every now and then one was lifted off his feet for a moment, but
came down planted like a tree, and after swaying to and fro soon became rigid again.

All eyes were upon the champions. Finally, either by trick or main force, Gall laid the other
sprawling upon the ground and held him fast for a minute, then released him and stood erect,
panting, a master youth. Shout after shout went up on the Sioux side of the camp. The mother
of Roman Nose came forward and threw a superbly worked buffalo robe over Gall, whose mother
returned the compliment by covering the young Cheyenne with a handsome blanket.

Undoubtedly these early contests had their influence upon our hero's career. It was his habit
to appear most opportunely in a crisis, and in a striking and dramatic manner to take command
of the situation. The best known example of this is his entrance on the scene of confusion
when Reno surprised the Sioux on the Little Big Horn. Many of the excitable youths, almost
unarmed, rushed madly and blindly to meet the intruder, and the scene might have unnerved even
an experienced warrior. It was Gall, with not a garment upon his superb body, who on his black
charger dashed ahead of the boys and faced them. He stopped them on the dry creek, while the
bullets of Reno's men whistled about their ears.

"Hold hard, men! Steady, we are not ready yet! Wait for more guns, more horses, and the day
is yours!"

They obeyed, and in a few minutes the signal to charge was given, and Reno retreated pell mell
before the onset of the Sioux.

Sitting Bull had confidence in his men so long as Gall planned and directed the attack, whether
against United States soldiers or the warriors of another tribe. He was a strategist, and able
in a twinkling to note and seize upon an advantage. He was really the mainstay of Sitting Bull's
effective last stand. He consistently upheld his people's right to their buffalo plains and
believed that they should hold the government strictly to its agreements with them. When the
treaty of 1868 was disregarded, he agreed with Sitting Bull in defending the last of their
once vast domain, and after the Custer battle entered Canada with his chief. They hoped to
bring their lost cause before the English government and were much disappointed when they were
asked to return to the United States.

Gall finally reported at Fort Peck, Montana, in 1881, and brought half of the Hunkpapa band
with him, whereupon he was soon followed by Sitting Bull himself. Although they had been promised
by the United States commission who went to Canada to treat with them that they would not be
punished if they returned, no sooner had Gall come down than a part of his people were attacked,
and in the spring they were all brought to Fort Randall and held as military prisoners. From
this point they were returned to Standing Rock agency.

When "Buffalo Bill" successfully launched his first show, he made every effort to secure both
Sitting Bull and Gall for his leading attractions. The military was in complete accord with
him in this, for they still had grave suspicions of these two leaders. While Sitting Bull reluctantly
agreed, Gall haughtily said: "I am not an animal to be exhibited before the crowd," and retired
to his teepee. His spirit was much worn, and he lost strength from that time on. That superb
manhood dwindled, and in a few years he died. He was a real hero of a free and natural people,
a type that is never to be seen again.

CRAZY HORSE

Crazy Horse was born on the Republican River about 1845. He was killed at Fort Robinson, Nebraska,
in 1877, so that he lived barely thirty-three years.

He was an uncommonly handsome man. While not the equal of Gall in magnificence and imposing
stature, he was physically perfect, an Apollo in symmetry. Furthermore he was a true type of
Indian refinement and grace. He was modest and courteous as Chief Joseph; the difference is
that he was a born warrior, while Joseph was not. However, he was a gentle warrior, a true
brave, who stood for the highest ideal of the Sioux. Notwithstanding all that biased historians
have said of him, it is only fair to judge a man by the estimate of his own people rather than
that of his enemies.

The boyhood of Crazy Horse was passed in the days when the western Sioux saw a white man but
seldom, and then it was usually a trader or a soldier. He was carefully brought up according
to the tribal customs. At that period the Sioux prided themselves on the training and development
of their sons and daughters, and not a step in that development was overlooked as an excuse
to bring the child before the public by giving a feast in its honor. At such times the parents
often gave so generously to the needy that they almost impoverished themselves, thus setting
an example to the child of self-denial for the general good. His first step alone, the first
word spoken, first game killed, the attainment of manhood or womanhood, each was the occasion
of a feast and dance in his honor, at which the poor always benefited to the full extent of
the parents' ability.

Big-heartedness, generosity, courage, and self-denial are the qualifications of a public servant,
and the average Indian was keen to follow this ideal. As every one knows, these characteristic
traits become a weakness when he enters a life founded upon commerce and gain. Under such conditions
the life of Crazy Horse began. His mother, like other mothers, tender and watchful of her boy,
would never once place an obstacle in the way of his father's severe physical training. They
laid the spiritual and patriotic foundations of his education in such a way that he early became
conscious of the demands of public service.

He was perhaps four or five years old when the band was snowed in one severe winter. They were
very short of food, but his father was a tireless hunter. The buffalo, their main dependence,
were not to be found, but he was out in the storm and cold every day and finally brought in
two antelopes. The little boy got on his pet pony and rode through the camp, telling the old
folks to come to his mother's teepee for meat. It turned out that neither his father nor mother
had authorized him to do this. Before they knew it, old men and women were lined up before
the teepee home, ready to receive the meat, in answer to his invitation. As a result, the mother
had to distribute nearly all of it, keeping only enough for two meals.

On the following day the child asked for food. His mother told him that the old folks had taken
it all, and added: "Remember, my son, they went home singing praises in your name, not my name
or your father's. You must be brave. You must live up to your reputation."

Crazy Horse loved horses, and his father gave him a pony of his own when he was very young.
He became a fine horseman and accompanied his father on buffalo hunts, holding the pack horses
while the men chased the buffalo and thus gradually learning the art. In those days the Sioux
had but few guns, and the hunting was mostly done with bow and arrows.

Another story told of his boyhood is that when he was about twelve he went to look for the
ponies with his little brother, whom he loved much, and took a great deal of pains to teach
what he had already learned. They came to some wild cherry trees full of ripe fruit, and while
they were enjoying it, the brothers were startled by the growl and sudden rush of a bear. Young
Crazy Horse pushed his brother up into the nearest tree and himself sprang upon the back of
one of the horses, which was frightened and ran some distance before he could control him.
As soon as he could, however, he turned him about and came back, yelling and swinging his lariat
over his head. The bear at first showed fight but finally turned and ran. The old man who told
me this story added that young as he was, he had some power, so that even a grizzly did not
care to tackle him. I believe it is a fact that a silver-tip will dare anything except a bell
or a lasso line, so that accidentally the boy had hit upon the very thing which would drive
him off.

It was usual for Sioux boys of his day to wait in the field after a buffalo hunt until sundown,
when the young calves would come out in the open, hungrily seeking their mothers. Then these
wild children would enjoy a mimic hunt, and lasso the calves or drive them into camp. Crazy
Horse was found to be a determined little fellow, and it was settled one day among the larger
boys that they would "stump" him to ride a good-sized bull calf. He rode the calf, and stayed
on its back while it ran bawling over the hills, followed by the other boys on their ponies,
until his strange mount stood trembling and exhausted.

At the age of sixteen he joined a war party against the Gros Ventres. He was well in the front
of the charge, and at once established his bravery by following closely one of the foremost
Sioux warriors, by the name of Hump, drawing the enemy's fire and circling around their advance
guard. Suddenly Hump's horse was shot from under him, and there was a rush of warriors to kill
or capture him while down. But amidst a shower of arrows the youth leaped from his pony, helped
his friend into his own saddle, sprang up behind him, and carried him off in safety, although
they were hotly pursued by the enemy. Thus he associated himself in his maiden battle with
the wizard of Indian warfare, and Hump, who was then at the height of his own career, pronounced
Crazy Horse the coming warrior of the Teton Sioux.

At this period of his life, as was customary with the best young men, he spent much time in
prayer and solitude. Just what happened in these days of his fasting in the wilderness and
upon the crown of bald buttes, no one will ever know; for these things may only be known when
one has lived through the battles of life to an honored old age. He was much sought after by
his youthful associates, but was noticeably reserved and modest; yet in the moment of danger
he at once rose above them all--a natural leader! Crazy Horse was a typical Sioux brave, and
from the point of view of our race an ideal hero, living at the height of the epical progress
of the American Indian and maintaining in his own character all that was most subtle and ennobling
of their spiritual life, and that has since been lost in the contact with a material civilization.

He loved Hump, that peerless warrior, and the two became close friends, in spite of the difference
in age. Men called them "the grizzly and his cub." Again and again the pair saved the day for
the Sioux in a skirmish with some neighboring tribe. But one day they undertook a losing battle
against the Snakes. The Sioux were in full retreat and were fast being overwhelmed by superior
numbers. The old warrior fell in a last desperate charge; but Crazy Horse and his younger brother,
though dismounted, killed two of the enemy and thus made good their retreat.

It was observed of him that when he pursued the enemy into their stronghold, as he was wont
to do, he often refrained from killing, and simply struck them with a switch, showing that
he did not fear their weapons nor care to waste his upon them. In attempting this very feat,
he lost this only brother of his, who emulated him closely. A party of young warriors, led
by Crazy Horse, had dashed upon a frontier post, killed one of the sentinels, stampeded the
horses, and pursued the herder to the very gate of the stockade, thus drawing upon themselves
the fire of the garrison. The leader escaped without a scratch, but his young brother was brought
down from his horse and killed.

While he was still under twenty, there was a great winter buffalo hunt, and he came back with
ten buffaloes' tongues which he sent to the council lodge for the councilors' feast. He had
in one winter day killed ten buffalo cows with his bow and arrows, and the unsuccessful hunters
or those who had no swift ponies were made happy by his generosity. When the hunters returned,
these came chanting songs of thanks. He knew that his father was an expert hunter and had a
good horse, so he took no meat home, putting in practice the spirit of his early teaching.

He attained his majority at the crisis of the difficulties between the United States and the
Sioux. Even before that time, Crazy Horse had already proved his worth to his people in Indian
warfare. He had risked his life again and again, and in some instances it was considered almost
a miracle that he had saved others as well as himself. He was no orator nor was he the son
of a chief. His success and influence was purely a matter of personality. He had never fought
the whites up to this time, and indeed no "coup" was counted for killing or scalping a white man.

Young Crazy Horse was twenty-one years old when all the Teton Sioux chiefs (the western or
plains dwellers) met in council to determine upon their future policy toward the invader. Their
former agreements had been by individual bands, each for itself, and every one was friendly.
They reasoned that the country was wide, and that the white traders should be made welcome.
Up to this time they had anticipated no conflict. They had permitted the Oregon Trail, but
now to their astonishment forts were built and garrisoned in their territory.

Most of the chiefs advocated a strong resistance. There were a few influential men who desired
still to live in peace, and who were willing to make another treaty. Among these were White
Bull, Two Kettle, Four Bears, and Swift Bear. Even Spotted Tail, afterward the great peace
chief, was at this time with the majority, who decided in the year 1866 to defend their rights
and territory by force. Attacks were to be made upon the forts within their country and on
every trespasser on the same.

Crazy Horse took no part in the discussion, but he and all the young warriors were in accord
with the decision of the council. Although so young, he was already a leader among them. Other
prominent young braves were Sword (brother of the man of that name who was long captain of
police at Pine Ridge), the younger Hump, Charging Bear, Spotted Elk, Crow King, No Water, Big
Road, He Dog, the nephew of Red Cloud, and Touch-the-Cloud, intimate friend of Crazy Horse.

The attack on Fort Phil Kearny was the first fruits of the new policy, and here Crazy Horse
was chosen to lead the attack on the woodchoppers, designed to draw the soldiers out of the
fort, while an army of six hundred lay in wait for them. The success of this stratagem was
further enhanced by his masterful handling of his men. From this time on a general war was
inaugurated; Sitting Bull looked to him as a principal war leader, and even the Cheyenne chiefs,
allies of the Sioux, practically acknowledged his leadership. Yet during the following ten
years of defensive war he was never known to make a speech, though his teepee was the rendezvous
of the young men. He was depended upon to put into action the decisions of the council, and
was frequently consulted by the older chiefs.

Like Osceola, he rose suddenly; like Tecumseh he was always impatient for battle; like Pontiac,
he fought on while his allies were suing for peace, and like Grant, the silent soldier, he
was a man of deeds and not of words. He won from Custer and Fetterman and Crook. He won every
battle that he undertook, with the exception of one or two occasions when he was surprised
in the midst of his women and children, and even then he managed to extricate himself in safety
from a difficult position.

Early in the year 1876, his runners brought word from Sitting Bull that all the roving bands
would converge upon the upper Tongue River in Montana for summer feasts and conferences. There
was conflicting news from the reservation. It was rumored that the army would fight the Sioux
to a finish; again, it was said that another commission would be sent out to treat with them.

The Indians came together early in June, and formed a series of encampments stretching out
from three to four miles, each band keeping separate camp. On June 17, scouts came in and reported
the advance of a large body of troops under General Crook. The council sent Crazy Horse with
seven hundred men to meet and attack him. These were nearly all young men, many of them under
twenty, the flower of the hostile Sioux. They set out at night so as to steal a march upon
the enemy, but within three or four miles of his camp they came unexpectedly upon some of his
Crow scouts. There was a hurried exchange of shots; the Crows fled back to Crook's camp, pursued
by the Sioux. The soldiers had their warning, and it was impossible to enter the well-protected
camp. Again and again Crazy Horse charged with his bravest men, in the attempt to bring the
troops into the open, but he succeeded only in drawing their fire. Toward afternoon he withdrew,
and returned to camp disappointed. His scouts remained to watch Crook's movements, and later
brought word that he had retreated to Goose Creek and seemed to have no further disposition
to disturb the Sioux. It is well known to us that it is Crook rather than Reno who is to be
blamed for cowardice in connection with Custer's fate. The latter had no chance to do anything,
he was lucky to save himself; but if Crook had kept on his way, as ordered, to meet Terry,
with his one thousand regulars and two hundred Crow and Shoshone scouts, he would inevitably
have intercepted Custer in his advance and saved the day for him, and war with the Sioux would
have ended right there. Instead of this, he fell back upon Fort Meade, eating his horses on
the way, in a country swarming with game, for fear of Crazy Horse and his braves!

The Indians now crossed the divide between the Tongue and the Little Big Horn, where they felt
safe from immediate pursuit. Here, with all their precautions, they were caught unawares by
General Custer, in the midst of their midday games and festivities, while many were out upon
the daily hunt.

On this twenty-fifth of June, 1876, the great camp was scattered for three miles or more along
the level river bottom, back of the thin line of cottonwoods--five circular rows of teepees,
ranging from half a mile to a mile and a half in circumference. Here and there stood out a
large, white, solitary teepee; these were the lodges or "clubs" of the young men. Crazy Horse
was a member of the "Strong Hearts" and the "Tokala" or Fox lodge. He was watching a game of
ring-toss when the warning came from the southern end of the camp of the approach of troops.

The Sioux and the Cheyennes were "minute men", and although taken by surprise, they instantly
responded. Meanwhile, the women and children were thrown into confusion. Dogs were howling,
ponies running hither and thither, pursued by their owners, while many of the old men were
singing their lodge songs to encourage the warriors, or praising the "strong heart" of Crazy Horse.

That leader had quickly saddled his favorite war pony and was starting with his young men for
the south end of the camp, when a fresh alarm came from the opposite direction, and looking
up, he saw Custer's force upon the top of the bluff directly across the river. As quick as
a flash, he took in the situation--the enemy had planned to attack the camp at both ends at
once; and knowing that Custer could not ford the river at that point, he instantly led his
men northward to the ford to cut him off. The Cheyennes followed closely. Custer must have
seen that wonderful dash up the sage-bush plain, and one wonders whether he realized its meaning.
In a very few minutes, this wild general of the plains had outwitted one of the most brilliant
leaders of the Civil War and ended at once his military career and his life.

In this dashing charge, Crazy Horse snatched his most famous victory out of what seemed frightful
peril, for the Sioux could not know how many were behind Custer. He was caught in his own trap.
To the soldiers it must have seemed as if the Indians rose up from the earth to overwhelm them.
They closed in from three sides and fought until not a white man was left alive. Then they
went down to Reno's stand and found him so well intrenched in a deep gully that it was impossible
to dislodge him. Gall and his men held him there until the approach of General Terry compelled
the Sioux to break camp and scatter in different directions.

While Sitting Bull was pursued into Canada, Crazy Horse and the Cheyennes wandered about, comparatively
undisturbed, during the rest of that year, until in the winter the army surprised the Cheyennes,
but did not do them much harm, possibly because they knew that Crazy Horse was not far off.
His name was held in wholesome respect. From time to time, delegations of friendly Indians
were sent to him, to urge him to come in to the reservation, promising a full hearing and fair
treatment.

For some time he held out, but the rapid disappearance of the buffalo, their only means of
support, probably weighed with him more than any other influence. In July, 1877, he was finally
prevailed upon to come in to Fort Robinson, Nebraska, with several thousand Indians, most of
them Ogallala and Minneconwoju Sioux, on the distinct understanding that the government would
hear and adjust their grievances.

At this juncture General Crook proclaimed Spotted Tail, who had rendered much valuable service
to the army, head chief of the Sioux, which was resented by many. The attention paid Crazy
Horse was offensive to Spotted Tail and the Indian scouts, who planned a conspiracy against
him. They reported to General Crook that the young chief would murder him at the next council,
and stampede the Sioux into another war. He was urged not to attend the council and did not,
but sent another officer to represent him. Meanwhile the friends of Crazy Horse discovered
the plot and told him of it. His reply was, "Only cowards are murderers."

His wife was critically ill at the time, and he decided to take her to her parents at Spotted
Tail agency, whereupon his enemies circulated the story that he had fled, and a party of scouts
was sent after him. They overtook him riding with his wife and one other but did not undertake
to arrest him, and after he had left the sick woman with her people he went to call on Captain
Lea, the agent for the Brules, accompanied by all the warriors of the Minneconwoju band. This
volunteer escort made an imposing appearance on horseback, shouting and singing, and in the
words of Captain Lea himself and the missionary, the Reverend Mr. Cleveland, the situation
was extremely critical. Indeed, the scouts who had followed Crazy Horse from Red Cloud agency
were advised not to show themselves, as some of the warriors had urged that they be taken out
and horsewhipped publicly.

Under these circumstances Crazy Horse again showed his masterful spirit by holding these young
men in check. He said to them in his quiet way: "It is well to be brave in the field of battle;
it is cowardly to display bravery against one's own tribesmen. These scouts have been compelled
to do what they did; they are no better than servants of the white officers. I came here on
a peaceful errand."

The captain urged him to report at army headquarters to explain himself and correct false rumors,
and on his giving consent, furnished him with a wagon and escort. It has been said that he
went back under arrest, but this is untrue. Indians have boasted that they had a hand in bringing
him in, but their stories are without foundation. He went of his own accord, either suspecting
no treachery or determined to defy it.

When he reached the military camp, Little Big Man walked arm-in-arm with him, and his cousin
and friend, Touch-the-Cloud, was just in advance. After they passed the sentinel, an officer
approached them and walked on his other side. He was unarmed but for the knife which is carried
for ordinary uses by women as well as men. Unsuspectingly he walked toward the guardhouse,
when Touch-the-Cloud suddenly turned back exclaiming: "Cousin, they will put you in prison!"

"Another white man's trick! Let me go! Let me die fighting!" cried Crazy Horse. He stopped
and tried to free himself and draw his knife, but both arms were held fast by Little Big Man
and the officer. While he struggled thus, a soldier thrust him through with his bayonet from
behind. The wound was mortal, and he died in the course of that night, his old father singing
the death song over him and afterward carrying away the body, which they said must not be further
polluted by the touch of a white man. They hid it somewhere in the Bad Lands, his resting place
to this day.

Thus died one of the ablest and truest American Indians. His life was ideal; his record clean.
He was never involved in any of the numerous massacres on the trail, but was a leader in practically
every open fight. Such characters as those of Crazy Horse and Chief Joseph are not easily found
among so-called civilized people. The reputation of great men is apt to be shadowed by questionable
motives and policies, but here are two pure patriots, as worthy of honor as any who ever breathed
God's air in the wide spaces of a new world.

SITTING BULL

IT is not easy to characterize Sitting Bull, of all Sioux chiefs most generally known to the
American people. There are few to whom his name is not familiar, and still fewer who have learned
to connect it with anything more than the conventional notion of a bloodthirsty savage. The
man was an enigma at best. He was not impulsive, nor was he phlegmatic. He was most serious
when he seemed to be jocose. He was gifted with the power of sarcasm, and few have used it
more artfully than he.

His father was one of the best-known members of the Unkpapa band of Sioux. The manner of this
man's death was characteristic. One day, when the Unkpapas were attacked by a large war party
of Crows, he fell upon the enemy's war leader with his knife. In a hand-to-hand combat of this
sort, we count the victor as entitled to a war bonnet of trailing plumes. It means certain
death to one or both. In this case, both men dealt a mortal stroke, and Jumping Buffalo, the
father of Sitting Bull, fell from his saddle and died in a few minutes. The other died later
from the effects of the wound.

Sitting Bull's boyhood must have been a happy one. It was long after the day of the dog-travaux,
and his father owned many ponies of variegated colors. It was said of him in a joking way that
his legs were bowed like the ribs of the ponies that he rode constantly from childhood. He
had also a common nickname that was much to the point. It was "Hunkeshnee", which means "Slow",
referring to his inability to run fast, or more probably to the fact that he seldom appeared
on foot. In their boyish games he was wont to take the part of the "old man", but this does
not mean that he was not active and brave. It is told that after a buffalo hunt the boys were
enjoying a mimic hunt with the calves that had been left behind. A large calf turned viciously
on Sitting Bull, whose pony had thrown him, but the alert youth got hold of both ears and struggled
until the calf was pushed back into a buffalo wallow in a sitting posture. The boys shouted:
"He has subdued the buffalo calf! He made it sit down!" And from this incident was derived
his familiar name of Sitting Bull.

It is a mistake to suppose that Sitting Bull, or any other Indian warrior, was of a murderous
disposition. It is true that savage warfare had grown more and more harsh and cruel since the
coming of white traders among them, bringing guns, knives, and whisky. Yet it was still regarded
largely as a sort of game, undertaken in order to develop the manly qualities of their youth.
It was the degree of risk which brought honor, rather than the number slain, and a brave must
mourn thirty days, with blackened face and loosened hair, for the enemy whose life he had taken.
While the spoils of war were allowed, this did not extend to territorial aggrandizement, nor
was there any wish to overthrow another nation and enslave its people. It was a point of honor
in the old days to treat a captive with kindness. The common impression that the Indian is
naturally cruel and revengeful is entirely opposed to his philosophy and training. The revengeful
tendency of the Indian was aroused by the white man. It is not the natural Indian who is mean
and tricky; not Massasoit but King Philip; not Attackullakulla but Weatherford; not Wabashaw
but Little Crow; not Jumping Buffalo but Sitting Bull! These men lifted their hands against
the white man, while their fathers held theirs out to him with gifts.

Remember that there were councils which gave their decisions in accordance with the highest
ideal of human justice before there were any cities on this continent; before there were bridges
to span the Mississippi; before this network of railroads was dreamed of! There were primitive
communities upon the very spot where Chicago or New York City now stands, where men were as
children, innocent of all the crimes now committed there daily and nightly. True morality is
more easily maintained in connection with the simple life. You must accept the truth that you
demoralize any race whom you have subjugated.

From this point of view we shall consider Sitting Bull's career. We say he is an untutored
man: that is true so far as learning of a literary type is concerned; but he was not an untutored
man when you view him from the standpoint of his nation. To be sure, he did not learn his lessons
from books. This is second-hand information at best. All that he learned he verified for himself
and put into daily practice. In personal appearance he was rather commonplace and made no immediate
impression, but as he talked he seemed to take hold of his hearers more and more. He was bull-headed;
quick to grasp a situation, and not readily induced to change his mind. He was not suspicious
until he was forced to be so. All his meaner traits were inevitably developed by the events
of his later career.

Sitting Bull's history has been written many times by newspaper men and army officers, but
I find no account of him which is entirely correct. I met him personally in 1884, and since
his death I have gone thoroughly into the details of his life with his relatives and contemporaries.
It has often been said that he was a physical coward and not a warrior. Judge of this for yourselves
from the deed which first gave him fame in his own tribe, when he was about twenty-eight years old.

In an attack upon a band of Crow Indians, one of the enemy took his stand, after the rest had
fled, in a deep ditch from which it seemed impossible to dislodge him. The situation had already
cost the lives of several warriors, but they could not let him go to repeat such a boast over
the Sioux!

"Follow me!" said Sitting Bull, and charged. He raced his horse to the brim of the ditch and
struck at the enemy with his coup-staff, thus compelling him to expose himself to the fire
of the others while shooting his assailant. But the Crow merely poked his empty gun into his
face and dodged back under cover. Then Sitting Bull stopped; he saw that no one had followed
him, and he also perceived that the enemy had no more ammunition left. He rode deliberately
up to the barrier and threw his loaded gun over it; then he went back to his party and told
them what he thought of them.

"Now," said he, "I have armed him, for I will not see a brave man killed unarmed. I will strike
him again with my coup-staff to count the first feather; who will count the second?"

Again he led the charge, and this time they all followed him. Sitting Bull was severely wounded
by his own gun in the hands of the enemy, who was killed by those that came after him. This
is a record that so far as I know was never made by any other warrior.

The second incident that made him well known was his taking of a boy captive in battle with
the Assiniboines. He saved this boy's life and adopted him as his brother. Hohay, as he was
called, was devoted to Sitting Bull and helped much in later years to spread his fame. Sitting
Bull was a born diplomat, a ready speaker, and in middle life he ceased to go upon the warpath,
to become the councilor of his people. From this time on, this man represented him in all important
battles, and upon every brave deed done was wont to exclaim aloud:

"I, Sitting Bull's boy, do this in his name!"

He had a nephew, now living, who resembles him strongly, and who also represented him personally
upon the field; and so far as there is any remnant left of his immediate band, they look upon
this man One Bull as their chief.

When Sitting Bull was a boy, there was no thought of trouble with the whites. He was acquainted
with many of the early traders, Picotte, Choteau, Primeau, Larpenteur, and others, and liked
them, as did most of his people in those days. All the early records show this friendly attitude
of the Sioux, and the great fur companies for a century and a half depended upon them for the
bulk of their trade. It was not until the middle of the last century that they woke up all
of a sudden to the danger threatening their very existence. Yet at that time many of the old
chiefs had been already depraved by the whisky and other vices of the whites, and in the vicinity
of the forts and trading posts at Sioux City, Saint Paul, and Cheyenne, there was general demoralization.
The drunkards and hangers-on were ready to sell almost anything they had for the favor of the
trader. The better and stronger element held aloof. They would not have anything of the white
man except his hatchet, gun, and knife. They utterly refused to cede their lands; and as for
the rest, they were willing to let him alone as long as he did not interfere with their life
and customs, which was not long.

It was not, however, the Unkpapa band of Sioux, Sitting Bull's band, which first took up arms
against the whites; and this was not because they had come less in contact with them, for they
dwelt on the Missouri River, the natural highway of trade. As early as 1854, the Ogallalas
and Brules had trouble with the soldiers near Fort Laramie; and again in 1857 Inkpaduta massacred
several families of settlers at Spirit Lake, Iowa. Finally, in 1869, the Minnesota Sioux, goaded
by many wrongs, arose and murdered many of the settlers, afterward fleeing into the country
of the Unkpapas and appealing to them for help, urging that all Indians should make common
cause against the invader. This brought Sitting Bull face to face with a question which was
not yet fully matured in his own mind; but having satisfied himself of the justice of their
cause, he joined forces with the renegades during the summer of 1863, and from this time on
he was an acknowledged leader.

In 1865 and 1866 he met the Canadian half-breed, Louis Riel, instigator of two rebellions,
who had come across the line for safety; and in fact at this time he harbored a number of outlaws
and fugitives from justice. His conversations with these, especially with the French mixed-bloods,
who inflamed his prejudices against the Americans, all had their influence in making of the
wily Sioux a determined enemy to the white man. While among his own people he was always affable
and genial, he became boastful and domineering in his dealings with the hated race. He once
remarked that "if we wish to make any impression upon the pale-face, it is necessary to put
on his mask."

Sitting Bull joined in the attack on Fort Phil Kearny and in the subsequent hostilities; but
he accepted in good faith the treaty of 1868, and soon after it was signed he visited Washington
with Red Cloud and Spotted Tail, on which occasion the three distinguished chiefs attracted
much attention and were entertained at dinner by President Grant and other notables. He considered
that the life of the white man as he saw it was no life for his people, but hoped by close
adherence to the terms of this treaty to preserve the Big Horn and Black Hills country for
a permanent hunting ground. When gold was discovered and the irrepressible gold seekers made
their historic dash across the plains into this forbidden paradise, then his faith in the white
man's honor was gone forever, and he took his final and most persistent stand in defense of
his nation and home. His bitter and at the same time well-grounded and philosophical dislike
of the conquering race is well expressed in a speech made before the purely Indian council
before referred to, upon the Powder River. I will give it in brief as it has been several times
repeated to me by men who were present.

"Behold, my friends, the spring is come; the earth has gladly received the embraces of the
sun, and we shall soon see the results of their love! Every seed is awakened, and all animal
life. It is through this mysterious power that we too have our being, and we therefore yield
to our neighbors, even to our animal neighbors, the same right as ourselves to inhabit this
vast land.

"Yet hear me, friends! we have now to deal with another people, small and feeble when our forefathers
first met with them, but now great and overbearing. Strangely enough, they have a mind to till
the soil, and the love of possessions is a disease in them. These people have made many rules
that the rich may break, but the poor may not! They have a religion in which the poor worship,
but the rich will not! They even take tithes of the poor and weak to support the rich and those
who rule. They claim this mother of ours, the Earth, for their own use, and fence their neighbors
away from her, and deface her with their buildings and their refuse. They compel her to produce
out of season, and when sterile she is made to take medicine in order to produce again. All
this is sacrilege.

"This nation is like a spring freshet; it overruns its banks and destroys all who are in its
path. We cannot dwell side by side. Only seven years ago we made a treaty by which we were
assured that the buffalo country should be left to us forever. Now they threaten to take that
from us also. My brothers, shall we submit? or shall we say to them: 'First kill me, before
you can take possession of my fatherland!'"

As Sitting Bull spoke, so he felt, and he had the courage to stand by his words. Crazy Horse
led his forces in the field; as for him, he applied his energies to state affairs, and by his
strong and aggressive personality contributed much to holding the hostiles together.

It may be said without fear of contradiction that Sitting Bull never killed any women or children.
He was a fair fighter, and while not prominent in battle after his young manhood, he was the
brains of the Sioux resistance. He has been called a "medicine man" and a "dreamer." Strictly
speaking, he was neither of these, and the white historians are prone to confuse the two. A
medicine man is a doctor or healer; a dreamer is an active war prophet who leads his war party
according to his dream or prophecy. What is called by whites "making medicine" in war time
is again a wrong conception. Every warrior carries a bag of sacred or lucky charms, supposed
to protect the wearer alone, but it has nothing to do with the success or safety of the party
as a whole. No one can make any "medicine" to affect the result of a battle, although it has
been said that Sitting Bull did this at the battle of the Little Big Horn.

When Custer and Reno attacked the camp at both ends, the chief was caught napping. The village
was in danger of surprise, and the women and children must be placed in safety. Like other
men of his age, Sitting Bull got his family together for flight, and then joined the warriors
on the Reno side of the attack. Thus he was not in the famous charge against Custer; nevertheless,
his voice was heard exhorting the warriors throughout that day.

During the autumn of 1876, after the fall of Custer, Sitting Bull was hunted all through the
Yellowstone region by the military. The following characteristic letter, doubtless written
at his dictation by a half-breed interpreter, was sent to Colonel Otis immediately after a
daring attack upon his wagon train.

Otis, however, kept on and joined Colonel Miles, who followed Sitting Bull with about four
hundred soldiers. He overtook him at last on Cedar Creek, near the Yellowstone, and the two
met midway between the lines for a parley. The army report says: "Sitting Bull wanted peace
in his own way." The truth was that he wanted nothing more than had been guaranteed to them
by the treaty of 1868--the exclusive possession of their last hunting ground. This the government
was not now prepared to grant, as it had been decided to place all the Indians under military
control upon the various reservations.

Since it was impossible to reconcile two such conflicting demands, the hostiles were driven
about from pillar to post for several more years, and finally took refuge across the line in
Canada, where Sitting Bull had placed his last hope of justice and freedom for his race. Here
he was joined from time to time by parties of malcontents from the reservation, driven largely
by starvation and ill-treatment to seek another home. Here, too, they were followed by United
States commissioners, headed by General Terry, who endeavored to persuade him to return, promising
abundance of food and fair treatment, despite the fact that the exiles were well aware of the
miserable condition of the "good Indians" upon the reservations. He first refused to meet them
at all, and only did so when advised to that effect by Major Walsh of the Canadian mounted
police. This was his characteristic remark: "If you have one honest man in Washington, send
him here and I will talk to him."

Sitting Bull was not moved by fair words; but when he found that if they had liberty on that
side, they had little else, that the Canadian government would give them protection but no
food; that the buffalo had been all but exterminated and his starving people were already beginning
to desert him, he was compelled at last, in 1881, to report at Fort Buford, North Dakota, with
his band of hungry, homeless, and discouraged refugees. It was, after all, to hunger and not
to the strong arm of the military that he surrendered in the end.

In spite of the invitation that had been extended to him in the name of the "Great Father"
at Washington, he was immediately thrown into a military prison, and afterward handed over
to Colonel Cody ("Buffalo Bill") as an advertisement for his "Wild West Show." After traveling
about for several years with the famous showman, thus increasing his knowledge of the weaknesses
as well as the strength of the white man, the deposed and humiliated chief settled down quietly
with his people upon the Standing Rock agency in North Dakota, where his immediate band occupied
the Grand River district and set to raising cattle and horses. They made good progress; much
better, in fact, than that of the "coffee-coolers" or "loafer" Indians, received the missionaries
kindly and were soon a church-going people.

When the Commissions of 1888 and 1889 came to treat with the Sioux for a further cession of
land and a reduction of their reservations, nearly all were opposed to consent on any terms.
Nevertheless, by hook or by crook, enough signatures were finally obtained to carry the measure
through, although it is said that many were those of women and the so-called "squaw-men", who
had no rights in the land. At the same time, rations were cut down, and there was general hardship
and dissatisfaction. Crazy Horse was long since dead; Spotted Tail had fallen at the hands
of one of his own tribe; Red Cloud had become a feeble old man, and the disaffected among the
Sioux began once more to look to Sitting Bull for leadership.

At this crisis a strange thing happened. A half-breed Indian in Nevada promulgated the news
that the Messiah had appeared to him upon a peak in the Rockies, dressed in rabbit skins, and
bringing a message to the red race. The message was to the effect that since his first coming
had been in vain, since the white people had doubted and reviled him, had nailed him to the
cross, and trampled upon his doctrines, he had come again in pity to save the Indian. He declared
that he would cause the earth to shake and to overthrow the cities of the whites and destroy
them, that the buffalo would return, and the land belong to the red race forever! These events
were to come to pass within two years; and meanwhile they were to prepare for his coming by
the ceremonies and dances which he commanded.

This curious story spread like wildfire and met with eager acceptance among the suffering and
discontented people. The teachings of Christian missionaries had prepared them to believe in
a Messiah, and the prescribed ceremonial was much more in accord with their traditions than
the conventional worship of the churches. Chiefs of many tribes sent delegations to the Indian
prophet; Short Bull, Kicking Bear, and others went from among the Sioux, and on their return
all inaugurated the dances at once. There was an attempt at first to keep the matter secret,
but it soon became generally known and seriously disconcerted the Indian agents and others,
who were quick to suspect a hostile conspiracy under all this religious enthusiasm. As a matter
of fact, there was no thought of an uprising; the dancing was innocent enough, and pathetic
enough their despairing hope in a pitiful Saviour who should overwhelm their oppressors and
bring back their golden age.

When the Indians refused to give up the "Ghost Dance" at the bidding of the authorities, the
growing suspicion and alarm focused upon Sitting Bull, who in spirit had never been any too
submissive, and it was determined to order his arrest. At the special request of Major McLaughlin,
agent at Standing Rock, forty of his Indian police were sent out to Sitting Bull's home on
Grand River to secure his person (followed at some little distance by a body of United States
troops for reinforcement, in case of trouble). These police are enlisted from among the tribesmen
at each agency, and have proved uniformly brave and faithful. They entered the cabin at daybreak,
aroused the chief from a sound slumber, helped him to dress, and led him unresisting from the
house; but when he came out in the gray dawn of that December morning in 1890, to find his
cabin surrounded by armed men and himself led away to he knew not what fate, he cried out loudly:

"They have taken me: what say you to it?"

Men poured out of the neighboring houses, and in a few minutes the police were themselves surrounded
with an excited and rapidly increasing throng. They harangued the crowd in vain; Sitting Bull's
blood was up, and he again appealed to his men. His adopted brother, the Assiniboine captive
whose life he had saved so many years before, was the first to fire. His shot killed Lieutenant
Bull Head, who held Sitting Bull by the arm. Then there was a short but sharp conflict, in
which Sitting Bull and six of his defenders and six of the Indian police were slain, with many
more wounded. The chief's young son, Crow Foot, and his devoted "brother" died with him. When
all was over, and the terrified people had fled precipitately across the river, the soldiers
appeared upon the brow of the long hill and fired their Hotchkiss guns into the deserted camp.

Thus ended the life of a natural strategist of no mean courage and ability. The great chief
was buried without honors outside the cemetery at the post, and for some years the grave was
marked by a mere board at its head. Recently some women have built a cairn of rocks there in
token of respect and remembrance.

RAIN-IN-THE-FACE

The noted Sioux warrior, Rain-in-the-Face, whose name once carried terror to every part of
the frontier, died at his home on the Standing Rock reserve in North Dakota on September 14,
1905. About two months before his death I went to see him for the last time, where he lay upon
the bed of sickness from which he never rose again, and drew from him his life-history.

It had been my experience that you cannot induce an Indian to tell a story, or even his own
name, by asking him directly.

"Friend," I said, "even if a man is on a hot trail, he stops for a smoke! In the good old days,
before the charge there was a smoke. At home, by the fireside, when the old men were asked
to tell their brave deeds, again the pipe was passed. So come, let us smoke now to the memory
of the old days!"

He took of my tobacco and filled his long pipe, and we smoked. Then I told an old mirthful
story to get him in the humor of relating his own history.

The old man lay upon an iron bedstead, covered by a red blanket, in a corner of the little
log cabin. He was all alone that day; only an old dog lay silent and watchful at his master's feet.

Finally he looked up and said with a pleasant smile:

"True, friend; it is the old custom to retrace one's trail before leaving it forever! I know
that I am at the door of the spirit home.

"I was born near the forks of the Cheyenne River, about seventy years ago. My father was not
a chief; my grandfather was not a chief, but a good hunter and a feast-maker. On my mother's
side I had some noted ancestors, but they left me no chieftainship. I had to work for my reputation.

"When I was a boy, I loved to fight," he continued. "In all our boyish games I had the name
of being hard to handle, and I took much pride in the fact.

"I was about ten years old when we encountered a band of Cheyennes. They were on friendly terms
with us, but we boys always indulged in sham fights on such occasions, and this time I got
in an honest fight with a Cheyenne boy older than I. I got the best of the boy, but he hit
me hard in the face several times, and my face was all spattered with blood and streaked where
the paint had been washed away. The Sioux boys whooped and yelled:

"'His enemy is down, and his face is spattered as if with rain! Rain-in-the-Face! His name
shall be Rain-in-the-Face!'

"Afterwards, when I was a young man, we went on a warpath against the Gros Ventres. We stole
some of their horses, but were overtaken and had to abandon the horses and fight for our lives.
I had wished my face to represent the sun when partly covered with darkness, so I painted it
half black, half red. We fought all day in the rain, and my face was partly washed and streaked
with red and black: so again I was christened Rain-in-the-Face. We considered it an honorable name.

"I had been on many warpaths, but was not especially successful until about the time the Sioux
began to fight with the white man. One of the most daring attacks that we ever made was at
Fort Totten, North Dakota, in the summer of 1866.

"Hohay, the Assiniboine captive of Sitting Bull, was the leader in this raid. Wapaypay, the
Fearless Bear, who was afterward hanged at Yankton, was the bravest man among us. He dared
Hohay to make the charge. Hohay accepted the challenge, and in turn dared the other to ride
with him through the agency and right under the walls of the fort, which was well garrisoned
and strong.

"Wapaypay and I in those days called each other 'brother-friend.' It was a life-and-death vow.
What one does the other must do; and that meant that I must be in the forefront of the charge,
and if he is killed, I must fight until I die also!

"I prepared for death. I painted as usual like an eclipse of the sun, half black and half red."

His eyes gleamed and his face lighted up remarkably as he talked, pushing his black hair back
from his forehead with a nervous gesture.

"Now the signal for the charge was given! I started even with Wapaypay, but his horse was faster
than mine, so he left me a little behind as we neared the fort. This was bad for me, for by
that time the soldiers had somewhat recovered from the surprise and were aiming better. 

Now what could have induced Rachel to commit so dishonorable and, moreover, dangerous an action,
but the idea that, in carrying away these images, her family's household "gods," she would
insure a blessing and prosperity to herself and her house? That by so doing, she would, according
to the heathens' notion, rob her father and old home of what she
wished to secure herself (see page 344), does not seem to have disturbed
her.

It is clear from this that, even after she was wedded to Jacob the monotheist, she remained
a heathen and idolater, though she concealed the fact from him.

10. On the other hand, wholesale emigration was not sufficient to remove the evil. Had it indeed
been a wilderness, unsettled in all its extent, into which the patriarchs led forth their
people, they might have succeeded in weaning them completely from the old influences. But,
scattered over it and already in possession, were numerous Canaanite
tribes, wealthy and powerful under their chiefs--Amorites, and Hivites,
and Hittites, and many more.

In the pithy and picturesque Biblical language, "the Canaanite was in the land" (Genesis, xii.
6), and the Hebrews constantly came into contact with them, indeed were dependent on their tolerance
and large hospitality for the freedom with which they were suffered to enjoy the pastures of
"the land wherein they were strangers," as the vast region over which they ranged is frequently
and pointedly called. Being but a handful of men, they had to be cautious in their dealings and
to keep on good terms with the people among whom they were brought. "I am a stranger and a sojourner with
you," admits Abraham, "bowing himself down before the people of the
land," (a tribe of Hittites near Hebron, west of the Dead Sea), when
he offers to buy of them a field, there to institute a family burying-place
for himself and his race; for he had no legal right to any of the
land, not so much as would yield a sepulchre to his dead, even though
the "children of Heth" treat him with high honor, and, in speaking
to him, say, "My lord," and "thou art a mighty prince among us"

(Genesis, xxiii.). This transaction, conducted on both sides in a spirit of great courtesy
and liberality, is not the only instance of the friendliness with which the Canaanite owners of
the soil regarded the strangers, both in Abraham's lifetime and long after his death. His grandson,
the patriarch Jacob, and his sons find the same tolerance among the Hivites of Shalem, who
thus commune among themselves concerning them:--"These men are peaceable with us; therefore
let them dwell in the land and trade therein; for the land, behold it is large enough for them;
let us take their daughters for wives, and let us give them our daughters."

And the Hivite prince speaks in this sense to the Hebrew chief:--"The soul of my son longeth
for your daughter: I pray you, give her him to wife. And make ye marriages with us, and give your
daughters unto us and take our daughters unto you. And ye shall dwell with us, and the land
shall be before you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein."

11. But this question of intermarriage was always a most grievous one; the question of all others
at which the Hebrew leaders strictly drew the line of intercourse
and good-fellowship; the more stubbornly that their people were naturally
much inclined to such unions, since they came and went freely among
their hosts, and their daughters went out, unhindered, "to see the
daughters of the land."

Now all the race of Canaan followed religions very similar to that of Chaldea, only grosser
still in their details and forms of worship. Therefore, that the old idolatrous habits might not
return strongly upon them under the influence of a heathen household,
the patriarchs forbade marriage with the women of the countries through
which they passed and repassed with their tents and flocks, and themselves
abstained from it.

And when Esau, Isaac's son, took two wives from among the Hittite women, it is expressly said
that they were "a grief of mind unto Isaac and Rebekah;" and Isaac's most solemn charge to
his other son, Jacob, as he sends him from him with his blessing, is: "Thou shalt not take a wife
of the daughters of Canaan." Whithersoever the Hebrews came in the course of their long wanderings,
which lasted many centuries, the same twofold prohibition was laid on them: of marrying with
native women--"for surely," they are told, "they will turn away your
heart after their gods," and of following idolatrous religions, a
prohibition enforced by the severest penalties, even to that of death.

But nothing could keep them long from breaking the law in both respects. The very frequency
and emphasis with which the command is repeated, the violence of the denunciations against offenders,
the terrible punishments threatened and often actually inflicted, sufficiently show how imperfectly
and unwillingly it was obeyed. Indeed the entire Old Testament is one continuous illustration
of the unslackening zeal with which the wise and enlightened men
of Israel--its lawgivers, leaders, priests and prophets--pursued their
arduous and often almost hopeless task, of keeping their people pure
from worships and practices which to them, who had realized the fallacy
of a belief in many gods, were the most pernicious abominations.

In this spirit and to this end they preached, they fought, they promised, threatened, punished,
and in this spirit, in later ages, they wrote.

12.

It is not until a nation is well established and enjoys a certain measure of prosperity, security
and the leisure which accompanies them, that it begins to collect its own traditions and memories
and set them down in order, into a continuous narrative. So it was with the Hebrews. The small
tribe became a nation, which ceased from its wanderings and conquered for itself a permanent place
on the face of the earth. But to do this took many hundred years, years of memorable adventures
and vicissitudes, so that the materials which accumulated for the future historians, in stories,
traditions, songs, were ample and varied.

Much, too, must have been written down at a comparatively early period. How early must remain
uncertain, since there is unfortunately nothing to show at what time the Hebrews learned the
art of writing and their characters thought, like other alphabets, to be borrowed from those
of the Phoenicians.

However that may be, one thing is sure: that the different books
which compose the body of the Hebrew Sacred Scriptures, which we call
"the Old Testament," were collected from several and different sources,
and put into the shape in which they have descended to us at a very
late period, some almost as late as the birth of Christ.

The first book of all, that of Genesis, describing the beginnings of the Jewish people,--("Genesis"
is a Greek word, which means "Origin")--belongs at all events to a somewhat earlier date. It
is put together mainly of two narratives, distinct and often different in point of spirit
and even fact. The later compiler who had both sources before him to work into a final form,
looked on both with too much respect to alter either, and generally
contented himself with giving them side by side, (as in the story
of Hagar, which is told twice and differently, in Chap.

XVI. and Chap. XXI.), or intermixing them throughout, so that it takes much attention and pains
to separate them, (as in the story of the Flood, Chap. VI.-VIII.). This latter story is almost
identical with the Chaldean Deluge-legend included in the great Izdubar epic, of which it forms
the eleventh tablet. (See Chap. VII.) Indeed, every child can see, by comparing the Chaldean
cosmogonic and mythical legends with the first chapters of the Book of Genesis, those which
relate to the beginnings not so much of the Hebrew people as of the
human race and the world in general, that both must originally have
flowed from one and the same spring of tradition and priestly lore.

The resemblances are too staring, close, continuous, not to exclude all rational surmises as
to casual coincidences. The differences are such as most strikingly illustrate the transformation
which the same material can undergo when treated by two races of different moral standards and
spiritual tendencies. Let us briefly examine both, side by side.

13. To begin with the Creation.

The description of the primeval chaos--a waste of waters, from which "the darkness was not lifted,"
(see p. 261)--answers very well to that in Genesis, i. 2: "And the earth was without form and
void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep." The establishment of the heavenly bodies and
the creation of the animals also correspond remarkably in both accounts,
and even come in the same order (see p. 264, and Genesis, i. 14-22).

The famous cylinder of the British Museum (see No. 62, p. 266) is strong presumption in favor
of the identity of the Chaldean version of the first couple's disobedience with the Biblical
one. We have seen the important position occupied in the Chaldean religion by the symbol of the
Sacred Tree, which surely corresponds to the Tree of Life in Eden
(see p. 268), and probably also to that of Knowledge, and the different
passages and names ingeniously collected and confronted by scholars
leave no doubt as to the Chaldeans having had the legend of an Eden,
a garden of God (see p. 274).

A better preserved copy of the Creation tablets with the now missing passages may be recovered
any day, and there is no reason to doubt that they will be found as closely parallel to the
Biblical narrative as those that have been recovered until now. But even as we have them at present
it is very evident that the groundwork, the material, is the same in both. It is the manner,
the spirit, which differs. In the Chaldean account, polytheism runs riot. Every element, every
power of nature--Heaven, Earth, the Abyss, Atmosphere, etc.--has
been personified into an individual divine being actively and severely
engaged in the great work.

The Hebrew narrative is severely monotheistic. In it GOD does all that "the gods" between them
do in the other. Every poetical or allegorical turn of phrase is carefully avoided, lest it
lead into the evil errors of the sister-nation. The symbolical myths--such as that of Bel's
mixing his own blood with the clay out of which he fashions man,(see
p. 266)--are sternly discarded, for the same reason.

One only is retained: the temptation by the Serpent.

But the Serpent being manifestly the personification of the Evil
Principle which is forever busy in the soul of man, there was no danger
of its being deified and worshipped; and as, moreover, the tale told
in this manner very picturesquely and strikingly points a great moral
lesson, the Oriental love of parable and allegory could in this instance
be allowed free scope.

Besides, the Hebrew writers of the sacred books were not beyond or above the superstitions
of their country and age; indeed they retained all of these that did not appear to them incompatible
with monotheism.

(Genesis, i. 14). But a belief in astrology by no means implies the admission of several gods.
In one or two passages, indeed, we do find an expression which seems to have slipped in unawares,
as an involuntary reminiscence of an original polytheism; it is where
God, communing with himself on Adam's trespass, says: "Behold, the
man is become as one of us, to know good and evil"

(Gen. iii. 22). An even clearer trace confronts us in one of the two names that are given to
God. These names are "Jehovah," (more correctly "Yahveh") and "Elohim." Now the latter name
is the plural of El, "god," and so really means "the gods." If the sacred writers retained it,
it was certainly not from carelessness or inadvertence.

As they use it, it becomes in itself almost a profession of faith. It seems to proclaim the
God of their religion as "the One God who is all the gods," in whom all the forces of the universe
are contained and merged.

14. (Gen. iii. 21). But such a judgment would be a serious error.

There is nothing mythical in this; only the tendency, common to all mankind, of endowing the
Deity with human attributes of form, speech and action, whenever the attempt was made to bring
it very closely within the reach of their imagination. This tendency is so universal, that it
has been classed, under a special name, among the distinctive features
of the human mind.

It has been called ANTHROPOMORPHISM, (from two Greek words Anthropos, "man," and morphê, "form,")
and can never be got rid of, because it is part and parcel of our
very nature.

Man's spiritual longings are infinite, his perceptive faculties are
limited.

His spirit has wings of flame that would lift him up and bear him even beyond the endlessness
of space into pure abstraction; his senses have soles of lead that ever weigh him down, back
to the earth, of which he is and to which he must needs cling, to
exist at all.

He can conceive, by a great effort, an abstract idea, eluding the grasp of senses, unclothed
in matter; but he can realize, imagine, only by using such appliances as the senses supply
him with.

Therefore, the more fervently he grasps an idea, the more closely he assimilates it, the more
it becomes materialized in his grasp, and when he attempts to reproduce it out of himself--behold!
it has assumed the likeness of himself or something he has seen, heard, touched--the spirituality
of it has become weighted with flesh, even as it is in himself. It is as it were a reproduction,
in the intellectual world, of the eternal strife, in physical nature,
between the two opposed forces of attraction and repulsion, the centrifugal
and centripetal, of which the final result is to keep each body in
its place, with a well-defined and limited range of motion allotted
to it.

Thus, however pure and spiritual the conception of the Deity may be, man, in making it real
to himself, in bringing it down within his reach and ken, within the shrine of his heart,
will, and must perforce make of it a Being, human not only in shape, but also in thought and feeling.
How otherwise could he grasp it at all? And the accessories with which he will surround it
will necessarily be suggested by his own experience, copied from
those among which he moves habitually himself.

"Walking in the garden in the cool of the day" is an essentially Oriental and Southern recreation,
and came quite naturally to the mind of a writer living in a land steeped in sunshine and sultriness.
Had the writer been a Northerner, a denizen of snow-clad plains and ice-bound rivers, the Lord
might probably have been represented as coming in a swift, fur-lined sleigh. Anthropomorphism,
then, is in itself neither mythology nor idolatry; but it is very clear that it can with the
utmost ease glide into either or both, with just a little help from
poetry and, especially, from art, in its innocent endeavor to fix
in tangible form the vague imaginings and gropings, of which words
often are but a fleeting and feeble rendering.

Hence the banishment of all material symbols, the absolute prohibition of any images whatever
as an accessory of religious worship, which, next to the recognition of One only God, is the keystone
of the Hebrew law:--"Thou shalt have no other gods before me. (Exodus,
xx.

3-5).

But, to continue our parallel.

15. The ten antediluvian kings of Berosus, who succeed the apparition of the divine Man-Fish,
Êa-Oannes (see p. 196), have their exact counterpart in the ten antediluvian
patriarchs of Genesis, v. Like the Chaldean kings, the patriarchs
live an unnatural number of years.

Only the extravagant figures of the Chaldean tradition are considerably reduced in the Hebrew
version. While the former allots to its kings reigns of tens of thousands of years (see p. 196);
the latter cuts them down to hundreds, and the utmost that it allows to any of its patriarchs
is nine hundred and sixty-nine years of life (Methuselah).

16.

The resemblances between the two Deluge narratives are so obvious and continuous, that it is not these,
but the differences that need pointing out. Here again the sober, severely monotheistic character
of the Hebrew narrative contrasts most strikingly with the exuberant polytheism of the Chaldean
one, in which Heaven, Sun, Storm, Sea, even Rain are personified, deified, and consistently
act their several appropriate and most dramatic parts in the great
cataclysm, while Nature herself, as the Great Mother of beings and
fosterer of life, is represented, in the person of Ishtar, lamenting
the slaughter of men (see p. 327).

Apart from this fundamental difference in spirit, the identity in
all the essential points of fact is amazing, and variations occur
only in lesser details.

The most characteristic one is that, while the Chaldean version describes the building and
furnishing of a ship, with all the accuracy of much seafaring knowledge, and does not forget
even to name the pilot, the Hebrew writer, with the clumsiness and ignorance of nautical matters
natural to an inland people unfamiliar with the sea or the appearance of ships, speaks only of
an ark or chest. The greatest discrepancy is in the duration of the flood, which is much shorter
in the Chaldean text than in the Hebrew.

On the seventh day already, Hâsisadra sends out the dove (see p. 316). But then in the Biblical narrative
itself, made up, as was remarked above, of two parallel texts joined
together, this same point is given differently in different places.

According to Genesis, vii. Again, the number of the saved is far larger in the Chaldean account:
Hâsisadra takes with him into the ship all his men-servants, his women-servants, and even his
"nearest friends," while Noah is allowed to save only his own immediate
family, "his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives"

(Genesis, vi. 18). Then, the incident of the birds is differently told: Hâsisadra sends out three
birds, the dove, the swallow, and the raven; Noah only two--first the raven, then three times
in succession the dove. But it is startling to find both narratives more than once using the
same words. Thus the Hebrew writer tells how Noah "sent forth a raven, which went to and fro," and
how "the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot and returned." Hâsisadra relates: "I took
out a dove and sent it forth. The dove went forth, to and fro, but found no resting-place and
returned." And further, when Hâsisadra describes the sacrifice he offered on the top of Mount
Nizir, after he came forth from the ship, he says: "The gods smelled a savor; the gods smelled
a sweet savor."

"And the Lord smelled a sweet savor," says Genesis,--viii. 21--of Noah's burnt-offering. These
few hints must suffice to show how instructive and entertaining is a parallel study of the two
narratives; it can be best done by attentively reading both alternately, and comparing them together,
paragraph by paragraph.

17. The legend of the Tower of Languages (see above, p. 293, and Genesis, xi.
 The whoops of the hunters, the lowing of the cows, and the
menacing glances of the bulls as they plunged along, or now and then stood at bay, were enough
to unnerve a boy less well tried. He was unable to select his victim. He had been carried deeply
into the midst of the herd and found himself helpless to make the one sure shot, therefore
he held his one arrow in his mouth and merely strove to separate them so as to get his chance.

At last the herd parted, and he cut out two fat cows, and was maneuvering for position when
a rider appeared out of the snow cloud on their other side. This aroused him to make haste
lest his rival secure both cows; he saw his chance, and in a twinkling his arrow sped clear
through one of the animals so that she fell headlong.

In this instant he observed that the man who had joined him was his own father, who had met
with the same difficulties as himself. When the young man had shot his only arrow, the old
chief with a whoop went after the cow that was left, but as he gained her broadside, his horse
stepped in a badger hole and fell, throwing him headlong. The maddened buffalo, as sometimes
happens in such cases, turned upon the pony and gored him to death. His rider lay motionless,
while Two Strike rushed forward to draw her attention, but she merely tossed her head at him,
while persistently standing guard over the dead horse and the all but frozen Indian.

Alas for the game of "one arrow to kill!" The boy must think fast, for his father's robe had
slipped off, and he was playing dead, lying almost naked in the bitter air upon the trampled
snow. His bluff would not serve, so he flew back to pull out his solitary arrow from the body
of the dead cow. Quickly wheeling again, he sent it into her side and she fell. The one arrow
to kill had become one arrow to kill two buffalo! At the council lodge that evening Two Strike
was the hero.

The following story is equally characteristic of him, and in explanation it should be said
that in the good old days among the Sioux, a young man is not supposed to associate with girls
until he is ready to take a wife. It was a rule with our young men, especially the honorable
and well-born, to gain some reputation in the hunt and in war,--the more difficult the feats
achieved the better,--before even speaking to a young woman. Many a life was risked in the
effort to establish a reputation along these lines. Courtship was no secret, but rather a social
event, often celebrated by the proud parents with feasts and presents to the poor, and this
etiquette was sometimes felt by a shy or sensitive youth as an insurmountable obstacle to the
fulfilment of his desires.

Two Strike was the son and grandson of a chief, but he could not claim any credit for the deeds
of his forbears. He had not only to guard their good name but achieve one for himself. This
he had set out to do, and he did well. He was now of marriageable age with a war record, and
admitted to the council, yet he did not seem to trouble himself at all about a wife. His was
strictly a bachelor career. Meanwhile, as is apt to be the case, his parents had thought much
about a possible daughter-in-law, and had even collected ponies, fine robes, and other acceptable
goods to be given away in honor of the event, whenever it should take place. Now and then they
would drop a sly hint, but with no perceptible effect.

They did not and could not know of the inward struggle that racked his mind at this period
of his life. The shy and modest young man was dying for a wife, yet could not bear even to
think of speaking to a young woman! The fearless hunter of buffaloes, mountain lions, and grizzlies,
the youth who had won his eagle feathers in a battle with the Utes, could not bring himself
to take this tremendous step.

At last his father appealed to him directly. "My son," he declared, "it is your duty to take
unto yourself a wife, in order that the honors won by your ancestors and by yourself may be
handed down in the direct line. There are several eligible young women in our band whose parents
have intimated a wish to have you for their son-in-law."

Two Strike made no reply, but he was greatly disturbed. He had no wish to have the old folks
select his bride, for if the truth were told, his choice was already made. He had simply lacked
the courage to go a-courting!

The next morning, after making an unusually careful toilet, he took his best horse and rode
to a point overlooking the path by which the girls went for water. Here the young men were
wont to take their stand, and, if fortunate, intercept the girl of their heart for a brief
but fateful interview. Two Strike had determined to speak straight to the point, and as soon
as he saw the pretty maid he came forward boldly and placed himself in her way. A long moment
passed. She glanced up at him shyly but not without encouragement. His teeth fairly chattered
with fright, and he could not say a word. She looked again, noted his strange looks, and believed
him suddenly taken ill. He appeared to be suffering. At last he feebly made signs for her to
go on and leave him alone. The maiden was sympathetic, but as she did not know what else to
do she obeyed his request.

The poor youth was so ashamed of his cowardice that he afterward admitted his first thought
was to take his own life. He believed he had disgraced himself forever in the eyes of the only
girl he had ever loved. However, he determined to conquer his weakness and win her, which he
did. The story came out many years after and was told with much enjoyment by the old men.

Two Strike was better known by his own people than by the whites, for he was individually a
terror in battle rather than a leader. He achieved his honorable name in a skirmish with the
Utes in Colorado. The Sioux regarded these people as their bravest enemies, and the outcome
of the fight was for some time uncertain. First the Sioux were forced to retreat and then their
opponents, and at the latter point the horse of a certain Ute was shot under him. A friend
came to his rescue and took him up behind him. Our hero overtook them in flight, raised his
war club, and knocked both men off with one blow.

He was a very old man when he died, only two or three years ago, on the Rosebud reservation.

AMERICAN HORSE

One of the wittiest and shrewdest of the Sioux chiefs was American Horse, who succeeded to
the name and position of an uncle, killed in the battle of Slim Buttes in 1876. The younger
American Horse was born a little before the encroachments of the whites upon the Sioux country
became serious and their methods aggressive, and his early manhood brought him into that most
trying and critical period of our history. He had been tutored by his uncle, since his own
father was killed in battle while he was still very young. The American Horse band was closely
attached to a trading post, and its members in consequence were inclined to be friendly with
the whites, a policy closely adhered to by their leader.

When he was born, his old grandfather said: "Put him out in the sun! Let him ask his great-grandfather,
the Sun, for the warm blood of a warrior!" And he had warm blood. He was a genial man, liking
notoriety and excitement. He always seized an opportunity to leap into the center of the arena.

In early life he was a clownish sort of boy among the boys--an expert mimic and impersonator.
This talent made him popular and in his way a leader. He was a natural actor, and early showed
marked ability as a speaker.

American Horse was about ten years old when he was attacked by three Crow warriors, while driving
a herd of ponies to water. Here he displayed native cunning and initiative. It seemed he had
scarcely a chance to escape, for the enemy was near. He yelled frantically at the ponies to
start them toward home, while he dropped off into a thicket of willows and hid there. A part
of the herd was caught in sight of the camp and there was a counter chase, but the Crows got
away with the ponies. Of course his mother was frantic, believing her boy had been killed or
captured; but after the excitement was over, he appeared in camp unhurt. When questioned about
his escape, he remarked: "I knew they would not take the time to hunt for small game when there
was so much bigger close by."

When he was quite a big boy, he joined in a buffalo hunt, and on the way back with the rest
of the hunters his mule became unmanageable. American Horse had insisted on riding him in addition
to a heavy load of meat and skins, and the animal evidently resented this, for he suddenly
began to run and kick, scattering fresh meat along the road, to the merriment of the crowd.
But the boy turned actor, and made it appear that it was at his wish the mule had given this
diverting performance. He clung to the back of his plunging and braying mount like a circus
rider, singing a Brave Heart song, and finally brought up amid the laughter and cheers of his
companions. Far from admitting defeat, he boasted of his horsemanship and declared that his
"brother" the donkey would put any enemy to flight, and that they should be called upon to
lead a charge.

It was several years later that he went to sleep early one night and slept soundly, having
been scouting for two nights previous. It happened that there was a raid by the Crows, and
when he awoke in the midst of the yelling and confusion, he sprang up and attempted to join
in the fighting. Everybody knew his voice in all the din, so when he fired his gun and announced
a coup, as was the custom, others rushed to the spot, to find that he had shot a hobbled pony
belonging to their own camp. The laugh was on him, and he never recovered from his chagrin
at this mistake. In fact, although he was undoubtedly fearless and tried hard to distinguish
himself in warfare, he did not succeed.

It is told of him that he once went with a war party of young men to the Wind River country
against the Shoshones. At last they discovered a large camp, but there were only a dozen or
so of the Sioux, therefore they hid themselves and watched for their opportunity to attack
an isolated party of hunters. While waiting thus, they ran short of food. One day a small party
of Shoshones was seen near at hand, and in the midst of the excitement and preparations for
the attack, young American Horse caught sight of a fat black-tail deer close by. Unable to
resist the temptation, he pulled an arrow from his quiver and sent it through the deer's heart,
then with several of his half-starved companions sprang upon the yet quivering body of the
animal to cut out the liver, which was sometimes eaten raw. One of the men was knocked down,
it is said, by the last kick of the dying buck, but having swallowed a few mouthfuls the warriors
rushed upon and routed their enemies. It is still told of American Horse how he killed game
and feasted between the ambush and the attack.

At another time he was drying his sacred war bonnet and other gear over a small fire. These
articles were held in great veneration by the Indians and handled accordingly. Suddenly the
fire blazed up, and our hero so far forgot himself as to begin energetically beating out the
flames with the war bonnet, breaking off one of the sacred buffalo horns in the act. One could
almost fill a book with his mishaps and exploits. I will give one of them in his own words
as well as I can remember them.

"We were as promising a party of young warriors as our tribe ever sent against any of its ancestral
enemies. It was midsummer, and after going two days' journey from home we began to send two
scouts ahead daily while the main body kept a half day behind. The scouts set out every evening
and traveled all night. One night the great war pipe was held out to me and to Young-Man-Afraid-of-His-Horses.
At daybreak, having met no one, we hid our horses and climbed to the top of the nearest butte
to take an observation. It was a very hot day. We lay flat on our blankets, facing the west
where the cliff fell off in a sheer descent, and with our backs toward the more gradual slope
dotted with scrub pines and cedars. We stuck some tall grass on our heads and proceeded to
study the landscape spread before us for any sign of man.

"The sweeping valleys were dotted with herds, both large and small, of buffalo and elk, and
now and then we caught a glimpse of a coyote slinking into the gulches, returning from night
hunting to sleep. While intently watching some moving body at a distance, we could not yet
tell whether of men or animals, I heard a faint noise behind me and slowly turned my head.
Behold! a grizzly bear sneaking up on all fours and almost ready to spring!

"'Run!' I yelled into the ear of my companion, and we both leaped to our feet in a second.
'Separate! separate!' he shouted, and as we did so, the bear chose me for his meat. I ran downhill
as fast as I could, but he was gaining. 'Dodge around a tree!' screamed Young-Man-Afraid. I
took a deep breath and made a last spurt, desperately circling the first tree I came to. As
the ground was steep just there, I turned a somersault one way and the bear the other. I picked
myself up in time to climb the tree, and was fairly out of reach when he gathered himself together
and came at me more furiously than ever, holding in one paw the shreds of my breechcloth, for
in the fall he had just scratched my back and cut my belt in two, and carried off my only garment
for a trophy!

"My friend was well up another tree and laughing heartily at my predicament, and when the bear
saw that he could not get at either of us he reluctantly departed, after I had politely addressed
him and promised to make an offering to his spirit on my safe return. I don't think I ever
had a narrower escape," he concluded.

During the troublous times from 1865 to 1877, American Horse advocated yielding to the government
at any cost, being no doubt convinced of the uselessness of resistance. He was not a recognized
leader until 1876, when he took the name and place of his uncle. Up to this time he bore the
nickname of Manishnee (Can not walk, or Played out.)

When the greater part of the Ogallalas, to which band he belonged, came into the reservation,
he at once allied himself with the peace element at the Red Cloud agency, near Fort Robinson,
Nebraska, and took no small part in keeping the young braves quiet. Since the older and better-known
chiefs, with the exception of Spotted Tail, were believed to be hostile at heart, the military
made much use of him. Many of his young men enlisted as scouts by his advice, and even he himself
entered the service.

In the early part of the year 1876, there was a rumor that certain bands were in danger of
breaking away. Their leader was one Sioux Jim, so nicknamed by the soldiers. American Horse
went to him as peacemaker, but was told he was a woman and no brave. He returned to his own
camp and told his men that Sioux Jim meant mischief, and in order to prevent another calamity
to the tribe, he must be chastised. He again approached the warlike Jim with several warriors
at his back. The recalcitrant came out, gun in hand, but the wily chief was too quick for him.
He shot and wounded the rebel, whereupon one of his men came forward and killed him.

This quelled the people for the time being and up to the killing of Crazy Horse. In the crisis
precipitated by this event, American Horse was again influential and energetic in the cause
of the government. From this time on he became an active participant in the affairs of the
Teton Sioux. He was noted for his eloquence, which was nearly always conciliatory, yet he could
say very sharp things of the duplicity of the whites. He had much ease of manner and was a
master of repartee. I recall his saying that if you have got to wear golden slippers to enter
the white man's heaven no Indian will ever get there, as the whites have got the Black Hills
and with them all the gold.

It was during the last struggle of his people, at the time of the Messiah craze in 1890-1891
that he demonstrated as never before the real greatness of the man. While many of his friends
were carried away by the new thought, he held aloof from it and cautioned his band to do the
same. When it developed into an extensive upheaval among the nations he took his positive stand
against it.

Presently all Indians who did not dance the Ghost Dance were ordered to come into camp at Pine
Ridge agency. American Horse was the first to bring in his people. I was there at the time
and talked with him daily. When Little was arrested, it had been agreed among the disaffected
to have him resist, which meant that he would be roughly handled. This was to be their excuse
to attack the Indian police, which would probably lead to a general massacre or outbreak. I
know that this desperate move was opposed from the beginning by American Horse, and it was
believed that his life was threatened.

On the day of the "Big Issue", when thousands of Indians were gathered at the agency, this
man Little, who had been in hiding, walked boldly among them. Of course the police would arrest
him at sight, and he was led toward the guardhouse. He struggled with them, but was overpowered.
A crowd of warriors rushed to his rescue, and there was confusion and a general shout of "Hurry
up with them! Kill them all!" I saw American Horse walk out of the agent's office and calmly
face the excited mob.

"What are you going to do?" he asked. "Stop, men, stop and think before you act! Will you murder
your children, your women, yes, destroy your nation to-day?" He stood before them like a statue
and the men who held the two policemen helpless paused for an instant. He went on: "You are
brave to-day because you outnumber the white men, but what will you do to-morrow? There are
railroads on all sides of you. The soldiers will pour in from every direction by thousands
and surround you. You have little food or ammunition. It will be the end of your people. Stop,
I say, stop now!"

Jack Red Cloud, son of the old chief rushed up to him and thrust a revolver almost in his face.
"It is you and men like you," he shouted, "who have reduced our race to slavery and starvation!"
American Horse did not flinch but deliberately reentered the office, followed by Jack still
flourishing the pistol. But his timely appearance and eloquence had saved the day. Others of
the police force had time to reach the spot, and with a large crowd of friendly Indians had
taken command of the situation.

When I went into the office I found him alone but apparently quite calm. "Where are the agent
and the clerks?" I asked. "They fled by the back door," he replied, smiling. "I think they
are in the cellar. These fools outside had almost caught us asleep, but I think it is over now."

American Horse was one of the earliest advocates of education for the Indian, and his son Samuel
and nephew Robert were among the first students at Carlisle. I think one or two of his daughters
were the handsomest Indian girls of full blood that I ever saw. His record as a councilor of
his people and his policy in the new situation that confronted them was manly and consistent.

DULL KNIFE

The life of Dull Knife, the Cheyenne, is a true hero tale. Simple, child-like yet manful, and
devoid of selfish aims, or love of gain, he is a pattern for heroes of any race.

Dull Knife was a chief of the old school. Among all the Indians of the plains, nothing counts
save proven worth. A man's caliber is measured by his courage, unselfishness and intelligence.
Many writers confuse history with fiction, but in Indian history their women and old men and
even children witness the main events, and not being absorbed in daily papers and magazines,
these events are rehearsed over and over with few variations. Though orally preserved, their
accounts are therefore accurate. But they have seldom been willing to give reliable information
to strangers, especially when asked and paid for.

Racial prejudice naturally enters into the account of a man's life by enemy writers, while
one is likely to favor his own race. I am conscious that many readers may think that I have
idealized the Indian. Therefore I will confess now that we have too many weak and unprincipled
men among us. When I speak of the Indian hero, I do not forget the mongrel in spirit, false
to the ideals of his people. Our trustfulness has been our weakness, and when the vices of
civilization were added to our own, we fell heavily.

It is said that Dull Knife as a boy was resourceful and self-reliant. He was only nine years
old when his family was separated from the rest of the tribe while on a buffalo hunt. His father
was away and his mother busy, and he was playing with his little sister on the banks of a stream,
when a large herd of buffalo swept down upon them on a stampede for water. His mother climbed
a tree, but the little boy led his sister into an old beaver house whose entrance was above
water, and here they remained in shelter until the buffalo passed and they were found by their
distracted parents.

Dull Knife was quite a youth when his tribe was caught one winter in a region devoid of game,
and threatened with starvation. The situation was made worse by heavy storms, but he secured
help and led a relief party a hundred and fifty miles, carrying bales of dried buffalo meat
on pack horses.

Another exploit that made him dear to his people occurred in battle, when his brother-in-law
was severely wounded and left lying where no one on either side dared to approach him. As soon
as Dull Knife heard of it he got on a fresh horse, and made so daring a charge that others
joined him; thus under cover of their fire he rescued his brother-in-law, and in so doing was
wounded twice.

The Sioux knew him as a man of high type, perhaps not so brilliant as Roman Nose and Two Moon,
but surpassing both in honesty and simplicity, as well as in his war record. (Two Moon, in
fact, was never a leader of his people, and became distinguished only in wars with the whites
during the period of revolt.) A story is told of an ancestor of the same name that illustrates
well the spirit of the age.

It was the custom in those days for the older men to walk ahead of the moving caravan and decide
upon all halts and camping places. One day the councilors came to a grove of wild cherries
covered with ripe fruit, and they stopped at once. Suddenly a grizzly charged from the thicket.
The men yelped and hooted, but the bear was not to be bluffed. He knocked down the first warrior
who dared to face him and dragged his victim into the bushes.

The whole caravan was in the wildest excitement. Several of the swiftest-footed warriors charged
the bear, to bring him out into the open, while the women and dogs made all the noise they
could. The bear accepted the challenge, and as he did so, the man whom they had supposed dead
came running from the opposite end of the thicket. The Indians were delighted, and especially
so when in the midst of their cheers, the man stopped running for his life and began to sing
a Brave Heart song as he approached the grove with his butcher knife in his hand. He would
dare his enemy again!

The grizzly met him with a tremendous rush, and they went down together. Instantly the bear
began to utter cries of distress, and at the same time the knife flashed, and he rolled over
dead. The warrior was too quick for the animal; he first bit his sensitive nose to distract
his attention, and then used the knife to stab him to the heart. He fought many battles with
knives thereafter and claimed that the spirit of the bear gave him success. On one occasion,
however, the enemy had a strong buffalo-hide shield which the Cheyenne bear fighter could not
pierce through, and he was wounded; nevertheless he managed to dispatch his foe. It was from
this incident that he received the name of Dull Knife, which was handed down to his descendant.

As is well known, the Northern Cheyennes uncompromisingly supported the Sioux in their desperate
defense of the Black Hills and Big Horn country. Why not? It was their last buffalo region--their
subsistence. It was what our wheat fields are to a civilized nation.

About the year 1875, a propaganda was started for confining all the Indians upon reservations,
where they would be practically interned or imprisoned, regardless of their possessions and
rights. The men who were the strongest advocates of the scheme generally wanted the Indians'
property--the one main cause back of all Indian wars. From the warlike Apaches to the peaceful
Nez Perces, all the tribes of the plains were hunted from place to place; then the government
resorted to peace negotiations, but always with an army at hand to coerce. Once disarmed and
helpless, they were to be taken under military guard to the Indian Territory.

A few resisted, and declared they would fight to the death rather than go. Among these were
the Sioux, but nearly all the smaller tribes were deported against their wishes. Of course
those Indians who came from a mountainous and cold country suffered severely. The moist heat
and malaria decimated the exiles. Chief Joseph of the Nez Perces and Chief Standing Bear of
the Poncas appealed to the people of the United States, and finally succeeded in having their
bands or the remnant of them returned to their own part of the country. Dull Knife was not
successful in his plea, and the story of his flight is one of poignant interest.

He was regarded by the authorities as a dangerous man, and with his depleted band was taken
to the Indian Territory without his consent in 1876. When he realized that his people were
dying like sheep, he was deeply moved. He called them together. Every man and woman declared
that they would rather die in their own country than stay there longer, and they resolved to
flee to their northern homes.

Here again was displayed the genius of these people. From the Indian Territory to Dakota is
no short dash for freedom. They knew what they were facing. Their line of flight lay through
a settled country and they would be closely pursued by the army. No sooner had they started
than the telegraph wires sang one song: "The panther of the Cheyennes is at large. Not a child
or a woman in Kansas or Nebraska is safe." Yet they evaded all the pursuing and intercepting
troops and reached their native soil. The strain was terrible, the hardship great, and Dull
Knife, like Joseph, was remarkable for his self-restraint in sparing those who came within
his power on the way.

But fate was against him, for there were those looking for blood money who betrayed him when
he thought he was among friends. His people were tired out and famished when they were surrounded
and taken to Fort Robinson. There the men were put in prison, and their wives guarded in camp.
They were allowed to visit their men on certain days. Many of them had lost everything; there
were but a few who had even one child left. They were heartbroken.

These despairing women appealed to their husbands to die fighting: their liberty was gone,
their homes broken up, and only slavery and gradual extinction in sight. At last Dull Knife
listened. He said: "I have lived my life. I am ready." The others agreed. "If our women are
willing to die with us, who is there to say no? If we are to do the deeds of men, it rests
with you women to bring us our weapons."

As they had been allowed to carry moccasins and other things to the men, so they contrived
to take in some guns and knives under this disguise. The plan was to kill the sentinels and
run to the nearest natural trench, there to make their last stand. The women and children were
to join them. This arrangement was carried out. Not every brave had a gun, but all had agreed
to die together. They fought till their small store of ammunition was exhausted, then exposed
their broad chests for a target, and the mothers even held up their little ones to be shot.
Thus died the fighting Cheyennes and their dauntless leader.

ROMAN NOSE

This Cheyenne war chief was a contemporary of Dull Knife. He was not so strong a character
as the other, and was inclined to be pompous and boastful; but with all this he was a true
type of native American in spirit and bravery.

While Dull Knife was noted in warfare among Indians, Roman Nose made his record against the
whites, in defense of territory embracing the Republican and Arickaree rivers. He was killed
on the latter river in 1868, in the celebrated battle with General Forsythe.

Save Chief Gall and Washakie in the prime of their manhood, this chief had no peer in bodily
perfection and masterful personality. No Greek or Roman gymnast was ever a finer model of physical
beauty and power. He thrilled his men to frenzied action when he came upon the field. It was
said of him that he sacrificed more youths by his personal influence in battle than any other
leader, being very reckless himself in grand-stand charges. He was killed needlessly in this
manner.

Roman Nose always rode an uncommonly fine, spirited horse, and with his war bonnet and other
paraphernalia gave a wonderful exhibition. The Indians used to say that the soldiers must gaze
at him rather than aim at him, as they so seldom hit him even when running the gantlet before
a firing line.

He did a remarkable thing once when on a one-arrow-to-kill buffalo hunt with his brother-in-law.
His companion had selected his animal and drew so powerfully on his sinew bowstring that it
broke. Roman Nose had killed his own cow and was whipping up close to the other when the misfortune
occurred. Both horses were going at full speed and the arrow jerked up in the air. Roman Nose
caught it and shot the cow for him.

Another curious story told of him is to the effect that he had an intimate Sioux friend who
was courting a Cheyenne girl, but without success. As the wooing of both Sioux and Cheyennes
was pretty much all effected in the night time, Roman Nose told his friend to let him do the
courting for him. He arranged with the young woman to elope the next night and to spend the
honeymoon among his Sioux friends. He then told his friend what to do. The Sioux followed instructions
and carried off the Cheyenne maid, and not until morning did she discover her mistake. It is
said she never admitted it, and that the two lived happily together to a good old age, so perhaps
there was no mistake after all.

Perhaps no other chief attacked more emigrants going west on the Oregon Trail between 1860
and 1868. He once made an attack on a large party of Mormons, and in this instance the Mormons
had time to form a corral with their wagons and shelter their women, children, and horses.
The men stood outside and met the Indians with well-aimed volleys, but they circled the wagons
with whirlwind speed, and whenever a white man fell, it was the signal for Roman Nose to charge
and count the "coup." The hat of one of the dead men was off, and although he had heavy hair
and beard, the top of his head was bald from the forehead up. As custom required such a deed
to be announced on the spot, the chief yelled at the top of his voice:

"Your Roman Nose has counted the first coup on the longest-faced white man who was ever killed!"

When the Northern Cheyennes under this daring leader attacked a body of scouting troops under
the brilliant officer General Forsythe, Roman Nose thought that he had a comparatively easy
task. The first onset failed, and the command entrenched itself on a little island. The wily
chief thought he could stampede them and urged on his braves with the declaration that the
first to reach the island should be entitled to wear a trailing war bonnet. Nevertheless he
was disappointed, and his men received such a warm reception that none succeeded in reaching
it. In order to inspire them to desperate deeds he had led them in person, and with him that
meant victory or death. According to the army accounts, it was a thrilling moment, and might
well have proved disastrous to the Forsythe command, whose leader was wounded and helpless.
The danger was acute until Roman Nose fell, and even then his lieutenants were bent upon crossing
at any cost, but some of the older chiefs prevailed upon them to withdraw.

Thus the brilliant war chief of the Cheyennes came to his death. If he had lived until 1876,
Sitting Bull would have had another bold ally.

CHIEF JOSEPH

The Nez Perce tribe of Indians, like other tribes too large to be united under one chief, was
composed of several bands, each distinct in sovereignty. It was a loose confederacy. Joseph
and his people occupied the Imnaha or Grande Ronde valley in Oregon, which was considered perhaps
the finest land in that part of the country.

When the last treaty was entered into by some of the bands of the Nez Perce, Joseph's band
was at Lapwai, Idaho, and had nothing to do with the agreement. The elder chief in dying had
counseled his son, then not more than twenty-two or twenty-three years of age, never to part
with their home, assuring him that he had signed no papers. These peaceful non-treaty Indians
did not even know what land had been ceded until the agent read them the government order to
leave. Of course they refused. You and I would have done the same.

When the agent failed to move them, he and the would-be settlers called upon the army to force
them to be good, namely, without a murmur to leave their pleasant inheritance in the hands
of a crowd of greedy grafters. General O. O. Howard, the Christian soldier, was sent to do
the work.

He had a long council with Joseph and his leading men, telling them they must obey the order
or be driven out by force. We may be sure that he presented this hard alternative reluctantly.
Joseph was a mere youth without experience in war or public affairs. He had been well brought
up in obedience to parental wisdom and with his brother Ollicut had attended Missionary Spaulding's
school where they had listened to the story of Christ and his religion of brotherhood. He now
replied in his simple way that neither he nor his father had ever made any treaty disposing
of their country, that no other band of the Nez Perces was authorized to speak for them, and
it would seem a mighty injustice and unkindness to dispossess a friendly band.

General Howard told them in effect that they had no rights, no voice in the matter: they had
only to obey. Although some of the lesser chiefs counseled revolt then and there, Joseph maintained
his self-control, seeking to calm his people, and still groping for a peaceful settlement of
their difficulties. He finally asked for thirty days' time in which to find and dispose of
their stock, and this was granted.

Joseph steadfastly held his immediate followers to their promise, but the land-grabbers were
impatient, and did everything in their power to bring about an immediate crisis so as to hasten
the eviction of the Indians. Depredations were committed, and finally the Indians, or some
of them, retaliated, which was just what their enemies had been looking for. There might be
a score of white men murdered among themselves on the frontier and no outsider would ever hear
about it, but if one were injured by an Indian--"Down with the bloodthirsty savages!" was the cry.

Joseph told me himself that during all of those thirty days a tremendous pressure was brought
upon him by his own people to resist the government order. "The worst of it was," said he,
"that everything they said was true; besides"--he paused for a moment--"it seemed very soon
for me to forget my father's dying words, 'Do not give up our home!'" Knowing as I do just
what this would mean to an Indian, I felt for him deeply.

Among the opposition leaders were Too-hul-hul-sote, White Bird, and Looking Glass, all of them
strong men and respected by the Indians; while on the other side were men built up by emissaries
of the government for their own purposes and advertised as "great friendly chiefs." As a rule
such men are unworthy, and this is so well known to the Indians that it makes them distrustful
of the government's sincerity at the start. Moreover, while Indians unqualifiedly say what
they mean, the whites have a hundred ways of saying what they do not mean.

The center of the storm was this simple young man, who so far as I can learn had never been
upon the warpath, and he stood firm for peace and obedience. As for his father's sacred dying
charge, he told himself that he would not sign any papers, he would not go of his free will
but from compulsion, and this was his excuse.

However, the whites were unduly impatient to clear the coveted valley, and by their insolence
they aggravated to the danger point an already strained situation. The murder of an Indian
was the climax and this happened in the absence of the young chief. He returned to find the
leaders determined to die fighting. The nature of the country was in their favor and at least
they could give the army a chase, but how long they could hold out they did not know. Even
Joseph's younger brother Ollicut was won over. There was nothing for him to do but fight; and
then and there began the peaceful Joseph's career as a general of unsurpassed strategy in conducting
one of the most masterly retreats in history.

This is not my judgment, but the unbiased opinion of men whose knowledge and experience fit
them to render it. Bear in mind that these people were not scalp hunters like the Sioux, Cheyennes,
and Utes, but peaceful hunters and fishermen. The first council of war was a strange business
to Joseph. He had only this to say to his people:

"I have tried to save you from suffering and sorrow. Resistance means all of that. We are few.
They are many. You can see all we have at a glance. They have food and ammunition in abundance.
We must suffer great hardship and loss." After this speech, he quietly began his plans for
the defense.

The main plan of campaign was to engineer a successful retreat into Montana and there form
a junction with the hostile Sioux and Cheyennes under Sitting Bull. There was a relay scouting
system, one set of scouts leaving the main body at evening and the second a little before daybreak,
passing the first set on some commanding hill top. There were also decoy scouts set to trap
Indian scouts of the army. I notice that General Howard charges his Crow scouts with being
unfaithful.

Their greatest difficulty was in meeting an unencumbered army, while carrying their women,
children, and old men, with supplies and such household effects as were absolutely necessary.
Joseph formed an auxiliary corps that was to effect a retreat at each engagement, upon a definite
plan and in definite order, while the unencumbered women were made into an ambulance corps
to take care of the wounded.

It was decided that the main rear guard should meet General Howard's command in White Bird
Canyon, and every detail was planned in advance, yet left flexible according to Indian custom,
giving each leader freedom to act according to circumstances. Perhaps no better ambush was
ever planned than the one Chief Joseph set for the shrewd and experienced General Howard. He
expected to be hotly pursued, but he calculated that the pursuing force would consist of not
more than two hundred and fifty soldiers. He prepared false trails to mislead them into thinking
that he was about to cross or had crossed the Salmon River, which he had no thought of doing
at that time. Some of the tents were pitched in plain sight, while the women and children were
hidden on the inaccessible ridges, and the men concealed in the canyon ready to fire upon the
soldiers with deadly effect with scarcely any danger to themselves. They could even roll rocks
upon them.

In a very few minutes the troops had learned a lesson. The soldiers showed some fight, but
a large body of frontiersmen who accompanied them were soon in disorder. The warriors chased
them nearly ten miles, securing rifles and much ammunition, and killing and wounding many.

The Nez Perces next crossed the river, made a detour and recrossed it at another point, then
took their way eastward. All this was by way of delaying pursuit. Joseph told me that he estimated
it would take six or seven days to get a sufficient force in the field to take up their trail,
and the correctness of his reasoning is apparent from the facts as detailed in General Howard's
book. He tells us that he waited six days for the arrival of men from various forts in his
department, then followed Joseph with six hundred soldiers, beside a large number of citizen
volunteers and his Indian scouts. As it was evident they had a long chase over trackless wilderness
in prospect, he discarded his supply wagons and took pack mules instead. But by this time the
Indians had a good start.

Meanwhile General Howard had sent a dispatch to Colonel Gibbons, with orders to head Joseph
off, which he undertook to do at the Montana end of the Lolo Trail. The wily commander had
no knowledge of this move, but he was not to be surprised. He was too brainy for his pursuers,
whom he constantly outwitted, and only gave battle when he was ready. There at the Big Hole
Pass he met Colonel Gibbons' fresh troops and pressed them close. He sent a party under his
brother Ollicut to harass Gibbons' rear and rout the pack mules, thus throwing him on the defensive
and causing him to send for help, while Joseph continued his masterly retreat toward the Yellowstone
Park, then a wilderness. However, this was but little advantage to him, since he must necessarily
leave a broad trail, and the army was augmenting its columns day by day with celebrated scouts,
both white and Indian. The two commands came together, and although General Howard says their
horses were by this time worn out, and by inference the men as well, they persisted on the
trail of a party encumbered by women and children, the old, sick, and wounded.

It was decided to send a detachment of cavalry under Bacon, to Tash Pass, the gateway of the
National Park, which Joseph would have to pass, with orders to detain him there until the rest
could come up with them. Here is what General Howard says of the affair. "Bacon got into position
soon enough but he did not have the heart to fight the Indians on account of their number."
Meanwhile another incident had occurred. Right under the eyes of the chosen scouts and vigilant
sentinels, Joseph's warriors fired upon the army camp at night and ran off their mules. He
went straight on toward the park, where Lieutenant Bacon let him get by and pass through the
narrow gateway without firing a shot.

Here again it was demonstrated that General Howard could not depend upon the volunteers, many
of whom had joined him in the chase, and were going to show the soldiers how to fight Indians.
In this night attack at Camas Meadow, they were demoralized, and while crossing the river next
day many lost their guns in the water, whereupon all packed up and went home, leaving the army
to be guided by the Indian scouts.

However, this succession of defeats did not discourage General Howard, who kept on with as
many of his men as were able to carry a gun, meanwhile sending dispatches to all the frontier
posts with orders to intercept Joseph if possible. Sturgis tried to stop him as the Indians
entered the Park, but they did not meet until he was about to come out, when there was another
fight, with Joseph again victorious. General Howard came upon the battle field soon afterward
and saw that the Indians were off again, and from here he sent fresh messages to General Miles,
asking for reinforcements.

Joseph had now turned northeastward toward the Upper Missouri. He told me that when he got
into that part of the country he knew he was very near the Canadian line and could not be far
from Sitting Bull, with whom he desired to form an alliance. He also believed that he had cleared
all the forts. Therefore he went more slowly and tried to give his people some rest. Some of
their best men had been killed or wounded in battle, and the wounded were a great burden to
him; nevertheless they were carried and tended patiently all during this wonderful flight.
Not one was ever left behind.

It is the general belief that Indians are cruel and revengeful, and surely these people had
reason to hate the race who had driven them from their homes if any people ever had. Yet it
is a fact that when Joseph met visitors and travelers in the Park, some of whom were women,
he allowed them to pass unharmed, and in at least one instance let them have horses. He told
me that he gave strict orders to his men not to kill any women or children. He wished to meet
his adversaries according to their own standards of warfare, but he afterward learned that
in spite of professions of humanity, white soldiers have not seldom been known to kill women
and children indiscriminately.

Another remarkable thing about this noted retreat is that Joseph's people stood behind him
to a man, and even the women and little boys did each his part. The latter were used as scouts
in the immediate vicinity of the camp.

The Bittersweet valley, which they had now entered, was full of game, and the Indians hunted
for food, while resting their worn-out ponies. One morning they had a council to which Joseph
rode over bareback, as they had camped in two divisions a little apart. His fifteen-year-old
daughter went with him. They discussed sending runners to Sitting Bull to ascertain his exact
whereabouts and whether it would be agreeable to him to join forces with the Nez Perces. In
the midst of the council, a force of United States cavalry charged down the hill between the
two camps. This once Joseph was surprised. He had seen no trace of the soldiers and had somewhat
relaxed his vigilance.

He told his little daughter to stay where she was, and himself cut right through the cavalry
and rode up to his own teepee, where his wife met him at the door with his rifle, crying: "Here
is your gun, husband!" The warriors quickly gathered and pressed the soldiers so hard that
they had to withdraw. Meanwhile one set of the people fled while Joseph's own band entrenched
themselves in a very favorable position from which they could not easily be dislodged.

General Miles had received and acted on General Howard's message, and he now sent one of his
officers with some Indian scouts into Joseph's camp to negotiate with the chief. Meantime Howard
and Sturgis came up with the encampment, and Howard had with him two friendly Nez Perce scouts
who were directed to talk to Joseph in his own language. He decided that there was nothing
to do but surrender.

He had believed that his escape was all but secure: then at the last moment he was surprised
and caught at a disadvantage. His army was shattered; he had lost most of the leaders in these
various fights; his people, including children, women, and the wounded, had traveled thirteen
hundred miles in about fifty days, and he himself a young man who had never before taken any
important responsibility! Even now he was not actually conquered. He was well entrenched; his
people were willing to die fighting; but the army of the United States offered peace and he
agreed, as he said, out of pity for his suffering people. Some of his warriors still refused
to surrender and slipped out of the camp at night and through the lines. Joseph had, as he
told me, between three and four hundred fighting men in the beginning, which means over one
thousand persons, and of these several hundred surrendered with him.

His own story of the conditions he made was prepared by himself with my help in 1897, when
he came to Washington to present his grievances. I sat up with him nearly all of one night;
and I may add here that we took the document to General Miles who was then stationed in Washington,
before presenting it to the Department. The General said that every word of it was true.

In the first place, his people were to be kept at Fort Keogh, Montana, over the winter and
then returned to their reservation. Instead they were taken to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, and
placed between a lagoon and the Missouri River, where the sanitary conditions made havoc with
them. Those who did not die were then taken to the Indian Territory, where the health situation
was even worse. Joseph appealed to the government again and again, and at last by the help
of Bishops Whipple and Hare he was moved to the Colville reservation in Washington. Here the
land was very poor, unlike their own fertile valley. General Miles said to the chief that he
had recommended and urged that their agreement be kept, but the politicians and the people
who occupied the Indians' land declared they were afraid if he returned he would break out
again and murder innocent white settlers! What irony!

The great Chief Joseph died broken-spirited and broken-hearted. He did not hate the whites,
for there was nothing small about him, and when he laid down his weapons he would not fight
on with his mind. But he was profoundly disappointed in the claims of a Christian civilization.
I call him great because he was simple and honest. Without education or special training he
demonstrated his ability to lead and to fight when justice demanded. He outgeneraled the best
and most experienced commanders in the army of the United States, although their troops were
well provisioned, well armed, and above all unencumbered. He was great finally, because he
never boasted of his remarkable feat. I am proud of him, because he was a true American.

LITTLE WOLF

If any people ever fought for liberty and justice, it was the Cheyennes. If any ever demonstrated
their physical and moral courage beyond cavil, it was this race of purely American heroes,
among whom Little Wolf was a leader.

I knew the chief personally very well. As a young doctor, I was sent to the Pine Ridge agency
in 1890, as government physician to the Sioux and the Northern Cheyennes. While I heard from
his own lips of that gallant dash of his people from their southern exile to their northern
home, I prefer that Americans should read of it in Doctor George Bird Grinnell's book, "The
Fighting Cheyennes." No account could be clearer or simpler; and then too, the author cannot
be charged with a bias in favor of his own race.

At the time that I knew him, Little Wolf was a handsome man, with the native dignity and gentleness,
musical voice, and pleasant address of so many brave leaders of his people. One day when he
was dining with us at our home on the reservation, I asked him, as I had a habit of doing,
for some reminiscences of his early life. He was rather reluctant to speak, but a friend who
was present contributed the following:

"Perhaps I can tell you why it is that he has been a lucky man all his life. When quite a small
boy, the tribe was one winter in want of food, and his good mother had saved a small piece
of buffalo meat, which she solemnly brought forth and placed before him with the remark: 'My
son must be patient, for when he grows up he will know even harder times than this.'

"He had eaten nothing all day and was pretty hungry, but before he could lay hands on the meat
a starving dog snatched it and bolted from the teepee. The mother ran after the dog and brought
him back for punishment. She tied him to a post and was about to whip him when the boy interfered.
'Don't hurt him, mother!' he cried; 'he took the meat because he was hungrier than I am!'"

I was told of another kind act of his under trying circumstances. While still a youth, he was
caught out with a party of buffalo hunters in a blinding blizzard. They were compelled to lie
down side by side in the snowdrifts, and it was a day and a night before they could get out.
The weather turned very cold, and when the men arose they were in danger of freezing. Little
Wolf pressed his fine buffalo robe upon an old man who was shaking with a chill and himself
took the other's thin blanket.

As a full-grown young man, he was attracted by a maiden of his tribe, and according to the
custom then in vogue the pair disappeared. When they returned to the camp as man and wife,
behold! there was great excitement over the affair. It seemed that a certain chief had given
many presents and paid unmistakable court to the maid with the intention of marrying her, and
her parents had accepted the presents, which meant consent so far as they were concerned. But
the girl herself had not given consent.

The resentment of the disappointed suitor was great. It was reported in the village that he
had openly declared that the young man who defied and insulted him must expect to be punished.
As soon as Little Wolf heard of the threats, he told his father and friends that he had done
only what it is every man's privilege to do.

"Tell the chief," said he, "to come out with any weapon he pleases, and I will meet him within
the circle of lodges. He shall either do this or eat his words. The woman is not his. Her people
accepted his gifts against her wishes. Her heart is mine."

The chief apologized, and thus avoided the inevitable duel, which would have been a fight to
the death.

The early life of Little Wolf offered many examples of the dashing bravery characteristic of
the Cheyennes, and inspired the younger men to win laurels for themselves. He was still a young
man, perhaps thirty-five, when the most trying crisis in the history of his people came upon
them. As I know and as Doctor Grinnell's book amply corroborates, he was the general who largely
guided and defended them in that tragic flight from the Indian Territory to their northern
home. I will not discuss the justice of their cause: I prefer to quote Doctor Grinnell, lest
it appear that I am in any way exaggerating the facts.

"They had come," he writes, "from the high, dry country of Montana and North Dakota to the
hot and humid Indian Territory. They had come from a country where buffalo and other game were
still plentiful to a land where the game had been exterminated. Immediately on their arrival
they were attacked by fever and ague, a disease wholly new to them. Food was scanty, and they
began to starve. The agent testified before a committee of the Senate that he never received
supplies to subsist the Indians for more than nine months in each year. These people were meat-eaters,
but the beef furnished them by the government inspectors was no more than skin and bone. The
agent in describing their sufferings said: 'They have lived and that is about all.'

"The Indians endured this for about a year, and then their patience gave out. They left the
agency to which they had been sent and started north. Though troops were camped close to them,
they attempted no concealment of their purpose. Instead, they openly announced that they intended
to return to their own country.

"We have heard much in past years of the march of the Nez Perces under Chief Joseph, but little
is remembered of the Dull Knife outbreak and the march to the north led by Little Wolf. The
story of the journey has not been told, but in the traditions of the old army this campaign
was notable, and old men who were stationed on the plains forty years ago are apt to tell you,
if you ask them, that there never was such another journey since the Greeks marched to the sea....

"The fugitives pressed constantly northward undaunted, while orders were flying over the wires,
and special trains were carrying men and horses to cut them off at all probable points on the
different railway lines they must cross. Of the three hundred Indians, sixty or seventy were
fighting men--the rest old men, women, and children. An army officer once told me that thirteen
thousand troops were hurrying over the country to capture or kill these few poor people who
had left the fever-stricken South, and in the face of every obstacle were steadily marching
northward.

"The War Department set all its resources in operation against them, yet they kept on. If troops
attacked them, they stopped and fought until they had driven off the soldiers, and then started
north again. Sometimes they did not even stop, but marched along, fighting as they marched.
For the most part they tried--and with success--to avoid conflicts, and had but four real hard
fights, in which they lost half a dozen men killed and about as many wounded."

It must not be overlooked that the appeal to justice had first been tried before taking this
desperate step. Little Wolf had gone to the agent about the middle of the summer and said to
him: "This is not a good country for us, and we wish to return to our home in the mountains
where we were always well. If you have not the power to give permission, let some of us go
to Washington and tell them there how it is, or do you write to Washington and get permission
for us to go back."

"Stay one more year," replied the agent, "and then we will see what we can do for you." "No,"
said Little Wolf. "Before another year there will be none left to travel north. We must go now."

Soon after this it was found that three of the Indians had disappeared and the chief was ordered
to surrender ten men as hostages for their return. He refused. "Three men," said he, "who are
traveling over wild country can hide so that they cannot be found. You would never get back
these three, and you would keep my men prisoners always."

The agent then threatened if the ten men were not given up to withhold their rations and starve
the entire tribe into submission. He forgot that he was addressing a Cheyenne. These people
had not understood that they were prisoners when they agreed to friendly relations with the
government and came upon the reservation. Little Wolf stood up and shook hands with all present
before making his final deliberate address.

"Listen, my friends, I am a friend of the white people and have been so for a long time. I
do not want to see blood spilt about this agency. I am going north to my own country. If you
are going to send your soldiers after me, I wish you would let us get a little distance away.
Then if you want to fight, I will fight you, and we can make the ground bloody at that place."

The Cheyenne was not bluffing. He said just what he meant, and I presume the agent took the
hint, for although the military were there they did not undertake to prevent the Indians' departure.
Next morning the teepees were pulled down early and quickly. Toward evening of the second day,
the scouts signaled the approach of troops. Little Wolf called his men together and advised
them under no circumstances to fire until fired upon. An Arapahoe scout was sent to them with
a message. "If you surrender now, you will get your rations and be well treated." After what
they had endured, it was impossible not to hear such a promise with contempt. Said Little Wolf:
"We are going back to our own country. We do not want to fight." He was riding still nearer
when the soldiers fired, and at a signal the Cheyennes made a charge. They succeeded in holding
off the troops for two days, with only five men wounded and none killed, and when the military
retreated the Indians continued northward carrying their wounded.

This sort of thing was repeated again and again. Meanwhile Little Wolf held his men under perfect
control. There were practically no depredations. They secured some boxes of ammunition left
behind by retreating troops, and at one point the young men were eager to follow and destroy
an entire command who were apparently at their mercy, but their leader withheld them. They
had now reached the buffalo country, and he always kept his main object in sight. He was extraordinarily
calm. Doctor Grinnell was told by one of his men years afterward: "Little Wolf did not seem
like a human being. He seemed like a bear." It is true that a man of his type in a crisis becomes
spiritually transformed and moves as one in a dream.

At the Running Water the band divided, Dull Knife going toward Red Cloud agency. He was near
Fort Robinson when he surrendered and met his sad fate. Little Wolf remained all winter in
the Sand Hills, where there was plenty of game and no white men. Later he went to Montana and
then to Pine Ridge, where he and his people remained in peace until they were removed to Lame
Deer, Montana, and there he spent the remainder of his days. There is a clear sky beyond the
clouds of racial prejudice, and in that final Court of Honor a noble soul like that of Little
Wolf has a place.

HOLE-IN-THE-DAY

[I wish to thank Reverend C. H. Beaulieu of Le Soeur, Minnesota, for much of the material used
in this chapter.]

In the beginning of the nineteenth century, the Indian nations of the Northwest first experienced
the pressure of civilization. At this period there were among them some brilliant leaders unknown
to history, for the curious reason that they cordially received and welcomed the newcomers
rather than opposed them. The only difficulties were those arising among the European nations
themselves, and often involving the native tribes. Thus new environments brought new motives,
and our temptations were increased manyfold with the new weapons, new goods, and above all
the subtly destructive "spirit water."

Gradually it became known that the new race had a definite purpose, and that purpose was to
chart and possess the whole country, regardless of the rights of its earlier inhabitants. Still
the old chiefs cautioned their people to be patient, for, said they, the land is vast, both
races can live on it, each in their own way. Let us therefore befriend them and trust to their
friendship. While they reasoned thus, the temptations of graft and self-aggrandizement overtook
some of the leaders.

Hole-in-the-Day (or Bug-o-nay-ki-shig) was born in the opening days of this era. The word "ki-shig"
means either "day" or "sky", and the name is perhaps more correctly translated Hole-in-the-Sky.
This gifted man inherited his name and much of his ability from his father, who was a war chief
among the Ojibways, a Napoleon of the common people, and who carried on a relentless warfare
against the Sioux. And yet, as was our custom at the time, peaceful meetings were held every
summer, at which representatives of the two tribes would recount to one another all the events
that had come to pass during the preceding year.

Hole-in-the-Day the younger was a handsome man, tall and symmetrically formed, with much grace
of manner and natural refinement. He was an astute student of diplomacy. The Ojibways allowed
polygamy, and whether or not he approved the principle, he made political use of it by marrying
the daughter of a chief in nearly every band. Through these alliances he held a controlling
influence over the whole Ojibway nation. Reverend Claude H. Beaulieu says of him:

"Hole-in-the-Day was a man of distinguished appearance and native courtliness of manner. His
voice was musical and magnetic, and with these qualities he had a subtle brain, a logical mind,
and quite a remarkable gift of oratory. In speech he was not impassioned, but clear and convincing,
and held fast the attention of his hearers."

It is of interest to note that his everyday name among his tribesmen was "The Boy." What a
boy he must have been! I wonder if the name had the same significance as with the Sioux, who
applied it to any man who performs a difficult duty with alertness, dash, and natural courage.
"The Man" applies to one who adds to these qualities wisdom and maturity of judgment.

The Sioux tell many stories of both the elder and the younger Hole-in-the-Day. Once when The
Boy was still under ten years of age, he was fishing on Gull Lake in a leaky birch-bark canoe.
Presently there came such a burst of frantic warwhoops that his father was startled. He could
not think of anything but an attack by the dreaded Sioux. Seizing his weapons, he ran to the
rescue of his son, only to find that the little fellow had caught a fish so large that it was
pulling his canoe all over the lake. "Ugh," exclaimed the father, "if a mere fish scares you
so badly, I fear you will never make a warrior!"

It is told of him that when he was very small, the father once brought home two bear cubs and
gave them to him for pets. The Boy was feeding and getting acquainted with them outside his
mother's birch-bark teepee, when suddenly he was heard to yell for help. The two little bears
had treed The Boy and were waltzing around the tree. His mother scared them off, but again
the father laughed at him for thinking that he could climb trees better than a bear.

The elder Hole-in-the-Day was a daring warrior and once attacked and scalped a Sioux who was
carrying his pelts to the trading post, in full sight of his friends. Of course he was instantly
pursued, and he leaped into a canoe which was lying near by and crossed to an island in the
Mississippi River near Fort Snelling. When almost surrounded by Sioux warriors, he left the
canoe and swam along the shore with only his nose above water, but as they were about to head
him off he landed and hid behind the falling sheet of water known as Minnehaha Falls, thus
saving his life.

It often happens that one who offers his life freely will after all die a natural death. The
elder Hole-in-the-Day so died when The Boy was still a youth. Like Philip of Massachusetts,
Chief Joseph the younger, and the brilliant Osceola, the mantle fell gracefully upon his shoulders,
and he wore it during a short but eventful term of chieftainship. It was his to see the end
of the original democracy on this continent. The clouds were fast thickening on the eastern
horizon. The day of individualism and equity between man and man must yield to the terrific
forces of civilization, the mass play of materialism, the cupidity of commerce with its twin
brother politics. Under such conditions the younger Hole-in-the-Day undertook to guide his
tribesmen. At first they were inclined to doubt the wisdom of so young a leader, but he soon
proved a ready student of his people's traditions, and yet, like Spotted Tail and Little Crow,
he adopted too willingly the white man's politics. He maintained the territory won from the
Sioux by his predecessors. He negotiated treaties with the ability of a born diplomat, with
one exception, and that exception cost him his life.

Like other able Indians who foresaw the inevitable downfall of their race, he favored a gradual
change of customs leading to complete adoption of the white man's ways. In order to accustom
the people to a new standard, he held that the chiefs must have authority and must be given
compensation for their services. This was a serious departure from the old rule but was tacitly
accepted, and in every treaty he made there was provision for himself in the way of a land
grant or a cash payment. He early departed from the old idea of joint ownership with the Lake
Superior Ojibways, because he foresaw that it would cause no end of trouble for the Mississippi
River branch of which he was then the recognized head. But there were difficulties to come
with the Leech Lake and Red Lake bands, who held aloof from his policy, and the question of
boundaries began to arise.

In the first treaty negotiated with the government by young Hole-in-the-Day in 1855, a "surplus"
was provided for the chiefs aside from the regular per capita payment, and this surplus was
to be distributed in proportion to the number of Indians under each. Hole-in-the-Day had by
far the largest enrollment, therefore he got the lion's share of this fund. Furthermore he
received another sum set apart for the use of the "head chief", and these things did not look
right to the tribe. In the very next treaty he provided himself with an annuity of one thousand
dollars for twenty years, beside a section of land near the village of Crow Wing, and the government
was induced to build him a good house upon this land. In his home he had many white servants
and henchmen and really lived like a lord. He dressed well in native style with a touch of
civilized elegance, wearing coat and leggings of fine broadcloth, linen shirt with collar,
and, topping all, a handsome black or blue blanket. His moccasins were of the finest deerskin
and beautifully worked. His long beautiful hair added much to his personal appearance. He was
fond of entertaining and being entertained and was a favorite both among army officers and
civilians. He was especially popular with the ladies, and this fact will appear later in the story.

At about this time, the United States government took it upon itself to put an end to warfare
between the Sioux and Ojibways. A peace meeting was arranged at Fort Snelling, with the United
States as mediator. When the representatives of the two nations met at this grand council,
Hole-in-the-Day came as the head chief of his people, and with the other chiefs appeared in
considerable pomp and dignity. The wives of the government officials were eager for admission
to this unusual gathering, but when they arrived there was hardly any space left except next
to the Sioux chiefs, and the white ladies soon crowded this space to overflowing. One of the
Sioux remarked: "I thought this was to be a council of chiefs and braves, but I see many women
among us." Thereupon the Ojibway arose and spoke in his courtliest manner. "The Ojibway chiefs
will feel highly honored," said he, "if the ladies will consent to sit on our side."

Another sign of his alertness to gain favor among the whites was seen in the fact that he took
part in the territorial campaigns, a most unusual thing for an Indian of that day. Being a
man of means and influence, he was listened to with respect by the scattered white settlers
in his vicinity. He would make a political speech through an interpreter, but would occasionally
break loose in his broken English, and wind up with an invitation to drink in the following
words: "Chentimen, you Pemicans (Republicans), come out and drink!"

From 1855 to 1864 Hole-in-the-Day was a well-known figure in Minnesota, and scarcely less so
in Washington, for he visited the capital quite often on tribal affairs. No comparative tests by
independent investigators are available. Practical experience with most of the materials used
has not extended over a long enough period of time to permit true conclusions to be drawn. Students
of the subject are not even agreed upon the broad questions whether it is better to work toward
developing an impervious concrete or toward perfecting a waterproof covering for concrete.
On the minor subdivisions there is no agreement at all. Among them was a handsome young woman who asked through
the interpreter if the chief would consent to an interview about his people, to aid her in
a paper she had promised to prepare.

Hole-in-the-Day replied: "If the beautiful lady is willing to risk calling on the chief at
his hotel, her request will be granted." The lady went, and the result was so sudden and strong
an attachment that both forgot all racial biases and differences of language and custom. She
followed him as far as Minneapolis, and there the chief advised her to remain, for he feared
the jealousy of some of his many wives. She died there, soon after giving birth to a son, who
was brought up by a family named Woodbury; and some fifteen years ago I met the young man in
Washington and was taken by him to call upon certain of his mother's relatives.

The ascendancy of Hole-in-the-Day was not gained entirely through the consent of his people,
but largely by government favor, therefore there was strong suppressed resentment among his
associate chiefs, and the Red Lake and Leech Lake bands in fact never acknowledged him as their
head, while they suspected him of making treaties which involved some of their land. He was
in personal danger from this source, and his life was twice attempted, but, though wounded,
in each case he recovered. His popularity with Indian agents and officers lasted till the Republicans
came into power in the sixties and there was a new deal. The chief no longer received the favors
and tips to which he was accustomed; in fact he was in want of luxuries, and worse still, his
pride was hurt by neglect. There is something impressive and reverent in thus re-burying the relics
of those dead ages and nations, whom the mysterious gloom of their self-erected tombs becomes better
than the glare of the broad, curious daylight.

When Layard, before his departure, after once more wandering with some friends through all the
trenches, tunnels and passages of the Nimrud mound, to gaze for the last time on the wonders
on which no man had looked before him, found himself once more on the naked platform and ordered the
workmen to cover them up again, he was strongly moved by the contrast: "We look around in vain,"
says he, "for any traces of the wonderful remains we have just seen,
and are half inclined to believe that we have dreamed a dream, or
have been listening to some tale of Eastern romance. He
had wounded the ideals of his people beyond forgiveness, and he suffered the penalty; yet his
courage was not diminished by the mistakes of his past. Like the Sioux chief Little Crow, he
was called "the betrayer of his people", and like him he made a desperate effort to regain
lost prestige, and turned savagely against the original betrayers of his confidence, the agents
and Indian traders.

When the Sioux finally broke out in 1862, the first thought of the local politicians was to
humiliate Hole-in-the-Day by arresting him and proclaiming some other "head chief" in his stead.
In so doing they almost forced the Ojibways to fight under his leadership. The chief had no
thought of alliance with the Sioux, and was wholly unaware of the proposed action of the military
on pretense of such a conspiracy on his part. He was on his way to the agency in his own carriage
when a runner warned him of his danger. He thereupon jumped down and instructed the driver
to proceed. His coachman was arrested by a file of soldiers, who when they discovered their
mistake went to his residence in search of him, but meanwhile he had sent runners in every
direction to notify his warriors, and had moved his family across the Mississippi. When the
military reached the river bank he was still in sight, and the lieutenant called upon him to
surrender. When he refused, the soldiers were ordered to fire upon him, but he replied with
his own rifle, and with a whoop disappeared among the pine groves.

It was remarkable how the whole tribe now rallied to the call of Hole-in-the-Day. He allowed
no depredations to the young men under his leadership, but camped openly near the agency and
awaited an explanation. Presently Judge Cooper of St. Paul, a personal friend of the chief,
appeared, and later on the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, accompanied by Mr. Nicolay,
private secretary of President Lincoln. Apparently that great humanitarian President saw the
whole injustice of the proceeding against a loyal nation, and the difficulty was at an end.

Through the treaties of 1864, 1867, and 1868 was accomplished the final destiny of the Mississippi
River Ojibways. Hole-in-the-Day was against their removal to what is now White Earth reservation,
but he was defeated in this and realized that the new turn of events meant the downfall of
his race. He declared that he would never go on the new reservation, and he kept his word.
He remained on one of his land grants near Crow Wing. As the other chiefs assumed more power,
the old feeling of suspicion and hatred became stronger, especially among the Pillager and
Red Lake bands. One day he was waylaid and shot by a party of these disaffected Indians. He
uttered a whoop and fell dead from his buggy.

Thus died one of the most brilliant chiefs of the Northwest, who never defended his birthright
by force of arms, although almost compelled to do so. He succeeded in diplomacy so long as
he was the recognized head of his people. Since we have not passed over his weaknesses, he
should be given credit for much insight in causing the article prohibiting the introduction
of liquor into the Indian country to be inserted into the treaty of 1858. I think it was in
1910 that this forgotten provision was discovered and again enforced over a large expanse of
territory occupied by whites, it being found that the provision had never been repealed. 

But the mind is naturally inquiring, and involuntarily the question presents itself: this solution,
so beautiful, so acceptable, so universal,--but so abstract--what
suggested it? What analogy first led up to it from the material world
of the senses?