Hakone is a very lovely and interesting region, nowadays a favorite summer resort of the European
residents of Tokio and Yokohama. From the latter place Hakone Lake is but about fifty miles
distant, and by jinrikisha and kago may be reached in one day. The lake is a most charming
little body of water, a regular mountain-gem, reflecting in its clear, crystal depths the pine-clad
slopes that encompass it round about, as though its surface were a mirror. Japanese mythology
peopled the region round with supernatural beings in the early days of the country's history,
when all about were impenetrable thickets and pathless woods. Until the revolution of 1868,
when all these old feudal customs were ruthlessly swept away, the Tokaido here was obstructed
with one of the "barriers," past which nobody might go without a passport. These barriers were
established on the boundaries of feudal territories, usually at points where the traveller
had no alternate route to choose.

A magnificent avenue of cryptomeria shades the Tokaido for a short distance out of Hakone village;
on the left is passed a large government sanitarium, one of those splendid modern-looking structures
that speak so eloquently of the present Mikado's progressive and enlightened policy. The road
then turns up the steep mountain-slopes, fringed with impenetrable thickets of bamboo. Fuji,
from here, presents a grand and curious sight. The wind has risen, and the summit of the cone
is almost hidden behind clouds of drifting snow, which at a distance might almost be mistaken
for a steamy eruption of the volcano. Close by, too, the spirit of the wind moves through the
bamboo-brakes, rubbing the myriad frost-dried flags together and causing a peculiar rustling
noise--the whispering of the spirits of the mountains.

The summit reached, the Tokaido now leads through glorious pine-woods, descending toward the
valley of the Sakawagawa by a series of breakneck zigzags. The region is picturesque in the
extreme; a small mountain-stream tumbles along through a deep ravine on the left, mountains
tower aloft on the other side, and here and there give birth to a cataract that tumbles and
splashes down from a height of several hundred feet.

By 1 p.m. Yomoto and the recommencement of the jinrikisha road is reached; a broiled fish and
a bottle of native beer are consumed for lunch, and the kago coolies dismissed. The road from
Yomoto is a gradual descent, for four miles, to Odawara, a town of some thirteen thousand inhabitants,
on the coast. The road now becomes level and broader than heretofore; vehicles drawn by horses
mingle with the swarms of jinrikishas and pedestrians. Both horses and drivers of the former
seem sleepy, woe-begone and careless, as though overcome with a consciousness of being out
of place.

Gangs of men are dragging stout hand-carts, loaded with material for the construction of the
Tokaido railway, now rapidly being pushed forward. Every mile of the road is swarming with
life--the strangely interesting life of Japan. Thirty miles from Yomoto, and Totsuka provides
me a comfortable yadoya, where the people quickly show their knowledge of the foreigner's requirements
by cooking a beefsteak with onions, also in the morning by charging the first really exorbitant
price I have been confronted with along the Tokaido. Totsuka is within the treaty limits of
Yokohama. A mile or so toward Yokohama I pass, in the morning, the "White Horse Tavern," kept
in European style as a sort of road-house for foreigners driving out from that city or Tokio.

