Reprinted by courtesy.

First edition, Cleveland, Burrows Bros., 1907.

Copyright 1907-1918

I.

A RHAPSODY ON THE NOBLE PROFESSION OF NOVEL READING

It must have been at about the good-bye age of forty that Thomas Moore, that choleric and pompous
yet genial little Irish gentleman, turned a sigh into good marketable "copy" for Grub Street
and with shrewd economy got two full pecuniary bites out of one melancholy apple of reflection:

  "Kind friends around me fall
  Like leaves in wintry weather,"

  --he sang of his own dead heart in the stilly night.

  "Thus kindly I scatter thy leaves on the bed
  Where thy mates of the garden lie scentless and dead."

--he sang to the dying rose. In the red month of October the rose is forty years old, as roses
go. How small the world has grown to a man of forty, if he has put his eyes, his ears and his
brain to the uses for which they are adapted. And as for time--why, it is no longer than a
kite string. At about the age of forty everything that can happen to a man, death excepted,
has happened; happiness has gone to the devil or is a mere habit; the blessing of poverty has
been permanently secured or you are exhausted with the cares of wealth; you can see around
the corner or you do not care to see around it; in a word--that is, considering mental existence--the
bell has rung on you and you are up against a steady grind for the remainder of your life.
It is then there comes to the habitual novel reader the inevitable day when, in anguish of
heart, looking back over his life, he--wishes he hadn't; then he asks himself the bitter question
if there are not things he has done that he wishes he hadn't. Melancholy marks him for its
own. He sits in his room some winter evening, the lamp swarming shadowy seductions, the grate
glowing with siren invitation, the cigar box within easy reach for that moment when the pending
sacrifice between his teeth shall be burned out; his feet upon the familiar corner of the mantel
at that automatically calculated altitude which permits the weight of the upper part of the
body to fall exactly upon the second joint from the lower end of the vertebral column as it
rests in the comfortable depression created by continuous wear in the cushion of that particular
chair to which every honest man who has acquired the library vice sooner or later gets attached
with a love no misfortune can destroy. As he sits thus, having closed the lids of, say, some
old favorite of his youth, he will inevitably ask himself if it would not have been better
for him if he hadn't. And the question once asked must be answered; and it will be an honest
answer, too. For no scoundrel was ever addicted to the delicious vice of novel-reading. It
is too tame for him. "There is no money in it."

       *       *       *       *       *

And every habitual novel-reader will answer that question he has asked himself, after a sigh.
A sigh that will echo from the tropic deserted island of Juan Fernandez to that utmost ice-bound
point of Siberia where by chance or destiny the seven nails in the sole of a certain mysterious
person's shoe, in the month of October, 1831, formed a cross--thus:

    *
  * * *
    *
    *
    *

while on the American promontory opposite, "a young and handsome woman replied to the man's
despairing gesture by silently pointing to heaven." The Wandering Jew may be gone, but the
theater of that appalling prologue still exists unchanged. That sigh will penetrate the gloomy
cell of the Abbe Faria, the frightful dungeons of the Inquisition, the gilded halls of Vanity
Fair, the deep forests of Brahmin and fakir, the jousting list, the audience halls and the
petits cabinets of kings of France, sound over the trackless and storm-beaten ocean--will echo,
in short, wherever warm blood has jumped in the veins of honest men and wherever vice has sooner
or later been stretched groveling in the dust at the feet of triumphant virtue.

And so, sighing to the uttermost ends of the earth, the old novel-reader will confess that
he wishes he hadn't. Had not read all those novels that troop through his memory. Because,
if he hadn't--and it is the impossibility of the alternative that chills his soul with the
despair of cruel realization--if he hadn't, you see, he could begin at the very first, right
then and there, and read the whole blessed business through for the first time. The neighbor is the friend of foe, the benefactor, the Detractors,
the customer, the competitor, the Warner, the raters, the refuge, the threat of Demon, the devil
and the only consolation.

They had never had reason to sing their praises life in Ansbach, for centuries not. Iron fist
of the Prince was on them, since people might think. Her day was Toil, their night was nightmare.
The long chains of gender pressed the Lord God's grace even the poorest of the last penny from his
pocket and the last drop of sweat from the body. And all the welding of the country turned
to the stables in horses, in the court and chamber offices in benefices, sinecures and perquisites,
in the gilded palaces in Chair and on the necks of the ladies in
favor precious stone necklaces.

But so hard to wear the halter was, they had eyes and ears for pasture had. They were standing before
the palace gates, and look up to brilliantly lighted windows allowed. They had six horses
carriages with footmen and colorful braided arms open mouth may marvel. It was' at the royal
kitchen, the smell of food through the niegeschmeckten Lanes drawn on which some of hungry erlabte
blissful, and he thought to himself: it is still a beautiful world, so what is the smell. There
had been pageantry, Driveways, parades, cavalcades, fireworks, raffles, solemn church-goers,
and they had Trellis can make. It was something to gape, to discuss expected to have. They had
had the feeling that the gentlemen at least were swimming in wealth
and happiness for the fact that they sweated and toiled.

But for them the Marquis Alexander barricaded not only the pathways to prosperity do not only
worse than its ancestors, with the help of taxes and customs duties to the fruits of their
Diligence cheated and robbed, not only their sons, brothers and husbands as cannon fodder out Bartered
away the country, but also to the colored light had let extinguish the shone over their misery,
the community gradually sank into a bitter flood of gray, silent, sober hopelessness. Was that
light was also the pyre on to their property burned, the fire had thrown but delightful appearance,
it had a somewhat warm made, and when the children were curious and
some of the world look coveted, could lead them to say, keep the arm:
see how fine it is burning.

In contrast, played what they were even deprived of amusements, the less important. For their entertainment
they had paid gemußt yes, but they were free. Together with the Lord the authorities had prohibited
good: who would nibble on thistle bush raspberries? They had Joy and merriment unlearned previously,
the edicts would hardly have been necessary.

Well, so much the better, when the temptation is missing, they said in their Frankish patience
and self-curing, sat behind the stove and slid his fingers between his knees.

After four years, the city resembled a pile of stale grief. As the bottom water breathes in a
landscape swampy vapors, the royal person in the exhaled Castle, the center of the common and
public affairs, ill humor. Ill nature penetrated into the room, ill humor, governed the relationship
between spouses, siblings, Relatives, strangers, the Lord was against the surly servant, the
servant to the Lord, the Woman against all servants, the servants against the wife, parents
against children, the children against the parents, the magistrate against the defendants,
the prison guards against the prisoners, the host to the guest, the merchant to the buyer, the
master to the apprentice, the Postillon against the passengers, the police against the citizens,
the citizens against the peasants, all the people against each other, against heaven and against
fate. Do not complain, she sighed not, they are not aligned, they do not sulked, they murmured. They
were able to not happy, they could laugh at anything, they were on and lay sullen sullen to bed. Crabby
they did their business, they lit their lights sullen, surly sat at the table, they looked sullen
weather, surly they witnessed their offspring. Sullenly and in silence walked the criminals'
secret paths, sullen preached Pastor from the pulpit, and eventually
even the sullen face of the famous rogue Moon over this city of grumpy.

Such

was the situation, came as Sturreganz.

Funfair

One day, on the city police a man dressed in outlandish and strange by nature. He wore long pointed
shoes, black silk stockings, black velvet breeches, black Jabot with black buttons, black tie and
a black hat in the form of a Sugarloaf with a stiff flat edge. This man, although he was only
as a traveling actor legitimized, inspired by a safety and dignity of the attitude that only well-traveled
People use to have some degree of respect, and as he urgent recommendations of the Archbishops vorwies
of Cologne and Trier, the duke of Nassau could not be good suggestion negative be allotted,
especially since he agreed to pay any required fee and A deposit of fifty thalers to kill.
He seemed to be nothing less than elsewhere in to give a humble circumstances, as he had in
the first inn of the town was taken Quarter and traveled with two
servants, who were also his support staff.

The request was that it allowed him, during the carnival flying in a theater he wanted to build
the Behuf to give performances. When asked what kind are the ideas, he said, kind of funny, but he said this
as one that deep grief oppressed, to such Grabeston and with such funereal countenance that police
violence, the still not among the dead belonged, not prevent a sour grin could and came to
the idea that risk can not be too large: mischievous or in terms of the regulations otherwise inadmissible
by the effects of which are not Melancholikus to expect. Also had severe since the rules were
issued and each candidate Constraints have made the immigration of jugglers, magicians, charlatans, snake
killers and stopped people like the autumn fair, almost completely, so we thought this time mild
procedure to be allowed and granted the requested permit.

Three days later they got up in the booth alley behind the backyard garden, a little pushed back against
the estates of the cheese, Lebküchner, Heringsbrater and other dealer a pleasant-looking Shack,
which might hold about two hundred people, at the gable on red canvas
emblazoned with huge black letters the word Sturreganz.

People walked by, looked up, turned around, stopped, muttered to himself, the word back, shook their
heads and asked each other what it is, Sturreganz? it 's a thing or is it a man? Their sullen
and apathetic curiosity got some information through the paper, which was immediately suspended from
a pole and on the number of suspicious Herzudrängende read as follows: "A highly commendable local
Publico and a high nobility inclined to serve Note that the far-famed to the borders of the
known globe also estimated Sturreganz, favorite mighty potentates, body and chamber Artist of
His Highness the Duke Nassau and the Count of Bentheim, friend of the gods and fear of the dark spirits
now give evening at six clock for the first time the honor is in its unrivaled presentation Asmodei
act as a devil and dero Recommend to favor and attention. Numerous and punctuality is desired. First
place three pennies, two pence, second place; third place a penny.

"

It turned up in disbelief and disparaging the nose, holding it for bragging and mischief and
went on. About six clock at night when the lights still burned in the stalls, a long line of candles
in colored paper sleeves or colorful glass enclosures are driven a few people before the boards
theater around, indecisive, suspicious, and the coins in the leather stock counting and again,
counting and rubbing between your fingers, carefully looking around, shamefully seeking the
shade, and finally there were maybe thirty or thirty-five in the
whole People who approached the spot, they laid their pennies and
behind the scarlet Curtain disappeared.

That was all, then remained in front of the theater deserted.

It happened, however, that about half past six clock, the poet passed Uz, the College of Justice
was made and at this time was on the way home. He was a worthy old man as a poet and an ornament
to the city who did not give a damn about him, however. In strained senses lost because he was
just involved a rhyming Madrigal after, he was about to cross the street outside the theater booth,
when his attention by a series of strange noise was distracting. At first it sounded like the
bleating of many Goats of the distinction then roaring and squeaking sounds, then came a volley,
as if pebbles raining down on a shingled roof. Amazement points, it was laughter! It was tall, sonorous,
dull, broad, wheezing, blaring, growing from second to seconds hearty laughter! In the middle
of the town of Ansbach, in the evening at a quarter to seven: laughter. Laughter of many people.
Unheard of. The idea stuck in the brain.

The lyrical parable disintegrated.

The madrigal was scattered seifenblasen way.

Laughter!

You could see it quite aware of how they turned themselves in there, like the necks swelled
to equal Bellows, like the mouths of gorges were bared teeth.

It was something extraordinary, something completely new, unknown for years, and it had to be
explored. The poet, hesitantly still stood at the cash booth in which a troubled young man crouched
paid, not light-heartedly, the inlet penny, and the red curtain withdrew his gaunt figure the mist
of the October evening.

As this elegiac and sorgenbeschwerte man an hour later with the other three dozen People left the
theater, he was drenched in sweat with laughter like the others.

It gurgled nachschütternd still in his throat. He gasped for breath.

The sides ached, my stomach gobbled, the palate was sore.

He had never seen the like, it never thought possible. The question arose: Who was Sturreganz? Without
a doubt a phenomenon, a curiosity, a wonder of the world. You had to be Uz and have grieved
so much in life eaten so much bitterness, so much injustice and beatings of fate have suffered in
order to understand this.

Who was Sturreganz? Where did he come from? Who had ever heard of him?

get completely out of balance, Uz tried the same evening to acquaintances, and Imhof the Medical Council
Merklein. He spoke, reported, was excited fired, beside himself, went so become an expression
of enthusiasm, the usual in strange contrast to its stateliness was barren. He quoted words, he
imitated, as best he could, movements after, described the facial expression, posture, gait,
the voice of the overwhelming comedians, popularly called him and sublime, mysterious and of course
for a child, and eventually produced in all who listened to him, an irresistible curiosity and impatience
to see the man as well.

Each individual in the theater-goers this evening played the customer in his own way. Everyone,
from the traveling salesman and Diurnisten down, behaved in his own way great. The result
was that the next morning long before the start of the performance a significant Crowd in front
of the unassuming shack had accumulated and full of troubled youth, all hands got to do. After the
people were let in and the red curtain was lowered to were still occurring to any stand outside
the two or three pennies wanted to stake but not or hoped that they could be so when they only
very pointed ears to hear something get. They then joined the shack owners, envious of the good
earnings of the stranger, Furthermore, a number of boys, prowling, maids from the neighboring
houses, the buntmaskierten Candle-lit their faces listening, and all the evil and envious
or poor or vermagerten faces, pale and unhappy one to the other, transformed itself Salmon in the
first tower that rang out of the house, very strange: it was as if one Wheat in a chicken flock
throws, and they stick together all the heads and peck. Sun pecked on the laughter, as gluttonous
chickens.

They heard nothing but the continually swelling laughter, as Gewehrgeknatter first, then as of
drums, then a cannonade; then silence, but once a cannonade; Weibergequietsch jubilant, clapping,
more complete rage Clapping, yelling, a nameless roar suddenly, it seemed as if they were
in the Belly hold, as they were afraid to burst. And the onlookers pointed lips, grinned,
stood, although it was useless to the toes, some with even laughed out loud. It flows continuously
providing new up to them, they crept closer, bent down and snapped his fingers and another hit on
the head when again the blessed throats Donnergepolter inside went off, and finally broke up
soon the, soon to be in the series, put his coin on the spot board and rushed to get behind the curtain.

The
third night was already been fighting for places. Three police men called to order to one
of them saw a their powerlessness. Were sent to the palace guard. People met and so crowded that
getting the idea about a half hour shift be had.

Also notables had already opened to see Sturreganz. For they were reserved special places, and a
special entrance gate. They appeared and they had to admit that the Fama had lied nor exaggerated.
There was no objection All prostrate before that, no prissy concerns, they were packed and in
the boiling crater of laughter broke. They talked of nothing else than him, she giggled in their home
yet, they announced the unusual among her friends, from the Assets of the neighborhood families
drove into town to see Sturreganz and had for days Wait until they were admitted.

Because of the crowds increased with each performance. There were people who never miss a wanted,
and already stationed in the early morning before the little theater. They left the work is, they did
not care for their affairs, and they had half of their savings sacrificed when it no different
at that price would have to Sturreganz can get. Schneider, Barber, gold clubs, mason, clerk,
cooks, kitchen boys, livestock keepers, Hökerinnen, Kramer female
Ladenmamsells were of one mind in it with teachers, judges, doctors,
high school students, Lady and noble ladies.

It occurred in scenes where a captain's wife in the dispute over
the inlet of the chignon was pulled from the head or a respectable
spinster of rock from the body. The authorities held out their arms,
since their intervention always one or the other senior civil servant
or person has been compromised. You could play Sturreganz further,
as to expired a week of the fair is over and the deadline was, and
indeed also on the Advocacy and high-ranking civil servant people.

What
will be done? asked preventive arm of the community. And it is beyond doubt awkward and embarrassing, because ill-natured men can refer
to it in moments of hatefulness--moments unfortunately too frequent.

Is it possible that this last creation was a mistake of Infinite Charity and Eternal Truth?
That Charity forbore to acknowledge that it was a mistake and that Truth, in the very nature
of its eternal essence, could not say it was good? It is so grave a matter that one wonders
Helvetius did not betray it, as he did that other secret about which the philosophers had agreed
to keep mum, so that Herr Schopenhauer could write about it as he did about that other. Herr
Schopenhauer certainly had the courage to speak with philosophical asperity of the gentle sex.
It may be because he was never married. And then his mother wrote novels! I have been surprised
that he was not accused of prejudice.

But if all these everyday obstacles were absent there would yet remain insurmountable reasons
why women can never be novel-readers in the sense that men are. Your wife, for instance, or
the impenetrable mystery of womanhood that you contemplate making your wife some day--can you,
honestly, now, as a self-respecting husband of either de facto or in futuro, quite agree to
the spectacle of that adored lady sitting over across the hearth from you in the snug room,
evening after evening, with her feet--however small and well-shaped--cocked up on the other
end of the mantel and one of your own big colorado maduros between her teeth! We men, and particularly
novel-readers, are liberal even generous, in our views; but it is not in human nature to stand
that!

Now, if a woman can not put her feet up and smoke, how in the name of heaven, can she seriously
read novels? Certainly not sitting bolt upright, in order to prevent the back of her new gown
from rubbing the chair; certainly not reclining upon a couch or in a hammock. A boy, yet too
young to smoke may properly lie on his stomach on the floor and read novels, but the mature
veteran will fight for his end of the mantel as for his wife and children. It is physiological
necessity, inasmuch as the blood that would naturally go to the lower extremities, is thus
measurably lessened in quantity and goes instead to the head, where a state of gentle congestion
ensues, exciting the brain cells, setting free the imagination to roam hand in hand with intelligence
under the spell of the wizard. There may be novel-readers who do not smoke at the game, but
surely they cannot be quite earnest or honest--you had better put in writing all business agreements
with this sort.

       *       *       *       *       *

No boy can ever hope to become a really great or celebrated novel-reader who does not begin
his apprenticeship under the age of fourteen, and, as I said before, stick to it as long as
he lives. He must learn to scorn those frivolous, vacillating and purposeless ones who, after
beginning properly, turn aside and whiling away their time on mere history, or science, or
philosophy. In a sense these departments of literature are useful enough. They enable you often
to perceive the most cunning and profoundly interesting touches in fiction. Then I have no
doubt that, merely as mental exercise, they do some good in keeping the mind in training for
the serious work of novel-reading. I have always been grateful to Carlyle's "French Revolution,"
if for nothing more than that its criss-cross, confusing and impressive dullness enabled me
to find more pleasure in "A Tale of Two Cities" than was to be extracted from any merit or
interest in that unreal novel.

This much however, may be said of history, that it is looking up in these days as a result
of studying the spirit of the novel. It was not many years ago that the ponderous gentlemen
who write criticisms (chiefly because it has been forgotten how to stop that ancient waste
of paper and ink) could find nothing more biting to say of Macaulay's "England" than that it
was "a splendid work of imagination," of Froude's "Caesar" that it was "magnificent political
fiction," and of Taine's "France" that "it was so fine it should have been history instead
of fiction." And ever since then the world has read only these three writers upon these three
epochs--and many other men have been writing history upon the same model. No good novel-reader
need be ashamed to read them, in fact. They are so like the real thing we find in the greatest
novels, instead of being the usual pompous official lies of old-time history, that there are
flesh, blood and warmth in them.

In 1877, after the railway riots, legislative halls heard the French Revolution rehearsed from
all points of view. In one capital, where I was reporting the debate, Old Oracle, with every
fact at hand from "In the beginning" to the exact popular vote in 1876, talked two hours of
accurate historical data from all the French histories, after which a young lawyer replied
in fifteen minutes with a vivid picture of the popular conditions, the revolt and the result.
Will it be allowable, in the interest of conveying exact impression, to say that Old Oracle
was "swiped" off the earth? No other word will relieve my conscience. After it was all over
I asked the young lawyer where he got his French history.

"From Dumas," he answered, "and from critical reviews of his novels. He's short on dates and
documents, but he's long on the general facts."

Why not? Are not novels history?

Book for book, is not a novel by a competent conscientious novelist just as truthful a record
of typical men, manners and motives as formal history is of official men, events and motives?

There are persons created out of the dreams of genius so real, so actual, so burnt into the
heart and mind of the world that they have become historical. Do they not show you, in the
old Ursuline Convent at New Orleans, the cell where poor Manon Lescaut sat alone in tears?
And do they not show you her very grave on the banks of the lake? Have I not stood by the simple
grave at Richmond, Virginia, where never lay the body of Pocahontas and listened to the story
of her burial there? One of the loveliest women I ever knew admits that every time she visits
relatives at Salem she goes out to look at the mound over the broken heart of Hester Prynne,
that dream daughter of genius who never actually lived or died, but who was and is and ever
will be. Her grave can be easily pointed out, but where is that of Alexander, of Themistocles,
of Aristotle, even of the first figure of history--Adam? Mark Twain found it for a joke. Dr.
Hale was finally forced to write a preface to "The Man Without a Country" to declare that his
hero was pure fiction and that the pathetic punishment so marvelously described was not only
imaginary, but legally and actually impossible. It was because Philip Nolan had passed into
history. I myself have met old men who knew sea captains that had met this melancholy prisoner
at sea and looked upon him, had even spoken to him upon subjects not prohibited. And these
old men did not hesitate to declare that Dr. Hale had lied in his denial and had repudiated
the facts through cowardice or under compulsion from the War Department.

       *       *       *       *       *

Indeed, so flexible, adaptable and penetrable is the style, and so admirably has the use and
proper direction of the imagination been developed by the school of fiction, that every branch
of literature has gained from it power, beauty and clearness. Nothing has aided more in the
spread of liberal Christianity than the remarkable series of "Lives of Christ," from Straus
to Farrar, not omitting particular mention of the singularly beautiful treatment of the subject
by Renan. In all of these conscientious imagination has been used, as it is used in the highest
works of fiction, to give to known facts the atmosphere and vividness of truth in order that
the spirit and personality of the surroundings of the Savior of Mankind might be newly understood
by and made fresh to modern perception.

Of all books it is to be said--of novels as well--that none is great that is not true, and
that cannot be true which does not carry inherence of truth. Now every book is true to some
reader. The "Arabian Nights" tales do not seem impossible to a little child, the only delight
him. The novels of "The Duchess" seem true to a certain class of readers, if only because they
treat of a society to which those readers are entirely unaccustomed. "Robinson Crusoe" is a
gospel to the world, and yet it is the most palpably and innocently impossible of books. It
is so plausible because the author has ingeniously or accidentally set aside the usual earmarks
of plausibility. When an author plainly and easily knows what the reader does not know and
enough more to continue the chain of seeming reality of truth a little further, he convinces
the reader of his truth and ability. Those men, therefore, who have been endowed with the genius
almost unconsciously to absorb, classify, combine, arrange and dispense vast knowledge in a
bold, striking or noble manner, are the recognized greatest men of genius for the simple reason
that the readers of the world who know most recognize all they know in these writers, together
with that spirit of sublime imagination that suggests still greater realms of truth and beauty.
What Shakesepare was to the intellectual leaders of his day, "The Duchess" was to countless
immature young folks of her day who were looking for "something to read."

All truth is history, but all history is not truth. Written history is notoriously no well-cleaner.

III.

READING THE FIRST NOVEL

BEING MOSTLY REMINISCENCES OF EARLY CRIMES AND JOYS

Once more and for all, the career of a novel reader should be entered upon, if at all, under
the age of fourteen. As much earlier as possible. The life of the intellect, as of its shadowy
twin, imagination, begins early and develops miraculously. The inbred strains of nature lie
exposed to influence as a mirror to reflections, and as open to impression as sensitized paper,
upon which pictures may be printed and from which they may also fade out. The greater the variety
of impressions that fall upon the young mind the more certain it is that the greatest strength
of natural tendency will be touched and revealed. Good or bad, whichever it may be, let it
come out as quickly as possible. How many men have never developed their fatal weaknesses until
success was within reach and the edifice fell upon other innocent ones. Believe me, no innate
scoundrel or brute will be much helped or hindered by stories. These have no turn or leisure
for dreaming. They are eager for the actual touch of life. What would a dull-eyed glutton,
famishing, not with hunger but with the cravings of digestive ferocity, find in Thackeray's
"Memorials of Gormandizing" or "Barmecidal Feasts?" Such banquets are spread for the frugal,
not one of whom would swap that immortal cook-book review for a dinner with Lucullus. Rascals
will not read. Men of action do not read. They look upon it as the gambler does upon the game
where "no money passes." It may almost be said that the capacity for novel-reading is the patent
of just and noble minds. You never heard of a great novel-reader who was notorious as a criminal.
There have been literary criminals, I grant you--Eugene Aram Dr. Dodd, Prof. Webster, who murdered
Parkmaan, and others. But they were writers, not readers And they did not write novels. Mr.
Aram wrote scientific and school books, as did Prof. Webster, and Dr. Wainwright wrote beautiful
sermons. We never do sufficiently consider the evil that lies behind writing sermons. The nearest
you can come to a writer of fiction who has been steeped in crime is in Benvenuto Cellini,
whose marvelous autobiographical memoir certainly contains some fiction, though it is classed
under the suspect department of History.

How many men actually have been saved from a criminal career by the miraculous influence of
novels? Let who will deny, but at the age of six I myself was absolutely committed to the abandoned
purpose of riding barebacked horses in a circus. Secretly, of course, because there were some
vague speculations in the family concerning what seemed to be special adaptability to the work
of preaching. Shortly after I gave that up to enlist in the Continental Army, under Gen. Francis
Marion, and no other soldier slew more Britons. After discharge I at once volunteered in an
Indiana regiment quartered in my native town in Kentucky, and beat the snare drum at the head
of that fine body of men for a long time. But the tendency was downward. For three months I
was chief of a of robbers that ravaged the backyards of the vicinity. Successively I became
a spy for Washington, an Indian fighter, a tragic actor.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ah, well--

Let us all own up--we men of above forty who aspire to respectability and do actually live
orderly lives and achieve even the odor of sanctity--have we not been stained with murder?--aye
worse! What man has not his Bluebeard closet, full of early crimes and villainies? A certain
boy in whom I take a particular interest, who goes to Sunday-school and whose life is outwardly
proper--is he not now on week days a robber of great renown? A week ago, masked and armed,
he held up his own father in a secluded corner of the library and relieved the old man of swag
of a value beyond the dreams--not of avarice, but--of successful, respectable, modern speculation.
He purposes to be a pirate whenever there is a convenient sheet of water near the house. God
speed him. Better a pirate at six than at sixty.

Give them work to do and good novels to read and they will get over it. History breeds queer
ideas in children. They read of military heroes, kings and statesmen who commit awful deeds
and are yet monuments of public honor. What a sweet hero is Raleigh, who was a farmer of piracy;
what a grand Admiral was Drake; what demi-gods the fighting Americans who murdered Indians
for the crime of wanting their own! History hath charms to move an infant breast to savagery.
Good strong novels are the best pabulum to nourish difference between virtue and vice.

Don't I know? I have felt the miracle and learned the difference so well that even now at an
advanced age I can tell the difference and indulge in either. It was not a week after the killing
of Joquita that I read the first novel of my life. It was "Scottish Chiefs." The dead bodies
of ten thousand novels lie between me and that first one. I have not read it since. Ten Incas
of Peru with ten rooms full of solid gold could not tempt me to read it again. Have I not a
clear cinch on a delicious memory, compared with which gold is only Robinson Crusoe's "drug?"
After a lapse of all these years the content of that one tremendous, noble chapter of heroic
climax is as deeply burned into my memory as if it had been read yesterday.

A sister, old enough to receive "beaux" and addicted to the piano-forte accomplishment, was
at that time practicing across the hall an instrumental composition, entitled, "La Reve." Under
the title, printed in very small letters, was the English translation; but I never thought
to look at it. An elocutionist had shortly before recited Poe's Raven at a church entertainment,
and that gloomy bird flapped its wings in my young emotional vicinity when the firelight threw
vague "shadows on the floor." When the piece of music was spoken as "La Reve," its sad cadences,
suffering, of course, under practice, were instantly wedded in my mind to Mr. Poe's wonderful
bird and for years it meant the "Raven" to me. How curious are childish impressions. Years
afterward when I saw a copy of the music and read the translation, "The Dream" under the title,
I felt a distinct shock of resentment as if the French language had been treacherous to my
sacred ideas. Then there was the romantic name of "Ellerslie," which, notwithstanding considerable
precocity in reading and spelling I carried off as "Elleressie" Yeas afterward when the actual
syllables confronted me in a historical sketch of Wallace, the truth entered like a stab and
I closed the book. O sacred first illusions of childhood, you are sweeter than a thousand year
of fame! It is God's providence that hardens us to endure the throwing of them down to our
eyes and strengthens us to keep their memory sweet in our hearts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would be an affront then, not to assume that every reputable novel reader has read "Scottish
Chiefs." If there is any descendant or any personal friend of that admirable lady, Miss Jane
Porter, who may now be in pecuniary distress, let that descendant call upon me privately with
perfect confidence. There are obligations that a glacial evolutionary period can not lessen.
I make no conditions but the simple proof of proper identity. I am not rich but I am grateful.

It was a Saturday evening when I became aware, as by prescience, that there hung over Sir William
Wallice and Helen Mar some terrible shadow of fate. And the piano-forte across the hall played
"La Reve." My heart failed me and I closed the book. If you can't do that, my friend, then
you waste your time trying to be a novel reader. You have not the true touch of genius for
it. It is the miracle of eating your cake and having it, too. It must have been the unconscious
moving of novel reading genius in me. For I forgot, as clearly as if it were not a possibility,
that the next day was Sunday. And so hurried off, before time, to bed, to be alone with the
burden on my heart.

  "Backward, turn backward, O Time in your flight--
  Make me a child again just for tonight."

There are two or three novels I should love to take to bed as of yore--not to read, but to
suffer over and to contemplate and to seek calmness and courage with which to face the inevitable.
Could there be men base enough to do to death the noble Wallace? Or to break the heart of Helen
Mar with grief? No argument could remove the presentiment, but facing the matter gave courage.
"Let tomorrow answer," I thought, as the piano-forte in the next room played "La Reve." Then
fell asleep.

And when I awoke next morning to the full knowledge that it was Sunday, I could have murdered
the calendar. For Sunday was Dies Irae. After Sunday-school, at least. There is a certain amount
of fun to be to extracted from Sunday-school. The remainder of those early Sundays was confined
to reading the Bible or storybooks from the Sunday-school library--books, by the Lord Harry,
that seem to be contrived especially to make out of healthy children life-long enemies of the
church, and to bind hypocrites to the altar with hooks of steel. There was no whistling at
all permitted; singing of hymns was encouraged; no "playing"--playing on Sunday was a distinct
source of displeasure to Heaven! Are free-born men nine years of age to endure such tyranny
with resignation? Ask the kids of today--and with one voice, as true men and free, they will
answer you, "Nit!" In the dark days of my youth liberty was in chains, and so Sunday was passed
in dreadful suspense as to what was doing in Scotland.

       *       *       *       *       *

Monday night after supper I rejoined Sir William in his captivity and soon saw that my worst
fears were to be realized. My father sat on the opposite side of the table reading politics;
my mother was effecting the restoration of socks; my brother was engaged in unraveling mathematical
tangles, and in the parlor across the hall my sister sat alone with her piano patiently debating
"La Reve." Under these circumstances I encountered the first great miracle of intellectual
emotion in the chapter describing the execution of William Wallace on Tower Hill. No other
incident of life has left upon me such a profound impression. It was as if I had sprung at
one bound into the arena of heroism. I remember it all. How Wallace delivered himself of theological
and Christian precepts to Helen Mar after which they both knelt before the officiating priest.
That she thought or said, "My life will expire with yours!" It was the keynote of death and
life devotion. It was worthy to usher Wallace up the scaffold steps where he stood with his
hands bound, "his noble head uncovered." There was much Christian edification, but the presence
of such a hero as he with "noble Head uncovered" would enable any man nine years old with a
spark of honor and sympathy in him to endure agonizing amounts of edification. Then suddenly
there was a frightful shudder in my heart. The hangman approached with the rope, and Helen
Mar, with a shriek, threw herself upon Wallace's breast. Then the great moment. If I live a
thousand years these lines will always be with me: "Wallace, with a mighty strength, burst
the bonds asunder that confined his arms and clasped her to his heart!"

       *       *       *       *       *

In reading some critical or pretended text books on construction since that time I came across
this sentence used to illustrate tautology. It was pointed out that the bonds couldn't be "burst"
without necessarily being asunder. The confoundedest outrages in this world are the capers
that precisionists cut upon the bodies of the noble dead. And with impunity too. Think of a
village surveyor measuring the forest of Arden to discover the exact acreage! Or a horse-doctor
elevating his eye-brow with a contemptuous smile and turning away, as from an innocent, when
you speak of the wings of that fine horse, Pegasus! Any idiot knows that bonds couldn't be
burst without being burst asunder. But, let the impregnable Jackass think--what would become
of the noble rhythm and the majestic roll of sound? Shakespeare was an ignorant dunce also
when he characterized the ingratitude that involves the principle of public honor as "the unkindest
cut of all." Every school child knows that it is ungrammatical; but only those who have any
sense learn after awhile the esoteric secret that it sometimes requires a tragedy of language
to provide fitting sacrifice to the manes of despair. There never was yet a man of genius who
wrote grammatically and under the scourge of rhetorical rules. Anthony Trollope is a most perfect
example of the exact correctness that sterilizes in its own immaculate chastity. Thackeray
would knock a qualifying adverb across the street, or thrust it under your nose to make room
for the vivid force of an idea. Trollope would give the idea a decent funeral for the sake
of having his adverb appear at the grave above reproach from grammatical gossip. Whenever I
have risen from the splendid psychological perspective of old Job, the solemn introspective
howls of Ecclesiasticus and the generous living philosophy of Shakespeare it has always been
with the desire--of course it is undignified, but it is human--to go and get an English grammar
for the pleasure of spitting upon it. Let us be honest. I understand everything about grammar
except what it means; but if you will give me the living substance and the proper spirit any
gentleman who desires the grammatical rules may have them, and be hanged to him! And, while
it may appear presumptuous, I can conscientiously say that it will not be agreeable to me to
settle down in heaven with a class of persons who demand the rules of grammar for the intellectual
reason that corresponds to the call for crutches by one-legged men.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the foregoing appear ill-tempered pray forget it. Remember rather that I have sought to
leave my friend Sir William Wallace, holding Helen Mar on his breast as long as possible. And
yet, I also loved her! Can human nature go farther than that?

"Helen," he said to her, "life's cord is cut by God's own hand." He stooped, he fell, and the
fall shook the scaffold. Helen--that glorified heroine--raised his head to her lap. The noble
Earl of Gloucester stepped forward, took the head in his hands.

"There," he cried in a burst of grief, letting it fall again upon the insensible bosom of Helen,
"there broke the noblest heart that ever beat in the breast of man!"

That page or two of description I read with difficulty and agony through blinding tears, and
when Gloucester spoke his splendid eulogy my head fell on the table and I broke into such wild
sobbing that the little family sprang up in astonishment. I could not explain until my mother,
having led me to my room, succeeded in soothing me into calmness and I told her the cause of
it. And she saw me to bed with sympathetic caresses and, after she left, it all broke out afresh
and I cried myself to sleep in utter desolation and wretchedness. Of course the matter got
out and my father began the book. He was sixty years old, not an indiscriminate reader, but
a man of kind and boyish heart. I felt a sort of fascinated curiosity to watch him when he
reached the chapter that had broken me. And, as if it were yesterday, I can see him under the
lamplight compressing his lips, or puffing like a smoker through them, taking off his spectacles,
and blowing his nose with great ceremony and carelessly allowing the handkerchief to reach
his eyes. Then another paragraph and he would complain of the glasses and wipe them carefully,
also his eyes, and replace the spectacles. But he never looked at me, and when he suddenly
banged the lids together and, turning away, sat staring into the fire with his head bent forward,
making unconcealed use of the handkerchief, I felt a sudden sympathy for him and sneaked out.
He would have made a great novel reader if he had had the heart. But he couldn't stand sorrow
and pain. The novel reader must have a heart for every fate. For a week or more I read that
great chapter and its approaches over and over, weeping less and less, until I had worn out
that first grief, and could look with dry eyes upon my dead. And never since have I dared to
return to it. Let who will speak freely in other tones of "Scottish Chiefs"--opinions are sacred
liberties--but as for me I know it changed my career from one of ruthless piracy to better
purposes, and certain boys of my private acquaintance are introduced to Miss Jane Porter as
soon as they show similar bent.

IV.

THE FIRST NOVEL TO READ

CONTAINING SOME SCANDALOUS REMARKS ABOUT "ROBINSON CRUSOE"

The very best First-Novel-To-Read in all fiction is "Robinson Crusoe." There is no dogmatism
in the declaration; it is the announcement of a fact as well ascertained as the accuracy of
the multiplication table. It is one of the delights of novel reading that you may have any
opinion you please and fire it off with confidence, without gainsay. Those who differ with
you merely have another opinion, which is not sacred and cannot be proved any more than yours.
All of the elements of supreme test of imaginative interest are in "Robinson Crusoe." Love
is absent, but that is not a test; love appeals to persons who cannot read or write--it is
universal, as hunger and thirst.

The book-reading boy is easily discovered; you always catch him reading books. But the novel-reading
boy has a system of his own, a sort of instinctive way of getting the greatest excitement out
of the story, the very best run for his money. This sort of boy soon learns to sit with his
feet drawn up on the upper rung of a chair, so that from the knees to the thighs there is a
gentle declivity of about thirty degrees; the knees are nicely separated that the book may
lie on them without holding. That involves one of the most cunning of psychological secrets;
because, if the boy is not a novel reader, he does not want the book to lie open, since every
time it closes he gains just that much relief in finding the place again. The novel-reading
boy knows the trick of immortal wisdom; he can go through the old book cases and pick the treasures
of novels by the way they lie open; if he gets hold of a new or especially fine edition of
his father's he need not be told to wrench it open in the middle and break the back of the
binding--he does it instinctively.

No story ever written exhibits so profoundly either the perfect design of supreme genius or
the curious accidental result of slovenly carelessness in a hack-writer. This is not said in
any critical spirit, because, Robinson Crusoe, in one sense, is above criticism, and in another
it permits the freest analysis without suffering in the estimation of any reader.

But for Robinson Crusoe, De Foe would never have ranked above the level of his time. It is
customary for critics to speak in awe of the "Journal of the Plague" and it is gravely recited
that that book deceived the great Dr. Meade. Dr. Meade must have been a poor doctor if De Foe's
accuracy of description of the symptoms and effects of disease is not vastly superior to the
detail he supplies as a sailor and solitaire upon a desert island. I have never been able to
finish the "Journal." The only books in which his descriptions smack of reality are "Moll Flanders"
and "Roxana," which will barely stand reading these days.

In what may be called its literary manner, Robinson Crusoe is entirely like the others. It
convinces you by its own conviction of sincerity. It is simple, wandering yet direct; there
is no making of "points" or moving to climaxes. De Foe did unquestionably possess the capacity
to put into his story the appearance of sincerity that persuades belief at a glance. In that
much he had the spark of genius; yet that same case has not availed to make the "Journal" of
the Plague anything more than a curious and laborious conceit, while Robinson Crusoe stands
among the first books of the world--a marvelous gleam of living interest, inextinguishably
fresh and heartening to the imagination of every reader who has sensibility two removes above
a toad.

The question arises, then, is "Robinson Crusoe" the calculated triumph of deliberate genius,
or the accidental stroke of a hack who fell upon a golden suggestion in the account of Alexander
Selkirk and increased its value ten thousand fold by an unintentional but rather perfect marshaling
of incidents in order, and by a slovenly ignorance of character treatment that enhanced the
interest to perfect intensity? This question may be discussed without undervaluing the book,
the extraordinary merit of which is shown in the fact that, while its idea has been paraphrased,
it has never been equalled. The "Swiss Family Robinson," the "Schonberg-Cotta Family" for children
are full of merit and far better and more carefully written, but there are only the desert
island and the ingenious shifts introduced. Charles Reade in "Hard Cash," Mr. Mallock in his
"Nineteenth Century Romance," Clark Russel in "Marooned," and Mayne Reid, besides others, have
used the same theater. But only in that one great book is the theater used to display the simple,
yearning, natural, resolute, yet doubting, soul and heart of man in profound solitude, awaiting
in armed terror, but not without purpose, the unknown and masked intentions of nature and savagery.
It seems to me--and I have been tied to Crusoe's chariot wheels for a dozen readings, I suppose--that
it is the pressing in upon your emotions of the immensity of the great castaway's solitude,
in which he appears like some tremendous Job of abandonment, fighting an unseen world, which
is the innate note of its power.

       *       *       *       *       *

The very moment Friday becomes a loyal subject, the suspense relaxes into pleased interest,
and after Friday's funny father and the Spaniard and others appear it becomes a common book.
As for the second part of the adventures I do not believe any matured man ever read it a second
time unless for curious or literary purposes. If he did he must be one of that curious but
simple family that have read the second part of "Faust," "Paradise Regained," and the "Odyssey,"
and who now peruse "Clarissa Harlowe" and go carefully over the catalogue of ships in the "Iliad"
as a preparation for enjoying the excitements of the city directory.

Every particle of greatness in "Robinson Crusoe" is compressed within two hundred pages, the
other four hundred being about as mediocre trash as you could purchase anywhere between cloth lids.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is interesting to apply subjective analysis to Robinson Crusoe. The book in its very greatness
has turned more critical swans into geese than almost any other. They have praised the marvelous
ingenuity with which De Foe described how the castaway overcame single-handed, the deprivations
of all civilized conveniences; they have marveled at the simple method in which all his labors
are marshaled so as to render his conversion of the island into a home the type of industrial
and even of social progress and theory; they have rhapsodized over the perfection of De Foe's
style as a model of literary strength and artistic verisemblance. Only a short time ago a mighty
critic of a great London paper said seriously that "Robinson Crusoe and Gulliver appeal infinitely
more to the literary reader than to the boy, who does not want a classic but a book written
by a contemporary." What an extraordinary boy that must be! It is probable that few boys care
for Gulliver beyond his adventures in Lilliput and Brobdignag, but they devour that much, together
with Robinson Crusoe, with just as much avidity now as they did a century ago. Your clear-headed,
healthy boy is the first best critic of what constitutes the very liver and lights of a novel.
Nothing but the primitive problems of courage meeting peril, virtue meeting vice, love, hatred,
ambition for power and glory, will go down with him. The grown man is more capable of dealing
with social subtleties and the problems of conscience, but those sorts of books do not last
unless they have also "action--action--action."

Will the New Zealander, sitting amidst the prophetic ruins of St. Paul's, invite his soul reading
Robert Elsmere? Of course you can't say what a New Zealander of that period might actually
do; but what would you think of him if you caught him at it? The greatest stories of the world
are the Bible stories, and I never saw a boy--intractable of acquiring the Sunday-school habit
though he may have been--who wouldn't lay his savage head on his paws and quietly listen to
the good old tales of wonder out of that book of treasures.

       *       *       *       *       *

So let us look into the interior of our faithful old friend, Robinson Crusoe, and examine his
composition as a literary whole. From the moment that Crusoe is washed ashore on the island
until after the release of Friday's father and the Spaniard from the hands of the cannibals,
there is no book in print, perhaps, that can surpass it in interest and the strained impression
it makes upon the unsophisticated mind. It is all comprised in about 200 pages, but to a boy
to whom the world is a theater of crowded action, to whom everything seems to have come ready-made,
to whom the necessity of obedience and accommodation to others has been conveyed by constant
friction--here he finds himself for the first time face to face with the problem of solitude.
He can appreciate the danger from wild animals, genii, ghosts, battles, sieges and sudden death,
but in no other book before, did he ever come upon a human being left solitary, with all these
possible dangers to face.

The voyages on the raft, the house-building, contriving, fearing, praying, arguing--all these
are full of plaintive pathos and yet of encouragement. He witnesses despair turned into comfortable
resignation as the result of industry. It has required about twelve years. Virtue is apparently
fattening upon its own reward, when--Smash! Bang!--our young reader runs upon "the--print--of--a--man's--naked--foot!"
and security and happiness, like startled birds, are flown forever. For twelve more years this
new unseen terror hangs over the poor solitary. Then we have Friday, the funny cannibals later
and it is all over. But the vast solitude of that poor castaway has entered the imagination
of the youth and dominates it.

These two hundred pages are crowded with suggestions that set a boy's mind on fire, yet every
page contains evidence of obvious slovenliness, indolence and ignorance of human nature and
common things, half of which faults seem directly to contribute to the result, while the other
half are never noticed by the reader.

How many of you, who sniff at this, know Crusoe's real name? Yet it stares right out of the
very first paragraphs in the book--a clean, perhaps accidental, proof of good scholarship,
which De Foe possessed. Crusoe tells us his father was a German from Bremen, who married an
Englishwoman, from whose family name of Robinson came the son's name which was properly Robinson
Kreutznaer. This latter name, he explains, became corrupted in the common English speech into
Crusoe. That is an excellent touch. The German pronunciation of Kreutznaer would sound like
Krites-nare, and a mere dry scholar would have evolved Crysoe out of the name. But the English-speaking
people everywhere, until within the past twenty years or so, have given the German "eu" the
sound of "oo" or "u." I was the woman as she is also very well deserved, always
been very fond of, but now, for me inextricably angehoerte began in me a reluctance and even
grow to almost a hatred against them, I have to hide the sometimes difficult knew. So we are
human beings, I threw in my heart to them the guilt of all that but was only the result of my
own weakness. Then God led me to my salvation into temptation.

It was a Sunday in the summer time. We made an excursion to the neighboring Mountain village,
where a relative of the family lived. The two sons with her sister We were way ahead of two
old, her talk and laughter was in the forest, through which the Led
away, already missing altogether.

       *       *       *       *       *

You may retort that all this doesn't matter. That is very true--and be hanged to you!--but
those facts prove by every canon of literary art that Robinson Crusoe is either a coldly calculated
flight of consummate genius or an accidental freak of hack literature. When De Foe wrote, it
was only a century after Drake and his companions in authorized piracy had made the British
privateer the scourge of the seas and had demonstrated that naval supremacy meant the control
of the world. The seafaring life was one of peril, but it carried with it honor, glory and
envy. Forty years later Nelson was born to crown British navalry with deathless Glory. Even
the commonest sailor spoke his ship's name--if it were a fine vessel--with the same affection
that he spoke his wife's and cursed a bad ship by its name as if to tag its vileness with proverbiality.

When De Foe wrote Alexander Selkirk, able seaman, was alive end had told his story of shipwreck
to Sir Richard Steele, editor of the English Gentleman and of the Tattler, who wrote it up
well--but not half as well as any one of ten thousand newspaper men of today could do under
similar circumstances.

Now who that has read of Selkirk and Dampierre and Stradling does not remember the two famous
ships, the "Cinque Ports" and the "St. George?" In every actvial book of the times, ship's
names were sprinkled over the page as if they had been shaken out of the pepper box. But you
inquire in vain the name of the slaver that wrecked "poor Robinson Crusoe"-- a name that would
have been printed on his memory beyond forgetting because of the very misfortune itself. Now
the book is the autobiography of a man whose only years of active life between eighteen and
twenty-six were passed as a sailor. It was written apparently after he was seventy-two years
old, at the period when every trifling incident and name of youth would survive most brightly;
yet he names no ships, no sailor mates, carefully avoids all knowledge of or advantage attaching
to any parts of ships. It is out of character as a sailor's tale, showing that the author either
did not understand the value of or was too indolent to acquire the ship knowledge that would
give to his work the natural smell of salt water and the bilge. It is a landlubber's sea yarn.

Is it in character as a revelation of human nature? No man like unto Robinson Crusoe ever did
live, does live, or ever will live, unless as a freak deprived of human emotions. The Robinson
Crusoe of Despair Island was not a castaway, but the mature politician. Daniel Defoe of Newgate
Prison. The castaway would have melted into loving recollections; the imprisoned lampoonist
would have busied himself with schemes, ideas, arguments and combinations for getting out,
and getting on. This poor Robin on the island weeps over nothing but his own sorrows, and,
while pretending to bewail his solitude, turns aside coldly from companionships next only in
affection to those of men. He has a dog, two ship's cats (of whose "eminent history" he promises
something that is never related), tame goats and parrots. He gives none of them a name, he
does not occupy his yearning for companionship and love by preparing comforts for them or by
teaching them tricks of intelligence or amusement; and when he does make a stagger at teaching
Poll to talk it is for the sole purpose of hearing her repeat "Poor Robin Crusoe!" The dog
is dragged in to work for him, but not to be rewarded. He dies without notice, as do the cats,
and not even a billet of wood marks their graves.

Could any being, with a drop of human blood in his veins, do that? He thinks of his father
with tears in his eyes--because he did not escape the present solitude by taking the old man's
advice! Does he recall his mother or any of the childish things that lie so long and deep in
the heart of every natural man? Does he ever wonder what his old school-fellows, Bob Freckles
and Pete Baker, are doing these solitary evenings when he sits under the tropics and hopes--could
he not at least hope it?--that they are, thank God, alive and happy at York? He discourses
like a parson of the utterly impossible affection that Friday had for his cannibal sire and
tells you how noble, Christian and beautiful it was--as if, by Jove! a little of that virtue
wouldn't have ornamented his own cold, emotionless, fishy heart!

He had no sentimental side. Think of those dreary, egotistic, awful evenings, when, for more
than twenty years this infernal hypocrite kept himself company and tried patiently to deceive
God by flattering Him about religion! It is impossible. Why thought turns as certainly to revery
and recollection as grass turns to seed. He married. What was his wife's name? We know how
much property she had. What were the names of the honest Portuguese Captain and the London
woman who kept his money? The cold selfishness and gloomy egotism of this creature mark him
as a monster and not as a man.

       *       *       *       *       *

So the book is not in character as an autobiography, nor does it contain a single softening
emotion to create sympathy. Let us see whether it be scholarly in its ease. The one line that
strikes like a bolt of lightning is the height of absurdity. We have all laughed, afterward
of course, at that--single--naked--foot--print. It could not have been there without others,
unless Friday were a one legged man, or was playing the good old Scots game of "hop-scotch!"

But the foot-print is not a circumstance to the cannibals. All the stage burlesques of Robinson
Crusoe combined could not produce such funny cannibals as he discovered. Crusoe's cannibals
ate no flesh but that of men! He had no great trouble contriving how to induce Friday to eat
goat's flesh! They took all the trouble to come to his island to indulge in picnics, during
which they ate up folks, danced and then went home before night. When the big party of 31 arrived,
they had with them one other cannibal of Friday's tribe, a Spaniard, and Friday's father. It
appears they always carefully unbound a victim before despatching him. They brought Friday
pere for lunch, although he was old, decrepit and thin--a condition that always unfits a man
among all known cannibals for serving as food. They reject them as we do stringy old roosters
for spring chickens in the best society. Then Friday, born a cannibal and converted to Crusoe's
peculiar religion, shows that in three years he has acquired all the emotions of filial affection
prevalent at that time among Yorkshire folk who attended dissenting chapels. More wonderful
still! old Friday pere, immersed in age and cannibalism, has the corresponding paternal feeling.
Crusoe never says exactly where these cannibals came from, but my own belief is that they came
from that little Swiss town whence the little wooden animals for toy Noah's Arks also came.

A German savant--one of the patient sort that spend half a life writing a monograph on the
variation of spots on the butterfly's wings--could get a philosophical dissertation on Doubt
out of Crusoe's troubles with pens, ink and paper; also clothes. In the volume I am using,
on page 86, third paragraph, he says: "I should lose my reckoning of time for want of books,
and pen and ink." So he kept it by notches in wood, he tells in the fourth paragraph. In paragraph
5, same page, he says: "We are to observe that among the many things I brought out of the ship,
I got several of less value, etc., which I omitted setting down as in particular pens, ink
and paper!" Page 87, second paragraph: "I wanted many things, notwithstanding all the many
things that I had amassed together, and of these ink was one!" Page 88, first paragraph: "I
drew up my affairs in writing!" Now, by George! did you ever hear of more appearing and disappearing
pens, ink and paper?

The adventures of his clothes were as remarkable as his own. On his very first trip to the
wreck, after landing, he went "rummaging for clothes, of which I found enough," but took no
more than he wanted for present use. On the second trip he "took all the men's clothes" (and
there were fifteen souls on board when she sailed). Yet in his famous debit and credit calculations
between good and evil he sets these down, page 88:

  EVIL         |         GOOD
 --------------------------------------------------
  I have no clothes to  | But I am in a hot climate,
  cover me.             | where, if I had
                        | clothes (!) I could hardly
                        | wear them.

On page 147, bewailing his lack of a sieve, he says: "Linen, I had none but what was mere rags."

Page 158 (one year later): "My clothes, too, began to decay; as to linen, I had had none a
good while, except some checkered shirts, which I carefully preserved, because many times I
could bear no other clothes on. I had almost three dozen of shirts, several thick watch coats,
too hot to wear."

So he tried to make jackets out of the watch coats. Then this ingenious gentleman, who had
nothing to wear and was glad of it on account of the heat, which kept him from wearing anything
but a shirt, and rendered watch coats unendurable, actually made himself a coat, waistcoat,
breeches, cap and umbrella of skins with the hair on and wore them in great comfort! Page 175
he goes hunting, wearing this suit, belted by two heavy skin belts, carrying hatchet, saw,
powder, shot, his heavy fowling piece and the goatskin umbrella--total weight of baggage and
clothes about ninety pounds. It must have been a cold day!

Yet the first thing he does for the naked Friday thirteen years later is to give him a pair--of--LINEN--trousers!
Poor Robin Crusoe--what a colossal liar was wasted on a desert island!

       *       *       *       *       *

Of course, no boy sees the blemishes in "Robinson Crusoe;" those are left to the Infallible
Critic. The book is as ludicrous as "Hamlet" from one aspect and as profound as "Don Quixote"
from another. In its pages the wonder tales and wonder facts meet and resolve; realism and
idealism are joined--above all, there is a mystery no critic may solve. It is useless to criticize
genius or a miracle, except to increase its wonder. Who remembers anything in "Crusoe" but
the touch of the wizard's hand? Who associates the Duke of Athens, Hermia and Helena, with
Bottom and Snug, Titania, Oberon and Puck? Any literary master mechanic might real off ten
thousand yards of the Greek folks or of "Pericles," but when you want something that runs thus:

  "I know a bank whereon the wild thyme blows!
  Where oxlip and the nodding violet grows--."

why, then, my masters, you must put up the price and employ a genius to work the miracle.

Take all miracles without question. Whether work of genius or miracle of accident, "Robinson
Crusoe" gives you a generous run for your money.

THE DELICIOUS VICE

V

THE OPEN POLAR SEA OF NOVELS

WITH HIGHLY INCENDIARY ADVICE TO BOYS AND SOME MORE ANCIENT HISTORY

After the first novel has been read, somewhere under the seasoned age of fourteen years, the
beginner equipped with inherent genius for novel reading is afloat upon an open sea of literature,
a master mariner of his own craft, having ports to make, to leave, to take, so splendid of
variety and wonder as to make the voyages of Sinbad sing small by comparison. It may be proper
and even a duty here to suggest to the young novel reader that the Ten Commandments and all
governmental statutes authorize the instant killing, without pity or remorse, of any heavy-headed
and intrusive person who presumes to map out for him a symmetrical and well-digested course
of novel reading. The murder of such folks is universally excused as self-defense and secretly
applauded as a public service. The born novel reader needs no guide, counsellor or friend.
He is his own "master." He can with perfect safety and indescribable delight shut his eyes,
reach out his hand, pull down any plum of a book and never make a mistake. Novel reading is
the only one of the splendid occupations of life calling for no instruction or advice. All
that is necessary is to bite the apple with the largest freedom possible to the intellectual
and imaginative jaws, and let the taste of it squander itself all the way down from the front
teeth until it is lost in the digestive joys of memory. There is no miserable quail limit to
novels--you can read thirty novels in thirty days or 365 novels in 365 days for thirty years,
and the last one will always have the delicious taste of the pies of childhood.

If any honest-minded boy chances to read these lines, let him charge his mind with full contempt
for any misguided elders who have designs of "choosing only the best accepted novels" for his
reading. There are no "best" novels except by the grace of the poor ones, and, if you don't
read the poor ones, the "best" will be as tasteless as unsalted rice. I say to boys that are
worth growing up: don't let anybody give you patronizing advice about novels. If your pastors
and masters try oppression, there is the orchard, the creek bank, the attic room, the roof
of the woodshed (under the peach tree), and a thousand other places where you may hide and
maintain your natural independence. Don't let elderly and officious persons explain novels
to you. They can not honestly do so; so don't waste time. Every boy of fourteen, with the genius
to read 'em, is just as good a judge of novels and can understand them quite as well as any
gentleman of brains of any old age. Because novels mean entirely different things to every
blessed reader.

       *       *       *       *       *

The main thing at the beginning is to be in the neighborhood of a good "novel orchard" and
to nibble and eat, and even "gormandize," as your fancy leads you. Only--as you value your
soul and your honor as a gentleman--bear in mind that what you read in every novel that pleases
you is sacred truth. There are busy-bodies, pretenders to "culture," and sticklers for the
multiplication table and Euclid's pestiferous theorem, who will tell you that novel reading
is merely for entertainment and light accomplishment, and that the histories of fiction are
purely imaginary and not to be taken seriously. That is pure falsehood. The truth of all humanity,
as well as all its untruth, flows in a noble stream through the pages of fiction. Do not allow
the elders to persuade you that pirate stories, battles, sieges, murders and sudden deaths,
the road to transgression and the face of dishonesty are not good for you. They are 90 per
cent. pure nutriment to a healthy boy's mind, and any other sort of boy ought particularly
to read them and so learn the shortest cut to the penitentiary for the good of the world. Whenever
you get hold of a novel that preaches and preaches and preaches, and can't give a poor ticket-of-leave
man or the decentest sort of a villain credit for one good trait--Gee, Whizz! how tiresome
they are--lose it, you young scamp, at once, if you respect yourself. If you are pushed you
can say that Bill Jones took it away from you and threw it in the creek. The great Victor Hugo
and the authors of that noble drama "The Two Orphans," are my authorities for the statement
that some fibs--not all fibs, but some proper fibs--are entered in heaven on both debit and
credit sides of the book of fate.

There is one book, the Book of Books, swelling rich and full with the wisdom and beauty and
joy and sorrow of humanity--a book that set humility like a diamond in the forehead of virtue;
that found mercy and charity outcasts among the minds of men and left them radiant queens in
the world's heart; that stickled not to describe the gorgeous esotery of corroding passion
and shamed it with the purity of Mary Magdelen; that dragged from the despair of old Job the
uttermost poison-drop of doubt and answered it with the noble problem of organized existence;
that teems with murder and mistake and glows with all goodness and honest aspiration--that
is the Book of Books. There hasn't been one written since that has crossed the boundary of
its scope. What would that book be after some goody-goody had expurgated it of evil and left
it sterilized in butter and sugar? Let no ignorant paternal Czar, ruling over cottage or mansion,
presume to keep from the mind and heart of youth the vigorous knowledge and observation of
evil and good, crime and virtue together. No chaff, no wheat; no dross, no gold; no human faults
and weaknesses, no heavenly hope. And if any gentleman does not like the sentiment, he can
find me at my usual place of residence, unless he intends violence--and be hanged, also, to him!

       *       *       *       *       *

A novel is a novel, and there are no bad ones in the world, except those you do not happen
to like. Suppose a boy started with Robinson Crusoe and was scientifically and criminally steered
by the hand of misguided "culture" to Scott and Dickens and Cooper and Hawthorne--all the classics,
in fact, so that he would escape the vulgar thousands? Answer a straight question, ye old rooters
between a thousand miles of muslin lids--would you have been willing to miss "The Gunmaker
of Moscow" back yonder in the green days of say forty years ago? What do you think of Prof.
William Henry Peck's "Cryptogram?" Were not Sylvanus Cobb, Jr., and Emerson Bennett authors
of renown--honor to their dust, wherever it lies! Didn't you read Mrs. Southworth's "Capitola"
or the "Hidden Hand" long before "Vashti" was dreamed of? Don't you remember that No. 52 of
Beadle's Dime Library (light yellowish red paper covers) was "Silverheels, the Delaware," and
that No. 77 was "Schinderhannes, the Outlaw of the Black Forest?" I yield to no man in affection
and reverence for M. Dumas, Mr. Thackeray and others of the higher circles, but what's the
matter with Ned Buntline, honest, breezy, vigorous, swinging old Ned? Put the "Three Guardsmen"
where you will, but there is also room for "Buffalo Bill, the Scout." When I first saw Col.
Cody, an ornament to the theatre and a painful trial to the drama, and realized that he was
Buffalo Bill in the flesh--why, I was glad I had also read "Buffalo Bill's Last Shot"--(may
he never shoot it). The day has passed forever, probably, when Buffalo Bill shall shout to
his other scouts, "You set fire to the girl while I take care of the house!" or vice versa,
and so saying, bear the fainting heroine triumphantly off from the treacherous redskins. But
the story has lived.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a happy and honored custom in the old days for subscribers to the New York Ledger and
the New York Weekly to unite in requests for the serial republication of favorite stories in
those great fireside luminaries. They were the old-fashioned, broadside sheets and, of course,
there were insuperable difficulties against preserving the numbers. After a year or two, therefore,
there would awaken a general hunger among the loyal hosts to "read the story over," and when
the demand was sufficiently strong the publishers would repeat it, cuts, divisions, and all,
just as at first. How many times the "Gunmaker of Moscow" was repeated in the Ledger, heaven
knows. I remember I petitioned repeatedly for "Buffalo Bill" in the Weekly, and we got it,
too, and waded through it again. By wading, I don't mean pushing laboriously and tediously
through, but, by George! half immersion in the joy. It was a week between numbers, and a studious
and appreciative boy made no bones of reading the current weekly chapters half a dozen times
over while waiting for the next.

It must have been ten years later that I felt a thrill at the coming of Buffalo Bill himself
in his first play. I had risen to the dignity of dramatic critic upon a journal of limited
civilization and boundless politics, and was privileged to go behind the scenes at the theatre
and actually speak to the actors. (I interviewed Mary Anderson during her first season, in
the parlor of the local hotel, where honest George Bristow--who kept the cigar stand and could
not keep a healthy appetite--always gave a Thanksgiving order for "two-whole-roast turkeys
and a piece of breast," and they were served, too, the whole ones going to some near-by hospital,
and the piece of breast to George's honest stomach--good, kind soul that he was. And Miss Anderson
chewed gum during the whole period of the interview to the intense amusement of my elder and
brother dramatic critic, who has since become the honored governor of his adopted state, and
toward whom I beg to look with affectionate memory of those days.) Now, when a man has known
novels intimately, has been dramatic critic, and has traveled with a circus, it seems to me
in all reason he can not fairly have any other earthly joys to desire. At fifteen I was walking
on tip-toe about the house on Sundays, and going off to the end of the garden to softly whistle
"weekday" tunes, and at twenty I stood off the wings L. U. E., and had twenty "Black Crook"
coryphees in silk tights and tarletan squeeze past in line, and nod and say, "Is it going all
right in front?" They--knew--I--was--the--Critic! When you can do that you can laugh at Byron,
roosting around upon inaccessible mountain crags and formulating solitude and indigestion into
poetry!

I waited for Buffalo Bill's coming with feelings that can not be described. It was impossible
to expect to meet Sir William Wallace in the flesh, or Sir Wilfred of Ivanhoe, or Capt. D'Artagnan,
or Umslopogaas, or any one of a thousand great fighting heroes; but here was Buffalo Bill,
just as great and glorious and dashing and handsome as any of them, and my right hand tingled
to be grasped in that of the Bayard of the Prairies. And that hand's desire was attained. In
his dressing-room between acts I sat nervously on a chair while the splendid Apollo of frontiersmen,
in buckskin and beads, sat on his trunk, with his long, shapely legs sprawled gracefully out,
his head thrown back so that the mane of brown hair should hang behind. It was glistening with
oil and redolent of barber's perfume. And we talked there as one man to another, each apparently
without fear. I was certainly nervous and timid, but he did not notice it, and I am frank to
say he did not appear to feel the slightest personal fear of me. Thus, face to face, I saw
the man with whom I had trod Ned Buntline's boundless plains and had seen and encountered a
thousand perils and redskins. When the act call came, and I rose to go, a man stopped at the
door and said to him:

"What shall it be to-night, Colonel?"

"A big beef-steak and a bottle of Bass!" answered Buffalo Bill heartily, "and tell 'ern to
have it hot and ready at 11:15."

The beef-steak and Bass' ale were the watchwords of true heroism. The real hero requires substantial
filling. He must have a head and a heart--but no less a good, healthy and impatient stomach.

In the daily paper the morning I write this I see the announcement of Buffalo Bill's "Wild
West Show" coming two week's hence. Good luck to him! He can't charge prices too steep for
me, and there are six seats necessary--the best in the amphitheater. And I wish I could be
sure the vigorous spirit of Ned Buntline would be looking down from the blue sky overhead to
see his hero charge the hill of San Juan at the head of the Rough Riders.

       *       *       *       *       *

This digression may be wide of the subject of novel reading, but the real novel reader is at
home anywhere. He has thoughts, dreams, reveries, fancies. All the world is his novel and all
actions are stories and all the actors are characters. When Lucile Western, the excellent American
actress, was at the height of her powers, not long before her last appearances, she had as
her leading man a big, slouchy and careless person, who was advertised as "the talented young
English actor, William Whally." In the intimacies of private association he was known as Bill
Whally, and his descent was straight down from "Mount Sinai's awful height." He was a Hebrew
and no better or more uneven and reckless actor ever played melodramatic "heavies." He had
a love for Shakespeare, but could not play him; he had a love of drink and could gratify it.
His vigorous talents purchased for him much forbearance. I've seen Mr. Whally play the fastidious
and elegant "Sir Archibald Levison" in shiny black doe-skin trousers and old-fashioned cloth
gaiters, because his condition rendered the problem of dressing somewhat doubtful, though it
could not obscure his acting. He was the only walking embodiment of "Bill Sykes" I ever saw,
and I contracted the habit of going to see him kill Miss Western as "Nancy" because he butchered
that young woman with a broken chair more satisfactorily than anybody else I ever saw. There
was a murderer for you--Bill Sykes! Bad as he was in most things, let us not forget that--he--killed--Nancy--
and--killed--her--well and--thoroughly. If that young woman didn't snivel herself under a just
sentence of death, I'm no fit householder to serve on a jury. Every time Miss Western came
around it was my custom to read up fresh on "Oliver Twist" and hurry around and enjoy Bill
Whally's happy application of retribution with the aid of the old property chair. There were
six other persons whom I succeeded in persuading to applaud the scene with me every time it
was acted.

But there's a separate chapter for villains.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us return to the old novels. What curious pranks time plays with tastes and vogues. Forty
years ago N. P. Willis was just faded. Yet he was long a great comet of literary glitter and
obscured many men of much greater ability. Everybody read him; the annuals hung upon his name;
the ladies regarded him as a finer and more dashing Byron than Byron. The place he filled was
much like that of Congreve, before whom Shakespeare's great nose was out of joint for a long
time; Congreve, who was the margarita aluminata major of English poesy and drama and public
life, and is now found in junk stores and in the back line on book shelves and whom nobody
reads now. Willis had his languid affectations, his superficial cynicism and added to them
ostentatious sentimentality.

Does anybody read William Gilmore Simm's elaborate rhetoric disguised as novels? He must have
written two dozen of them, the Richardson of the United States. Lovers of delicious wit and
intellectual humor still read Dr. Holmes' essays, but it would probably take a physician's
prescription to make them swallow the novels. In what dark corners of the library are Bayard
Taylor's novels and travels hidden? Will you come into the garden, Maud, and read Chancellor
Walworth's mighty tragedies and Miss Mulock's Swiss-toy historical novels, or will you beg
off, like the honest girl you are, and take a nap? Your sleepiness, dear Miss Maud, does you
credit. By the way, what the deuce is the name of anyone of these novels? I can recall "Elsie
Vernier," by Dr. Holmes and then there is a blank.

But what classics they were--then! In the thick of them had appeared a newspaper story that
struggled through and was printed in book form. Old friends have told me how they waited at
the country post-offices to get a copy, delayed for weeks. It was a scandal to read it in some
localities. It was fiercely attacked as an outrageous exaggeration produced by temporary excitement
and hostile feeling, or praised as a new gospel. It has been translated into every tongue having
a printing press, and has sold by millions of copies. It was "Uncle Tom's Cabin." It was not
a classic, but what a vigorous immortal mongrel of human sentiment it was! What a row was kicked
up over Miss Braddon's "Octoroon," and what an impossible yellowback it was! The toughest piece
of fiction I met with as a boy was "Sanford and Merton," and I've been aching to say so for
four pages. If this world were full of Sanfords and Mertons, then give me Jupiter or some other
comfortable planet at a secure sanitary distance removed.

I can't even remember the writers who were grammatically and rhetorically perfect forty years
ago, and also very dull with it all. Is there a bookshelf that holds "Leni Leoti, or The Flower
of the Prairies?" There are "Jane Eyre," "Lady Audley's Secret," and "John Halifax, Gentleman,"
which will go with many and are all well worth the reading, too. Are Mrs. Eliza A. Dupuy, Mrs.
E. D. E. N. Southworth, Mrs. Caroline Lee Hentz and Augusta J. Evans dead? Their novels still
live--look at the book stores. "Linda, or the Young Pilot of the Belle Creole," "India, the
Pearl of Pearl River," "The Planter's Northern Bride," "St. Elmo"--they were fiction for you!
A boy old enough to have a first sweetheart could swallow them by the mile.

You remember, when we were boys, the circus acrobats always--always, remember--rubbed young
children with snake-oil and walloped them with a rawhide to educate them in tumbling and contortion?
Well, if I could get the snake-oil for the joints and a curly young wig, I'd like to get back
at five hundred of those books and devour them again--"as of yore!"

VI

RASCALS

BEING A DISCOURSE UPON GOOD, HONEST SCOUNDRELISM AND VILLAINS.

The people that inhabit novels are like other peoples of the earth--if they are peaceful, they
have no history. So that, therefore, in novels, as in nations, it is the great restless heights
of society that are to be approached with greatest awe and that engage admiration and regard.
Everybody is interested in Nero, but not one person in ten thousand can tell you anything definite
about Constantine or even Marcus Aurelius. If you should speak off-handedly about Amelia Sedley
in the presence of a thousand average readers you would probably miss 85 per cent. of effect;
if you said Becky Sharp the whole thousand would understand.

There is this to be said of disreputable folk, that they are clever and picturesque and interesting,
at least.

An elderly jeweler in New York City was arrested several years ago upon the charge of receiving
stolen gold and silver plate, watches and jewelry from well-known thieves. For forty years
he had been a respected merchant, a church officer, a husband, father, and citizen, of irreproachable
reputation, with enduring friendships. He was charitable, liberal and kindly. For decade after
decade he was the experienced, wise and fatherly "fence" of professional burglars and thieves.
Why, it would be an education in itself to know that man, to shake his honest hand, fresh from
charity or concealment, and smoke a pipe with him and hear him talk about things frankly. When
he gave to the missionary collection, rest assured he gave sincerely; when he "covered swag,"
into the melting pot for an industrious burglar, he did so only in the regular course of business.

Strange as it may seem, even criminals have human feelings in common with all of us. The old
Thug who stepped aside into the bushes and prayed earnestly while his son was throwing his
first strangling cloth around the throat of the English traveler--prayed for that son's honorable,
successful beginning in his life devotion--was a good father. And when he was told that the
son had acted with unusual skill, who can doubt that his tears of joy were sincere and humble
tears of thankfulness? At least Bowanee knew. Can you not imagine a kind-hearted Chinese matron
saying to her neighbor over the bamboo fence, "Yes, we sent the baby down to the beach (or
the river bank or the forest) yesterday. We couldn't afford to keep it. I hope the gods have
taken its little soul. At any rate it is sure of salvation hereafter."

       *       *       *       *       *

Some twenty years ago I took the night train from Pineville to Barbourville, in the Kentucky
mountains, reaching the latter place about 11 o'clock of a cold, rainy, dark November night.
Only one other passenger alighted. There was an express wagon to take us to the town, a mile
or so distant, and the wagon was already heavy with freight packages. The road was through
a narrow lane, hub-deep with mud, and what, with stalling and resting, we were more than half
an hour getting to the hotel. My fellow passenger was about my age, and was a shrewd, well-informed
native of the vicinity. He knew the mineral, timber and agricultural resources, was evidently
an enterprising business man and an intelligent but not voluble talker. He accepted a cigar,
and advised me to see the house in Barbourville where the late Justice Samuel Miller was born.
At the hotel he registered first, and, as he was going to leave next day and I was to remain
several days, he told the clerk to give me the better of the two rooms vacant. It was a very
pleasant act of thoughtfulness. The name on the register was "A. Johnson." The next day I asked
the clerk about Mr. Johnson. My fellow passenger was Andy Johnson, whose fame as a feud-fighter
and slayer of men has never been exceeded in the history of mountain feuds. He then had three
or four men to his credit, definitely, and several doubtful ascriptions. He added a few more,
I believe, before he met the inevitable.

Now, while Mr. Johnson, in all matters where killing seemed to him to be appropriate, was a
most prompt and accurate man in accomplishing it, yet he was not the murderer that ignorant
and isolated folks conceive such persons to be. The cigar I had given him was a very bad, cheap
cigar, and, if he had merely wanted murder, he had every reason to kill me for giving it to
him, and he had a perfect night for the deed. But he smoked it to the stub without a complaint
or remark and saw that I got the best room in the hotel. Johnson was a cautious and considerate
fellow-man, whose murders were doubtless private hobbies and exercises growing out of his environment
and heredity. "We can continue in there talking about what your charges should mean, here
on the street is not the place to "he said, and wanted to go forward! bounced back, however,
because his wife was sitting in the room and sewed! - Out here, I also had his wife, but claimed
that it was not his wife but only his fiancee! Who was the correct one, who the wrong Kuzunoha?
- He then opened the door very quietly, went back and told his parents: "Wait here a moment,
I'll be right back! "

Then he entered his house, greeted his wife and told her: "Your parents have arrived, brace yourself
to receive it! In an hour we are back here! "

After the woman agreed to consider that you get everything in the best way Yasuna went to the in-laws
back and asked him to take a walk, after an hour he would be in Home
run.

On the way he told the parents that the girls actually located in them Kuzunoha her daughter,
was his bride and that this heartbroken about the fact that in the Yasuna long time nothing
was heard from again, her parents have arranged for the long journey
to do with it.

Now arrived, they would have to see to her great sorrow, that even
another woman in the house was!

Yasuna told his adventure and his happy marriage.

In this conversation, the hour had passed, all came back and went into the house, but it was to
see no woman, only the child was lying on his bed and wept, cheered but the Kuzunoha, which took
the boy in his arms and joked with him. Then told the boy its a strange dream he had and asked
what he meant. He told the Kuzunoha: "Before, when I was sleeping, you said to me that you
are enchanted not human, but a Fox mayest.

The father had once saved the life of you and so you had human Taken shape and Seist him in
the form of his bride appeared to thank him. Now But is the real bride came and then you must
part.

I should notify the father and tell me to become and remain well-behaved
and well.

    A stupid dream, is not it! "
    

    All looked in amazement, but now the mystery was resolved. The real
    Kuzunoha remained now in the home as a lawful wife, and brought the
little Yasunas Dokyo a clever Man who was wise and brave.

    

  

Of the white fox you never heard from again.

[Note 1: Shimoda = place on the Izu Peninsula, near Yokohama.]

[Note 2: = Kumamoto city and province in the south of Japan near in Nagasaki.]

[Note 3: Dokyo = courage.]

[Decoration]

Urashima Taro [1].

lived in a fishing village near present-day Yokohama many, many years ago a young Fisherman
named Urashima Taro.

One evening as he returned from fishing and quite satisfied and was in good spirits because
he had made good booty, he saw a crowd on the beach boys a small turtle was caught and fixed
to the front at one of its legs Cord in a circle waving and tormented [2]. Urashima, who liked
the animals and any Cruelty to innocent animals detested felt again now, sorry for the poor
animals and went to the children.

By giving his voice a vigorous tone, he scolded the children.

"What is this Malice, "he exclaimed indignantly," this innocent and helpless animal to torment so! Do
you not know that God in heaven those punished naughty children who
mistreat the poor animals?

Show me once, To whom is this turtle? "

"This animal belongs to no one," said the eldest of the boys and added even more outrageous added:
"We can do what we want, and if we have a pleasure in the animal to kill, so this is our free
will and no one else goes to something! "

Urashima saw that he was not the naughty boy should come with moral lessons, for in Such a hard
heart, words have no influence; so he changed his tactics and said
now with possible mild voice now, "Well, you just do not offend, that
was not meant so bad; but enjoy this most delightful turtle me and
I would like to own.

Ye you engage in a trade with me?

How about if you give me the animal would you sell? For their money you can buy something and
make you more joy than to be this animal spun around in circles here!

"

The children were delighted to trade quickly, leaving Urashima against some silver coins the
turtle.

Urashima took her in hand, walked to the water and put the animal into the sea, saying:

"Poor little creatures, not to deprive you of freedom, but you play
the freedom I bought you and now swim out and be more careful in future,
lest you again fall into evil hands boys!

"He stood there for a while and looked happy, smiling the fast in the water then swimming turtle
after, until he no longer saw; then he took his fishing gear and his fish and went cheerfully
to his tent.

The next morning he went as usual to his craft. When he and his canoe on the Sea and had thrown his
net, he heard suddenly a delicate little voice:

"Urashima Sama!"

[3]

Astonished, he looked around, but could not discover where the voice was heard and who his Name
called. As it rang again:

"Urashima Sama!"

Now he realized that the voice came from the water and he leaned over
the edge of his Boat and saw the little turtle that he the day before
from the hands of the boys was freed.

At first he was frightened, but he took heart and asked: "Was it
you who called me?"

"Certainly," answered the little creature. "I came to you my gratitude for your yesterday noble
deed to say.

And because you have given me my freedom, I want to tell you something right Nice show! Did
you like, follow me! "

Urashima thought: What it may well be that I could show this innocuous animal? But nothing special.
But that does not matter, it will prove to be grateful to me and so will I told him not to
spoil the joy.

After he had been so careful for a while, asked precaution, but he:

"It does not take too long? I will follow you, but I did not miss too much time. Where should
it go? "

"Not at all far from here. I intend only to you the palace of our marine Queen Otohime and to lead
you there to show miracles! "

"That's impossible," said Urashima, "because I can not swim as fast and not as good as you dive and
what is the main thing after all, I can in the water not breathe and therefore do not accompany
you to the bottom! "

"Make yourself so do not worry, Urashima," replied the turtle, "rises to my And the further back you
will see! "

"But my boat - said," Urashima alarmingly -.

"It can be found here again, I lead you back," interrupted the animal.

"But you're so small, you can not carry me," said Urashima still questionable.

As it roared in the water, the turtle stretched and stretched and looked astonished Urashima,
as more and more enlarged, until it had the same size of the boat, then asked she laughed

"Well?" - Am I too weak for you, "Since all concerns vanished Urashima, hastily rose? he made
his boat after he had the same precaution anchored and took the Back of the animal room.

"Hold on tight right and fear not" After some time, called the Turtle!: "Now shut his eyes tight
and do not open it till I tell you. Also consider breath for a while, it does not last long! "

Urashima did as he was told and then he felt the animal in the water sank and the water roared and
roared around his ears, anxious, he clung with both hands at the sign his strange horse riding,
but mindful of the warning, he kept his eyes closed and held his breath.

Even he thought it would go with him to the end, because the cry was heard: "Now!"

As he opened his eyes and looked at the bottom of the sea, the fine sand of nothing Beads was.
Shimmering in the distance he saw a huge building in dazzling splendor, on that the turtle
with her rider zuschwamm. At last they came and stood in front of a great gates, which was
decorated with pure gold with precious stones. Two large eerie sea dragon lay by the gate and stared
Urashima with terrible rolling eyes, so that it completely was anxious. When the dragon but saw
the turtle left their menacing look and after they tried to make friendly faces.

"Now climb off and wait here," said the turtle, and then went after Urashima has gone and had
sat on the floor, through the gate.

Urashima looked around then and was very surprised that he, though he was on the bottom of the sea
was and the sea water around him, but quite dry and was able to breathe without discomfort,
even the air he was even more pure and spicy ago, when the top of the earth.

It was not long since returned to the turtle, it was followed by a large number Fish of all sizes,
shapes and colors, as it brings the ocean, all wore only a very bright fabric in blue, like a dress,
and had silver premium.

They surrounded Urashima, who had stood up and saluted him respectfully by tilting her head.

Then approached two larger fish, which also wore a blue dress with gold but Premiums, and just such
a dress and put something without talking, Urashima the fisherman clothes went out and brought
the blue-clad attire.

Urashima left everything without will be done with it, he told himself, now I am here and alone
can not proceed. Bad it will certainly not happen to me, for who you with a Robe of honor, wearing the one
will not swallow well.

After he also wonderful Sammetpantoffel were put on the feet, there
came a wonderful beautiful maid, took him by the hand and led him
through the gate, while the fish as an honorary escort followed at
a respectful distance in perfect order.

After they had walked through the door, they came to a marble staircase, the seven stages and
had flickered at a gate of polished mahogany, in which many emeralds,
ended.

Once there, the maid opened the door and let Urashima occur, which is now in a large hall was,
the indescribable beauty his eyes almost blinded. Twenty Columns of the purest crystal wore
formed from coral ceiling of the room, from which a Vast amount of precious lamps hung down, in
which burned fragrant oils. The walls were all marble and contributed
to a variety of jewelry gemstones and rubies. In the middle the hall
was a diamond throne, on which Otohime, the sea queen sat, beautiful
like the dawn, which distributes the pale Queen of Night. The throne
was surrounded by infinite Amount of dignitaries and palace officials,
all clad in costly garments. The splendor was not the usual beauty
and wonder of such young fisherman so dazzling that He only reluctantly
and half involuntarily, slowly put one foot before the other and thus
the Throne was near, where he wanted to bow down reverently and humbly.
But the queen, had observed that his surprise and his hesitation with
a mild, pleasant smile, rose quickly, Urashima by the hand and prevented
his falling down. With a voice that resembled the sound of a silver
bell, sweet and pure, she said to him:

"Let me welcome. I have heard
you yesterday in a selfless way one of my favorite Servants of the
lives you saved. It was my sincere wish to you this noble deed to
retaliate and prove to you my gratitude. That is why I have invited
you to me and I was glad that you were so fearless of danger and not
eight test, the way to do here. Who is fearless, is also usually true!
The young fisherman knew not how it happened and he was so embarrassed
and self-conscious that he does not respond to a word could, he made
only a silent, demure bow.

At a sign from the Queen he was now brought
silk cushion on which he settle had to be put to an ivory table in
front of him on the red on a Coating plate tasty food of various kinds
were that it was all unknown. He was no longer necessary, but said
the food and drink to brave. It was for him in the true sense of the
word for a divine meal, he had in his whole life never seen such things,
let alone ever tasted.

When he had finished his meal, he asked the
Queen to look at the palace; they led him from room to room, from
room to room through any premises, with the lavish Splendor were equipped
and had every possible convenience only.

But the most wonderful was
the garden, the four large beds containing the four seasons corresponded.

One
bed, spring, contained numerous plum and cherry trees all over strewn
with flowers were sealed and were standing on a lush dark green grass.
On the branches were numerous nightingales, who had their sweet romance
and a melodic sound infinite set Larks had built their nests in the
sea of ​​flowers.

To the south there was the bed of the summer: Here
stood pear and Aepfelbäume whose Branches under the weight of the
finest fruits to near the ground bent. Grilling and cicadas filled
the air with their monotonous and deafening clamor. The great heat,
which prevailed in this part was tempered by a gentle, cooling breeze.

No hero who does more or less than is demanded by the best practical opinion of the society
of his time is worth more than thirty cents as a hero. Boys are literary and dramatic critics
so far above the critics formed by strained formulas of the schools that you can trust them.
They have an unerring distrust of the fellow who moves around with his confounded conscientious
scruples, as if the well-settled opinion of the breathing world were not good enough for him!
Who the deuce has got any business setting everybody else right?

Some of these days I believe it is going to be discovered that the atmosphere and the encompassing
radiance and sweetness of Heaven are composed of the dear sighs and loving aspirations of earthly
motherhood. If it turns out otherwise, rest assured Heaven will not have reached its perfect
point of evolution. Why is it, then, that mothers will--will--will--try, so mistakenly, to
extirpate the jewel of honest, manly savagery from the breasts of their boys? I wonder if they
know that when grown men see one of these "pretty-mannered boys," cocksure as a Swiss toy new
painted and directed by watch spring, they feel an unholy impulse to empty an ink-bottle over
the young calf? Fauntleroy kids are a reproach to our civilization. Men, women and children,
all of us, crowd around the grimy Deignan of the Merrimac crew, and shout and cheer for Bill
Smith, the Rough Rider, who carried his mate out of the ruck at San Juan and twirls his hat
awkwardly and explains: "Ef I hadn't a saw him fall he would 'a' laid thar yit!"--and go straight
home and pretend to be proud of a snug little poodle of a man who doesn't play for fear of
soiling his picture-clothes, and who says: "Yes, sir, thank you," and "No, thank you, ma'am,"
like a French doll before it has had the sawdust kicked out of it!

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, when a hero tries to stamp his acts with the precise quality of exact justice--why, he
performs no acts. He is no better than that poor tongue-loose Hamlet, who argues you the right
of everything, and then, by the great Jingo! piles in and messes it all by doing the wrong
thing at the wrong time and in the wrong manner. It is permitted of course to be a great moral
light and correct the errors of all the dust of earth that has been blown into life these ages;
but human justice has been measured out unerringly with poetry and irony to such folk. They
are admitted to be saints, but about the time they have got too good for their earthly setting,
they have been tied to stakes and lighted up with oil and faggots; or a soda phosphate with
a pinch of cyanide of potassium inserted has been handed to them, as in the case of our old
friend, Socrates. And it's right. When a man gets too wise and good for his fellows and is
embarrassed by the healthful scent of good human nature, send him to heaven for relief, where
he can have the goodly fellowship of the prophets, the company of the noble army of martyrs,
and amuse himself suggesting improvements upon the vocal selections of cherubim and seraphim!
Impress the idea upon these gentry with warmth--and--with--oil!

       *       *       *       *       *

The ideal hero of fiction, you say, is Capt. D'Artagnan, first name unknown, one time cadet
in the Reserves of M. de Troisville's company of the King's Guards, intrusted with the care
of the honor and safety of His Majesty, Louis XIV. Very well; he is a noble gentleman; the
choice does honor to your heart, mind and soul; take him and hold the remembrance of his courage,
loyalty, adroitness and splendid endurance with hooks of steel. For myself, while yielding
to none who honor the great D'Artagnan, yet I march under the flag of the Sieur Bussy d'Amboise,
a proud Clermont, of blood royal in the reign of Henry III., who shed luster upon a court that
was edified by the wisdom of M. Chicot, the "King's Brother," the incomparable jester and philosopher,
who would have himself exceeded all heroes except that he despised the actors and the audience
of the world's theater and performed valiant feats only that he might hang his cap and bells
upon the achievements in ridicule.

Can it be improper to compare D'Artagnan and Bussy--when the intention is wholly respectful
and the motive pure? If a single protest is heard, there will be an end to this paper now--at
once. There are some comparisons that strengthen both candidates. For, we must consider the
extent of the theater and the stage, the space of time covering the achievements, the varying
conditions, lights and complexities. As, for instance, the very atmosphere in which these two
heroes moved, the accompaniment of manner which we call the "air" of the histories, and which
are markedly different. The contrast of breeding, quality and refinement between Bussy and
D'Artagnan is as great as that which distinguishes Mercutio from the keen M. Chicot. Yet each
was his own ideal type. Birth and the superior privileges of the haute noblesse conferred upon
the Sieur Bussy the splendid air of its own sufficient prestige; the lack of these require
of D'Artagnan that his intelligence, courage and loyal devotion should yet seem to yield something
of their greatness in the submission that the man was compelled to pay to the master. True,
this attitude was atoned for on occasion by blunt boldness, but the abased position and the
lack of subtle distinction of air and mind of the noble, forbade to the Fourth Mousquetaire
the last gracious touch of a Bayard of heroism. But the vulgarity was itself heroic.

       *       *       *       *       *

Compare the first appearance of the great Gascon at the Hotel de Troisville, or even his manner
and attitude toward the King when he sought to warn that monarch against forgetfulness of loyalty
proved, with the haughty insolence of indomitable spirit in which Bussy threw back to Henry
the shuttle of disfavor on the night of that remarkable wedding of St. Luc with the piquant
little page soubrette, Jeanne de Brissac.

D'Artagnan's air to his King has its pathos. It seems to say: "I speak bluntly, sire, knowing
that my life is yours and yet feeling that it is too obscure to provoke your vengeance." A
very hard draught for a man of fire and fearlessness to take without a gulp. But into Bussy's
manner toward his King there was this flash of lightning from Olympus: "My life, sire, is yours,
as my King, to take or leave; but not even you may dare to think of taking the life of Bussy
with the dust of least reproach upon it. My life you may blow out; my honor you do not dare
approach to question!"

There are advantages in being a gentleman, which can not be denied. One is that it commands
credit in the King's presence as well as at the tailor's.

It is interesting to compare both these attitudes with that of "Athos," the Count de la Fere,
toward the King. He was lacking in the irresistibly fierce insolence of Bussy and in the abasement
of D'Artagnan; it was melancholy, patient, persistent and terrible in its restrained calmness.
How narrowly he just escaped true greatness. I would no more cast reproaches upon that noble
gentleman than I would upon my grandmother; but he--was--a--trifle--serous, wasn't he? He was
brave, prompt, resourceful, splendid, and, at need, gingerish as the best colt in the paddock.
It is the deuce's own pity for a man to be born to too much seriousness. Do you know--and as
I love my country, I mean it in honest respect--that I sometimes think that the gentleness
and melancholy of Athos somehow suggests a bit of distrust. One is almost terrified at times
lest he may begin the Hamlet controversies. You feel that if he committed a murder by mistake
you are not absolutely sure he wouldn't take a turn with Remorse. Not so Bussy; he would throw
the mistake in with good will and not create worry about it. Hang it all, if the necessary
business of murder is to halt upon the shuffling accident of mistake, we may as well sell out
the hero business and rent the shop. It would be down to the level of Hamlet in no time. Unless,
of course, the hero took the view of it that Nero adopted. It is improbable that Nero inherited
the gift of natural remorse; but he cultivated one and seemed to do well with it. He used to
reflect upon his mother and his wife, both of whom he had affectionately murdered, and justified
himself by declaring that a great artist, who was also the Roman Emperor, would be lacking
in breadth of emotional experience and retrospective wisdom, unless he knew the melancholy
of a two-pronged family remorse. And from Nero's standpoint it was one of the best thoughts
that he ever formulated into language.

To return to Bussy and D'Artagnan. In courage they were Hector and Achilles. You remember the
champagne picnic before the bastion St. Gervais at the siege of St. Rochelle? What light-hearted
gayety amid the flying missiles of the arquebusiers! Yet, do not forget that--ignoring the
lacquey--there were four of them, and that his Eminence, the Cardinal Duke, had said the four
of them were equal to a thousand men! If you have enough knowledge of human nature to understand
the fine game of baseball, and have at any time scraped acquaintance with the interesting mathematical
doctrine of progressive permutations, you will see, when four men equal to a thousand are under
the eyes of each other, and of the garrison in the fort, that the whole arsenal of logarithms
would give out before you could compute the permutative possibilities of the courage that would
be refracted, reflected, compounded and concentrated by all there, each giving courage to and
receiving courage from each and all the others. It makes my head ache to think of it. I feel
as if I could be brave myself.

Certainly they were that day. To the bitter end of finishing the meal; and they confessed the
added courage by gamboling like boys amid awful thunders of the arquebuses, which made a rumble
in their time like their successors, the omnibuses, still make to this day on the granite streets
of cities populated by deaf folks.

There never was more of a gay, lilting, impudent courage than those four mousquetaires displayed
with such splendid coolness and spirit.

But compare it with the fight which Bussy made, single-handed, against the assassins hired
by Monsereau and authorized by that effeminate fop, the Due D'Anjou. Of course you remember
it. Let me pay you the affectionate compliment of presuming that you have read "La Dame de
Monsereau," often translated under the English title, "Chicot, the Jester," that almost incomparable
novel of historical romance, by M. Dumas. If, through some accident or even through lack of
culture, you have failed to do so, pray do not admit it. Conceal your blemish and remedy the
matter at once. At least, seem to deserve respect and confidence, and appear to be a worthy
novel-reader if actually you are not. There is a novel that, I assure you on my honor, is as
good as the "Three Guardsmen;" but--oh!--so--much--shorter; the pity of it, too!--oh, the pity
of it! On the second reading--now, let us speak with frank conservatism--on the second reading
of it, I give you my word, man to man, I dreaded to turn every page, because it brought the
end nearer. If it had been granted to me to have one wish fulfilled that fine winter night,
I should have said with humility: "Beneficent Power, string it out by nine more volumes, presto
me here a fresh box of cigars, and the account of your kindness, and my gratitude is closed." Then he said: "She has waited in vain for me, I'm never come home again
.-- I will now tell you could happen like that.

My first job I found in Vienna, where were then the best piano factories, and from there came I for
one and a half years ago Wuerttembergische, present to my home. A side-fellow I had a brother
there, of which he to the procurement of a reliable assistant was asked .-- It was still a young
couple to whom I came into the house. The shop was small, But the owner of a kind and clever man
with whom I soon everything in these things learned as in the big factory, where I was allowed
only to individual works. Since I took the matter to the utmost and yet also some of my experiences
Vienna added did, I soon won the trust of these good people. Particular joy, set them that
I had in my free time the oldest of her two boys in the German Language teaching, because they
liked my time still northern German pronunciation, and they hope that the children would like
for once, as they thought, so pure speak German. Soon the younger brother was involved in the
lesson, and now it was not at the dry grammar, I knew to give books from which I give all sorts
of provide entertaining and interesting facts used. So it was that the children with great Love
hanging with me. When after-year period for the first time without the aid of a piano very beautiful
sound had brought about, it was a joy throughout the home, as have the dearest relatives are
made masterpiece .-- but I'm now on the return.

Since my young master fell ill. From a cold finally became a serious Breast evil, the seed has long
been located in it have liked. Daily management Of course, as was almost entirely in my hands.
Now I could not leave. It looked I further into the relations of the family, with me an ever
more intimate friendship combined. Unity and hard work were living under their roof. But it
was still a bad thing, The third inmate, the good spirits that had not been able to sell. In
each Angle where the sun did not just saw, the sick man is sitting .-- This thing was concern
.-- "Take the broom and feg it away," I said often to my friends, "I will help you, Martin!
"Then he shook my hand well, and a wistful serenity flew for a moment over his pale face, but
soon he saw again the black cobweb in all things.

Unfortunately it was not mere fantasy.

The capital with which he started his business, was from the outset have been too low. In the
early years he was due to poor working Suffered losses that were not taken into account, and
sales of finished goods would not be as rapid as it requires such circumstances, there came a
hopeless Disease state at that.
 Bang! the doors are broken in, and the assassins penetrate up the stairway.
The brave Bussy confides Diana to St. Luc and Rely, and, hastily throwing up a barricade of
tables and chairs near the door of the apartment, draws his sword. Then, ye friends of sudden
death and valorous exercise, began a surfeit of joy. Monsereau and his assassins numbered sixteen.
In less than three moderate paragraphs Bessy's sword, playing like avenging lightning, had
struck fatality to seven. Even then, with every wrist going, he reflected, with sublime calculation:
"I can kill five more, because I can fight with all my vigor ten minutes longer!" After that?
Bessy could see no further--there spoke fate!--you feel he is to die. Once more the leaping
steel point, the shrill death cry, the miraculous parry. The villain, Monsereau, draws his
pistol. Bessy, who is fighting half a dozen swordsmen, can even see the cowardly purpose; he
watches; he--dodges--the--bullets!--by watching the aim--

  "Ye sons of France, behold the glory!"

He thrusts, parries and swings the sword as a falchion. Suddenly a pistol ball snaps the blade
off six inches from the hilt. Bessy picks up the blade and in an instant splices--it--to--the--hilt--with--his--
handkerchief! Oh, good sword of the good swordsman! it drinks the blood of three more before
it--bends--and--loosens--under--the--strain! Bessy is shot in the thigh; Monsereau is upon
him; the good Rely, lying almost lifeless from a bullet wound received at the outset, thrusts
a rapier to Bessy's grasp with a last effort. Bessy springs upon Monsereau with the great bound
of a panther and pins--the--son--of--a--gun--to--the--floor --with--the--rapier--and--watches--him--die!

You can feel faint for joy at that passage for a good dozen readings, if you are appreciative.
Poor Bessy, faint from wounds and blood-letting, retreats valiantly to a closet window step
by step and drops out, leaving Monsereau spitted, like a black spider, dead on the floor. Here
hope and expectation are drawn out in your breast like chewing gum stretched to the last shred
of tenuation. At this point I firmly believed that Bessy would escape. I feel sorry for the
reader who does not. You just naturally argue that the faithful Rely will surely reach him
and rub him with the balsam. That balsam of Dumas! The same that D'Artagnan's mother gave him
when he rode away on the yellow horse, and which cured so many heroes hurt to the last gasp.
That miraculous balsam, which would make doctors and surgeons sing small today if they had
not suppressed it from the materia medica. May be they can silence their consciences by the
reflection that they suppressed it to enhance the value and necessity of their own personal
services. But let them look at the death rate and shudder. I had confidence in Rely and the
balsam, but he could not get there in time. Then, it was forgone that Bessy must die. Like
Mercutio, he was too brilliant to live. Depend upon it, these wizards of story tellers know
when the knell of fate rings much sooner than we halting readers do.

Bessy drops from the closet window upon an iron fence that surrounded the park and was impaled
upon the dreadful pickets! Even then for another moment you can cherish a hope that he may
escape after all. Suspended there and growing weaker, he hears footsteps approaching. Is it
a rescuing friend? He calls out--and a dagger stroke from the hand of D'Anjou, his Judas master,
finds his heart. That's the way Bessy died. No man is proof against the dagger stroke of treachery.
Bessy was powerful and the due jealous.

Diana has been carried off safely by the trustworthy St. Luc. She must have died of grief if
she had not been kept alive to be the instrument of retributive justice. (In the sequel you
will find that this Queen of Hearts descended upon the ignoble due at the proper time like
a thousand of brick and took the last trick of justice.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The extraordinary description of Bussy's fight is beyond everything. You gallop along as if
in a whirlwind, and it is only in cooler moments that you discover he killed about twelve rascals
with his own good arm. It seems impossible; the scientific, careful readers have been known
to declare it impossible and sneer at it with laughter. I trust every novel reader respects
scientific folks as he should; but science is not everything. Our scientific friends have contended
that the whale did not engulf Jonah; that the sun did not pause over the vale of Askelon; that
Baron Munchausen's horse did not hang to the steeple by his bridle; that the beanstalk could
not have supported a stout lad like Jack; that General Monk was not sent to Holland in a cage;
that Remus and Romulus had not a devoted lady wolf for a step-mother; in fact, that loads of
things, of which the most undeniable proof exists in plain print all over the world, never
were done or never happened. Bessy was killed, Rely was killed later, Diana died in performing
her destiny, St. Luc was killed. Nobody left to make affidavits, except M. Dumas; in his lifetime
nobody questioned it; he is now dead and unable to depose; whereupon the scientists sniff scornfully
and deny. I hope I shall always continue to respect science in its true offices, but, brethren,
are there not times when--science--makes--you--just--a--little--tired?

Heroes! D'Artagnan or Bessy? Choose, good friends, freely; as freely let me have my Bessy.

VIII

HEROINES

A SUBJECT ALMOST WITHOUT AN OBJECT--WHY THERE ARE FEW HEROINES FOR MEN.

Notwithstanding the subject, there are almost no heroines in novels. There are impossibly good
women, absurdly patient and brave women, but few heroines as the convention of worldly thinking
demands heroines. There is an endless train of what Thackeray so aptly described as "pale,
pious, and pulmonary ladies" who snivel and snuffle and sigh and linger irresolutely under
many trials which a little common sense would dissolve; but they are pathological heroines.
"Little Nell," "Little Eva," and their married sisters are unquestionable in morals, purpose
and faith; but oh! how--they--do--try--the--nerves! How brave and noble was Jennie Deans, but
how thick-headed was the dear lass!

These women who are merely good, and enforce it by turning on the faucet of tears, or by old-fashioned
obstinacy, or stupidity of purpose, can scarcely be called heroines by the canons of understood
definition. On the other hand, the conventions do not permit us to describe as a heroine any
lady who has what is nowadays technically called "a past." The very best men in the world find
splendid heroism and virtue in Tess l'Durbeyfield. There is nowhere an honest, strong, good
man, full of weakness, though he may be, scarred so much, however with fault, who does not
read St. John vii., 3-11, with sympathy, reverence and Amen! The infallible critics can prove
to a hair that this passage is an interpolation. An interpolation in that sense means something
inserted to deceive or defraud; a forgery. How can you defraud or deceive anybody by the interpolation
of pure gold with pure gold? How can that be a forgery which hurts nobody, but gives to everybody
more value in the thing uttered? If John vii., 3-11, is an interpolation let us hope Heaven
has long ago blessed the interpolator. Does anybody--even the infallible critic--contend that
Jesus would not have so said and done if the woman had been brought to Him? Was that not the
very flower and savor and soul of His teaching? Would He have said or done otherwise? And when I urged him: "Throw your cares on the Lord, Martin!" he cried
in despair: "Wait, Wait, those are not the concern, which is poverty itself! Soon they will crawl
away over my dead body, and my wife, my little children, they are not escape her! "

It is a peculiar thing to a death bed, I do not know whether you know it, my young friend. But at
that moment I promised my dying Master, bear with his family, up the specter that disrupts his
last hour, they can no longer reach would. And as I promised, let even death is no longer in
coming. Quietly, he walked through the door. Martin held out his hand and I thought he was going
to be enough for me yet, but It was the invisible messenger of the Lord, she took, because before
I touched it, had the Life of my young master aufgehoert. "

My Reisegefaehrte took off his hat and placed it before him on his lap, his white Hair blowing
in the warm midday air. He sat there in silence as he dedicate this moment the memory of long-dead
friend .-- But I had to remember the words that my old Hansen spoke to me: "There are other things
than death, that of man Will of force. "It was still was the death that had separated the living.
For it is understood that I am over the person of him who sat by my side, no longer be in doubt could.
After some time the old man began his story again, as he slowly his head covered.

"I have kept my word given," he said, "but because I gave it, I broke
another; for I have now not been able to leave.

It soon became apparent that the conditions still distracted, as I had previously known. A few
months after the death of the husband was still A third child, a girl born in such circumstances
to a new worry to the old. I did my part, but year after year passed, and the lucky always wanted
to come yet. Notwithstanding, I not only my strength but also the savings in recent years gave,
it was still not me, the fight with that ghost of poverty victorious quit, and I saw it clearly, even
if a little less loyal and caring hand on my Was replaced, my proteges were forfeited to him.

Often,
of course, in the midst of working the nostalgia came over me and gnawed and gnawed at me, and
more than once on the chisel, without that I was aware about Muessig was in my hand, I am terrified
at the sound of the good wife went together, for my thoughts were
continued in the home, and a whole other voice in my ears. saw in
my dreams I am the tower of our own country, initially in the bright
sunshine, encircled by an army of swallows; later, when the dream
came back to me, I saw him black and menacing in the empty sky tower,
autumn storm was raging, and I heard hit the big bell; But always,
even then, Agnes leaned up on the railing of the platform, they still
bore the blue dress, which she had taken leave of me there, only it
was completely torn, the light shreds fluttered in the air.

 No girl ever willingly marries door mats. She
just wipes her feet on them and passes on into the drawing room looking for the Prince. It
seems to me one of the triumphant proofs of Becky as a heroine that she did not marry Captain
Dobbin. She might have done it any day by crooking her little finger at him--but she didn't.

Madame Becky, that smart daughter of an alcoholic gentleman artist and of his lady of the French
ballet, inherited the perfect non-moral morality of the artist blood that sang mercurially
through her veins. How could she, therefore, how could she, being non-moral, be immoral? It
is clear nonsense. But she did possess the instinctive artist morality of unerring taste for
selection in choice. Examine the facts meticulously--meticulously--and observe how carefully
she selected that best in all that worst she moved among.

In the will I shall some day leave behind me there will be devised, in primogenitural trust
forever, the priceless treasure of conviction that Becky was innocent of Lord Steyne. I leave
it to any gentleman who has had the great opportunity to look in familiarly upon the outer
and upper fringes of the world of unclassed and predatory women and the noble lords that abound
thereamong. Let him read over again that famous scene where Becky writes her scorn upon Steyne's
forehead in the noble blood of that aristocratic wolf. Then let him give his decision, as an
honest juryman upon his oath, whether he is convinced that the most noble Marquis was raging
because he was losing a woman, or from the discovery that he was one of two dupes facing each
other, and that he was the fool who had paid for both and had had "no run for his money!" Marquises
of Steyne do not resent sentimental losses--they can be hurt only in their sportsmanship.

You may begin with the Misses Pinkerton (in whose select school Becky absorbed the intricate
hypocrisies and saturated snobbery of the highest English society) and follow her through all
the little and big turmoils of her life, meeting on the way of it all the elaborated differentials
of the country-gentleman and lady tribe of Crawley, the line officers and bemedalled generals
of the army (except honest O'Dowd and his lady), the most noble Marquis and his shadowy and
resigned Marchioness, the R--y--l P--rs--n--ge himself--even down to the tuft-hunters Punter
and Loder--and if Becky is not superior to every man and woman of them in every personal trait
and grace that calls for admiration--then, why, by George! do you take such an interest, such
an undying interest, in her? You invariably take the greatest interest in the best character
in a story--unless it's too good and gets "sweety" and "sticky" and so sours on your philosophical
stomach. You can't possibly take any interest in Dobbin--you just naturally, emphatically,
and in the most unreflecting way in the world, say "Oh, d--n Dobbin!" and go right ahead after
somebody else. I don't say Becky was all that a perfect Sunday School teacher should have been,
but in the group in which she was born to move she smells cleaner than the whole raft of them--to
me.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thackeray was, next to Shakespeare, the writer most wonderfully combined of instinct and reason
that English literature of grace has produced. He has been compared with the Frenchman, Balzac.
Since I have no desire to provoke squabbles about favorite authors, let us merely definitely
agree that such a comparison is absurd and pass on. Because you must have noticed that Balzac
was often feeble in his reason and couldn't make it keep step with his instinct, while in Thackeray
they both step together like the Siamese twins. It is a very striking fact, indeed, that during
all Becky's intense early experiences with the great world, Thackeray does not make her guilty.
All the circumstances of that world were guilty and she is placed amidst the circumstances;
but that is all.

"The ladies in the drawing room," said one lady to Thackeray, when "Vanity Fair" in monthly
parts publishing had just reached the catastrophe of Rawdon, Rebecca, old Steyne and the bracelet--"The
ladies have been discussing Becky Sharpe and they all agree that she was guilty. May I ask
if we guessed rightly?"

"I am sure I don't know," replied the "seared cynic," mischievously. "I am only a man and I
haven't been able to make up my mind on that point. But if the ladies agree I fear it may be
true--you must understand your sex much better than we men!"

That is proof that she was not guilty with Steyne. But straightway then, Thackeray starts out
to make her guilty with others. It is so much the more proof of her previous innocence that,
incomparable artist as he was in showing human character, he recognized that he could convince
the reader of her guilt only by disintegrating her, whipping himself meanwhile into a ceaseless
rage of vulgar abuse of her, a thing of which Thackeray was seldom guilty. But it was not really
Becky that became guilty--it was the woman that English society and Thackeray remorselessly
made of her. I wouldn't be a lawyer for a wagon load of diamonds, but if I had had to be a
lawyer I should have preferred to be a solicitor at the London bar in 1817 to write the brief
for the respondent in the celebrated divorce case of Crawley vs. Crawley. Against the back-ground
of the world she lived in Becky could have been painted as meekly white and beautiful as that
lovely old picture of St. Cecilia at the Choir Organ.

Perhaps Becky was not strictly a heroine; but she was a honey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Men can not "create" heroines in the sense of shadowing forth what they conceive to be the
glory, beauty, courage and splendor of womanly character. It is the indescribable sum of womanhood
corresponding to the unutterable name of God. The true man's love of woman is a spirit sense
attending upon the actual senses of seeing, hearing, feeling, tasting and smelling. The woman
he loves enters into every one of these senses and thus is impounded five-fold upon that union
of all of them, which, together with the miracle of mind, composes what we call the human soul
as a divine essence. She is attached to every religion, yet enters with authority into none.
She is first at its birth, the last to stay weeping at its death. In every great novel a heroine,
unnamed, unspoken, undescribed, hovers throughout like an essence. The heroism of woman is
her privacy. There is to me no more wonderful, philosophical, psychological and delicate triumph
of literary art in existence than the few chapters in "Quo Vadis" in which that great introspective
genius, Sienkiewicz, sets forth the growth of the spell of love with which Lygia has encompassed
Vinicius, and the singular development and progress of the emotion through which Vinicius is
finally immersed in human love of Lygia and in the Christian reverence of her spiritual purity
at the same time. It is the miracle of soul in sex.

Every clean-hearted youth that has had the happiness to marry a good woman--and, thank Heaven,
clean youths and good women are thick as leaves in Vallambrosa in this sturdy old world of
ours--every such youth has had his day of holy conversion, his touch of the wand conferring
upon him the miracle of love, and he has been a better and wiser man for it. Not sense love,
not the instinctive, restless love of matter for matter, but the love that descends like the
dove amid radiance.

       *       *       *       *       *

We've all seen that bridal couple; she is as pretty as peaches; he is as proud of her as if
she were a splendid race horse; he glories in knowing she is lovely and accepts the admiration
offered to her as a tribute to his own judgment, his own taste and even his merit, which obtained
her. There is a certain amount of silliness in her which he soon detects, a touch of helplessness,
and unsophistication in knowledge of worldly things that he yet feels is mysteriously guarded
against intrusion upon and which makes companionship with her sometimes irksome. He feels superior
and uncompensated; from the superb isolation of his greater knowledge, courage and independence,
he grants to her a certain tender pity and protection; he admits her faith and purity and--er--but--you
see, he is sorry she is not quite the well poised and noble creature he is! Mr. Youngwed is
at this time passing through the mental digestive process of feeling his oats. He is all right,
though, if he is half as good as he thinks he is. He has not been touched by the live wire
of experience--yet; that's all.

Well, in the course of human events, there comes a time when he is frightened to death, then
greatly relieved and for a few weeks becomes as proud as if he had actually provided the last
census of the United States with most of the material contained in it. A few months later,
when the feeble whines and howls have found increased vigor of utterance and more frequency
of expression; when they don't know whether Master Jack or Miss Jill has merely a howling spell
or is threatened with fatal convulsions; when they don't know whether they want a dog-muzzle
or a doctor; when Mr. Youngwed has lost his sleep and his temper, together, and has displayed
himself with spectacular effect as a brute, selfish, irritable, helpless, resourceless and
conquered--then--then, my dear madame, you have doubtless observed him decrease in self-estimated
size like a balloon into which a pin has been introduced, until he looks, in fact, like Master
Frog reduced in bulk from the bull-size, to which he aspired, to his original degree.

At that time Mrs. Youngwed is very busy with little Jack or Jill, as the case may be. Her husband's
conduct she probably regards with resignation as the first heavy burden of the cross she is
expected to bear. She does not reproach him, it is useless; she has perhaps suspected that
his assumed superiority would not stand the real strain. But, he is the father of the dear
baby and, for that precious darling's sake, she will be patient. I wonder if she feels that
way? She has every right to, and, for one, I say that I'll be hanged if I find any fault with
her if she does. That is the way she must keep human, and so balance the little open accounts
that married folks ought to run between themselves for the purpose of keeping cobwebs and mildew
off, or rather of maintaining their lives as a running stream instead of a stagnant pond. A
little good talking back now and then is good for wives and married men. Don't be afraid, Mrs.
Youngwed; and when the very worst has come, why cry--at--him! One tear weighs more and will
hit him harder than an ax. In the lachrymal ducts with which heaven has blessed you, you are
more surely protected against the fires of your honest indignation than you are by the fire
department against a blaze in the house. And be patient, also; remember, dear sister, that,
though you can cry, he has a gift--that--enables--him--to--swear! You and other wedded wives
very properly object to swearing, but you will doubtless admit that there is compensation in
that when he does swear in his usual good form you--never--feel--any--apprehension--about--the--state--of--his--health!

This natural outburst of resentment has not lasted three minutes. Mr. Y. has returned to his
couch, sulky and ashamed. He pretends to sleep ostentatiously; he--does--not! He is thinking
with remarkable intensity and has an eye open. He sees the slender figure in the dim light,
hanging over the crib, he hears the crooning, he begins to suspect that there is an alloy in
his godlikeness. He looks to earth, listens to the thin, wailing cries, wonders, regrets, wearies,
sleeps. At that moment Mrs. Y. should fall on her knees and rejoice. She would if she could
leave young Jack or Jill; but she can't--she--never--can. That's what sent Mr. Y. to sleep.
It is just as well perhaps that Mrs. Y. is unobservant.

A miracle is happening to Mr. Y. In an hour or two, let us say, there is a new vocal alarm
from the crib. Almost with the first suspicion of fretfulness or pain the mother has heard
it. Heaven's mysterious telepathy of instinct has operated. Between angels, babies and mothers
the distance is no longer than your arm can reach. They understand, feel and hear each other,
and are linked in one chain. So, that, when Mr. Y. has struggled laboriously awake and wonders
if--that--child--is--going-- to--howl--all----. Well, he goes no further. In the dim light
he sees again the slender figure hanging over the crib, he hears the crooning and the retreating
sobs. It is just as he saw and heard before he fell asleep. No complaints, no reproaches, no
irritation. Oh, what a brute he feels! He battles with his reason and his bewilderment. Had
he fallen asleep and left her to bear that strain; or has she gone anew to the rescue, while
he slept without thought? Up out of his heart the tenderness wells; down into his mind the
revelation comes. The miracle works. He looks and listens. In the figure hanging there so patiently
and tenderly he sees for the first time the wonderful vision of the sweetheart wife, not lost,
but enveloped in the mystery of motherhood; he hears in the crooning voice a tone he never
before knew. Mother and child are united in mysterious converse. Where did that girl whom he
thought so unsophisticated of the world learn that marvel of acquaintance with that babe, so
far removed from his ability to reach? It must be that while he knew the world, she understood
the secret of heaven. She is so patient. What a brute he is to grow impatient, when she endures
day and night in rapt patience and the joy of content! She can enter a world from which he
is barred. And, that is his wife! As a home reverse he stood there, hands out the gifts in
all directions, and things are far away and she knows each of the recipient to use. Wanka had
the feeling that the whole world was living out of his pocket, and it should not ill go there.
He was to be found always in a circle of young people he serious and threw loose ideas in
colorful mess, and they were all in it enough to make their Days to fill it, and her nights.
He did not notice the aimlessness in these young minds; for he himself had no goal, because he
had a thousand and today this, tomorrow to grab that imagined. This way of life brought him a large
amount of people in contact all he gave himself up with the same fidelity, and if he will
once again right on its own new idea was inspired, he believed it to have to thank the people that
it suspicious circumstances. Gradually, he was silent, listening now, the opposing speeches
carefully , and found that he was not really in a position to answer them. Slowly he began to see
that all were his hobbies fragments of a great monologue, and this recognition disillusioned and lonely
it very much.

Night after night he now sat silently at the root table of the National cafes, wrong in what men the older
and more serious than he and that he thought that they at the top of the people circumstances.
There were poets and painters, actors and students. They all had something in their Demeanor, which
had earlier strongly repelled him, but he tried to get used to. After the theater they found
themselves together tired and grumpy and when they greeted each other, smiling them to each other
sympathetically. In their clothes was either exaggerated or noble to note a gross neglect
and it was difficult to recognize at first glance, what united them. Only a few glasses of Budweiser
beer Tschaj or made to understand that the similarity lies in the great words which are more
numerous and boisterous of its Lips were, the later it got. However, there was a difference in
the fact that modern in the clothes her words, as it were just right on the table with the
Warning: do not touch, while others simply threw in the air, no matter whom they might take.
Since Wanka heard the affairs of the "nation to negotiate," he told for the first time of their
affliction and need, from her quiet and heartfelt longing. A shame suddenly came over him like
a laugher, who learns that a dead man in the house was, and he thought about it, how could it happen,
then, that he of all this oppressive nothing noted all had long years. He was thirsty, right
to know much about it, but if he the men turned back, he discovered that they all in the same
tone of other long Things, spoke of the art and the like. And he saw a male, that their enthusiasm
was nothing but violence, and that they had nothing in common than their imagination. Then she
took it it back from them. He stopped again in the evenings at home, devoted himself with more
zeal his studies at the university and formed a long time that everything was as before. To him
on such a night as when he found Luisa their ghosts in the kitchen was about all of his inner
musings into words. Since then, he knew that he the people on the street differently in the eye,
trying in their faces the traces of that to see suffering, of which its people should be visited.
Here and there he now believed really an oppressed, enslaved form notice, but when he looked
more closely and recognized He disappointed that it was only the burden of poverty or misery,
which the foreign shoulders was not the yoke of bondage. And yet it left him no peace. He
still felt Power in himself and asked each day, whether his people needed her. He was always perplexed
and discontented, thought it neither in the classroom still in the living room where he sat and Luisa
expected with big questioning eyes. So he made long walks.

Once in spring he was gone the Podskal along, deep in thought, and when he looked up, stuck on
some terrain abgegrabenem a gray, monotonous building in front of
him, whose Window it empty, burned, stares.

Wanka thought it was a former barracks, which is now the demolition was abandoned, and occurred
because the court concluded no further appeared, one by one of the yawning gates. The farms
were with Thürrahmen and doors, boards and filled all sorts of old rubbish, and these things looked
quite incredibly sad in the dull, slow fading light of late afternoon. The student turned determined
from time, from any feeling that he climbed the worn wooden stairs and went long white corridors
and down along with many whitewashed rooms, whose low ceilings, which Floorboards were torn
up in part.
 "Suffer little children to come
unto Me," said the Master; He did not instruct us to drive them with fear and terror and trembling.
Whenever I have heard such sermons I have wanted to get up and stalk out of the church with
ostentatiousness of contempt, as if to say to the preacher that his conduct did--not--meet--with--my--approval.
But I didn't; the philosopher has his cowardice not less than the preacher.

But there is something meretricious and cheap in the use of material and subjects that lie
warm against the very secret heart of nature. The mystery of love and the sanctity of death
are to be used by writers and artists only in their ennobling aspect of results. In recognition of concealed Services
he had conferred on the Marquis for the overall management of the ballet, his talent proper office
in which he acquired through the ingenious reform the applause of
his master. Both
are violations of the ethics of art as they are of nature. True love as true sorrow shrinks
from exhibition and should be permitted to enjoy the sacredness of privacy. The famous women
of the world, Herodias, Semiramis, Aspasia, Thais, Cleopatra, Sapho, Messalina, Marie de Medici,
Catherine of Russia, Elizabeth of England--all of them have been immoral. Publicity to women
is like handling to peaches--the bloom comes off, whether or not any other harm occurs. In
literature, the great feminine figures, George Sand, Madame de Sevigne, Madame de Stael, George
Eliot--all were banned and at least one--the first--was out of the pale. Creative thought has
in it the germ of masculinity. Genius in a woman, as we usually describe genius, means masculinity,
which, of all things, to real men is abhorrent in woman. True genius in woman is the antithesis
of the qualities that make genius in man; so is her heroism, her beauty, her virtue, her destiny
and her duty.

Let this be said--even though it be only a jest--one of those smart attempts at epigram, which,
ladies, a man has no more power to resist than a baby to resist the desire to improve his thumb
by sucking it--that: whenever you find a woman who looks real--that is, who produces upon a
real man the impression of being endowed with the splendid gifts for united and patient companionship
in marriage--whenever you find her advocating equal suffrage, equal rights, equal independence
with men in all things, you may properly run away. When he before his
Home arrived, he did one at the door, his parents and his wife want to see the talked vividly,
and he stepped closer, she greeted and asked why they were not in the house, but circumstances
at the door. This, however, may be said: That, whenever you find a
woman wanting all rights with man; wanting his morals to be judged by hers, or willing to throw
hers in with his, or itching to enter his employments and labors and willing that he shall--of
course--nurse the children and patch the small trousers and dresses, depend upon it that some
weak and timid man has been neglecting the old manly, savage duty of applying quiet home murder
as society approves now and then.

