Wittgenstein sent Yatchwil to threaten the least accessible side, and on the 18th he himself
advanced against the other; at first with some rashness, for two French squadrons, the only
ones which Saint Cyr had retained, overthrew his column in advance, took its artillery, and
made himself prisoner, it is said, without being aware of it; so that they abandoned this general-in-chief,
as an insignificant prize, when they were forced by numbers to retreat.

Rushing from their woods, the Russians then exhibited their whole force, and attacked Saint
Cyr in the most furious manner. In one of the first discharges of their musketry, the marshal
was wounded by a ball. He remained, however, in the midst of the troops, but being unable to
support himself, was obliged to be carried about. Wittgenstein's determination to carry this
point lasted as long as it was daylight. The redoubts, which were defended by Maison, were
taken and retaken seven times. Seven times did Wittgenstein believe himself the conqueror;
Saint Cyr finally wore him out. Legrand and Maison remained in possession of their entrenchments,
which were bathed with the blood of the Russians.

But while on the right the victory appeared completely gained, on the left every thing seemed
to be lost: the eagerness of the Swiss and the Croats was the cause of this reverse. Their
rivalry had up to that period wanted an opportunity of showing itself. From a too great anxiety
to show themselves worthy of belonging to the grand army, they acted rashly. Having been placed
carelessly in front of their position, in order to draw on Yacthwil, they had, instead of abandoning
the ground which had been prepared for his destruction, rushed forward to meet his masses,
and were overwhelmed by numbers. The French artillery, being prevented from firing on this
medley, became useless, and our allies were driven back into Polotsk.

It was then that the batteries on the left bank of the Düna discovered, and were able to commence
firing on the enemy, but instead of arresting, they only quickened his march. The Russians
under Yacthwil, in order to avoid that fire, threw themselves with great rapidity into the
ravine of the Polota, by which they were about to penetrate into the town, when at last three
cannon, which were hastily directed against the head of their column, and a last effort of
the Swiss, succeeded in driving them back. At five o'clock the battle terminated; the Russians
retreated on all sides into their woods, and fourteen thousand men had beat fifty thousand.

The night which followed was perfectly tranquil, even to Saint Cyr. His cavalry were deceived,
and brought him wrong intelligence; they assured him that no enemy had passed the Düna either
above or below his position: this was incorrect, as Steingell and thirteen thousand Russians
had crossed the river at Drissa, and gone up the left bank, with the object of taking the marshal
in the rear, and shutting him up in Polotsk, between them, the Düna, and Wittgenstein.

The morning of the 19th exhibited the latter under arms, and making every disposition for an
attack, the signal for which he appeared to be afraid of giving. Saint Cyr, however, was not
to be deceived by these appearances; he was satisfied that it was not his feeble entrenchments
which kept back an enterprising and numerous enemy, but that he was doubtless waiting the effect
of some manoeuvre, the signal of an important co-operation, which could only be effected in
his rear.

In fact, about ten o'clock in the morning, an aide-de-camp came in full gallop from the other
side of the river, with the intelligence, that another hostile army, that of Steingell, was
marching rapidly along the Lithuanian side of the river, and that it had defeated the French
cavalry. He required immediate assistance, without which this fresh army would speedily get
in the rear of the camp and surround it. The news of this engagement soon reached the army
of Wittgenstein, where it excited the greatest joy, while it carried dismay into the French
camp. Their position became dreadfully critical. Let any one figure to himself these brave
fellows, hemmed in, against a wooden town, by a force treble their number, with a great river
behind them, and no other means of retreat but a bridge, the passage from which was threatened
by another army.

It was in vain that Saint Cyr then weakened his force by three regiments, which he dispatched
to the other side to meet Steingell, and whose march he contrived to conceal from Wittgenstein's
observation. It is said, they well know this kingdom not to be so over stocked with neighbouring
gentry; but a discreet, learned clergyman, with a competency fit for one of his education, may
be an entertaining, a useful, and sometimes a necessary companion. At sight of this, loud shouts of joy burst out from
the whole of Wittgenstein's line; but that officer still remained immoveable. To make him begin
it was not merely necessary that he should hear Steingell; he seemed absolutely determined
to see him make his appearance.

Meanwhile, all Saint Cyr's generals, in consternation, were surrounding him, and urging him
to order a retreat, which would soon become impossible. Saint Cyr refused; convinced that the
50,000 Russians before him under arms, and on the tiptoe of expectation, only waited for his
first retrograde movement to dart upon him, he remained immoveable, availing himself of their
unaccountable inaction, and still flattering himself that night would cover Polotsk with its
shades before Steingell could make his appearance.

He has since confessed, that never in his life was his mind in such a state of agitation. A
thousand times, in the course of these three hours of suspense, he was seen looking at his
watch and at the sun; as if he could hasten his setting.

At last, when Steingell was within half an hour's march of Polotsk, when he had only to make
a few efforts to appear in the plain, to reach the bridge of the town, and shut out Saint Cyr
from the only outlet by which he could escape from Wittgenstein, he halted. Soon after, a thick
fog, which the French looked upon as an interposition from heaven, preceded the approach of
night, and shut out the three armies from the sight of each other.

Saint Cyr only waited for that moment. His numerous artillery was already silently crossing
the river, his divisions were about to follow it and conceal their retreat, when the soldiers
of Legrand, either from habit, or regret at abandoning their camp entire to the enemy, set
fire to it; the other two divisions, fancying that this was a signal agreed upon, followed
their example, and in an instant the whole line was in a blaze.

This fire disclosed their movement; the whole of Wittgenstein's batteries immediately began
their fire; his columns rushed forward, his shells set fire to the town; the French troops
were obliged to contend every inch of ground with the flames, the fire throwing light on the
engagement the same as broad daylight. The retreat, however, was effected in good order; on
both sides the loss was great; but it was not until three o'clock in the morning of the 20th
of October that the Russian eagle regained possession of Polotsk.

As good luck would have it, Steingell slept soundly at the noise of this battle, although he
might have heard even the shouts of the Russian militia. He seconded the attack of Wittgenstein
during that night as little as Wittgenstein had seconded his the day before. It was not until
Wittgenstein had finished on the right side, that the bridge of Polotsk was broken down, and
Saint Cyr, with all his force on the left bank, and then fully able to cope with Steingell,
that the latter began to put himself in motion. But De Wrede, with 6,000 French, surprised
him in his first movement, beat him back several leagues into the woods which he had quitted,
and took or killed 2,000 of his men.

CHAP. II.

Those three days were days of glory. Wittgenstein was repulsed, Steingell defeated, and ten
thousand Russians, with six generals, killed or put hors du combat. But Saint Cyr was wounded,
the offensive was lost, confidence, joy, and plenty reigned in the enemy's corps, despondency
and scarcity in ours; it was necessary to fall back. The army required a commander: De Wrede
aspired to be so, but the French generals refused even to enter into concert with that officer,
from a knowledge of his character, and a belief that it was impossible to go on harmoniously
with him. Amidst their jarring pretensions Saint Cyr, although wounded, was obliged to retain
the command of these two corps.

Immediately after, he gave orders to retreat on Smoliantzy by all the roads leading to that
place. He himself kept in the centre, regulating the march of the different columns by that
of each other. This was a mode of retreat completely contrary to that which Napoleon had just
followed.

Saint Cyr's object was to find more provisions, to march with greater freedom, and more concert;
in short, to avoid that confusion which is so common in the march of numerous columns, when
troops, artillery, and baggage are crowded together on one road. He completely succeeded. Ten
thousand French, Swiss, and Croats, with fifty thousand Russians at their heels, retired slowly
in four columns, without allowing themselves to be broken, and kept Wittgenstein and Steingell
from advancing more than three marches in eight days.

By retreating in this manner towards the south, they covered the right flank of the road from
Orcha to Borizof, by which the Emperor was returning from Moscow. One column only, that of
the left, met with a check. It was that of De Wrede and his fifteen hundred Bavarians, augmented
with a brigade of French cavalry, which he retained with him in spite of Saint Cyr's orders.
He marched at his own pleasure; his wounded pride would no longer suffer him to yield obedience
to others; but it cost him the whole of his baggage. Afterwards, under pretence of better serving
the common cause by covering the line of operations from Wilna to Witepsk, which the Emperor
had abandoned, he separated himself from the second corps, retreated by Klubokoe on Vileika,
and made himself useless.

The discontent of De Wrede had existed ever since the 19th of August. He fancied that he had
contributed so great a part to the victory of the 18th, that he thought it was made too little
of in the report of the following day. This feeling had rankled in his mind, and was increased
by repeated complaints, and by the instigation of a brother, who it was said was serving in
the Austrian army. Added to this, it was believed, that at the last period of the retreat,
the Saxon general, Thielmann, had drawn him into his plans for the liberation of Germany.

This defection was scarcely felt at the time. The Duke of Belluno, with twenty-five thousand
men, hastened from Smolensk, and on the 31st of October effected a junction with Saint Cyr
in front of Smoliantzy, at the very moment that Wittgenstein, ignorant of this junction, and
relying on his superior strength, had crossed the Lukolmlia, imprudently engaged himself in
defiles at his rear, and attacked our out-posts. It only required a simultaneous effort of
the two French corps to have destroyed his army completely. The generals and soldiers of the
second corps were burning with ardour. But at the moment that victory was in their hearts,
and when, believing it before their eyes, they were waiting for the signal to engage, Victor
gave orders to retreat.

Whether this prudence, which was then considered unseasonable, arose from his unacquaintance
with a country, which he then saw for the first time, or from his distrust of soldiers whom
he had not yet tried, we know not. It is possible that he did not feel himself justified in
risking a battle, the loss of which would certainly have involved that of the grand army and
its leader.

After falling back behind the Lukolmlia, and keeping on the defensive the whole of the day,
he took advantage of the night to gain Sienno. The Russian general then became sensible of
the peril of his position; it was so critical, that he only took advantage of our retrograde
movement, and the discouragement which it occasioned, to effect his retreat.

The officers who gave us these details added, that ever since that time Wittgenstein seemed
to think of nothing but retaking Witepsk, and keeping on the defensive. He probably thought
it too rash to turn the Berezina at its sources, in order to join Tchitchakof; for a vague
rumour had already reached us of the march of this army from the south upon Minsk and Borizof,
and of the defection of Schwartzenberg.

It was at Mikalewska, on the 6th of November, that unfortunate day when he had just received
information of Mallet's conspiracy, that Napoleon was informed of the junction of the second
and the ninth corps, and of the unfortunate engagement at Czazniki. Irritated at the intelligence,
he sent orders to the Duke of Belluno immediately to drive Wittgenstein behind the Düna, as
the safety of the army depended upon it. He did not conceal from the marshal that he had arrived
at Smolensk with an army harassed to death and his cavalry entirely dismounted.

Thus, therefore, the days of good fortune were passed, and from all quarters nothing but disastrous
intelligence arrived. On one side Polotsk, the Düna, and Witepsk lost, and Wittgenstein already
within four days march of Borizof; on the other, towards Elnia, Baraguay d'Hilliers defeated.
That general had allowed the enemy to cut off the brigade of Augereau, and to take the magazines,
and the Elnia road, by the possession of which Kutusoff was now enabled to anticipate us at
Krasnoë, as he had done at Wiazma.

At the same time, at one hundred leagues in advance of us, Schwartzenberg informed the Emperor,
that he was covering Warsaw; in other words, that he had uncovered Minsk and Borizof, the magazine,
and the retreat of the grand army, and that probably, the Emperor of Austria would deliver
up his son-in-law to Russia.

At the same moment, in our rear and our centre, Prince Eugene was conquered by the Wop; the
draught-horses which had been waiting for us at Smolensk were devoured by the soldiers; those
of Mortier carried off in a forage; the cattle at Krasnoë captured; the army exhibiting frightful
symptoms of disease; and at Paris the period of conspiracies appeared to have returned; in
short, every thing seemed to combine to overwhelm Napoleon.

The daily reports which he received of the state of each corps of the army were like so many
bills of mortality; in these he saw his army, which had conquered Moscow, reduced from an hundred
and eighty thousand, to thirty thousand men, still capable of fighting. To this mass of calamities,
he could only oppose an inert resistance, an impassable firmness, and an unshaken attitude.
His countenance remained the same; he changed none of his habits, nothing in the form of his
orders; in reading them, you would have supposed that he had still several armies under his
command. He did not even expedite his march. Irritated only at the prudence of Marshal Victor,
he repeated his orders to him to attack Wittgenstein, and thereby remove the danger which menaced
his retreat. As to Baraguay d'Hilliers, whom an officer had just accused, he had him brought
before him, and sent him off to Berlin, where that general, overwhelmed by the fatigues of
the retreat, and sinking under the weight of chagrin, died before he was able to make his defence.

The unshaken firmness which the Emperor preserved was the only attitude which became so great
a spirit, and so irreparable a misfortune. But what appears surprising, is, that he allowed
fortune to strip him of every thing, rather than sacrifice a part to save the rest. It was
at first without his orders that the commanders of corps burnt the baggage and destroyed their
artillery; he only allowed it to be done. Amen.

III.

WRITTEN Nov. 6, 1727.

O Merciful Father, Who never afflictest Thy children, but for their
own good, and with justice, over which Thy mercy always prevaileth,
either to turn them to repentance, or to punish them in the present
life, in order to reward them in a better; take pity, we beseech Thee,
upon this Thy poor afflicted servant, languishing so long and so grievously
under the weight of Thy hand. Give her strength, O Lord, to support
her weakness; and patience to endure her pains, without repining at
Thy correction. During
the respite which this afforded to their sufferings, these were asking each other, "how it
happened, that at Moscow every thing had been forgotten; why there was so much useless baggage;
why so many soldiers had already died of hunger and cold under the weight of their knapsacks,
which were loaded with gold, instead of food and raiment; and, above all, if three and thirty
days rest had not allowed sufficient time to make snow shoes for the artillery, cavalry, and
draught-horses, which would have made their march more sure and rapid?

"If that had been done, we should not have lost our best men at Wiazma, at the Wop, at the
Dnieper, and along the whole road; in short, even now, Kutusoff, Wittgenstein, and perhaps
Tchitchakof would not have had time to prepare more fatal days for us.

"But why, in the absence of orders from Napoleon, had not that precaution been taken by the
commanders, all of them kings, princes, and marshals? Had not the winter in Russia been foreseen?
Was it that Napoleon, accustomed to the active intelligence of his soldiers, had reckoned too
much upon their foresight? Had the recollection of the campaign in Poland, during a winter
as mild as that of our own climate, deceived him, as well as an unclouded sun, whose continuance,
during the whole of the month of October, had astonished even the Russians themselves? What
spirit of infatuation is it that has seized the whole army as well as its leader? What has
every one been reckoning upon? as even supposing that at Moscow the hope of peace had dazzled
us all, it was always necessary to return, and nothing had been prepared, even for a pacific
journey homeward!"

The greater number could not account for this general infatuation, otherwise than by their
own carelessness, and because in armies, as well as in despotic governments, it is the office
of one to think for all; in this case that one was alone regarded as responsible, and misfortune,
which authorizes distrust, led every one to condemn him. It had been already remarked, that
in this important fault, this forgetfulness, so improbable in an active genius during so long
and unoccupied a residence, there was something of that spirit of error, "the fatal forerunner
of the fall of kings!"

Napoleon had been at Smolensk for five days. It was known that Ney had received orders to arrive
there as late as possible, and Eugene to halt for two days at Doukhowtchina. "Then it was not
the necessity of waiting for the army of Italy which detained him! To what then must we attribute
this delay, when famine, disease and the winter, and three hostile armies were gradually surrounding
us?

