"Will nothing induce you to speak just one word to me?" he exclaimed; and then he ran right
away from her mocking laughter, and did not even wait to have the rose-leaf door banged in
his face.

It was a very crestfallen King Grumbelo who knocked at the gates of apple-blossom on the following
morning.  But no one was sitting on the doorstep of the dainty little house of rose leaves;
and King Grumbelo's heart gave a great jump.

"Where is she?" he demanded of the dragon, who had followed him along the path and was looking
at him with his aggravating smile.

The dragon became reproachful.

"It is your fault," he complained.  "I told you she never spoke; why did n't you listen to
me?  You have driven her away now by your endless questions; she has gone into her house of
rose leaves, and the Wise Woman of the Wood alone knows what will bring her out again."

King Grumbelo looked up at the dainty little house of rose leaves, and thought he heard the
sound of muffled laughter floating through the open windows.  He turned once more to the dragon.

"Where does the Wise Woman of the Wood live?" he asked.  But the dragon had curled himself
up in the sun and was already half asleep.

"Don't ask so many questions," he mumbled sleepily; and King Grumbelo strode angrily out of
the garden.  He mounted his horse and allowed it to take him wherever it would, for he had
no idea where the Wise Woman of the Wood lived, and one way was as good as another.  Towards
sundown, a blackbird hopped on to his horse's head and sang to him, and something in its song
so reminded the King of Lady Whimsical's laughter that he put out his hand to caress it.  No
sooner did he touch it, however, than it turned into a squirrel, and scampered away from him
so mischievously that he was again reminded of Lady Whimsical and of the way she, too, had
run away from him.  He put spurs to his horse and chased the squirrel until he overtook it,
when it immediately turned into a field mouse and sprang into a large hole in the root of an
old elm tree; and after it went King Grumbelo without a moment's hesitation.  He left his horse
outside, and threw his crown on the ground, and crept into the hole as humbly as though he
had not been a King at all.  The hole opened into a long, dark passage which grew smaller and
smaller as it wound deeper into the earth, so that King Grumbelo could scarcely drag himself
along on his hands and knees.  It came to an end at last, however, and he crawled into a cavern
lighted dimly by glow-worms.  The field mouse was just ahead of him, but before he could catch
it he found that it was no longer there, and in its place stood a tall witch woman, with a
voice like a blackbird's, and eyes like a squirrel's, and hair the colour of a field mouse.

"Tell me," said King Grumbelo, eagerly, "are you the Wise Woman of the Wood?"

"Of course I am," said the witch woman.  "Do you think any one else would have been so much
trouble to catch?  And now that you have caught me, what can I do for you?"

"I want you to remove the spell from the Lady Whimsical, so that she may be able to speak to
me," said King Grumbelo.  The witch woman laughed outright.

"There is no spell over the Lady Whimsical," she said.  "She can talk as much as she pleases."

"Then why has she never spoken to me?" asked the King in astonishment.

"You wished for the most silent woman in the world," said the Wise Woman of the Wood.  "Now
that you have found her, why do you complain?"

For the first time in his life King Grumbelo felt distinctly foolish.

"I made a mistake," he owned.  "I don't want a silent Queen at all."

"Then go back and tell her so," said the witch woman, promptly.

"Do you think that will make her come out from her house of rose leaves?" asked King Grumbelo.

"I should n't wonder," said the Wise Woman of the Wood; "but go and see for yourself.  There
is no need to thank me, for any one who takes the trouble to follow the Wise Woman of the Wood
to her home is welcome to what he may find when he gets there."

Indeed, before he had time to thank her he found himself once more outside the tree, with his
crown lying at his feet and his horse standing at his side.  He was in such a hurry to get
back to the Lady Whimsical, however, that he did not stay to pick up his crown, but rode bareheaded
all through the night and reached the hedge of sweet-briar and honeysuckle precisely at two
hours after sunrise.

"Dear, dear," complained the dragon; "do you mean to say you 've come back again?"

"I have some good news for you," said King Grumbelo, jovially.  "There is no spell over the
Lady Whimsical after all!"

"Of course there is n't," said the dragon, as he slowly unfastened the gates of apple-blossom.
"Did n't I tell you she was n't a Princess?"

King Grumbelo did not stay to argue the point with him, but walked quickly up the path and
stopped in front of the dainty little house all made of rose leaves.

"Lady Whimsical," he said, very gently and humbly, "will it please you to smile on me once
more?  I have discovered that you are the wisest person in the world, and that I am by far
the most foolish."

When the Lady Whimsical looked out of her window and saw the King standing there so humbly
without his crown, the tears came right into her wonderful eyes and stayed there.

"Oh!" she cried, "I am so glad you have come back!  I was afraid you were never coming back
any more."

She held out her two little hands, and the King kissed them.  Then she came running down the
stairs as fast as she could; and they sat on the doorstep side by side, and talked.

"I feel as though I should never stop talking again!  Do you mind?" asked Lady Whimsical.

"I should like nothing better," said King Grumbelo.  "But first of all I must confess to you
that I have an extremely ugly name.  Do you think you can bear to hear it?"

"I know it already!" laughed the Lady Whimsical.  "Do you suppose I have n't coaxed it out
of my dragon long ago?  But I, too, have something to confess to you.  Do you think it will
make you angry?"

"I am quite sure I shall never be angry again," declared the King.

"Then," said Lady Whimsical, looking extremely solemn, "to begin with, I am not a Princess at all."

"As if I did n't know that!" laughed the King.  "The dragon told me, ever so long ago!"

"He did n't tell you the rest, so stop laughing and listen to me," said Lady Whimsical, with
severity.  "I knew all the while who you were and what you wanted, and I pretended to be under
a spell just to tease you."

"I know that, too," said the King, triumphantly.  "The Wise Woman of the Wood told me."

"Did she tell you that I came and hid myself here on purpose, because I heard you were looking
for a Princess and I wanted you to find me?" asked the Lady Whimsical, softly.

"Nobody told me that," answered King Grumbelo; "I guessed it for myself."

"What will the Professor of Practical Jokes say, when you come home without the Princess you
went out to find?" she asked mischievously.

The King had no time to answer, for at that moment the Professor of Practical Jokes--whose
profession always required him to arrive unexpectedly in places where he was not wanted--appeared
at the apple-blossom gates and answered Lady Whimsical's question himself.

"There is nothing to say," he observed.  "There never was a Princess for your Majesty to find,
so of course your Majesty has n't found her."

"There never was anybody for you to find except me," added Lady Whimsical, who was nodding
at the Professor as though she had known him all her life.  "The other Princess was a practical
joke, don't you see. Do you mean to say my dragon did not tell you that, too?"

"Then, who are you?" asked King Grumbelo in bewilderment.  The Lady Whimsical laughed, as she
had laughed every day for a month when she banged the door in the King's face.

"Can't you guess?" she exclaimed.  "Why, I am just the daughter of the Professor of Practical
Jokes!"

And the King only wondered that he had not guessed it long ago.

As they went out through the apple-blossom gates, the dainty little house of rose leaves vanished
away because it was no longer wanted, and so did the beautiful flower-garden, and the hedge
of sweet-briar and honeysuckle, and the sleepy good-natured dragon.  They had no trouble in
getting home, for the Wise Woman of the Wood had a hand in the matter, and the road came racing
towards them as fast as an express train; all they had to do was to stand quite still and wait
until King Grumbelo's country came hurrying along, which was the most convenient way of travelling
any one could possibly invent.  When the city reached them they found they were just in time
to be married, for the people were on the point of celebrating their wedding for the hundred
and first time; so the King and Queen were married almost before they knew it themselves, and
certainly before the people discovered that somebody was really being married at last.  This,
however, was not at all surprising, for the real wedding was very much the same as all the
make-believe ones, except that it took a little longer because the King and Queen were not
so used to being married as the people were to marrying them.

After that, every one was as happy as it was possible to be.  The country had grown so accustomed
to being frivolous that it never became serious again; and the King never made another law,
because the people were so fond of Lady Whimsical that they did everything she told them, and
therefore no laws were needed.  The result of all this happiness was that nobody in the kingdom
ever grew old; and the Lady Whimsical who sits and laughs on her throne at this very moment
is the same Lady Whimsical who sat and laughed on the doorstep of her rose-leaf house, years
and years and years ago.

The Doll that came straight from Fairyland

The country was celebrating the tenth birthday of the Prince Perfection.  That particular country
always celebrated the tenth birthday of its princes and princesses, but never before had it
gone so completely wild with joy.  The fireworks began punctually at sunrise, and so did everything
else that was worth beginning; and the happy shouts of the people made conversation quite impossible,
except in the royal family, which was fully accustomed to being shouted at whenever the country
had a whole holiday.  The Prince had five hundred and fifty-four birthday presents, and his
Secretaries spent all their summer holidays in writing letters to acknowledge them; and every
child in the kingdom who was of the same age as the Prince was allowed to come to the palace
gates and receive a royal smile and a large box of barley sugar from Prince Perfection himself.
In the afternoon, the Prince drove through the streets over a carpet of flowers and smiled
without stopping; and by his side sat the little Princess Pansy, who was not smiling at all,
for she had no birthday and no presents, and two years was a long time to wait before she,
too, should be ten years old.  Still, she was so fond of the Prince Perfection that she would
not have let him guess for a moment that she felt envious of him, although this he was in no
danger of doing, for he was so brimful of happiness that he had no time to think about his
sister at all.  Truly, it is worth while to be ten years old if one is a Prince!  In the evening
there was a banquet of a hundred and twenty courses, which was the exact number of months in
the Prince's life; and the two children sat at the head of the table between their royal parents,
and managed to keep awake until the moment arrived to cut the birthday cake.

That was when the catastrophe occurred.  At the moment nobody suspected that it was going to
be a catastrophe at all.  It seemed the most fortunate thing in the world that the Prince's
godmother, the Fairy Zigzag, should manage to arrive just in time to drink her godson's health.
Most people would think that a catastrophe was far more likely to have occurred if the King
and Queen had forgotten to invite the Fairy Zigzag.  That only shows how little most of us
know about fairy godmothers.  The truth is that the Fairy Zigzag was not like other godmothers
at all.  She did not like banquets and she did not like noise; and she would much sooner have
sent her present by post.  It would never have done, however, to refuse the Queen's invitation,
for that is what no fairy godmother has ever been known to do; so she came at the very last
minute with a very bad grace, and she meant to go away again as soon as she could.

Bang!  What a noise she made as she came down the chimney in a cloud of blue smoke!  If she
had not been quite so cross she would have arrived through the window in her best chariot drawn
by sea-gulls; but she was determined to take as little trouble as possible over the matter,
and no one could take less trouble over anything than to come straight down the chimney.

"Oh!" said every one with a little scream; and the Prince was so startled that he cut an extremely
crooked slice of cake.  As soon as the blue smoke cleared away, however, and he saw that it
was his fairy godmother, he recovered his good manners without any difficulty, and walked across
the room to greet her.

"I am delighted to see you, dear godmother," said Prince Perfection with his best birthday
smile, which he had been saving up all day on purpose.  "Would you like to have a piece of cake?"

His parents beamed with pleasure at the charming manners of Prince Perfection; and the little
Princess rubbed the sleep out of her eyes, and wondered how long it would take to live through
two whole years, so that she might have a birthday party and a birthday cake, and a visit from
her fairy godmother.  The Fairy Zigzag, however, did not seem at all impressed by the charming
manners of her godson.

"I never eat cake," she said, without giving so much as a look at the crooked slice of cake
which the Prince was handing her on a real gold plate.  Her godson put down the cake immediately,
and took up a silver goblet filled to the brim with sparkling ginger-beer.

"You have come just in time, dear godmother, to drink my health," he said, just as politely
as ever.

"I never drink healths," said the Fairy Zigzag, frowning.  "I have plenty of my own, thank
you.  What's the matter with your health that you want every one to drink it up?  You 'd better
keep it: it may come in useful, later on."

This was such an entirely new view of the matter that a complete silence fell on every one
in the room; and all the guests put down their glasses of ginger beer, and stared into them
to see if the Prince's health was floating about on the top.  In the midst of the pause, the
Fairy Zigzag stalked to the table, nodded to the royal parents, and took the seat that had
been reserved for her at the Queen's right hand.

"So good of you to come," murmured the Queen, nervously.  "We never thought you would give
us so great a pleasure."

"Oh, didn't you?  Then, why did you invite me?" snapped the fairy godmother.  The Queen said
nothing, for she did not know what to say. The King did his best to put matters right.

"The Prince has been looking forward to your visit all day," he hastened to say.  "The dear
boy has hardly known how to wait until this evening."

"Rubbish," said the Fairy Zigzag, laughing most unpleasantly.  "It is quite time for the dear
boy to be in bed.  What is that other child doing, over there?"

She pointed with her wand at the little Princess Pansy, whose eyes were now so full of sleep
that she could hardly keep them open.  When, however, she saw the Fairy Zigzag pointing at
her, she instantly became wide awake, and grew quite pink with pleasure at being noticed. 
It was the first time any one had noticed her all that day; but of course, one must expect
to be forgotten when it is somebody else's birthday.

"Oh!" cried Princess Pansy, holding out both her hands to the cross old Fairy Zigzag.  "Are
you really a fairy godmother?  I have never seen a real fairy before, and I am so glad you
have come!"

The King and Queen were horrified at the familiar way in which the little Princess was speaking
to such an important guest as the fairy godmother.  It was true that she was only eight years
old, but it was quite time she learnt some of the charming manners for which her brother the
Prince was so remarkable.  If the Fairy Zigzag had turned her into a toad, or a marble statue,
or something chilly like that, they would not have been in the least surprised.  But the Fairy
Zigzag did nothing of the sort.  She just took the two hands the Princess Pansy held out to
her, and looked her full in the face; and directly she did that all the crossness faded out
of her own, and instead of being just a disagreeable old fairy she suddenly appeared quite
good-natured and pleasant.  This, indeed, was no wonder; for it would have been difficult to
look at the little Princess without feeling happier for it.  The King and Queen, however, mistook
her silence for anger.

"Pray forgive her," they said, tremblingly.  "She is so young, and she doesn't know any better.
We have tried in vain to teach her good manners.  Doubtless, when she is as old as the Prince
Perfection she will have learnt to be as polite as he is."

"It is to be hoped not," said the Fairy Zigzag, turning once more to the royal parents.  "And
if I know anything about it, she will never be as polite as the Prince Perfection.  That child
is a real child, and none of us will ever make her anything else.  Now, I don't mean to waste
any more time; so come here, godson, and tell me what you would like for a birthday present."

The Prince Perfection did not know what to say.  He longed to ask for a steamboat that went
by real steam, or a cannon that would fire real gunpowder, or a balloon that would take him
wherever he wished to go; but he felt that only an ordinary boy would have asked for such things
as these, and Prince Perfection had always been told by his nurses that he was not an ordinary boy.

"Please give me whatever you like, dear godmother," he said, and hoped very much that it would
be a steamboat with real steam.

"The dear boy does not like to appear greedy," said the Queen.

"Fiddlesticks!" said the Fairy Zigzag, and then she pointed again at the little Princess Pansy.
"If I were to give you a present, do you think you would know what to choose?" she asked her,
smiling.

"Oh, how beautiful!" exclaimed Princess Pansy, clapping her hands.  To have a present without
a birthday was more than she had ever believed possible.

"What will you have?" asked the Fairy, raising her wand.  The Princess did not stop to think.

"I will have a wax doll, please, with blue eyes and yellow hair and pink cheeks, dressed in
a white silk frock with lots of little frills," she said, rapidly.  "And, if you could manage
it," she added, glancing sideways at the Prince, her brother, "I think I should like one that
doesn't melt when you put it near the fire."

"I think I can manage it," said the Fairy Zigzag, and down came her wand with a sharp tap on
the table.  Princess Pansy gave a cry of delight.  In front of her lay the most beautiful wax
doll any little girl of eight years old has ever possessed.  She had blue eyes and yellow curls
and pink cheeks; she was dressed in a white silk frock with rows and rows of little frills;
she had a gold crown perched on her head, and she wore high-heeled shoes on her dainty feet;
she had a real pocket with a real lace handkerchief sticking out of it; she carried a fan in
one hand and a scent bottle in the other; and she actually possessed real six-buttoned gloves,
which could be drawn on and off her little hands.  Princess Pansy was breathless.  She had
never seen anything so beautiful before.

"You must thank the Fairy Zigzag," whispered the King and Queen.  The little Princess gave
a sigh and looked up; it seemed so stupid to say "Thank you" for such a superb dolly as hers.
After all, she had to say nothing whatever, for the Fairy Zigzag was no longer there; she had
gone away without a chariot, or a cloud of blue smoke, or even a bang!

"She has given nothing to her godson," said the courtiers to one another; and they fully expected
that Prince Perfection would fly into a passion.  However, Prince Perfection did not fly into
a passion.  He looked at the little Princess as she laughed with joy over her beautiful new
doll; he thought just once of the steamboat that would have gone by real steam, and the cannon
that would have fired real gunpowder, and the balloon that would have taken him wherever he
wished to go; and then he remembered that he was ten years old and a Prince, and he flung back
his head and began to whistle.

"It doesn't matter," he said, indifferently.  "I have five hundred and fifty-four presents
upstairs, and I don't care for dolls."

Little Princess Pansy had never been so contented in the whole of her life.  The palace seemed
a different place to her, now that it contained the doll that had come from Fairyland; and
she immediately named her the Lady Emmelina, which was the most important name she could remember
on the spur of the moment.  From that day the Princess and her doll were never separated. 
When the Prince and Princess went for a drive, the Lady Emmelina sat up stiffly between them;
when the Professors came to give the children their lessons, they found that they had to give
them also to a little lady in a white silk frock with rows and rows of little frills, who stared
at them solemnly with her large, impassive blue eyes, and never answered a word to any of their
questions.  Princess Pansy no longer wished to be ten years old; she no longer wished for anything:
she had everything she wanted in the unchangeable Lady Emmelina.  For the Lady Emmelina never
varied; the Princess might have as many moods as she pleased, but the Lady Emmelina merely
smiled.  For a constant companion, it would have been difficult to find any one more delightful
than the Lady Emmelina.  The Prince Perfection, however, took a very different view of the
matter.  Thanks to the Lady Emmelina, he had no one to play with.  He had never been left so
much to himself in his life, and in spite of his excellent opinion of himself he found himself
extremely dull.  He could no longer play cricket, since the Princess was not there to bowl
for him; it was no fun to play at soldiers if the Princess was not there to be on the losing
side; he could not pretend to be the Royal Executioner if the Princess was not there to be
executed.  To be sure, he had five hundred and fifty-four birthday presents; but what consolation
could they afford him when he was still without a steamboat that went by real steam?  The Lady
Emmelina was the cause of all his misfortunes, and he could not bear the Lady Emmelina.  It
was the Lady Emmelina who had come in the place of his real steamboat and his real cannon and
his real balloon; it was the Lady Emmelina who had bewitched the little Princess, his sister,
and robbed him of his best playfellow.  And the Prince Perfection, whatever his faults were,
was extremely fond of the little Princess.

"If you will come and play cricket with me, I will let you have the first innings," he said
to her in despair one sunny afternoon.

"It is far too rough a game for the Lady Emmelina," answered Princess Pansy, shaking her head.

"Then choose any game you like, only do come and play with me," begged the Prince.  He had
never had to beg so hard for anything before, for the little Princess had been his willing
slave as long as he could remember.

"We cannot possibly come this afternoon," answered Princess Pansy. "The Lady Emmelina is going
to have a tea-party.  I will ask her to invite you if you like."

The Prince, however, would have nothing to do with Lady Emmelina's tea-party.  He went and
sat by the pond instead, and thought how fine his steamboat would have looked if it had gone
puffing across the water with real smoke coming out of the funnel.  The mere thought of it
made him dislike the Lady Emmelina so much more than before that he made up his mind to be
revenged on her.  Now, this was an extremely bold thing even to think about, for she had come
straight from Fairyland, and it is never safe to meddle with toys that have come straight from
Fairyland.  For all that, the Prince crept into the nursery that very same night, when everyone
in the palace was asleep, and prepared to have his revenge on the waxen Lady Emmelina.  There
she sat in all her magnificence on the nursery table, with both her gloves tightly buttoned,
and both her pointed toes turned upwards.  The very sight of her annoyed the jealous little
Prince.  He pattered across the floor on his bare feet, and seized the Lady Emmelina by the
arm.  She greeted him with a shrill and angry shriek.

"How dare you?  Let me go at once!" she screamed.  The Prince was so surprised that he dropped
her on the table again.  The Lady Emmelina, shaking all over with fury, began smoothing out
her rows of crumpled frills.

"The idea of such a thing!" she gasped.  "I declare, you have actually pushed my crown on one
side, and there is no looking-glass in the room. I have a great mind to report you to Fairyland."

"You may do what you like," answered the Prince, who was no coward and had recovered from his
astonishment.  "You have bewitched the Princess Pansy, and I mean to hide you where no one
will be able to find you."

No sooner had he uttered these words than the Lady Emmelina turned extremely pale.  If he had
tried to melt her at the fire or to cut off her head with the scissors, which was the kind
of thing he usually did to his sister's dolls, she knew that she would have been safe; but
he had threatened to do the one thing that even the fairies who protected her could not prevent
him from doing.  Her only hope was that he would hide her somewhere so that she should have
time to escape before sunrise; for after sunrise all her powers of moving or speaking would
desert her and she would be nothing but a wax doll again.  She need not have been afraid, for
the Prince did not mean to waste any more time than he could help; and the next moment she
was being carried swiftly out of the room under his arm.  Downstairs ran the little Prince,
with his hand over the Lady Emmelina's mouth to prevent her from screaming; and along the marble
passages he hastened, until he came to a little door that led into the garden, and this he
unlocked with the diamond key that usually hung on the nail on the nursery wall.  It is not
pleasant to run without shoes along a gravel path, and Prince Perfection soon turned aside
on to the lawn, and trotted over the grass in search of a hiding place for the Lady Emmelina.
A large white stone lay in the middle of the lawn and gleamed in the moonlight.  The Prince
did not remember having seen it there before; indeed, it was not likely that the royal gardeners
would have allowed it to remain in such a place for a moment.  He stooped down and rolled it
on one side, and found that it covered a neat round hole lined with green moss.  It was the
very place for the Lady Emmelina; and he laid her gently in the very middle of it.

"I hope you will not be very cramped," said Prince Perfection, politely.

Lady Emmelina lay motionless on the mossy ground, and stared at the moon.  No one would have
thought that she was the same dolly who had screamed so angrily in the nursery ten minutes ago.

"It is the nicest place I could have found in the whole garden," continued Prince Perfection
a little anxiously.  After all, she was a very beautiful doll, and she had come straight from
Fairyland.

Still the Lady Emmelina stared intently at the moon, with her large blue eyes.

"I should never have thought of putting you anywhere if you had not bewitched the Princess,"
declared Prince Perfection, feeling still more uncomfortable.  It was not easy to go on apologising
to some one who persisted in staring at the moon just as though no one was speaking to her.

"Why did you bewitch the Princess Pansy?" cried the little Prince.  "If you will promise not
to bewitch her any more, I will take you straight back to the nursery."

But although he waited eagerly for her answer, not a word came from the Lady Emmelina; and
the Prince ceased to feel sorry for her, and gave up apologising.

"It is your own fault, and I don't care a bit," he said, impatiently; and he rolled the large
white stone over the hole, until the doll from Fairyland was completely hidden.  It is a wonder
the fairies did not interfere; but perhaps they had their reasons.

There was no peace for any one in the palace when the Princess discovered that the Lady Emmelina
was gone; and she discovered it before breakfast the very next morning.  It was in vain that
the Prince offered to give her his five hundred and fifty-four birthday presents if she would
only stop crying: the Princess wanted her doll from Fairyland, and nothing but her doll from
Fairyland would console her. Every one who loved the little Princess--and that was every one
in the palace--began looking for the Lady Emmelina; but no one succeeded in finding a trace
of her.  This, however, was by no means so surprising as it sounds, for the large white stone
was no longer in the middle of the lawn, and the neat round hole lined with green moss had
disappeared just as completely.  The Prince was no less unhappy than his sister. Nothing was
turning out as he had expected; for, instead of being ready to play with him again, the little
Princess was far too miserable to think of playing at all.  He tried all day long to coax her
into a good humour; but bedtime came, and he had not won a single smile from her. It was then
that he made up his mind to go out into the world and find the Lady Emmelina.  So that night
the Prince once more unhooked the diamond key from the nail on the nursery wall, and stole
into the garden in the moonlight.  This time, however, he had not forgotten to put on his shoes
and stockings and his second-best court suit, for when a prince goes out into the world he
must at least do his best to look like a prince.  When he came to the lawn he stopped and stared
with amazement; for there, in the moonlight, lay the large white stone under which he had hidden
the doll from Fairyland.  Overjoyed at reaching the end of his journey so soon, he ran forward
and rolled the stone on one side.  There, to be sure, was the neat round hole lined with green
moss; but in the middle of it sat a large grasshopper, and not a sign of the Lady Emmelina
was to be seen.

The Prince was so disappointed that he had the greatest difficulty in remembering that he was
ten years old, and that crying was therefore out of the question.  The grasshopper was winking
at him as though he understood how he felt.

"I guessed you would come," he said, in a kind voice.  "I just waited on purpose."

"Where has she gone?" asked Prince Perfection, dolefully.

"Ask me something easier than that," answered the grasshopper.  "I didn't see her go.  I happened
to look in as I was passing; and when I found she was gone I thought I'd just wait and tell
you she was gone, don't you see?"

"What is the good of waiting to tell me something I could have found out for myself?" asked
Prince Perfection.  "If you can't help me to find her, you might just as well not be there."

"I didn't say I couldn't help you to find her," said the grasshopper, looking hurt; "though
if you are going to be cross about it I don't know that I will."

"Oh," cried Prince Perfection, "I will never be cross again, if you will help me to find the
Lady Emmelina."

"Then why did you hide her in the first place?" asked the grasshopper. The Prince looked foolish.

"Because I had no one to play with," he said.

"If you do find her," continued the grasshopper, "do you think the Princess will play with
you again?"

"Oh, no," sighed the Prince.  "She will only want to play with the Lady Emmelina."

"Then don't try to find the Lady Emmelina," said the grasshopper, promptly.

"I must," said Prince Perfection.  "Anything is better than seeing the Princess cry.  I took
her doll away, you see, and it is my fault that Pansy is so unhappy.  I don't mean to go home
again until I have found the Lady Emmelina."

"Right you are," said the grasshopper.  "You're the man for me.  I'll help you as far as I
can, but you must come down here first; I can't go on shouting like this."

"Down there?" said the Prince.  "The hole is much too small."

"Nonsense!  Come and try," said the grasshopper, and indeed, before he tried at all, the Prince
found himself inside the neat round hole, with the mossy walls reaching far above his head,
and the grasshopper shaking hands with him.

"Feel all right?" asked the grasshopper.  "Sit down and get your breath.  These sudden changes
are apt to be exhausting if you are not used to them."

"Are you used to them?" asked the Prince, when he had recovered enough breath to speak.

"Dear me, yes!" said the grasshopper with a chuckle.  "When I get up in the morning I never
know how many changes I may not have to go through before the day is over.  Don't think I am
complaining though, for of course it is part of my profession."

"What is your profession?" asked the Prince.

"Chief Spy in Particular to the Fairy Queen," answered the grasshopper. "It's very hard work,
I can tell you; some days I haven't a moment to myself.  Of course, I find out a great deal
that nobody else knows, which is always amusing.  Yesterday, for instance, if I hadn't been
a cockchafer, a doll's teapot, a garden seat, a rose tree and a nursery table, I shouldn't
know as much as I do about you and the Lady Emmelina."

"Then please tell me what I must do in order to find the Lady Emmelina," begged the Prince.

"By all means," said the grasshopper, cheerfully.  "Go straight on without turning to the right
or the left; and whenever some one greets you, ask him politely to give you what he is thinking
about, and then you will be able to find the Lady Emmelina."

It seemed rather a roundabout way of finding anything; but, as the grasshopper disappeared
directly he had finished speaking, there was nothing to do but to follow his advice.  The first
part was easy enough, for just in front of him the Prince noticed a little door in the green
mossy wall, which he was quite sure had not been there before; and through this he straightway
walked.  He immediately found himself in a blaze of sunshine on the sea-shore, with green waves
stretching before him as far as he could see, and nothing on either side of him except the
flat stony beach.  "It's all very well to tell any one to go straight on, but how am I to get
across the sea?" thought the Prince.  He had never been afraid of anything in his life, however,
so he ran down the beach and put one foot into the white foam at the edge.

"Good-day to you!" said a voice.  "Who are you, and what do you want?"

"I am Prince Perfection, and I want what you are thinking about," answered the Prince, boldly,
although he could not see who was speaking.

"That is a strange thing to want," said the voice; "for I was just thinking about a little
steamboat that would go by real steam; and how you can possibly want such a thing as that is
more than I can understand."

At that moment there was a faint puffing sound in the distance, which came nearer and nearer;
and presently over the waves rode a most perfect little steamboat, with real smoke coming out
of the funnel.  It was just large enough for the Prince, and he stepped on board directly it
came near enough, and put his hand on the little brass wheel.

"Thank you very much," he said as loudly as he could, in the hope that the owner of the mysterious
voice would hear him.  Nobody answered him; but he wondered why an old crab, who was shuffling
along the beach, chose that particular moment to wink at him.

Certainly, no one has ever reached the shore on the opposite side of the sea so quickly as
Prince Perfection in his real steamboat.  It was a pleasure to hear it puff as it cut through
the big green waves; and he stood like a real captain with his hand on the little brass wheel,
and steered it right into a bay that seemed waiting on purpose for it. It was very sad that
it should disappear directly he stepped out of it; but as it had come from nowhere at all because
he wanted it, he could not complain because it went back to nowhere at all when he had done
with it.  So he sighed twice, and then walked straight ahead as before, up the beach and over
a flat grassy plain, covered with yellow poppies and gorse bushes and purple heather.  Nothing
could have been easier than this; and Prince Perfection had not the slightest wish to turn
to the right or the left, until he came suddenly upon a thick clump of gorse bushes which lay
in the very middle of his path.  He made two attempts to clamber over it; but, each time, he
was caught in the gorse bushes and was scratched all over; and even if one is ten years old
and a prince, it is hard to bear being scratched all over by a gorse bush. Prince Perfection
began to wonder if it would be very wrong to follow the path to the right until he should come
to an opening, but before he had time to decide such a difficult question a shrill voice broke
the silence once more.

"Good-day to you," it said.  "Who are you, and what do you want?"

"I am Prince Perfection, and I want what you are thinking about," answered the Prince, boldly.

"How ridiculous!" laughed the voice.  "Why, I am thinking about a cannon, a real cannon that
will fire real gunpowder.  Surely, you can want nothing so useless as that?"

"Indeed, I do," said the Prince; and there stood the most perfect little real cannon, loaded
with real shot, and in his hand was a lighted match ready to fire it with.  He lost no time
in pointing it straight at the clump of furze bushes, and the real gunpowder made a flash and
a splutter, and the shot went right into the middle of the yellow gorse and blew it all away
so completely that not a trace of it was left, except one small bush that the Prince had no
difficulty in jumping over.  The cannon went back to nowhere at all, just as the steamboat
had done.

