   I that have wasted, months, weeks, days, and hours
   In viewing kingdoms, countries, towns, and towers,
   Without all measure, measuring many paces,
   And with my pen describing many places,
   With few additions of mine own devising,
   (Because I have a smack of Coryatizing[16])
   Our Mandeville, Primaleon, Don Quixote,
   Great Amadis, or Huon, travelled not
   As I have done, or been where I have been,
   Or heard and seen, what I have heard and seen;
   Nor Britain's Odcombe (Zany brave Ulysses)
   In all his ambling, saw the like as this is.
   I was in (would I could describe it well)
   A dark, light, pleasant, profitable hell,
   And as by water I was wafted in,
   I thought that I in Charon's boat had been,
   But being at the entrance landed thus,
   Three men there (instead of Cerberus)
   Convey'd me in, in each one hand a light
   To guide us in that vault of endless night,
   There young and old with glim'ring candles burning
   Dig, delve, and labour, turning and returning,
   Some in a hole with baskets and with bags,
   Resembling furies, or infernal hags:
   There one like Tantalus feeding, and there one,
   Like Sisyphus he rolls the restless stone.
   Yet all I saw was pleasure mixed with profit,
   Which proved it to be no tormenting Tophet[17]
   For in this honest, worthy, harmless hell,
   There ne'er did any damned Devil dwell;
   And th' owner of it gains by 't more true glory,
   Than Rome doth by fantastic Purgatory. I
   can hear her yell now, and it made her so frantic she's
   been killing them ever since. It was only a harmless
   little garter snake, but she was so surprised.

Miss
   Amelia held her head very much on one side all
   the time she walked with Laddie, and she was
   so birdlike Leon slipped him a brick and
   told him to have her hold it to keep her
   down. Seemed as if she might fly any minute.
   She thought our barn was the nicest she ever had
   seen and the cleanest. When Laddie opened the
   doors on the east side, and she could see the big,
   red, yellow, and green apples thick as leaves
   on the trees in the orchard, the lane,
   the woods pasture, and the meadow with scattering trees, two running
springs, and the meeting of the creeks, she said it was the loveliest
sight she ever saw--I mean beheld.

The sea at certain places doth leak, or soak into the mine, which by the industry of Sir George
Bruce, is all conveyed to one well near the land; where he hath a device like a horse-mill,
that with three horses and a great chain of iron, going downward many fathoms, with thirty-six
buckets fastened to the chain, of the which eighteen go down still to be filled, and eighteen
ascend up to be emptied, which do empty themselves (without any man's labour) into a trough
that conveys the water into the sea again; by which means he saves his mine, which otherwise
would be destroyed with the sea, besides he doth make every week ninety or a hundred tons of
salt, which doth serve most part of Scotland, some he sends into England, and very much into
Germany: all which shows the painful industry with God's blessings to such worthy endeavours:
I must with many thanks remember his courtesy to me, and lastly how he sent his man to guide
me ten miles on the way to Stirling, where by the way I saw the outside of a fair and stately
house called Allaway, belonging to the Earl of Mar which by reason that his honour was not
there, I past by and went to Stirling, where I was entertained and lodged at one Master John
Archibalds, where all my want was that I wanted room to contain half the good cheer that I
might have had there! he had me into the castle, which in few words I do compare to Windsor
for situation, much more than Windsor in strength, and somewhat less in greatness: yet I dare
affirm that his Majesty hath not such another hall to any house that he hath neither in England
or Scotland, except Westminster Hall which is now no dwelling hall for a prince, being long
since metamorphosed into a house for the law and the profits.

This goodly hall was built by King James the fourth, that married King Henry the Eight's sister,
and after was slain at Flodden field; but it surpasses all the halls for dwelling houses that
ever I saw, for length, breadth, height and strength of building, the castle is built upon
a rock very lofty, and much beyond Edinburgh Castle in state and magnificence, and not much
inferior to it in strength, the rooms of it are lofty, with carved works on the ceilings, the
doors of each room being so high, that a man may ride upright on horseback into any chamber
or lodging. There is also a goodly fair chapel, with cellars, stables, and all other necessary
offices, all very stately and befitting the majesty of a king.

From Stirling I rode to Saint Johnstone,[19] a fine town it is, but it is much decayed, by
reason of the want of his Majesty's yearly coming to lodge there. There I lodged one night
at an inn, the goodman of the house his name being Patrick Pitcairne, where my entertainment
was with good cheer, good lodging, all too good to a bad weary guest. Mine host told me that
the Earl of Mar, and Sir William Murray of Abercairney were gone to the great hunting to the
Brae of Mar[20]; but if I made haste I might perhaps find them at a town called Brekin, or
Brechin, two and thirty miles from Saint Johnstone whereupon I took a guide to Brechin the
next day, but before I came, my lord was gone from thence four days.

Then I took another guide, which brought me such strange ways over mountains and rocks, that
I think my horse never went the like; and I am sure I never saw any ways that might fellow
them I did go through a country called Glen Esk, where passing by the side of a hill, so steep
as the ridge of a house, where the way was rocky, and not above a yard broad in some places,
so fearful and horrid it was to look down into the bottom, for if either horse or man had slipped,
he had fallen without recovery a good mile downright; but I thank God, at night I came to a
lodging in the Laird of Edzell's land, where I lay at an Irish house, the folks not being able
to speak scarce any English, but I supped and went to bed, where I had not laid long, but I
was enforced to rise, I was so stung with Irish musquitoes, a creature that hath six legs,
and lives like a monster altogether upon man's flesh, they do inhabit and breed most in sluttish
houses, and this house was none of the cleanest, the beast is much like a louse in England,
both in shape and nature; in a word, they were to me the A. and the Z. the prologue and the
epilogue, the first and the last that I had in all my travels from Edinburgh; and had not this
Highland Irish house helped me at a pinch, I should have sworn that all Scotland had not been
so kind as to have bestowed a louse upon me: but with a shift that I had, I shifted off my
cannibals, and was never more troubled with them. 

The creek was more in earnest and working harder at pushing steadily ahead without ever stopping
than anything else; and like the poetry piece again, it really did "seem to smile upon us
as it quickly passed us by." I had to quit playing, and go to work some time; it made me sorry
to think how behind I was, because I had not started two years before, when I should. But that couldn't
be helped now. All there was left was to go this time, for sure.
 Up and down, I think this hill is six miles, the way so
uneven, stony, and full of bogs, quagmires, and long heath, that a dog with three legs will
out-run a horse with four; for do what we could, we were four hours before we could pass it.

