A portion of the city is pretty exclusively Turkish; the Jews have a quarter to themselves;
the Franks another quarter; so, also, with the Armenians.  The Armenians, of course, are Christians.
Their houses are large, clean, airy, handsomely paved with black and white squares of marble,
and in the centre of many of them is a square court, which has in it a luxuriant flower-garden
and a sparkling fountain; the doors of all the rooms open on this.  A very wide hall leads
to the street door, and in this the women sit, the most of the day. Sempronia--Of the same gens as
the two Gracchi. She was the wife of Decimus Brutus.

[139] Sing, play, and dance--Psallere, saltare. As psallo signifies both to play on a musical
instrument, and to sing to it while playing, I have thought it necessary to give both senses
in the translation.

[140] By no means despicable--Haud absurdum. Compare, Bene dicere haud absurdum est, c. 8.

[141]
She was distinguished, etc.--Multae facetiae, multusque lepos inerat. Both facetiae and lepos mean
"agreeableness, humor, pleasantry," but lepos here seems to refer to diction, as in Cic. Orat.
i. 7: Magnus in jocando lepos.

[142] XXVI. By an arrangement respecting their provinces--Pactione provinciae. This passage has been
absurdly misrepresented by most translators, except De Brosses. Even Rose, who was a scholar,
translated pactione provinciae, "by promising a province to his colleague." Plutarch, in his
Life of Cicero, says that the two provinces, which Cicero and his colleague Antonius shared
between them, were Gaul and Macedonia, and that Cicero, in order to retain Antonius in the
interest of the senate, exchanged with him Macedonia, which had fallen to himself, for the inferior
province of Gaul. See Jug., c. 27.

[143] Plots which he had laid for the consuls in the Campus Martius --Insidiae quas consuli
in campo fecerat. I have here departed from the text of Cortius, who reads consulibus, thinking
that Catiline, in his rage, might have extended his plots even to the consuls-elect. But consuli,
there is little doubt, is the right reading, as it is favored by
what is said at the beginning of the chapter, insidias parabat Ciceroni,
by what follows in the next chapter, consuli insidias tendere, and
by the words, sperans, si designatus foret, facile se ex voluntate
Antonio usurum; for if Catiline trusted that he should be able to
use his pleasure with Antonius, he could hardly think it necessary
to form plots against his life.

I have De Brosses on my side, who translates the phrase, les pieges ou il comptait faire perir
le consul. The words in campo, which look extremely like an intruded gloss, I wonder that Cortius
should have retained. "Consuli," says Gerlach, "appears the more eligible, not only on account
of consuli insidias tendere, c. 27, but because nothing but the death of Cicero was necessary
to make everything favorable for Catiline." Kritzius, Bernouf, Dietsch, Pappaur, Allen, and all the
modern editors, read Consuli. To see a camel train laden with the spices of Arabia and the rare fabrics
of Persia come marching through the narrow alleys of the bazaar, among porters with their burdens,
money-changers, lamp-merchants, Al-naschars in the glassware business, portly cross-legged
Turks smoking the famous narghili; and the crowds drifting to and fro in the fanciful costumes
of the East, is a genuine revelation of the Orient.  The picture lacks nothing.  It casts you
back at once into your forgotten boyhood, and again you dream over the wonders of the Arabian
Nights; again your companions are princes, your lord is the Caliph Haroun Al Raschid, and your
servants are terrific giants and genii that come with smoke and lightning and thunder, and
go as a storm goes when they depart!

CHAPTER XXXIX.

We inquired, and learned that the lions of Smyrna consisted of the ruins of the ancient citadel,
whose broken and prodigious battlements frown upon the city from a lofty hill just in the edge
of the town--the Mount Pagus of Scripture, they call it; the site of that one of the Seven
Apocalyptic Churches of Asia which was located here in the first century of the Christian era;
and the grave and the place of martyrdom of the venerable Polycarp, who suffered in Smyrna
for his religion some eighteen hundred years ago.

We took little donkeys and started.  We saw Polycarp's tomb, and then hurried on.

The "Seven Churches"--thus they abbreviate it--came next on the list.  We rode there--about
a mile and a half in the sweltering sun--and visited a little Greek church which they said
was built upon the ancient site; and we paid a small fee, and the holy attendant gave each
of us a little wax candle as a remembrancer of the place, and I put mine in my hat and the
sun melted it and the grease all ran down the back of my neck; and so now I have not any thing
left but the wick, and it is a sorry and a wilted-looking wick at that.

Several of us argued as well as we could that the "church" mentioned in the Bible meant a party
of Christians, and not a building; that the Bible spoke of them as being very poor--so poor,
I thought, and so subject to persecution (as per Polycarp's martyrdom) that in the first place
they probably could not have afforded a church edifice, and in the second would not have dared
to build it in the open light of day if they could; and finally, that if they had had the privilege
of building it, common judgment would have suggested that they build it somewhere near the
town. But the elders of the ship's family ruled us down and scouted our evidences.  However,
retribution came to them afterward.  They found that they had been led astray and had gone
to the wrong place; they discovered that the accepted site is in the city.

Riding through the town, we could see marks of the six Smyrnas that have existed here and been
burned up by fire or knocked down by earthquakes. The hills and the rocks are rent asunder
in places, excavations expose great blocks of building-stone that have lain buried for ages,
and all the mean houses and walls of modern Smyrna along the way are spotted white with broken
pillars, capitals and fragments of sculptured marble that once adorned the lordly palaces that
were the glory of the city in the olden time.

The ascent of the hill of the citadel is very steep, and we proceeded
rather slowly.  But there were matters of interest about us.  In one
place, five hundred feet above the sea, the perpendicular bank on the
upper side of the road was ten or fifteen feet high, and the cut exposed
three veins of oyster shells, just as we have seen quartz veins exposed
in the cutting of a road in Nevada or Montana.  The veins were about
eighteen inches thick and two or three feet apart, and they slanted along
downward for a distance of thirty feet or more, and then disappeared
where the cut joined the road.  Heaven only knows how far a man might
trace them by "stripping."  They were clean, nice oyster shells, large,
and just like any other oyster shells.  They were thickly massed
together, and none were scattered above or below the veins.  Each one was
a well-defined lead by itself, and without a spur.  My first instinct was
to set up the usual--
                                 NOTICE:

     "We, the undersigned, claim five claims of two hundred feet each,
     (and one for discovery,) on this ledge or lode of oyster-shells,
     with all its dips, spurs, angles, variations and sinuosities, and
     fifty feet on each side of the same, to work it, etc., etc.,
     according to the mining laws of Smyrna."

They were such perfectly natural-looking leads that I could hardly keep from "taking them up."
Among the oyster-shells were mixed many fragments of ancient, broken crockery ware.  Now how
did those masses of oyster-shells get there?  I can not determine.  Broken crockery and oyster-shells
are suggestive of restaurants--but then they could have had no such places away up there on
that mountain side in our time, because nobody has lived up there.  A restaurant would not
pay in such a stony, forbidding, desolate place.  And besides, there were no champagne corks
among the shells.  If there ever was a restaurant there, it must have been in Smyrna's palmy
days, when the hills were covered with palaces. I could believe in one restaurant, on those
terms; but then how about the three?  Did they have restaurants there at three different periods
of the world?--because there are two or three feet of solid earth between the oyster leads.
Evidently, the restaurant solution will not answer.

The hill might have been the bottom of the sea, once, and been lifted up, with its oyster-beds,
by an earthquake--but, then, how about the crockery?  And moreover, how about three oyster
beds, one above another, and thick strata of good honest earth between?

That theory will not do.  It is just possible that this hill is Mount Ararat, and that Noah's
Ark rested here, and he ate oysters and threw the shells overboard.  But that will not do,
either.  There are the three layers again and the solid earth between--and, besides, there
were only eight in Noah's family, and they could not have eaten all these oysters in the two
or three months they staid on top of that mountain.  The beasts--however, it is simply absurd
to suppose he did not know any more than to feed the beasts on oyster suppers.

It is painful--it is even humiliating--but I am reduced at last to one slender theory: that
the oysters climbed up there of their own accord. But what object could they have had in view?--what
did they want up there?  What could any oyster want to climb a hill for?  To climb a hill must
necessarily be fatiguing and annoying exercise for an oyster. "To retreat," adds Dietsch, "is
disgraceful only to those qui ab hostibus se pelli patiantur, who suffer themselves to be repulsed
by the enemy."
[63] X. When mighty princes had been vanquished in war--Perses, Antiochus,
Mithridates, Tigranes, and others.  An oyster is of a retiring
disposition, and not lively--not even cheerful above the average, and never enterprising. 
But above all, an oyster does not take any interest in scenery--he scorns it.  What have I
arrived at now? Simply at the point I started from, namely, those oyster shells are there,
in regular layers, five hundred feet above the sea, and no man knows how they got there.  I
have hunted up the guide-books, and the gist of what they say is this: "They are there, but
how they got there is a mystery."

