A BOOK OF SCOUNDRELS

By Charles Whibley

To the Greeks FOOLISHNESS

I desire to thank the Proprietors of the 'National Observer,' the 'New Review,' the 'Pall Mall
Gazette,' and 'Macmillan's Magazine,' for courteous permission to reprint certain chapters
of this book.

CONTENTS

     INTRODUCTION

     CAPTAIN HIND

     MOLL CUTPURSE AND JONATHAN WILD
     I. MOLL CUTPURSE
     II. JONATHAN WILD
     III. A PARALLEL

     RALPH BRISCOE

     GILDEROY AND SIXTEEN-STRING JACK
     I. GILDEROY
     II. SIXTEEN-STRING JACK
     III. A PARALLEL

     THOMAS PURENEY

     SHEPPARD AND CARTOUCHE
     I. JACK SHEPPARD
     II. LOUIS-DOMINIQUE CARTOUCHE
     III. A PARALLEL

     VAUX

     GEORGE BARRINGTON

     THE SWITCHER AND GENTLEMAN HARRY
     I. THE SWITCHER
     II. GENTLEMAN HARRY
     III. A PARALLEL

     DEACON BRODIE AND CHARLES PEACE
     I. DEACON BRODIE
     II. CHARLES PEACE
     III. A PARALLEL

     THE MAN IN THE GREY SUIT

     MONSIEUR L'ABBÉ

INTRODUCTION

There are other manifestations of greatness than to relieve suffering or to wreck an empire.
Julius Cæsar and John Howard are not the only heroes who have smiled upon the world. In the
supreme adaptation of means to an end there is a constant nobility, for neither ambition nor
virtue is the essential of a perfect action. How shall you contemplate with indifference the
career of an artist whom genius or good guidance has compelled to exercise his peculiar skill,
to indulge his finer aptitudes? A masterly theft rises in its claim to respect high above the
reprobation of the moralist. The scoundrel, when once justice is quit of him, has a right to
be appraised by his actions, not by their effect; and he dies secure in the knowledge that
he is commonly more distinguished, if he be less loved, than his virtuous contemporaries.

While murder is wellnigh as old as life, property and the pocket invented theft, late-born
among the arts. It was not until avarice had devised many a cunning trick for the protection
of wealth, until civilisation had multiplied the forms of portable property, that thieving
became a liberal and an elegant profession. True, in pastoral society, the lawless man was
eager to lift cattle, to break down the barrier between robbery and warfare. But the contrast
is as sharp between the savagery of the ancient reiver and the polished performance of Captain
Hind as between the daub of the pavement and the perfection of Velasquez.

So long as the Gothic spirit governed Europe, expressing itself in useless ornament and wanton
brutality, the more delicate crafts had no hope of exercise. Even the adventurer upon the road
threatened his victim with a bludgeon, nor was it until the breath of the Renaissance had vivified
the world that a gentleman and an artist could face the traveller with a courteous demand for
his purse. But the age which witnessed the enterprise of Drake and the triumph of Shakespeare
knew also the prowess of the highwayman and the dexterity of the cutpurse. Though the art displayed
all the freshness and curiosity of the primitives, still it was art. With Gamaliel Ratsey,
who demanded a scene from Hamlet of a rifled player, and who could not rob a Cambridge scholar
without bidding him deliver an oration in a wood, theft was already better than a vulgar extortion.
Moll Cutpurse, whose intelligence and audacity were never bettered, was among the bravest of
the Elizabethans. Her temperament was as large and as reckless as Ben Jonson's own. Neither
her tongue nor her courage knew the curb of modesty, and she was the first to reduce her craft
to a set of wise and imperious rules. She it was who discovered the secret of discipline, and
who insisted that every member of her gang should undertake no other enterprise than that for
which nature had framed him. Thus she made easy the path for that other hero, of whom you are
told that his band was made up 'of several sorts of wicked artists, of whom he made several
uses, according as he perceived which way every man's particular talent lay.' This statesman--Thomas
Dun was his name--drew up for the use of his comrades a stringent and stately code, and he
was wont to deliver an address to all novices concerning the art and mystery of robbing upon
the highway. Under auspices so brilliant, thievery could not but flourish, and when the Stuarts
sat upon the throne it was already lifted above the level of questioning experiment.

Every art is shaped by its material, and with the variations of its material it must perforce
vary. If the skill of the cutpurse compelled the invention of the pocket, it is certain that
the rare difficulties of the pocket created the miraculous skill of those crafty fingers which
were destined to empty it. And as increased obstacles are perfection's best incentive, a finer
cunning grew out of the fresh precaution. History does not tell us who it was that discovered
this new continent of roguery. Those there are who give the credit to the valiant Moll Cutpurse;
but though the Roaring Girl had wit to conceive a thousand strange enterprises, she had not
the hand to carry them out, and the first pickpocket must needs have been a man of action.
Moreover, her nickname suggests the more ancient practice, and it is wiser to yield the credit
to Simon Fletcher, whose praises are chanted by the early historians.

Now, Simon, says his biographer, was 'looked upon to be the greatest artist of his age by all
his contemporaries.' The son of a baker in Rosemary Lane, he early deserted his father's oven
for a life of adventure; and he claims to have been the first collector who, stealing the money,
yet left the case. The new method was incomparably more subtle than the old: it afforded an
opportunity of a hitherto unimagined delicacy; the wielders of the scissors were aghast at
a skill which put their own clumsiness to shame, and which to a previous generation would have
seemed the wildest fantasy. Yet so strong is habit, that even when the picking of pockets was
a recognised industry, the superfluous scissors still survived, and many a rogue has hanged
upon the Tree because he attempted with a vulgar implement such feats as his unaided forks
had far more easily accomplished.

But, despite the innovation of Simon Fletcher, the highway was the glory of Elizabeth, the
still greater glory of the Stuarts. 'The Lacedæmonians were the only people,' said Horace Walpole,
'except the English who seem to have put robbery on a right foot.' And the English of the seventeenth
century need fear the rivalry of no Lacedæmonian. They were, indeed, the most valiant and graceful
robbers that the world has ever known. The Civil War encouraged their profession, and, since
many of them had fought for their king, a proper hatred of Cromwell sharpened their wits. They
were scholars as well as gentlemen; they tempered their sport with a merry wit; their avarice
alone surpassed their courtesy; and they robbed with so perfect a regard for the proprieties
that it was only the pedant and the parliamentarian who resented their interference.

Nor did their princely manner fail of its effect upon their victims. The middle of the seventeenth
century was the golden age, not only of the robber, but of the robbed. The game was played
upon either side with a scrupulous respect for a potent, if unwritten, law. Neither might nor
right was permitted to control the issue. A gaily attired, superbly mounted highwayman would
hold up a coach packed with armed men, and take a purse from each, though a vigorous remonstrance
might have carried him to Tyburn. But the traveller knew his place: he did what was expected
of him in the best of tempers. Who was he that he should yield in courtesy to the man in the
vizard? As it was monstrous for the one to discharge his pistol, so the other could not resist
without committing an outrage upon tradition. One wonders what had been the result if some
mannerless reformer had declined his assailant's invitation and drawn his sword. Maybe the
sensitive art might have died under this sharp rebuff. But none save regicides were known to
resist, and their resistance was never more forcible than a volley of texts. Thus the High-toby-crack
swaggered it with insolent gaiety, knowing no worse misery than the fear of the Tree, so long
as he followed the rules of his craft. But let a touch of brutality disgrace his method, and
he appealed in vain for sympathy or indulgence. The ruffian, for instance, of whom it is grimly
recorded that he added a tie-wig to his booty, neither deserved nor received the smallest consideration.
Delivered to justice, he speedily met the death his vulgarity merited, and the road was taught
the salutary lesson that wigs were as sacred as trinkets hallowed by association.

With the eighteenth century the highway fell upon decline. No doubt in its silver age, the
century's beginning, many a brilliant deed was done. Something of the old policy survived,
and men of spirit still went upon the pad. But the breadth of the ancient style was speedily
forgotten; and by the time the First George climbed to the throne, robbery was already a sordid
trade. Neither side was conscious of its noble obligation. The vulgar audacity of a bullying
thief was suitably answered by the ungracious, involuntary submission of the terrified traveller.
From end to end of England you might hear the cry of 'Stand and deliver.' Yet how changed the
accent! The beauty of gesture, the deference of carriage, the ready response to a legitimate
demand--all the qualities of a dignified art were lost for ever. As its professors increased
in number, the note of aristocracy, once dominant, was silenced. The meanest rogue, who could
hire a horse, might cut a contemptible figure on Bagshot Heath, and feel no shame at robbing
a poor man. Once--in that Augustan age, whose brightest ornament was Captain Hind--it was something
of a distinction to be decently plundered. A century later there was none so humble but he
might be asked to empty his pocket. In brief, the blight of democracy was upon what should
have remained a refined, secluded art; and nowise is the decay better illustrated than in the
appreciation of bunglers, whose exploits were scarce worth a record.

James Maclaine, for instance, was the hero of his age. In a history of cowards he would deserve
the first place, and the 'Gentleman Highwayman,' as he was pompously styled, enjoyed a triumph
denied to many a victorious general. Lord Mountford led half White's to do him honour on the
day of his arrest. On the first Sunday, which he spent in Newgate, three thousand jostled for
entrance to his cell, and the poor devil fainted three times at the heat caused by the throng
of his admirers. So long as his fate hung in the balance, Walpole could not take up his pen
without a compliment to the man, who claimed to have robbed him near Hyde Park. Yet a more
pitiful rascal never showed the white feather. Not once was he known to take a purse with his
own hand, the summit of his achievement being to hold the horses' heads while his accomplice
spoke with the passengers. A poltroon before his arrest, in Court he whimpered and whinnied
for mercy; he was carried to the cart pallid and trembling, and not even his preposterous finery
availed to hearten him at the gallows. Taxed with his timidity, he attempted to excuse himself
on the inadmissible plea of moral rectitude. 'I have as much personal courage in an honourable
cause,' he exclaimed in a passage of false dignity, 'as any man in Britain; but as I knew I
was committing acts of injustice, so I went to them half loth and half consenting; and in that
sense I own I am a coward indeed.'

The disingenuousness of this proclamation is as remarkable as its hypocrisy. Well might he
brag of his courage in an honourable cause, when he knew that he could never be put to the
test. But what palliation shall you find for a rogue with so little pride in his art, that
he exercised it 'half loth, half consenting'? It is not in this recreant spirit that masterpieces
are achieved, and Maclaine had better have stayed in the far Highland parish, which bred him,
than have attempted to cut a figure in the larger world of London. His famous encounter with
Walpole should have covered him with disgrace, for it was ignoble at every point; and the art
was so little understood, that it merely added a leaf to his crown of glory. Now, though Walpole
was far too well-bred to oppose the demand of an armed stranger, Maclaine, in defiance of his
craft, discharged his pistol at an innocent head. True, he wrote a letter of apology, and insisted
that, had the one pistol-shot proved fatal, he had another in reserve for himself. But not
even Walpole would have believed him, had not an amiable faith given him an opportunity for
the answering quip: 'Can I do less than say I will be hanged if he is?'

As Maclaine was a coward and no thief, so also he was a snob and no gentleman. His boasted
elegance was not more respectable than his art. Fine clothes are the embellishment of a true
adventurer; they hang ill on the sloping shoulders of a poltroon.

And Maclaine, with all the ostensible weaknesses of his kind, would claim regard for the strength
that he knew not. He occupied a costly apartment in St. James's Street; his morning dress was
a crimson damask banjam, a silk shag waistcoat, trimmed with lace, black velvet breeches, white
silk stockings, and yellow morocco slippers; but since his magnificence added no jot to his
courage, it was rather mean than admirable. Indeed, his whole career was marred by the provincialism
of his native manse.

And he was the adored of an intelligent age; he basked a few brief weeks in the noonday sun
of fashion.

If distinction was not the heritage of the Eighteenth Century, its glory is that now and again
a giant raised his head above the stature of a prevailing rectitude. The art of verse was lost
in rhetoric; the noble prose, invented by the Elizabethans, and refined under the Stuarts,
was whittled away to common sense by the admirers of Addison and Steele. Swift and Johnson,
Gibbon and Fielding, were apparitions of strength in an amiable, ineffective age. They emerged
sudden from the impeccable greyness, to which they afforded an heroic contrast. So, while the
highway drifted--drifted to a vulgar incompetence, the craft was illumined by many a flash
of unexpected genius. The brilliant achievements of Jonathan Wild and of Jack Sheppard might
have relieved the gloom of the darkest era, and their separate masterpieces make some atonement
for the environing cowardice and stupidity. Above all, the Eighteenth Century was Newgate's
golden age; now for the first time and the last were the rules and customs of the Jug perfectly
understood. If Jonathan the Great was unrivalled in the art of clapping his enemies into prison,
if Jack the Slip-string was supreme in the rarer art of getting himself out, even the meanest
criminal of his time knew what was expected of him, so long as he wandered within the walled
yard, or listened to the ministrations of the snuff-besmirched Ordinary. He might show a lamentable
lack of cleverness in carrying off his booty; he might prove a too easy victim to the wiles
of the thief-catcher; but he never fell short of courage, when asked to sustain the consequences
of his crime.

Newgate, compared by one eminent author to a university, by another to a ship, was a republic,
whose liberty extended only so far as its iron door. While there was no liberty without, there
was licence within; and if the culprit, who paid for the smallest indiscretion with his neck,
understood the etiquette of the place, he spent his last weeks in an orgie of rollicking lawlessness.
He drank, he ate, he diced; he received his friends, or chaffed the Ordinary; he attempted,
through the well-paid cunning of the Clerk, to bribe the jury; and when every artifice had
failed he went to Tyburn like a man. If he knew not how to live, at least he would show a resentful
world how to die.

'In no country,' wrote Sir T. Smith, a distinguished lawyer of the time,
'do malefactors go to execution more intrepidly than in England'; and
assuredly, buoyed up by custom and the approval of their fellows, Wild's
victims made a brave show at the gallows. Nor was their bravery the
result of a common callousness. They understood at once the humour and
the delicacy of the situation. Though hitherto they had chaffed the
Ordinary, they now listened to his exhortation with at least a semblance
of respect; and though their last night upon earth might have been
devoted to a joyous company, they did not withhold their ear from the
Bellman's Chant. As twelve o'clock approached--their last midnight upon
earth--they would interrupt the most spirited discourse, they would
check the tour of the mellowest bottle to listen to the solemn doggerel.
     Past twelve o'clock!

Even if this warning voice struck a momentary terror into their offending souls, they were
up betimes in the morning, eager to pay their final debt. Their journey from Newgate to Tyburn
was a triumph, and their vanity was unabashed at the droning menaces of the Ordinary. At one
point a chorus of maidens cast wreaths upon their way, or pinned nosegays in their coats, that
they might not face the executioner unadorned. At the Crown Tavern they quaffed their last
glass of ale, and told the landlord with many a leer and smirk that they would pay him on their
way back. Though gravity was asked, it was not always given; but in the Eighteenth Century
courage was seldom wanting. To the common citizen a violent death was (and is) the worst of
horrors; to the ancient highwayman it was the odd trick lost in the game of life. And the highwayman
endured the rope, as the practised gambler loses his estate, without blenching. One there was,
who felt his leg tremble in his own despite: wherefore he stamped it upon the ground so violently,
that in other circumstances he would have roared with pain, and he left the world without a
tremor. In this spirit Cranmer burnt his recreant right hand, and in either case the glamour
of a unique occasion was a stimulus to courage.

But not even this brilliant treatment of accessories availed to save the highway from disrepute;
indeed, it had become the profitless pursuit of braggarts and loafers, long before the abolition
of the stage-coach destroyed its opportunity. In the meantime, however, the pickpocket was
master of his trade. His strategy was perfect, his sleight of hand as delicate as long, lithe
fingers and nimble brains could make it. He had discarded for ever those clumsy instruments
whose use had barred the progress of the Primitives. The breast-pocket behind the tightest
buttoned coat presented no difficulty to his love of research, and he would penetrate the stoutest
frieze or the lightest satin, as easily as Jack Sheppard made a hole through Newgate. His trick
of robbery was so simple and yet so successful, that ever since it has remained a tradition.
The collision, the victim's murmured apology, the hasty scuffle, the booty handed to the aide-de-camp,
who is out of sight before the hue and cry can be raised--such was the policy advocated two
hundred years ago; such is the policy pursued to day by the few artists that remain.

Throughout the eighteenth century the art of cly-faking held its own, though its reputation
paled in the glamour of the highway. As we continued our journey, we saw, on the plateau of a
small mountain, a stone pyramid forty or fifty feet high, its four sides covered with inscriptions
to the praise of their Majesties. About thirty children dressed as mamelukes seemed to guard
this monument, which recalled to the Emperor glorious memories. The moment their Majesties appeared,
balladeers, or dancers, of the country emerged from a neighboring wood, dressed in the most picturesque
costumes, bearing banners of different colors, and reproducing with remarkable agility and vigor the
traditional dance of the mountaineers of the south.

Near the town of Tarbes was a sham mountain planted with firs, which
opened to let the cortege pass through, surmounted by an imperial
eagle suspended in the air, and holding a banner on which was inscribed--
"He will open our Pyrenees."

On his arrival at Tarbes, the Emperor immediately mounted his horse to pay a visit to the Grand
Duke of Berg, who was ill in one of the suburbs. We left next day without visiting Bareges
and Bagneres, where the most brilliant preparations had been made to receive their Majesties.

As
the Emperor passed through Agen, there was presented to him a brave fellow named Printemps, over
a hundred years old, who had served under Louis XIV., XV., and XVI., and who, although bending
beneath the weight of many years and burdens, finding himself in the presence of the Emperor,
gently pushed aside two of his grandsons by whom he had been supported, and exclaimed almost
angrily that he could go very well alone. His Majesty, who was much touched, met him half-way,
and most kindly bent over the old centenarian, who on his knees, his white head uncovered,
and his eyes full of tears, said in trembling tones, "Ah, Sire, I was afraid I should die without
seeing you." The Emperor assisted him to rise, and conducted him to a chair, in which he placed
him with his own hands, and seated himself beside him on another, which he made signs to hand
him. "I am glad to see you, my dear Printemps, very glad. You have heard from me lately?" (His
Majesty had given this brave man a pension, which his wife was to
inherit after his death.) Printemps put his hand on his heart, "Yes,
I have heard from you."

The Emperor took pleasure in making him speak of his campaigns, and bade him farewell after a
long conversation, handing him at the same time a gift of fifty napoleons.

There

was also presented to his Majesty a soldier born at Agen, who had lost his sight in consequence of the
campaign in Egypt. The Emperor gave him three hundred francs, and promised him a pension, which
was afterwards sent him.

The day after their arrival at Saint-Cloud, the Emperor and Empress went to Paris in order to be
present at the fetes of the 15th of August, which it is useless to say were magnificent. As
soon as he entered the Tuileries, the Emperor hastened through the chateau to examine the repairs
and improvements which had been made during his absence, and, as was his habit, criticised
more than he praised all that he saw. Looking out of the hall of the marshals, he demanded of
M. de Fleurieu, governor of the palace, why the top of the arch of triumph on the Carrousel was
covered with a cloth; and his Majesty was told that it was because all the arrangements had not yet
been made for placing his statue in the chariot to which were attached the Corinthian horses,
and also because the two Victories who were to guide the four horses were not yet completed.
"What!" vehemently exclaimed the Emperor; "but I will not allow that! I said nothing about
it! I did not order it!"

Then turning to M. Fontaine, he continued, "Monsieur Fontaine, was my statue in the design
which was presented to you?"--"No, Sire, it was that of the god Mars."--"Well, why have you put
me in the place of the god of war?"-- "Sire, it was not I, but M. the director-general of
the museum."

"The director-general was wrong," interrupted the Emperor impatiently. "I wish this statue removed;
do you hear, Monsieur Fontaine? I wish it taken away; it is most unsuitable. What! shall I erect
statues to myself! Let the chariot and the Victories be finished; but let the chariot let
the chariot remain empty." The order was executed; and the statue of the Emperor was taken down
and placed in the orangery, and is perhaps still there. It was made of gilded lead, was a fine
piece of work, and a most excellent likeness.

The Sunday following the Emperor's arrival, his Majesty received at the Tuileries the Persian
ambassador, Asker-Khan; M. Jaubert accompanied him, and acted as interpreter. This savant, learned
in Oriental matters, had by the Emperor's orders received his excellency on the frontiers of France,
in company with M. Outrey, vice-consul of France at Bagdad. Later his excellency had a second
audience, which took place in state at the palace of Saint-Cloud.

The ambassador was a very handsome man, tall, with regular features, and a noble and attractive
countenance; his manners were polished and elegant, especially towards ladies, with even something
of French gallantry. His suite, composed of select personages all magnificently dressed, comprised,
on his departure from Erzeroum, more than three hundred persons; but the innumerable difficulties
encountered on the journey compelled his excellency to dismiss a large part of his retinue, and,
though thus reduced, this suite was notwithstanding one of the most numerous ever brought by
an ambassador into France.

The ambassador and suite were lodged in the rue de Frejus, in the residence formerly occupied
by Mademoiselle de Conti.

The presents which he brought to the Emperor in the name of his sovereign were of great value,
comprising more than eighty cashmere shawls of all kinds; a great quantity of fine pearls of
various sizes, a few of them very large; an Eastern bridle, the curb adorned with pearls, turquoise,
emeralds, etc.; and finally the sword of Tamerlane, and that of Thamas- Kouli-Khan, the former covered
with pearls and precious stones, the second very simply mounted, both having Indian blades of
fabulous value with arabesques of embossed gold.

I took pleasure at the time in inquiring some particulars about this ambassador. His character
was very attractive; and he showed much consideration and regard for every one who visited
him, giving the ladies attar of roses, the men tobacco, perfumes, and pipes. He took much
pleasure in comparing French jewels with those he had brought from
his own country, and even carried his gallantry so far as to propose
to the ladies certain exchanges, always greatly to their advantage;
and a refusal of these proposals wounded him deeply.

When a pretty woman entered his residence he smiled at first, and heard her speak in a kind of
silent ecstasy; he then devoted his attention to seating her, placed under her feet cushions and
carpets of cashmere (for he had only this material about him). Even his clothing and bed-coverings
were of an exceedingly fine quality of cashmere. Asker-Khan did not scruple to wash his face,
his beard, and hands in the presence of everybody, seating himself for this operation in front
of a slave, who presented to him on his knees a porcelain ewer.

The ambassador had a decided taste for the sciences and arts, and was himself a very learned man.
Messieurs Dubois and Loyseau conducted near his residence an institution which he often visited,
especially preferring to be present at the classes in experimental
physics; and the questions which he propounded by means of his interpreter
evinced on his part a very extensive knowledge of the phenomena of
electricity.

Those who traded in curiosities and objects of art liked him exceedingly, since he bought
their wares without much bargaining. However, on one occasion he wished to purchase a telescope,
and sent for a famous optician, who seized the opportunity to charge him an enormous price.
But Asker-Khan having examined the instrument, with which he was much pleased, said to the
optician, "You have given me your long price, now give me your short one."

He admired above all the printed calicoes of the manufactures of Jouy,
the texture, designs, and colors of which he thought even superior
to cashmere; and bought several robes to send to Persia as models.

On the day of the Emperor's fete, his Excellency gave in the garden of his residence an entertainment
in the Eastern style, at which the Persian musicians attached to the embassy executed warlike
pieces, astonishing both for vigor and originality. There were also artificial fireworks, conspicuous
among which were the arms of the Sufi, on which were represented most ingeniously the cipher
of Napoleon.

His Excellency visited the Imperial library, M. Jaubert serving as
interpreter; and the ambassador was overcome with admiration on seeing
the order in which this immense collection of books was kept.

He remained half an hour in the hall of the manuscripts, which he thought very handsome, and
recognized several as being copied by writers of much renown in Persia. A copy of the Koran struck
him most of all; and he said, while admiring it, that there was not a man in Persia who would
not sell his children to acquire such a treasure.

On leaving, the library, Asker-Khan presented his compliments to the librarians, and promised
to enrich the collection by several precious manuscripts which he had brought from his own country.

A
few days after his presentation, the ambassador went to visit the Museum, and was much impressed
by a portrait of his master, the King of Persia; and could not sufficiently express his joy and
gratitude when several copies of this picture were presented to him. The historical pictures,
especially the battle-scenes, then engrossed his attention completely; and he remained at least
a quarter of an hour in front of the one representing the surrender of the city of Vienna.

Having
arrived at the end of the gallery of Apollo, Asker-Khan seated himself to rest, asked for a
pipe, and indulged in a smoke; and when he had finished, rose, and
seeing around him many ladies whom curiosity had attracted, paid them,
through M. Jaubert, exceedingly flattering compliments.

Then leaving the Museum, his Excellency went to promenade in the garden of the Tuileries, where
he was soon followed by an immense crowd.

On that day his Excellency bestowed on Prince de Benevento, in the name of his sovereign, the
Grand Order of the Sun, a magnificent decoration consisting of a diamond sun attached to a cordon
of red cloth covered with pearls.

Asker-Khan made a greater impression at Paris than the Turkish ambassador. He was generous and
more gallant, paid his court with more address, and conformed more readily to French customs and manners.
The Turk was irascible, austere, and irritable, while the Persian was fond of and well understood
a joke. One day, however, he became red with anger, and it must be admitted not without good
reason.

At a concert given in the apartments of the Empress Josephine, Asker-
Khan, whom the music evidently did not entertain very highly, at first
applauded by ecstatic gestures and rolling his eyes in admiration,
until at last nature overcame politeness, and the ambassador fell
sound asleep.

His Excellency's position was not the best for sleeping, however, as he was standing with his
back against the wall, with his feet braced against a sofa on which a lady was seated. It occurred
to some of the officers of the palace that it would be a good joke to take away suddenly this point
of support, which they accomplished with all ease by simply beginning a conversation with
the lady on the sofa, who rising suddenly, the seat slipped over the floor; his Excellency's
feet followed this movement, and the ambassador, suddenly deprived of the weight which had balanced
him, extended his length on the floor. On this rude awakening, he tried to stop himself in
his fall by clutching at his neighbors, the furniture, and the curtains, uttering at the same
time frightful screams. The officers who had played this cruel joke upon him begged him, with
the most ridiculously serious air, to place himself on a stationary chair in order to avoid
the recurrence of such an accident; while the lady who had been made the accomplice in this
practical joke, with much difficulty stifled her laughter, and his Excellency was consumed
with an anger which he could express only in looks and gestures.

Another adventure of Asker-Khan's was long a subject of conversation, and furnished much amusement.
Having felt unwell for several days, he thought that French medicine might cure him more quickly
than Persian; so he sent for M. Bourdois, a most skillful physician whose name he well knew, having
taken care to acquaint himself with all our celebrities of every kind. The ambassador's orders
were promptly executed; but by a singular mistake it was not Dr. Bourdois who was requested
to visit Asker-Khan, but the president of the Court of Accounts, M. Marbois, who was much astonished
at the honor the Persian ambassador did him, not being able to comprehend what connection there
could be between them. Nevertheless, he repaired promptly to Asker-Khan, who could scarcely
believe that the severe costume of the president of the Court of Accounts was that of a physician.
No sooner had M. Marbois entered than the ambassador held out his
hand and stuck out his tongue, regarding him very attentively.

M. Marbois was a little surprised at this welcome; but thinking it was doubtless the Oriental
manner of saluting magistrates, he bowed profoundly, and timidly pressed the hand presented to him,
and he was in this respectful position when four of the servants of the ambassador brought a vessel
with unequivocal signs. M. Marbois recognized the use of it with a surprise and indignation
that could not be expressed, and drew back angrily, inquiring what all this meant. Hearing himself
called doctor, "What!" cried he, "M. le Docteur I"-- "Why; yes; le Docteur Bourdois!" M. Marbois
was enlightened. The similarity between the sound of his name and that of the doctor had exposed him
to this disagreeable visit.

CHAPTER XI.

The day preceding the Emperor's fete, or the day following, the colossal bronze statue which
was to be placed on the monument in the Place Vendome was removed from the studio of M. Launay. The
brewers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine offered their handsomest horses to draw the chariot on
which the statue was carried, and twelve were selected, one from each brewer; and as their masters requested
the privilege of riding them, nothing could be more singular than
this cortege, which arrived on the Place Vendome at five o'clock in
the evening, followed by an immense crowd, amid cries of "Vive l'Empereur."

A few days before his Majesty's departure for Erfurt, the Emperor with the Empress and their
households played prisoner's base for the last time. It was in the evening; and footmen bore
lighted torches, and followed the players when they went beyond the reach of the light. The
Emperor fell once while trying to catch the Empress, and was taken prisoner; but he soon broke
bounds and began to run again, and when he was free, carried off Josephine in spite of the protests
of the players; and thus ended the last game of prisoner's base that I ever saw the Emperor play.

It
had been decided that the Emperor Alexander and the Emperor Napoleon should meet at Erfurt
on the 27th of September; and most of the sovereigns forming the Confederation of the Rhine had
been invited to be present at this interview, which it was intended should be both magnificent
and imposing. Consequently the Duke of Frioul, grand marshal of the palace, sent M. de Canouville,
marshal of lodgings of the palace, M. de Beausset, prefect of the palace, and two quartermasters
to prepare at Erfurt lodgings for all these illustrious visitors, and to organize the grand
marshal's service.

The government palace was chosen for the Emperor
Napoleon's lodgings, as on account of its size it perfectly suited
the Emperor's intention of holding his court there; for the Emperor
Alexander, the residence of M. Triebel was prepared, the handsomest
in the town; and for S. A. L, the Grand Duke Constantine, that of
Senator Remann. Other residences were reserved for the Princes of
the Confederation and the persons of their suite; and a detachment
of all branches of the service of the Imperial household was established
in each of these different lodgings. For him the worst terror of all is the evil eye, and
he would rather be hanged by an unsuspected judge than receive an easy stretch from one whose
glance he dared not face. And while the anthropologist claims him for a savage, whose civilisation
has been arrested at brotherhood with the Solomon Islanders, the politician might pronounce
him a true communist, in that he has preserved a wholesome contempt of property and civic life.
The pedant, again, would feel his bumps, prescribe a gentle course of bromide, and hope to
cure all the sins of the world by a municipal Turkish bath. The wise man, respecting his superstitions,
is content to take him as he finds him, and to deduce his character from his very candid history,
which is unaffected by pedant or politician.

Before all things, he is sanguine; he believes that Chance, the great god of his endeavour,
fights upon his side. Whatever is lacking to-day, to-morrow's enterprise will fulfil, and if
only the omens be favourable, he fears neither detection nor the gallows. His courage proceeds
from this sanguine temperament, strengthened by shame and tradition rather than from a self-controlled
magnanimity; he hopes until despair is inevitable, and then walks firmly to the gallows, that
no comrade may suspect the white feather. His ambition, too, is the ambition of the savage
or of the child; he despises such immaterial advantages as power and influence, being perfectly
content if he have a smart coat on his back and a bottle of wine at his elbow. He would rather
pick a lock than batter a constitution, and the world would be well lost, if he and his doxy
might survey the ruin in comfort.

But if his ambition be modest, his love of notoriety is boundless. He must be famous, his name
must be in the mouths of men, he must be immortal (for a week) in a rough woodcut. And then,
what matters it how soon the end? His braveries have been hawked in the street; his prowess
has sold a Special Edition; he is the first of his race, until a luckier rival eclipses him.
Thus, also, his dandyism is inevitable: it is not enough for him to cover his nakedness--he
must dress; and though his taste is sometimes unbridled, it is never insignificant. Indeed,
his biographers have recorded the expression of his fancy in coats and small-clothes as patiently
and enthusiastically as they have applauded his courage. And truly the love of magnificence,
which he shares with all artists, is sincere and characteristic. When an accomplice of Jonathan
Wild's robbed Lady M----n at Windsor, his equipage cost him forty pounds; and Nan Hereford
was arrested for shoplifting at the very moment that four footmen awaited her return with an
elegant sedan-chair.

His vanity makes him but a prudish lover, who desires to woo less than to be wooed; and at
all times and through all moods he remains the primeval sentimentalist. He will detach his
life entirely from the catchwords which pretend to govern his actions; he will sit and croon
the most heartrending ditties in celebration of home-life and a mother's love, and then set
forth incontinently upon a well-planned errand of plunder. For all his artistry, he lacks balance
as flagrantly as a popular politician or an advanced journalist. Therefore it is the more remarkable
that in one point he displays a certain caution: he boggles at a superfluous murder. For all
his contempt of property, he still preserves a respect for life, and the least suspicion of
unnecessary brutality sets not only the law but his own fellows against him. Like all men whose
god is Opportunity, he is a reckless gambler; and, like all gamblers, he is monstrously extravagant.
In brief, he is a tangle of picturesque qualities, which, until our own generation, was incapable
of nothing save dulness.

The Bible and the Newgate Calendar--these twain were George Borrow's favourite reading, and
all save the psychologist and the pedant will applaud the preference. For the annals of the
'family' are distinguished by an epic severity, a fearless directness of speech, which you
will hardly match outside the Iliad or the Chronicles of the Kings. But the Newgate Calendar
did not spring ready-made into being: it is the result of a curious and gradual development.
The chap-books came first, with their bold type, their coarse paper, and their clumsy, characteristic
woodcuts--the chap-books, which none can contemplate without an enchanted sentiment. Here at
last you come upon a literature, which has been read to pieces. The very rarity of the slim,
rough volumes, proves that they have been handed from one greedy reader to another, until the
great libraries alone are rich enough to harbour them. They do not boast the careful elegance
of a famous press: many of them came from the printing-office of a country town: yet the least
has a simplicity and concision, which are unknown in this age of popular fiction. Even their
lack of invention is admirable: as the same woodcut might be used to represent Guy, Earl of
Warwick, or the last highwayman who suffered at Tyburn, so the same enterprise is ascribed
with a delightful ingenuousness to all the heroes who rode abroad under the stars to fill their
pockets.

The Life and Death of Gamaliel Ratsey delighted England in 1605, and was the example of after
ages. The anecdote of the road was already crystallised, and henceforth the robber was unable
to act contrary to the will of the chap-book. Thus there grew up a folk-lore of thievery: the
very insistence upon the same motive suggests the fairytale, and, as in the legends of every
country, there is an identical element which the anthropologists call 'human'; so in the annals
of adventure there is a set of invariable incidents, which are the essence of thievery. The
industrious hacks, to whom we owe the entertainment of the chap-books, being seedy parsons
or lawyers' clerks, were conscious of their literary deficiencies: they preferred to obey tradition
rather than to invent ineptitudes. So you may trace the same jest, the same intrigue through
the unnumbered lives of three centuries. And if, being a philosopher, you neglect the obvious
plagiarism, you may induce from these similarities a cunning theory concerning the uniformity
of the human brain. But the easier explanation is, as always, the more satisfactory; and there
is little doubt that in versatility the thief surpassed his historian.

Had the chap-books still been scattered in disregarded corners, they would have been unknown
or misunderstood. Happily, a man of genius came in the nick to convert them into as vivid and
sparkling a piece of literature as the time could show. This was Captain Alexander Smith, whose
Lives of the Highwaymen, published in 1719, was properly described by its author as 'the first
impartial piece of this nature which ever appeared in English.' Now, Captain Smith inherited
from a nameless father no other patrimony than a fierce loyalty to the Stuarts, and the sanguine
temperament which views in horror a well-ordered life. Though a mere foundling, he managed
to acquire the rudiments, and he was not wholly unlettered when at eighteen he took to the
road. His courage, fortified by an intimate knowledge of the great tradition, was rewarded
by an immediate success, and he rapidly became the master of so much leisure as enabled him
to pursue his studies with pleasure and distinction. When his companions damned him for a milksop,
he was loftily contemptuous, conscious that it was not in intelligence alone that he was their
superior. While the Stuarts were the gods of his idolatry, while the Regicides were the fiends
of his frank abhorrence, it was from the Elizabethans that he caught the splendid vigour of
his style; and he owed not only his historical sense, but his living English to the example
of Philemon Holland. Moreover, it is to his constant glory that, living at a time that preferred
as well to attenuate the English tongue as to degrade the profession of the highway, he not
only rode abroad with a fearless courtesy, but handled his own language with the force and
spirit of an earlier age.

He wrote with the authority of courage and experience. A hazardous career had driven envy and
malice from his dauntless breast. Though he confesses a debt to certain 'learned and eminent
divines of the Church of England,' he owed a greater debt to his own observation, and he knew--none
better--how to recognise with enthusiasm those deeds of daring which only himself has rivalled.
A master of etiquette, he distributed approval and censure with impartial hand; and he was
quick to condemn the smallest infraction of an ancient law. Nor was he insensible to the dignity
of history. The best models were always before him. With admirable zeal he studied the manner
of such masters as Thucydides and Titus Livius of Padua. Above all, he realised the importance
of setting appropriate speeches in the mouths of his characters; and, permitting his heroes
to speak for themselves, he imparted to his work an irresistible air of reality and good faith.
His style, always studied, was neither too low nor too high for his subject. An ill-balanced
sentence was as hateful to him as a foul thrust or a stolen advantage.

Abroad a craftsman, he carried into the closet the skill and energy which distinguished him
when the moon was on the heath. Though not born to the arts of peace, he was determined to
prove his respect for letters, and his masterpiece is no less pompous in manner than it is
estimable in tone and sound in reflection. He handled slang as one who knew its limits and
possibilities, employing it not for the sake of eccentricity, but to give the proper colour
and sparkle to his page; indeed, his intimate acquaintance with the vagabonds of speech enabled
him to compile a dictionary of Pedlar's French, which has been pilfered by a whole battalion
of imitators. Moreover, there was none of the proverbs of the pavement, those first cousins
of slang, that escaped him; and he assumed all the licence of the gentleman-collector in the
treatment of his love-passages.

Captain Smith took the justest view of his subject. For him robbery, in the street as on the
highway, was the finest of the arts, and he always revered it for its own sake rather than
for vulgar profit. Though, to deceive the public, he abhorred villainy in word, he never concealed
his admiration in deed of a 'highwayman who robs like a gentleman.' 'There is a beauty in all
the works of nature,' he observes in one of his wittiest exordia, 'which we are unable to define,
though all the world is convinced of its existence: so in every action and station of life
there is a grace to be attained, which will make a man pleasing to all about him and serene
in his own mind.' Some there are, he continues, who have placed 'this beauty in vice itself;
otherwise it is hardly probable that they could commit so many irregularities with a strong
gust and an appearance of satisfaction.' Notwithstanding that the word 'vice' is used in its
conventional sense, we have here the key to Captain Smith's position. He judged his heroes'
achievements with the intelligent impartiality of a connoisseur, and he permitted no other
prejudice than an unfailing loyalty to interrupt his opinion.

Though he loved good English as he loved good wine, he was never so happy as when (in imagination)
he was tying the legs of a Regicide under the belly of an ass. And when in the manner of a
bookseller's hack he compiled a Comical and Tragical History of the Lives and Adventures of
the most noted Bayliffs, adoration of the Royalists persuaded him to miss his chance. So brave
a spirit as himself should not have looked complacently upon the officers of the law, but he
saw in the glorification of the bayliff another chance of castigating the Roundheads, and thus
he set an honorific crown upon the brow of man's natural enemy. 'These unsanctified rascals,'
wrote he, 'would run into any man's debt without paying him, and if their creditors were Cavaliers
they thought they had as much right to cheat 'em, as the Israelites had to spoil the Egyptians
of their ear-rings and jewels.' Alas! the boot was ever on the other leg; and yet you cannot
but admire the Captain's valiant determination to sacrifice probability to his legitimate hate.

Of his declining years and death there is no record. One likes to think of him released from
care, and surrounded by books, flowers, and the good things of this earth. Now and again, maybe,
he would muse on the stirring deeds of his youth, and more often he would put away the memory
of action to delight in the masterpiece which made him immortal. He would recall with pleasure,
no doubt, the ready praise of Richard Steele, his most appreciative critic, and smile contemptuously
at the baseness of his friend and successor, Captain Charles Johnson. Now, this ingenious writer
was wont to boast, when the ale of Fleet Street had empurpled his nose, that he was the most
intrepid highwayman of them all. 'Once upon a time,' he would shout, with an arrogant gesture,
'I was known from Blackheath to Hounslow, from Ware to Shooter's Hill.' And the truth is, the
only 'crime' he ever committed was plagiarism. The self-assumed title of Captain should have
deceived nobody, for the braggart never stole anything more difficult of acquisition than another
man's words. He picked brains, not pockets; he committed the greater sin and ran no risk. He
helped himself to the admirable inventions of Captain Smith without apology or acknowledgment,
and, as though to lighten the dead-weight of his sin, he never skipped an opportunity of maligning
his victim. Again and again in the very act to steal he will declare vaingloriously that Captain
Smith's stories are 'barefaced inventions.' But doubt was no check to the habit of plunder,
and you knew that at every reproach, expressed (so to say) in self-defence, he plied the scissors
with the greater energy. The most cunning theft is the tag which adorns the title-page of his book:

     Little villains oft submit to fate
     That great ones may enjoy the world in state.

Thus he quotes from Gay, and you applaud the aptness of the quotation, until you discover that
already it was used by Steele in his appreciation of the heroic Smith! However, Johnson has
his uses, and those to whom the masterpiece of Captain Alexander is inaccessible will turn
with pleasure to the General History of the lives and adventures of the most Famous Highwaymen,
Murderers, Street-Robbers, &c., and will feel no regret that for once they are receiving stolen
goods.

Though Johnson fell immeasurably below his predecessor in talent, he manifestly excelled him
in scholarship. A sojourn at the University had supplied him with a fine assortment of Latin
tags, and he delighted to prove his erudition by the citation of the Chronicles. Had he possessed
a sense of humour, he might have smiled at the irony of committing a theft upon the historian
of thieves. But he was too vain and too pompous to smile at his own weakness, and thus he would
pretend himself a venturesome highwayman, a brave writer, and a profound scholar. Indeed, so
far did his pride carry him, that he would have the world believe him the same Charles Johnson,
who wrote The Gentleman Cully and The Successful Pyrate. Thus with a boastful chuckle he would
quote:

     Johnson, who now to sense, now nonsense leaning,
     Means not, but blunders round about a meaning

Thus, ignoring the insult, he would plume himself after his drunken fashion that he, too, was
an enemy of Pope.

Yet Johnson has remained an example. For the literature of scoundrelism is as persistent in
its form as in its folk-lore. As Harman's Caveat, which first saw the light in 1566, serves
as a model to an unbroken series of such books, as The London Spy, so from Johnson in due course
were developed the Newgate Calendar, and those innumerable records, which the latter half of
the Eighteenth Century furnished us forth. The celebrated Calendar was in its origin nothing
more than a list of prisoners printed in a folio slip. But thereafter it became the Malefactor's
Bloody Register, which we know. Its plan and purpose were to improve the occasion. The thief
is no longer esteemed for an artist or appraised upon his merits: he is the awful warning,
which shall lead the sinner to repentance. 'Here,' says the preface, 'the giddy thoughtless
youth may see as in a mirror the fatal consequences of deviating from virtue'; here he may
tremble at the discovery that 'often the best talents are prostituted to the basest purposes.'
But in spite of 'the proper reflections of the whole affair,' the famous Calendar deserved
the praise of Borrow. There is a directness in the narration, which captures all those for
whom life and literature are something better than psychologic formulæ. Moreover, the motives
which drive the brigand to his doom are brutal in their simplicity, and withal as genuine and
sincere as greed, vanity, and lust can make them. The true amateur takes pleasure even in the
pious exhortations, because he knows that they crawl into their place, lest the hypocrite be
scandalised. But with years the Newgate Calendar also declined, and at last it has followed
other dead literatures into the night.

Meanwhile the broadside had enjoyed an unbroken and prosperous career. Up and down London,
up and down England, hurried the Patterer or Flying Stationer. There was no murder, no theft,
no conspiracy, which did not tempt the Gutter Muse to doggerel. But it was not until James
Catnach came up from Alnwick to London (in 1813), that the trade reached the top of its prosperity.
The vast sheets, which he published with their scurvy couplets, and the admirable picture,
serving in its time for a hundred executions, have not lost their power to fascinate. Theirs
is the aspect of the early woodcut; the coarse type and the catchpenny headlines are a perpetual
delight; as you unfold them, your care keeps pace with your admiration; and you cannot feel
them crackle beneath your hand without enthusiasm and without regret. He was no pedant--Jemmy
Catnach; and the image of his ruffians was commonly as far from portraiture, as his verses
were remote from poetry. But he put together in a roughly artistic shape the last murder, robbery,
or scandal of the day. His masterpieces were far too popular to live, and if they knew so vast
a circulation as 2,500,000 they are hard indeed to come by. And now the art is wellnigh dead;
though you may discover an infrequent survival in a country town. But how should Catnach, were
he alive to-day, compete with the Special Edition of an evening print?

The decline of the Scoundrel, in fact, has been followed by the disappearance of chap-book
and broadside. The Education Act, which made the cheap novel a necessity, destroyed at a blow
the literature of the street. Since the highwayman wandered, fur-coated, into the City, the
patterer has lost his occupation. Robbery and murder have degenerated into Chinese puzzles,
whose solution is a pleasant irritant to the idle brain. The misunderstanding of Poe has produced
a vast polyglot literature, for which one would not give in exchange a single chapter of Captain
Smith. Vautrin and Bill Sykes are already discredited, and it is a false reflection of M. Dupin,
which dazzles the eye of a moral and unimaginative world. Yet the wise man sighs for those
fearless days, when the brilliant Macheath rode vizarded down Shooter's Hill, and presently
saw his exploits set forth, with the proper accompaniment of a renowned and ancient woodcut,
upon a penny broadside.

CAPTAIN HIND

JAMES HIND, the Master Thief of England, the fearless Captain of the Highway, was born at Chipping
Norton in 1618. His father, a simple saddler, had so poor an appreciation of his son's magnanimity,
that he apprenticed him to a butcher; but Hind's destiny was to embrue his hands in other than
the blood of oxen, and he had not long endured the restraint of this common craft when forty
shillings, the gift of his mother, purchased him an escape, and carried him triumphant and
ambitious to London.

Even in his negligent schooldays he had fastened upon a fitting career. A born adventurer,
he sought only enterprise and command: if a commission in the army failed him, then he would
risk his neck upon the road, levying his own tax and imposing his own conditions. To one of
his dauntless resolution an opportunity need never have lacked; yet he owed his first preferment
to a happy accident. Surprised one evening in a drunken brawl, he was hustled into the Poultry
Counter, and there made acquaintance over a fresh bottle with Robert Allen, one of the chief
rogues in the Park, and a ruffian, who had mastered every trick in the game of plunder. A dexterous
cly-faker, an intrepid blade, Allen had also the keenest eye for untested talent, and he detected
Hind's shining qualities after the first glass. No sooner had they paid the price of release,
than Hind was admitted of his comrade's gang; he took the oath of fealty, and by way of winning
his spurs was bid to hold up a traveller on Shooter's Hill. Granted his choice of a mount,
he straightway took the finest in the stable, with that keen perception of horse-flesh which
never deserted him, and he confronted his first victim in the liveliest of humours. There was
no falter in his voice, no hint of inexperience in his manner, when he shouted the battle-cry:
'Stand and deliver!' The horseman, fearful of his life, instantly surrendered a purse of ten
sovereigns, as to the most practised assailant on the road. Whereupon Hind, with a flourish
of ancient courtesy, gave him twenty shillings to bear his charges. 'This,' said he, 'is for
handsale sake '; and thus they parted in mutual compliment and content.

Allen was overjoyed at his novice's prowess. 'Did you not see,' he cried to his companions,
'how he robbed him with a grace?' And well did the trooper deserve his captain's compliment,
for his art was perfect from the first. In bravery as in gallantry he knew no rival, and he
plundered with so elegant a style, that only a churlish victim could resent the extortion.
He would as soon have turned his back upon an enemy as demand a purse uncovered. For every
man he had a quip, for every woman a compliment; nor did he ever conceal the truth that the
means were for him as important as the end. Though he loved money, he still insisted that it
should be yielded in freedom and good temper; and while he emptied more coaches than any man
in England, he was never at a loss for admirers.

Under Allen he served a brilliant apprenticeship. Enrolled as a servant, he speedily sat at
the master's right hand, and his nimble brains devised many a pretty campaign. For a while
success dogged the horse-hoofs of the gang; with wealth came immunity, and not one of the warriors
had the misfortune to look out upon the world through a grate. They robbed with dignity, even
with splendour. Now they would drive forth in a coach and four, carrying with them a whole
armoury of offensive weapons; now they would take the road apparelled as noblemen, and attended
at a discreet distance by their proper servants. But recklessness brought the inevitable disaster;
and it was no less a personage than Oliver Cromwell who overcame the hitherto invincible Allen.
A handful of the gang attacked Oliver on his way from Huntingdon, but the marauders were outmatched,
and the most of them were forced to surrender. Allen, taken red-handed, swung at Tyburn; Hind,
with his better mount and defter horsemanship, rode clear away.

The loss of his friend was a lesson in caution, and henceforth Hind resolved to follow his
craft in solitude. He had embellished his native talent with all the instruction that others
could impart, and he reflected that he who rode alone neither ran risk of discovery nor had
any need to share his booty. Thus he began his easy, untrammelled career, making time and space
of no account by his rapid, fearless journeys. Now he was prancing the moors of Yorkshire,
now he was scouring the plain between Gloucester and Tewkesbury, but wherever he rode, he had
a purse in his pocket and a jest on his tongue. To recall his prowess is to ride with him (in
fancy) under the open sky along the fair, beaten road; to put up with him at the busy, white
posthouse, to drink unnumbered pints of mulled sack with the round-bellied landlord, to exchange
boastful stories over the hospitable fire, and to ride forth in the morning with the joyous
uncertainty of travel upon you. Failure alone lay outside his experience, and he presently
became at once the terror and the hero of England.

Not only was his courage conspicuous; luck also was his constant companion; and a happy bewitchment
protected him for three years against the possibility of harm. He had been lying at Hatfield,
at the George Inn, and set out in the early morning for London. As he neared the town-gate,
an old beldame begged an alms of him, and though Hind, not liking her ill-favoured visage,
would have spurred forward, the beldame's glittering eye held his horse motionless. 'Good woman,'
cried Hind, flinging her a crown, 'I am in haste; pray let me pass.' 'Sir,' answered the witch,
'three days I have awaited your coming. Would you have me lose my labour now?' And with Hind's
assent the sphinx delivered her message: 'Captain Hind,' said she, 'your life is beset with
constant danger, and since from your birth I have wished you well, my poor skill has devised
a perfect safeguard.' With this she gave him a small box containing what might have been a
sundial or compass. 'Watch this star,' quoth she, 'and when you know not your road, follow
its guidance. Thus you shall be preserved from every peril for the space of three years. Thereafter,
if you still have faith in my devotion, seek me again, and I will renew the virtue of the charm.'

Hind took the box joyfully; but when he turned to murmur a word of gratitude, the witch struck
his nag's flanks with a white wand, the horse leapt vehemently forward, and Hind saw his benefactress
no more. Henceforth, however, a warning voice spoke to him as plainly as did the demon to Socrates;
and had he but obeyed the beldame's admonition, he might have escaped a violent death. For
he passed the last day of the third year at the siege of Youghal, where; deprived of happy
guidance, he was seriously wounded, and whence he presently regained England to his own undoing.

So long as he kept to the road, his life was one long comedy. His wit and address were inexhaustible,
and fortune never found him at a loss. He would avert suspicion with the tune of a psalm, as
when, habited like a pious shepherd, he broke a traveller's head with his crook, and deprived
him of his horse. An early adventure was to force a pot-valiant parson, who had drunk a cup
too much at a wedding, into a rarely farcical situation. Hind, having robbed two gentlemen's
servants of a round sum, went ambling along the road until he encountered a parson. 'Sir,'
said he, 'I am closely pursued by robbers. You, I dare swear, will not stand by and see me
plundered.' Before the parson could protest, he thrust a pistol into his hand, and bade him
fire it at the first comer, while he rode off to raise the county. Meanwhile the rifled travellers
came up with the parson, who, straightway, mistaking them for thieves, fired without effect,
and then, riding forward, flung the pistol in the face of the nearest. Thus the parson of the
parish was dragged before the magistrate, while Hind, before his dupe could furnish an explanation,
had placed many a mile between himself and his adversary.

Though he could on occasion show a clean pair of heels, Hind was never lacking in valiance;
and, another day, meeting a traveller with a hundred pounds in his pocket, he challenged him
to fight there and then, staked his own horse against the money, and declared that he should
win who drew first blood. 'If I am the conqueror,' said the magnanimous Captain, 'I will give
you ten pounds for your journey. If you are favoured of fortune, you shall give me your servant's
horse.' The terms were instantly accepted, and in two minutes Hind had run his adversary through
the sword-arm. But finding that his victim was but a poor squire going to London to pay his
composition, he not only returned his money, but sought him out a surgeon, and gave him the
best dinner the countryside could afford.

Thus it was his pleasure to act as a providence, many a time robbing Peter to pay Paul, and
stripping the niggard that he might indulge his fervent love of generosity. Of all usurers
and bailiffs he had a wholesome horror, and merry was the prank which he played upon the extortionate
money-lender of Warwick. Riding on an easy rein through the town, Hind heard a tumult at a
street corner, and inquiring the cause, was told that an innkeeper was arrested by a thievish
usurer for a paltry twenty pounds. Dismounting, this providence in jack-boots discharged the
debt, cancelled the bond, and took the innkeeper's goods for his own security. And thereupon
overtaking the usurer, 'My friend!' he exclaimed, 'I lent you late a sum of twenty pounds.
Repay it at once, or I take your miserable life.' The usurer was obliged to return the money,
with another twenty for interest, and when he would take the law of the innkeeper, was shown
the bond duly cancelled, and was flogged wellnigh to death for his pains.

So Hind rode the world up and down, redressing grievances like an Eastern monarch, and rejoicing
in the abasement of the evildoer. Nor was the spirit of his adventure bounded by the ocean.
More than once he crossed the seas; the Hague knew him, and Amsterdam, though these somnolent
cities gave small occasion for the display of his talents. It was from Scilly that he crossed
to the Isle of Man, where, being recommended to Lord Derby, he gained high favour, and received
in exchange for his jests a comfortable stipend. Hitherto, said the Chronicles, thieving was
unknown in the island. A man might walk whither he would, a bag of gold in one hand, a switch
in the other, and fear no danger. But no sooner had Hind appeared at Douglas than honest citizens
were pilfered at every turn. In dismay they sought the protection of the Governor, who instantly
suspected Hind, and gallantly disclosed his suspicions to the Captain. 'My lord!' exclaimed
Hind, a blush upon his cheek, 'I protest my innocence; but willingly will I suffer the heaviest
penalty of your law if I am recognised for the thief.' The victims, confronted with their robber,
knew him not, picturing to the Governor a monster with long hair and unkempt beard. Hind, acquitted
with apologies, fetched from his lodging the disguise of periwig and beard. 'They laugh who
win!' he murmured, and thus forced forgiveness and a chuckle even from his judges.

As became a gentleman-adventurer, Captain Hind was staunch in his loyalty to his murdered King.
To strip the wealthy was always reputable, but to rob a Regicide was a masterpiece of well-doing.

A fervent zeal to lighten Cromwell's pocket had brought the illustrious Allen to the gallows.
But Hind was not one whit abashed, and he would never forego the chance of an encounter with
his country's enemies. His treatment of Hugh Peters in Enfield Chace is among his triumphs.
At the first encounter the Presbyterian plucked up courage enough to oppose his adversary with
texts. To Hind's command of 'Stand and deliver!' duly enforced with a loaded pistol, the ineffable
Peters replied with ox-eye sanctimoniously upturned: 'Thou shalt not steal; let him that stole,
steal no more,' adding thereto other variations of the eighth commandment. Hind immediately
countered with exhortations against the awful sin of murder, and rebuked the blasphemy of the
Regicides, who, to defend their own infamy, would wrest Scripture from its meaning. Moreover,
was it not Solomon who wrote: "Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul
when he is hungry"? And is not my soul hungry for gold and the Regicides' discomfiture?' Peters
was still fumbling after texts when the final argument: 'Deliver thy money, or I will send
thee out of the world!' frightened him into submission, and thirty broad pieces were Hind's reward.

Not long afterwards he confronted Bradshaw near Sherborne, and, having taken from him a purse
fat with Jacobuses, he bade the Sergeant stand uncovered while he delivered a discourse upon
gold, thus shaped by tradition: 'Ay, marry, sir, this is the metal that wins my heart for ever!
O precious gold, I admire and adore thee as much as Bradshaw, Prynne, or any villain of the
same stamp. This is that incomparable medicament, which the republican physicians call the
wonder-working plaster. It is truly catholic in operation, and somewhat akin to the Jesuit's
powder, but more effectual. The virtues of it are strange and various; it makes justice deaf
as well as blind, and takes out spots of the deepest treason more cleverly than castle-soap
does common stains; it alters a man's constitution in two or three days, more than the virtuoso's
transfusion of blood can do in seven years. 'Tis a great alexiopharmick, and helps poisonous
principles of rebellion, and those that use them. It miraculously exalts and purifies the eyesight,
and makes traitors behold nothing but innocence in the blackest malefactors. 'Tis a mighty
cordial for a declining cause; it stifles faction or schism, as certainly as the itch is destroyed
by butter and brimstone. In a word, it makes wise men fools, and fools wise men, and both knaves.
The very colour of this precious balm is bright and dazzling. For they were all to come down,
he said, and live in the golden and fruitful land of Goshen, and he would watch over them
there.

THE CHILD MOSES.

I.

Jacob and his sons stayed in Egypt until the old man died. Then Joseph carried his body back
to Hebron in a great funeral procession, and having buried him beside his wife, who had been
dead for a long time, came back again to Egypt.

The Hebrews expected to return to Canaan soon, but that was not to be. In course of time Joseph
and his brothers died, but still the Hebrews, or Israelites, as they
were also called, stayed on in Egypt, and in time grew into a great
nation.

Then a new king came to the throne, who was afraid of their numbers, and made slaves of them
all, forcing them to make bricks and build for him great walls, forts, and buildings of all kinds.

They
were taken in gangs, guarded by soldiers, to the place where the brown river clay was thick;
there they dug it out with spades, trod it with their feet, and worked it with their hands until
it was wet and soft. Then they shaped it with little square boxes into brown bricks for building.
Other workers placed the bricks in baskets and carried them away to the boats in the river, for
the boatmen to take up to the great cities where the walls were being built.

Some of the Israelites toiled at building these high brick walls, storehouses, forts, and even
cities for the great king; and it is not unlikely that some of the
Pyramids, which we now see standing on the banks of the Nile, were
built by these poor slaves in the days now long gone by.

Others, again, were driven out to the fields to drag wooden ploughs up and down like cattle,
to dig with small wooden spades, and to clear the land of stones; and when the harvest came, they
cut down the crops and threshed out the grain, and carried it off to their master's storehouses.

Others
had to stand on the bank of the river all day long, filling buckets with water and emptying
them into little drains that ran away into the fields. And over all these slaves were slave-drivers,
who stood beside them with long whips to lash them if they did not work hard enough. So the
poor Israelites were very unhappy, and often prayed to God that they might be set free again;
for they were the lowest labourers in the land, toiling for those who gave them no money for
their work.

But for all this they increased more and more in numbers, until the king was afraid that they might
some day side with his enemies and fight against him, and then he would be in great danger;
so he treated them more cruelly still, and at last ordered all the boy children that were born
to the Israelites to be thrown into the river.

There was great weeping and sorrow amongst the Hebrew mothers when they heard of the king's
cruel order. And they did many strange and brave things to save their little ones, and did indeed
save many of them; but many others perished, so that there was grief instead of joy in the poor
Hebrew huts whenever a baby boy was born.

Now, Jochebed, one of those Hebrew mothers, lived in the city of the great king, so close to the
side of the blue Nile that the white walls of the royal palace were
reflected in the water.

She had a little baby boy, so beautiful that she told her husband he must not be thrown into
the river where the crocodiles were, for she herself would save him alive.

She had two other children--Miriam, a girl of fifteen, and Aaron, a little boy of three--and
she told them that they were not to tell any one they had a little baby brother in the house lest
the king's soldiers should come and take him away and throw him into the river. And she kept
her little baby carefully hidden in the house, running to him every time he cried lest he should
be heard outside, and trembling each time a soldier passed her door.

For three months she was able to keep her child hidden from the slave-drivers. Often did she
pray to God that he might never be found; and she loved her baby all the more because of the danger
he was in.

But at last a day came when his mother could keep him hidden no longer. With a sorrowful heart
she saw that she must get him away, although at the moment she could not tell how to do so. Then
she weighed him in her arms, measured him with her hands, and made up a plan to save him such as
only a mother's heart could devise.

She had seen a fair Egyptian princess coming down from the palace every morning to bathe in the
river at a place not far from her hut; and she thought that if this princess could only see
her lovely baby boy she would save him.

So this Hebrew mother went down to the river and gathered an armful of strong reeds. With these she
wove a stout basket long enough and wide enough to hold her baby boy. Then she painted it inside
and out with black bitumen, until not a drop of water could get in. She lined it next with soft
cloth of red and green, as mothers line their cradles, and then it was ready to be placed on
the water and save the life of her little boy.

II.

The morning sun shone brightly on the broad surface of the Nile, turning the Pyramids on the
banks into dull gold, and lighting up the palaces of the city; and
while the white-robed priests went up to the temple roof to beat the
brass gong and chant their hymn to the morning, the poor Hebrews flocked
in thousands out of their little yellow huts, to do their heavy tasks
amongst the wet, brown clay by the riverside.

Taking Miriam with her, Jochebed, the Hebrew mother, stole out of her hut, carrying a little black
basket shaped like a boat, with something asleep in it, hidden under her wide blue cloak. Crossing
the fields, she went down to the riverside and along the path until she came to the beach of golden
sand where the red-feathered hoopoes strutted in the sun--the place where the princess came to
bathe, not far from the lilies of white and yellow.

As they went she told Miriam what she was to do when the princess came, and then stepping down to
the water's edge at a place where the lilies grew thick, she opened the basket, kissed something
in it, and covered it over again.

Stepping into the water, she gently put down the little basket to
float among the water-flags, where the princess could not help but
see it as she came along the path on the bank above.

With tears running down her cheeks, this Hebrew mother turned away, praying, as she went, that
all would be well with her little child; while Miriam, going a short way off, sat down on the
sand to watch until the lovely princess came.

Slaves in red tunics, with swords at their sides, bowed low down to the earth as they opened
the palace gates to let out a bright throng of girls, laughing and singing as they went on their
way down to the river; and the wind blew aside their thin robes of white and pink and soft
blue, showing bare feet thrust into little slippers of red and yellow leather. Foremost of the
band walked the young princess, holding a white bud of the lotus
lily and smelling it as she went, while slave girls kept the hot rays
of the sun from her head with fans of peacock feathers.

She, too, had red slippers on her feet, and her neck and arms shone like pale copper; but she wore
no chains or rings, for she was going to bathe, and her brown eyes looked with pleasure upon the
cool waters of the broad river.

She did not notice the Hebrew girl sitting on the sand as she walked along the river's bank;
but in a few moments she saw a strange little black object floating among the green flags,
and at once sent some of her maidens to bring the strange thing to her.

Running down to the water, the girls lifted out the little dripping basket, wondering what was
in it that made it feel so heavy; but soon a little cry from within told them, and they went
quickly with their burden to the princess, to ask what they should do with it.

The dark eyes of the Hebrew girl were watching them as she sat playing
at odd and even with round stones from the river--a favourite game
of the children of Egypt.

She saw them bring the basket to the princess. She saw her smile, and noticed her pleased cry
when they opened the lid; and she heard her speaking kindly to the little child, which was crying
loudly. The girls were crowding round the open basket, looking in at the child; and when they
placed the basket upon the ground and looked about them in doubt, Miriam knew that her time had come,
and went timidly forward.

"This is one of the Hebrew children," the gentle princess said, with pity in her voice, as she
looked at the baby's red cheeks, so different from the brown cheeks of the Egyptian babies.
The little boy still wept loudly, and the princess's heart was touched, for he would not stop
crying. What was to be done?

The princess knew that such baby boys were to be thrown into the river;
but perhaps the meaning of it all dawned upon her as she talked with
her maidens, for she turned with a smile to the kneeling girl, and
said simply, "Go."

With light feet and a beating heart Miriam sped away to the spot where her mother was hiding,
calling to her in Hebrew as she went to come quickly. The princess and her maidens looked
with amusement at the Hebrew woman as she came swiftly forward and knelt before them; and
the whole of the mother's little plot was clearly seen in her blushing
cheeks and tear-filled eyes.

This clever little slave girl had found a Hebrew nurse very, very quickly!

"Take this child away and nurse it for me, and I will give you your wages," the princess said
to the kneeling woman; and she smiled again when the little child ceased weeping and held up his little
chubby arms as soon as this Hebrew woman's face bent over him. She was indeed the mother, but
the princess would tell no one, for thenceforth the boy was to be as her own child.

When the little child grew up this good princess took him into her lovely palace to be her son; and
she called him Moses, because that name meant that he was taken out of the water. And there
is a pretty story told about this same princess by an old Jewish writer, though it is not to be
found in our Bible.

He says that the princess was so proud of the boy that one day she
brought the little fellow to her father the king, that he might see
how beautiful he was.

The king took off his golden crown and put it on the child's curly head; but the little boy
took it off again, and putting it upon the ground, tried to stand upon it, which amused the
king and his courtiers very much. The old Jewish writer says that this showed how the little
boy would one day force this king to set free the Hebrews, which indeed he did, as the Bible
tells us. For Moses became, when he grew up, the great leader of the Israelites, who led them
out of Egypt to the promised land of Canaan, where in time, after much fighting, they founded
a kingdom of their own.

RUTH THE GLEANER.

In the days before there was a king in Israel a woman called Naomi, whose name means "the pleasant,"
lived in the little village of Bethlehem; and when at one time food was scarce, she left the place
with her husband and two sons, and went over into the land of Moab, where there was plenty
of food to eat.

For ten years she lived in that land, and there her sons married Moabite girls. Then heavy trouble
came upon Naomi, for she lost not only her husband, but her two sons also. In her sorrow Naomi's
heart turned to Bethlehem, with its cluster of white houses among
the hills of her own country.

But before going back she bade her daughters-in-law return to their mothers' houses, where they
would be happy. They both wept, and Orpah, the elder, kissed Naomi and went away; but Ruth clung
to her and refused to go.

So they went back together to the village of Bethlehem, and Naomi in her sorrow said to her
old friends, when she met them once more, "Call me not Naomi 'the pleasant,' but Mara 'the
bitter;' for God hath dealt bitterly with me."

Ruth wore the dress of the village girls, of deep green and bright red, with a white veil streaming
over her shoulder, and a row of coins upon her brow; and she was pleasant to look upon as she
went up and down the stony path which ran from the gate in the wall to the women's well, carrying
her pitcher to get water. As she moved along the path her eyes often strayed over the plains of
dry grass and the fields of golden grain; for it was the rich harvest time, and she was very
poor.

Rising one morning before the clouds were red over Hebron, she went down into the valley where the harvesters
were at work, and followed the reapers and binders, picking up as a gleaner all the stray heads
of barley she could find. As the binders were women she kept near them; and they talked kindly
to her, for they knew her and had heard her sad story.

Now when Boaz, the farmer, came down to the village to see how the work went on in his field,
he called out, "God be with you" to his reapers; and they answered, "May God bless you." Turning
to the women, he asked the name of the strange maiden, and spoke
kindly to her, calling her his daughter, and telling her to keep close
to his women, where no one would touch her, and not to leave his fields.

If she was thirsty, she might drink from the water-bottles from which the reapers could drink when they
wished.

Kneeling before him with head bowed down, as if this farmer were a king, Ruth thanked him for his
kindness to a stranger; and the man replied that he had heard of her goodness to Naomi, her mother,
and praised her.

When the midday heat was great the reapers gathered in a shady place, and Boaz bade Ruth come and
share their bread and light wine, and he gave her parched corn, as much as she could eat. In
the afternoon they rose to work again, and Boaz told the reapers to let the girl glean among the
sheaves, and pull out a handful here and there; and she gleaned there till the sun went down
over the hills.

Now the corn that she gathered was too heavy for her to carry away as it was, so she sat down
and beat the barley out between two stones, and tying it up in her veil, put it on her head, and
went home with a light step. Naomi was astonished when she opened out her store in the little
house; for she had gleaned more than a bushel of barley.

When she told Naomi where she had been, her mother said that Boaz was a relative of her own; and
the elder woman was glad indeed to hear that he had given Ruth leave to glean in his fields
during the whole of the harvest time.

And so it came about that every day at the red dawn Ruth went singing down the rocky pathway
to work with the reapers in the warm Eastern valley; and as the wheat
harvest followed close upon the barley harvest, she worked for many
days, returning home at night with her ruddy cheeks burnt brown with
the sun, to lay her heap on the floor of her mother's house; for they
were laying up a little store with which to bake bread in the months
of wind and rain that were before them in the coming winter.

But as time went on they did not need to live in poverty, for Boaz married Ruth at the end of
the wheat harvest; and this Moabite girl became the great-grandmother of King David, the most
famous king of Israel, and one of the ancestors of Jesus Christ our Lord Himself.

THE CHILD SAMUEL.

I.

When the Israelites had made their home in the promised land of Canaan, they did not forget the
God of their great ancestor Jacob; but they set up on a hill called Shiloh a tabernacle, or place
of worship, where they came to offer sacrifice to the God of their fathers.

Here the priests of the tabernacle killed bullocks and rams and goats,
and burnt their flesh on the great altars, believing that these offerings
were pleasing to God; and here the people came also to the chief of
the priests whenever they had disputes with their neighbours, for
the "high priest" was a judge in Israel.

Now, at one time there lived in a little cottage on the hill of Ramah, not far from what is
now Jerusalem, a certain man named Elkanah, whose wife Hannah had a little boy named Samuel.
The child was dearly loved by his parents, and especially by his mother, who had made up her
mind that her son, when he grew up, should become a priest of the God of Israel.

The child Samuel grew, amid sunshine and wind, at his father's home on the hill of Ramah, watched
by his mother with loving care; for when the time came, he was to be given to the priests in
the great tent of the tabernacle on the hill of Shiloh. Three times the mother and child saw
the blossoms cover the twisted branches of the olive trees and fade
again; three times the valley was filled with golden wheat swaying
in the wind, and the song of the reaper was heard in the fields.

Three happy years in Ramah, and the little child could run about, and talk, and shout, and
take care of himself when the camels and oxen were near; then Hannah said she must how give him
up to the priests. So with her husband she rode away upon a sure-footed ass, down the hills to the
great festival at Shiloh, through rocky passes and across foaming
streams; and her face was sad, for the little child of three sitting
in her lap she would not bring back again.

She took with her a sack of meal and a leather bottle of wine, while a servant led a young bull.
The animal was to be killed and burnt, while the meal and wine were to be given to the priest at
the tabernacle; for these things were all to be offered as gifts to God.

Before long they saw the tabernacle on the hill of Shiloh, with its
broad tent-roof of red sheepskins, as well as the hundreds of little
black tents of the tribesmen, some grouped into camps with a flag,
others clustered round the springs and pools of water under the trees;
and soon Hannah and her boy mingled with the crowds thronging into
the walled space about the tabernacle.

With beating heart the mother
saw the bull killed and her meal and wine given to the busy priests.
Taking her child by the hand, she led him forward to the doorway of
the tabernacle, where sat Eli, the aged chief priest. The little child
clung to his mother's dark-red robe as he stood with naked feet before
the old man, the hem of his sleeveless tunic scarce reaching to his
knees, and his head uncovered.

"Oh my lord," said the mother, "I
prayed for this child as a gift from God, and God gave me my desire;
and now I give him again to God as long as he shall live."

Then she
pushed forward her beautiful boy; and as Eli looked at the mother
and child he was pleased, and drawing the little child to himself,
he blessed the waiting woman. With bowed head and falling tears she
went out at the tent door, leaving behind her the greatest treasure
of her life.

Before long the black tents were taken down by the women
of the tribes, the crowds of men and animals passed away through the
openings in the hills, and the festival was over. And Hannah rode
up with her people back to Ramah, but not before she had kissed her
sweet boy once more, weeping as she did so, and telling him in soft
Hebrew words that she would come again to see him.

The priests took
the little child, and over his short blue tunic they drew a white
linen dress like their own. After that he lived with them in one of
the houses near the tabernacle on the hill of Shiloh, and they taught
him how to read from the old yellow rolls of the Bible; and he served
them, doing what he was told, as a little child should. And there
were other brown-eyed boys of Israel there, left by their mothers,
and all beautiful as little angels without wings.

Four times a year
the Israelite tribes gathered round this hill of Shiloh, to bring
gifts, and offer worship to God, and hold councils of war. Then little
Samuel was glad, for his mother came to see him; and he ran gaily
about, now looking at the leaping fires on the brass altar, now watching
the clouds of sweet smoke rolling out from behind the blue curtains
of the holy place of the tabernacle.

Sometimes he was told to pour
olive oil into a flickering lamp; sometimes he would sing in the choir,
or carry a golden bowl or a priest's shoes; but he was never allowed
to go in behind the thick veil of purple, blue, crimson, gold, and
white, which hid the sacred place known as the Holy of Holies, where
the gold-winged cherubs were.

Did his mother forget little Samuel?
Other little children were born to her, but still she remembered him,
away among bearded men in that large, dark tent; and this is how she
showed her love for him. She gathered of the finest of the lamb's
wool, and having dyed it purple, spun it into threads; and with her
loom of strings hanging from the roof she wove a little blue gown
without a seam and without sleeves, to reach from his chin to his
knees; and she worked it round the broad hem with flowers and bells,
and fruit of red and yellow and brown.

And each time she went to
the great yearly festival she took a little blue coat with her, making
it longer and longer as the child grew into a boy, and the boy became
a ruddy youth; and with it, too, would go a little white willow basket
with honey-comb and cheese, sweet cakes and pressed figs, such as
she knew that Samuel loved.

Thus she showed her constant love for
the child who had left her side, but would never leave her heart.
And the child-priest grew, not only in stature, but in favour with
God and men.

II.

The great tent of the tabernacle on the hill of
Shiloh had thick curtains woven in colours of blue, purple, and scarlet,
and a high roof covered over with red and brown skins to keep it warm
and dry; the sides were of stone, and the doors of wood, with carved
wooden pillars. A thick curtain of purple, scarlet, and gold hung
down inside, dividing off the Holy of Holies at the end from the rest
of the place, where the priests went about every day, attending to
the altar of incense and the golden lamps. And there was a special
golden lamp, with seven branches, which always stood close to this
great purple curtain.

All was dark in the Holy of Holies behind that
heavy curtain, and there stood the Ark, a box about a yard long, plated
with gold and having a wreath of gold round it, under the outspread
wings of two golden angels. Inside that box were two flat stones,
on which were written the Commandments that God had given to His people,
the children of Israel. The priests had charge of the tabernacle,
and of all that was in it; and they took special care of the Ark,
which was the chief treasure of the nation. Honest citizens were robbed with
small risk to life or property. For Moll always frowned upon violence, and was ever ready to
restore the booty for a fair ransom. And the thieves, driven by discipline to a certain humanity,
plied their trade with an obedience and orderliness hitherto unknown. Moll's then was no mean
achievement. Her career was not circumscribed by her trade, and the Roaring Girl, the daredevil
companion of the wits and bloods, enjoyed a fame no less glorious than the Queen of Thieves.

'Enter Moll in a frieze jerkin and a black safeguard.' Thus in the old comedy she comes upon
the stage; and truly it was by her clothes that she was first notorious. By accident a woman,
by habit a man, she must needs invent a costume proper to her pursuits. But she was no shrieking
reformer, no fanatic spying regeneration in a pair of breeches. Only in her attire she showed
her wit; and she went to a bull-baiting in such a dress as well became her favourite sport.
She was not of those who 'walk in spurs but never ride.' The jerkin, the doublet, the galligaskins
were put on to serve the practical purposes of life, not to attract the policeman or the spinster.
And when a petticoat spread its ample folds beneath the doublet, not only was her array handsome,
but it symbolised the career of one who was neither man nor woman, and yet both. After a while,
however, the petticoat seemed too tame for her stalwart temper, and she exchanged it for the
great Dutch slop, habited in which unseemly garment she is pictured in the ancient prints.

Up and down the town she romped and scolded, earning the name which Middleton gave her in her
green girlhood. 'She has the spirit of four great parishes,' says the wit in the comedy, 'and
a voice that will drown all the city.' If a gallant stood in the way, she drew upon him in
an instant, and he must be a clever swordsman to hold his ground against the tomboy who had
laid low the German fencer himself. A good fellow always, she had ever a merry word for the
passer-by, and so sharp was her tongue that none ever put a trick upon her. Not to know Moll
was to be inglorious, and she 'slipped from one company to another like a fat eel between a
Dutchman's fingers.' Now at Parker's Ordinary, now at the Bear Garden, she frequented only
the haunts of men, and not until old age came upon her did she endure patiently the presence
of women.

Her voice and speech were suited to the galligaskin. She was a true disciple of Maltre François,
hating nothing so much as mincing obscenity, and if she flavoured her discourse with many a
blasphemous quip, the blasphemy was 'not so malicious as customary.' Like the blood she was,
she loved good ale and wine; and she regarded it among her proudest titles to renown that she
was the first of women to smoke tobacco. Many was the pound of best Virginian that she bought
of Mistress Gallipot, and the pipe, with monkey, dog, and eagle, is her constant emblem. Her
antic attire, the fearless courage of her pranks, now and again involved her in disgrace or
even jeopardised her freedom; but her unchanging gaiety made light of disaster, and still she
laughed and rollicked in defiance of prude and pedant.

Her companion in many a fantastical adventure was Banks, the vintner of Cheapside, that same
Banks who taught his horse to dance and shod him with silver. Now once upon a time a right
witty sport was devised between them. The vintner bet Moll £20 that she would not ride from
Charing Cross to Shoreditch astraddle on horseback, in breeches and doublet, boots and spurs.

The hoyden took him up in a moment, and added of her own devilry a trumpet and banner. She
set out from Charing Cross bravely enough, and a trumpeter being an unwonted spectacle, the
eyes of all the town were clapped upon her. Yet none knew her until she reached Bishopsgate,
where an orange-wench set up the cry, 'Moll Cutpurse on horseback!' Instantly the cavalier
was surrounded by a noisy mob. Some would have torn her from the saddle for an imagined insult
upon womanhood, others, more wisely minded, laughed at the prank with good-humoured merriment.
Every minute the throng grew denser, and it had fared hardly with roystering Moll, had not
a wedding and the arrest of a debtor presently distracted the gaping idlers. As the mob turned
to gaze at the fresh wonder, she spurred her horse until she gained Newington by an unfrequented
lane. There she waited until night should cover her progress to Shoreditch, and thus peacefully
she returned home to lighten the vintner's pocket of twenty pounds.

The fame of the adventure spread abroad, and that the scandal should not be repeated Moll was
summoned before the Court of Arches to answer a charge of appearing publicly in mannish apparel.
The august tribunal had no terror for her, and she received her sentence to do penance in a
white sheet at Paul's Cross during morning-service on a Sunday with an audacious contempt.
'They might as well have shamed a black dog as me,' she proudly exclaimed; and why should she
dread the white sheet, when all the spectators looked with a lenient eye upon her professed
discomfiture?' For a halfpenny,' she said, 'she would have travelled to every market-town of
England in the guise of a penitent,' and having tippled off three quarts of sack she swaggered
to Paul's Cross in the maddest of humours. But not all the courts on earth could lengthen her
petticoat, or contract the Dutch slop by a single fold. For a while, perhaps, she chastened
her costume, yet she soon reverted to the ancient mode, and to her dying day went habited as a man.

As bear baiting was the passion of her life, so she was scrupulous in the care and training
of her dogs. She gave them each a trundle-bed, wrapping them from the cold in sheets and blankets,
while their food would not have dishonoured a gentleman's table. Parrots, too, gave a sense
of colour and companionship to her house; and it was in this love of pets, and her devotion
to cleanliness, that she showed a trace of dormant womanhood. Abroad a ribald and a scold,
at home she was the neatest of housewives, and her parlour, with its mirrors and its manifold
ornaments, was the envy of the neighbours. So her trade flourished, and she lived a life of
comfort, of plenty even, until the Civil War threw her out of work. When an unnatural conflict
set the whole country at loggerheads, what occasion was there for the honest prig? And it is
not surprising that, like all the gentlemen adventurers of the age, Moll remained most stubbornly
loyal to the King's cause. She made the conduit in Fleet Street run with wine when Charles
came to London in 1638; and it was her amiable pleasantry to give the name of Strafford to
a clever, cunning bull, and to dub the dogs that assailed him Pym, Hampden, and the rest, that
right heartily she might applaud the courage of Strafford as he threw off his unwary assailants.

So long as the quarrel lasted, she was compelled to follow a profession more ancient than the
fence's; for there is one passion which war itself cannot extinguish. When once the King had
laid his head 'down as upon a bed,' when once the Protector had proclaimed his supremacy, the
industry of the road revived; and there was not a single diver or rumpad that did not declare
eternal war upon the black-hearted Regicides. With a laudable devotion to her chosen cause,
Moll despatched the most experienced of her gang to rob Lady Fairfax on her way to church;
and there is a tradition that the Roaring Girl, hearing that Fairfax himself would pass by
Hounslow, rode forth to meet him, and with her own voice bade him stand and deliver. One would
like to believe it; yet it is scarce credible. If Fairfax had spent the balance of an ignominious
career in being plundered by a band of loyal brigands, he would not have had time to justify
the innumerable legends of pockets emptied and pistols levelled at his head. Moreover, Moll
herself was laden with years, and she had always preferred the council chamber to the battlefield.
But it is certain that, with Captain Hind and Mull Sack to aid, she schemed many a clever plot
against the Roundheads, and nobly she played her part in avenging the martyred King.

Thus she declined into old age, attended, like Queen Mary, by her maids, who would card, reel,
spin, and beguile her leisure with sweet singing. Though her spirit was untamed, the burden
of her years compelled her to a tranquil life. She, who formerly never missed a bull-baiting,
must now content herself with tick-tack. Her fortune, moreover, had been wrecked in the Civil
War. Though silver shells still jingled in her pocket, time was she knew the rattle of the
yellow boys. But she never lost courage, and died at last of a dropsy, in placid contentment
with her lot. Assuredly she was born at a time well suited to her genius. Had she lived to-day,
she might have been a 'Pioneer'; she might even have discussed some paltry problem of sex in
a printed obscenity.

In her own freer, wiser age, she was not man's detractor, but his rival; and if she never knew
the passion of love, she was always loyal to the obligation of friendship. By her will she
left twenty pounds to celebrate the Second Charles's restoration to his kingdom; and you contemplate
her career with the single regret that she died a brief year before the red wine, thus generously
bestowed, bubbled at the fountain.

II--JONATHAN WILD

WHEN Jonathan Wild and the Count La Ruse, in Fielding's narrative, took a hand at cards, Jonathan
picked his opponent's pocket, though he knew it was empty, while the Count, from sheer force
of habit, stacked the cards, though Wild had not a farthing to lose. And if in his uncultured
youth the great man stooped to prig with his own hand, he was early cured of the weakness:
so that Fielding's picture of the hero taking a bottle-screw from the Ordinary's pocket in
the very moment of death is entirely fanciful. For 'this Machiavel of Thieves,' as a contemporary
styled him, left others to accomplish what his ingenuity had planned. His was the high policy
of theft. If he lived on terms of familiar intimacy with the mill-kens, the bridle-culls, the
buttock-and-files of London, he was none the less the friend and minister of justice. He enjoyed
the freedom of Newgate and the Old Bailey. He came and went as he liked: he packed juries,
he procured bail, he manufactured evidence; and there was scarce an assize or a sessions passed
but he slew his man.

The world knew him for a robber, yet could not refuse his brilliant service. At the Poultry
Counter, you are told, he laid the foundations of his future greatness, and to the Poultry
Counter he was committed for some trifling debt ere he had fully served his apprenticeship
to the art and mystery of buckle-making. There he learned his craft, and at his enlargement
he was able forthwith to commence thief-catcher. His plan was conceived with an effrontery
that was nothing less than genius. On the one side he was the factor, or rather the tyrant,
of the cross-coves: on the other he was the trusted agent of justice, the benefactor of the
outraged and the plundered. Among his earliest exploits was the recovery of the Countess of
G--d--n's chair, impudently carried off when her ladyship had but just alighted; and the courage
wherewith he brought to justice the murderers of one Mrs. Knap, who had been slain for some
trifling booty, established his reputation as upon a rock. He at once advertised himself in
the public prints as Thief-Catcher General of Great Britain and Ireland, and proceeded to send
to the gallows every scoundrel that dared dispute his position.

His opportunities of gain were infinite. Even if he did not organise the robbery which his
cunning was presently to discover, he had spies in every hole and corner to set him on the
felon's track. Nor did he leave a single enterprise to chance: 'He divided the city and suburbs
into wards or divisions, and appointed the persons who were to attend each ward, and kept them
strictly to their duty.' If a subordinate dared to disobey or to shrink from murder, Jonathan
hanged him at the next assize, and happily for him he had not a single confederate whose neck
he might not put in the halter when he chose. Thus he preserved the union and the fidelity
of his gang, punishing by judicial murder the smallest insubordination, the faintest suspicion
of rivalry. Even when he had shut his victim up in Newgate, he did not leave him so long as
there was a chance of blackmail. He would make the most generous offers of evidence and defence
to every thief that had a stiver left him. But whether or not he kept his bargain--that depended
upon policy and inclination. On one occasion, when he had brought a friend to the Old Bailey,
and relented at the last moment, he kept the prosecutor drunk from the noble motive of self-interest,
until the case was over. And so esteemed was he of the officers of the law that even this interference
did but procure a reprimand.

His meanest action marked him out from his fellows, but it was not until he habitually pillaged
the treasures he afterwards restored to their grateful owners for a handsome consideration,
that his art reached the highest point of excellence. The event was managed by him with amazing
adroitness from beginning to end.

It was he who discovered the wealth and habit of the victim; it was he who posted the thief
and seized the plunder, giving a paltry commission to his hirelings for the trouble; it was
he who kept whatever valuables were lost in the transaction; and as he was the servant of the
Court, discovery or inconvenience was impossible. Surely the Machiavel of Thieves is justified
of his title. He was known to all the rich and titled folk in town; and if he was generally
able to give them back their stolen valuables at something more than double their value, he
treated his clients with a most proper insolence. When Lady M--n was unlucky enough to lose
a silver buckle at Windsor, she asked Wild to recover it, and offered the hero twenty pounds
for his trouble. 'Zounds, Madam,' says he, 'you offer nothing. It cost the gentleman who took
it forty pounds for his coach, equipage, and other expenses to Windsor.' His impudence increased
with success, and in the geniality of his cups he was wont to boast his amazing rogueries:
'hinting not without vanity at the poor Understandings of the Greatest Part of Mankind, and
his own Superior Cunning.'

In fifteen years he claimed £10,000 for his dividend of recovered plunderings, and who shall
estimate the moneys which flowed to his treasury from blackmail and the robberies of his gang?
So brisk became his trade in jewels and the precious metals that he opened relations with Holland,
and was master of a fleet. His splendour increased with wealth: he carried a silver-mounted
sword, and a footman tramped at his heels. 'His table was very splendid,' says a biographer:
'he seldom dining under five Dishes, the Reversions whereof were generally charitably bestow'd
on the Commonside felons.' At his second marriage with Mrs. Mary D--n, the hempen widow of
Scull D--n, his humour was most happily expressed: he distributed white ribbons among the turnkeys,
he gave the Ordinary gloves and favours, he sent the prisoners of Newgate several ankers of
brandy for punch. 'Twas a fitting complaisance, since his fortune was drawn from Newgate, and
since he was destined himself, a few years later, to drink punch--'a liquor nowhere spoken
against in the Scriptures'--with the same Ordinary whom he thus magnificently decorated. Endowed
with considerable courage, for a while he had the prudence to save his skin, and despite his
bravado he was known on occasion to yield a plundered treasure to an accomplice who set a pistol
to his head. But it is certain that the accomplice died at Tyburn for his pains, and on equal
terms Jonathan was resolute with the best. On the trail he was savage as a wild beast. When
he arrested James Wright for a robbery committed upon the persons of the Earl of B--l--n and
the Lord Bruce, he held on to the victim's chin by his teeth--an exploit which reminds you
of the illustrious Tiger Roche.

Even in his lifetime he was generously styled the Great. The scourge of London, he betrayed
and destroyed every man that ever dared to live upon terms of friendship with him. It was Jonathan
that made Blueskin a thief, and Jonathan screened his creature from justice only so long as
clemency seemed profitable. At the first hint of disobedience Blueskin was committed to Newgate.
When he had stood his trial, and was being taken to the Condemned Hole, he beckoned to Wild
as though to a conference, and cut his throat with a penknife. The assembled rogues and turnkeys
thought their Jonathan dead at last, and rejoiced exceedingly therein. Straightway the poet
of Newgate's Garland leaped into verse:

               Then hopeless of life,
               He drew his penknife,
               And made a sad widow of Jonathan's wife.
          But forty pounds paid her, her grief shall appease,
          And every man round me may rob, if he please.

But Jonathan recovered, and Molly, his wife, was destined a second time to win the conspicuous
honour that belongs to a hempen widow.

As his career drew to its appointed close, Fortune withheld her smiles. 'People got so peery,'
complained the great man, 'that ingenious men were put to dreadful shifts.' And then, highest
tribute to his greatness, an Act of Parliament was passed which made it a capital offence 'for
a prig to steal with the hands of other people'; and in the increase of public vigilance his
undoing became certain. On the 2nd of January, 1725, a day not easy to forget, a creature of
Wild's spoke with fifty yards of lace, worth £40, at his Captain's bidding, and Wild, having
otherwise disposed of the plunder, was charged on the 10th of March that he 'did feloniously
receive of Katharine Stetham ten guineas on account and under colour of helping the said Katharine
Stetham to the said lace again, and did not then, nor any time since, discover or apprehend,
or cause to be apprehended and brought to Justice, the persons that committed the said felony.'
Thus runs the indictment, and, to the inexpressible relief of lesser men, Jonathan Wild was
condemned to the gallows.

Thereupon he had serious thoughts of 'putting his house in order'; with an ironical smile he
demanded an explanation of the text: 'Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree'; but, presently
reflecting that 'his Time was but short in this World, he improved it to the best advantage
in Eating, Drinking, Swearing, Cursing, and talking to his Visitants.' For all his bragging,
drink alone preserved his courage: 'he was very restless in the Condemned Hole,' though 'he
gave little or no attention to the condemned Sermon which the purblind Ordinary preached before
him,' and which was, in Fielding's immortal phrase, 'unto the Greeks foolishness.' But in the
moment of death his distinction returned to him. He tried, and failed, to kill himself; and
his progress to the nubbing cheat was a triumph of execration. He reached Tyburn through a
howling mob, and died to a yell of universal joy.

The Ordinary has left a record so precious and so lying, that it must needs be quoted at length.
The great Thief-Catcher's confession is a masterpiece of comfort, and is so far removed from
the truth as completely to justify Fielding's incomparable creation. 'Finding there was no
room for mercy (and how could I expect mercy, who never showed any)'--thus does the devil dodger
dishonour our Jonathan's memory!--'as soon as I came into the Condemned Hole, I began to think
of making a preparation for my soul. . . . To part with my wife, my dear Molly, is so great
an Affliction to me, that it touches me to the Quick, and is like Daggers entering into my
Heart.' How tame the Ordinary's falsehood to the brilliant invention of Fielding, who makes
Jonathan kick his Tishy in the very shadow of the Tree! And the Reverend Gentleman gains in
unction as he goes: 'In the Cart they all kneeled down to prayers and seemed very penitent;
the Ordinary used all the means imaginable to make them think of another World, and after singing
a penitential Psalm, they cry'd Lord Jesus Christ receive our Souls, the cart drew away and
they were all turned off. This is as good an account as can be given by me.' Poor Ordinary!
If he was modest, he was also untruthful, and you are certain that it was not thus the hero
met his death.

Even had Fielding never written his masterpiece, Jonathan Wild would still have been surnamed
'The Great.' For scarce a chap-book appeared in the year of Jonathan's death that did not expose
the only right and true view of his character. 'His business,' says one hack of prison literature,
'at all times was to put a false gloss upon things, and to make fools of mankind.' Another
precisely formulates the theory of greatness insisted upon by Fielding with so lavish an irony
and so masterly a wit. While it is certain that The History of the Late Mr. Jonathan Wild is
as noble a piece of irony as literature can show, while for the qualities of wit and candour
it is equal to its motive, it is likewise true that therein you meet the indubitable Jonathan
Wild. It is an entertainment to compare the chap-books of the time with the reasoned, finished
work of art: not in any spirit of pedantry--since accuracy in these matters is of small account,
but with intent to show how doubly fortunate Fielding was in his genius and in his material.
Of course the writer rejoiced in the aid of imagination and eloquence; of course he embellished
his picture with such inspirations as Miss Laetitia and the Count; of course he preserves from
the first page to the last the highest level of unrivalled irony. But the sketch was there
before him, and a lawyer's clerk had treated Jonathan in a vein of heroism within a few weeks
of his death. And since a plain statement is never so true as fiction, Fielding's romance is
still more credible, still convinces with an easier effort, than the serious and pedestrian
records of contemporaries. Nor can you return to its pages without realising that, so far from
being 'the evolution of a purely intellectual conception,' Jonathan Wild is a magnificently
idealised and ironical portrait of a great man.

III--A PARALLEL

(MOLL CUTPURSE AND JONATHAN WILD)

THEY plied the same trade, each with incomparable success. By her, as by him, the art of the
fence was carried to its ultimate perfection. In their hands the high policy of theft wanted
nor dignity nor assurance. Neither harboured a single scheme which was not straightway translated
into action, and they were masters at once of Newgate and the Highway. As none might rob without
the encouragement of his emperor, so none was hanged at Tyburn while intrigue or bribery might
avail to drag a half-doomed neck from the halter; and not even Moll herself was more bitterly
tyrannical in the control of a reckless gang than the thin-jawed, hatchet-faced Jonathan Wild.

They were statesmen rather than warriors--happy if they might direct the enterprises of others,
and determined to punish the lightest disobedience by death. The mind of each was readier than
his right arm, and neither would risk an easy advantage by a misunderstood or unwonted sleight
of hand. But when you leave the exercise of their craft to contemplate their character with
a larger eye, it is the woman who at every point has the advantage. Not only was she the peerless
inventor of a new cunning; she was at home (and abroad) the better fellow. The suppression
of sex was in itself an unparalleled triumph, and the most envious detractor could not but
marvel at the domination of her womanhood. Moreover, she shone in a gayer, more splendid epoch.
The worthy contemporary of Shakespeare, she had small difficulty in performing feats of prowess
and resource which daunted the intrepid ruffians of the eighteenth century. Her period, in
brief, gave her an eternal superiority; and it were as hopeless for Otway to surpass the master
whom he disgraced, as for Wild to o'ershadow the brilliant example of Moll Cutpurse.

Tyrants both, they exercised their sovereignty in accordance with their varying temperament.
Hers was a fine, fat, Falstaffian humour, which, while it inspired Middleton, might have suggested
to Shakespeare an equal companion of the drunken knight. His was but a narrow, cynic wit, not
edged like the knife, which wellnigh cut his throat, but blunt and scratching like a worn-toothed
saw.

She laughed with a laugh that echoed from Ludgate to Charing Cross, and her voice drowned all
the City. He grinned rarely and with malice; he piped in a voice shrill and acid as the tricks
of his mischievous imagination. She knew no cruelty beyond the necessities of her life, and
none regretted more than she the inevitable death of a traitor. He lusted after destruction
with a fiendish temper, which was a grim anticipation of De Sade; he would even smile as he
saw the noose tighten round the necks of the poor innocents he had beguiled to Tyburn. It was
his boast that he had contrived robberies for the mere glory of dragging his silly victims
to the gallows. But Moll, though she stood half-way between the robber and his prey, would
have sacrificed a hundred well-earned commissions rather than see her friends and comrades
strangled. Her temperament compelled her to the loyal support of her own order, and she would
have shrunk in horror from her rival, who, for all his assumed friendship with the thief, was
a staunch and subtle ally of justice.

Before all things she had the genius of success. Her public offences were trivial and condoned.
She died in her bed, full of years and of honours, beloved by the light-fingered gentry, reverenced
by all the judges on the bench. He, for all the sacrifices he made to a squint-eyed law, died
execrated alike by populace and police. Already Blueskin had done his worst with a pen-knife;
already Jack Sheppard and his comrades had warned Drury Lane against the infamous thief-catcher.
And so anxious, on the other hand, was the law to be quit of their too zealous servant, that
an Act of Parliament was passed with the sole object of placing Jonathan's head within the
noose. His method, meagre though masterly, lulled him too soon to an impotent security. She,
with her larger view of life, her plumper sense of style, was content with nothing less than
an ultimate sovereignty, and manifestly did she prove her superiority.

Though born for the wimple, she was more of a man than the breeched and stockinged Jonathan,
whose only deed of valiance was to hang, terrier-like, by his teeth to an evasive enemy. While
he cheated at cards and cogged the dice, she trained dogs and never missed a bear-baiting.
He shrank, like the coward that he was, from the exercise of manly sports; she cared not what
were the weapons--quarterstaff or broadsword--so long as she vanquished her opponent. She scoured
the town in search of insult; he did but exert his cunning when a quarrel was put upon him.
Who, then, shall deny her manhood? Who shall whisper that his style was the braver or the better
suited to his sex?

As became a hero, she kept the best of loose company: her parlour was ever packed with the
friends of loyalty and adventure. Are not Hind and Mull Sack worth a thousand Blueskins? Moreover,
plunder and wealth were not the only objects of her pursuit: she was not merely a fence but
a patriot, and she would have accounted a thousand pounds well lost, if she did but compass
the discomfiture of a Parliament-man. Indeed, if Jonathan, the thief-catcher, limped painfully
after his magnificent example, Jonathan the man and the sportsman confessed a pitiful inferiority
to the valiant Moll. Thus she avenged her sex by distancing the most illustrious of her rivals;
and if he pleads for his credit a taste for theology, hers is the chuckle of contemptuous superiority.
She died a patriot, bequeathing a fountain of wine to the champions of an exiled king; he died
a casuist, setting crabbed problems to the Ordinary. Here, again, the advantage is evident:
loyalty is the virtue of men; a sudden attachment to religion is the last resource of the second-rate
citizen and of the trapped criminal.

RALPH BRISCOE

A SPARE, lean frame; a small head set forward upon a pair of sloping shoulders; a thin, sharp
nose, and rat-like eyes; a flat, hollow chest; shrunk shanks, modestly retreating from their
snuff-coloured hose--these are the tokens which served to remind his friends of Ralph Briscoe,
the Clerk of Newgate. As he left the prison in the grey air of morning upon some errand of
mercy or revenge, he appeared the least fearsome of mortals, while an awkward limp upon his
left toe deepened the impression of timidity. So abstract was his manner, so hesitant his gait,
that he would hug the wall as he went, nervously stroking its grimy surface with his long,
twittering fingers. But Ralph, as justice and the Jug knew too well, was neither fool nor coward.
His character belied his outward seeming. A large soul had crept into the case of his wizened
body, and if a poltroon among his ancestors had gifted him with an alien type, he had inherited
from some nameless warrior both courage and resource.

He was born in easy circumstances, and gently nurtured in the distant village of Kensington.
Though cast in a scholar's mould, and very apt for learning, he rebelled from the outset against
a career of inaction. His lack of strength was never a check upon his high stomach; he would
fight with boys of twice his size, and accept the certain defeat in a cheerful spirit of dogged
pugnacity. Moreover, if his arms were weak, his cunning was as keen-edged as his tongue; and,
before his stricken eye had paled, he had commonly executed an ample vengeance upon his enemy.
Nor was it industry that placed him at the top of the class. A ready wit made him master of
the knowledge he despised.

But he would always desert his primer to follow the hangman's lumbering cart up Tyburn Hill,
and, still a mere imp of mischief, he would run the weary way from Kensington to Shoe Lane
on the distant chance of a cock-fight. He was present, so he would relate in after years, when
Sir Thomas Jermin's man put his famous trick upon the pit. With a hundred pounds in his pocket
and under his arm a dunghill cock, neatly trimmed for the fray, the ingenious ruffian, as Briscoe
would tell you, went off to Shoe Lane, persuaded an accomplice to fight the cock in Sir Thomas
Jermin's name, and laid a level hundred against his own bird. So lofty was Sir Thomas's repute
that backers were easily found, but the dunghill rooster instantly showed a clean pair of heels,
and the cheat was justified of his cunning.

Thus Ralph Briscoe learnt the first lessons in that art of sharping wherein he was afterwards
an adept; and when he left school his head was packed with many a profitable device which no
book learning could impart. His father, however, still resolute that he should join an intelligent
profession, sent him to Gray's Inn that he might study law. Here the elegance of his handwriting
gained him a rapid repute; his skill became the envy of all the lean-souled clerks in the Inn,
and he might have died a respectable attorney had not the instinct of sport forced him from
the inkpot and parchment of his profession. Ill could he tolerate the monotony and restraint
of this clerkly life. In his eyes law was an instrument, not of justice, but of jugglery. Men
were born, said his philosophy, rather to risk their necks than ink their fingers; and if a
bold adventure puts you in a difficulty, why, then, you hire some straw-splitting attorney
to show his cunning. Indeed, the study of law was for him, as it was for Falstaff, an excuse
for many a bout and merry-making. He loved his glass, and he loved his wench, and he loved
a bull-baiting better than either. It was his boast, and Moll Cutpurse's compliment, that he
never missed a match in his life, and assuredly no man was better known in Paris Garden than
the intrepid Ralph Briscoe.

The cloistered seclusion of Gray's Inn grew daily more irksome. There he would sit, in mute
despair, drumming the table with his fingers, and biting the quill, whose use he so bitterly
contemned. Of winter afternoons he would stare through the leaded window-panes at the gaunt,
leafless trees, on whose summits swayed the cawing rooks, until servitude seemed intolerable,
and he prayed for the voice of the bearward that summoned him to Southwark. And when the chained
bear, the familiar monkey on his back, followed the shrill bagpipe along the curious street,
Briscoe felt that blood, not ink, coursed in his veins, forgot the tiresome impediment of the
law, and joined the throng, hungry for this sport of kings. Nor was he the patron of an enterprise
wherein he dared take no part. He was as bold and venturesome as the bravest ruffler that ever
backed a dog at a baiting. When the bull, cruelly secured behind, met the onslaught of his
opponents, throwing them off, now this side, now that, with his horns, Briscoe, lost in excitement,
would leap into the ring that not a point of the combat should escape him.

So it was that he won the friendship of his illustrious benefactress, Moll Cutpurse. For, one
day, when he had ventured too near the maddened bull, the brute made a heave at his breeches,
which instantly gave way; and in another moment he would have been gored to death, had not
Moll seized him by the collar and slung him out of the ring. Thus did his courage ever contradict
his appearance, and at the dangerous game of whipping the blinded bear he had no rival, either
for bravery or adroitness. He would rush in with uplifted whip until the breath of the infuriated
beast was hot upon his cheek, let his angry lash curl for an instant across the bear's flank,
and then, for all his halting foot, leap back into safety with a smiling pride in his own nimbleness.

His acquaintance with Moll Cutpurse, casually begun at a bull-baiting, speedily ripened, for
her into friendship, for him into love. In this, the solitary romance of his life, Ralph Briscoe
overtopped even his own achievements of courage. The Roaring Girl was no more young, and years
had not refined her character unto gentleness. It was still her habit to appear publicly in
jerkin and galligaskins, to smoke tobacco in contempt of her sex, and to fight her enemies
with a very fury of insolence. In stature she exceeded the limping clerk by a head, and she
could pick him up with one hand, like a kitten. Yet he loved her, not for any grace of person,
nor beauty of feature, nor even because her temperament was undaunted as his own. He loved
her for that wisest of reasons, which is no reason at all, because he loved her. In his eyes
she was the Queen, not of Misrule, but of Hearts. Had a throne been his, she should have shared
it, and he wooed her with a shy intensity, which ennobled him, even in her austere regard.
Alas! she was unable to return his passion, and she lamented her own obduracy with characteristic
humour. She made no attempt to conceal her admiration. 'A notable and famous person,' she called
him, confessing that, 'he was right for her tooth, and made to her mind in every part of him.'
He had been bred up in the same exercise of bull-baiting, which was her own delight; she had
always praised his towardliness, and prophesied his preferment. But when he paid her court
she was obliged to decline the honour, while she esteemed the compliment.

In truth, she was completely insensible to passion, or, as she exclaimed in a phrase of brilliant
independence, 'I should have hired him to my embraces.'

The sole possibility that remained was a Platonic friendship, and Briscoe accepted the situation
in excellent humour. 'Ever since he came to know himself,' again it is Moll that speaks, 'he
always deported himself to me with an abundance of regard, calling me his Aunt.' And his aunt
she remained unto the end, bound to him in a proper and natural alliance. Different as they
were in aspect, they were strangely alike in taste and disposition. Nor was the Paris Garden
their only meeting-ground.

His sorry sojourn in Gray's Inn had thrown him on the side of the law-breaker, and he had acquired
a strange cunning in the difficult art of evading justice. Instantly Moll recognised his practical
value, and, exerting all her talent for intrigue, presently secured for him the Clerkship of
Newgate. Here at last he found scope not only for his learning, but for that spirit of adventure
that breathed within him. His meagre acquaintance with letters placed him on a pinnacle high
above his colleagues. Now and then a prisoner proved his equal in wit, but as he was manifestly
superior in intelligence to the Governor, the Ordinary, and all the warders, he speedily seized
and hereafter retained the real sovereignty of Newgate.

His early progress was barred by envy and contempt. Why, asked the men in possession, should
this shrivelled stranger filch our privileges? And Briscoe met their malice with an easy smile,
knowing that at all points he was more than their match. His alliance with Moll stood him in
good stead, and in a few months the twain were the supreme arbiters of English justice. Should
a highwayman seek to save his neck, he must first pay a fat indemnity to the Newgate Clerk,
but, since Moll was the appointed banker of the whole family, she was quick to sanction whatever
price her accomplice suggested. And Briscoe had a hundred other tricks whereby he increased
his riches and repute. There was no debtor came to Newgate whom the Clerk would not aid, if
he believed the kindness profitable. Suppose his inquiries gave an assurance of his victim's
recovery, he would house him comfortably, feed him at his own table, lend him money, and even
condescend to win back the generous loan by the dice-box.

His civility gave him a general popularity among the prisoners, and his appearance in the Yard
was a signal for a subdued hilarity. He drank and gambled with the roysterers; he babbled a
cheap philosophy with the erudite; and he sold the necks of all to the highest bidder. Though
now and again he was convicted of mercy or revenge, he commonly held himself aloof from human
passions, and pursued the one sane end of life in an easy security. The hostility of his colleagues
irked him but little. A few tags of Latin, the friendship of Moll, and a casual threat of exposure
frightened the Governor into acquiescence, but the Ordinary was more difficult of conciliation.
The Clerk had not been long in Newgate before he saw that between the reverend gentleman and
himself there could be naught save war. Hitherto the Ordinary had reserved to his own profit
the right of intrigue; he it was who had received the hard-scraped money of the sorrowing relatives,
and untied the noose when it seemed good to him. Briscoe insisted upon a division of labour.
'It is your business,' he said, 'to save the scoundrels in the other world. Leave to me the
profit of their salvation in this.' And the Clerk triumphed after his wont: freedom jingled
in his pocket; he doled out comfort, even life, to the oppressed; and he extorted a comfortable
fortune in return for privileges which were never in his gift.

Without the walls of Newgate the house of his frequentation was the 'Dog Tavern.' Thither he
would wander every afternoon to meet his clients and to extort blood-money. In this haunt of
criminals and pettifoggers no man was better received than the Newgate Clerk, and while he
assumed a manner of generous cordiality, it was a strange sight to see him wince when some
sturdy ruffian slapped him too strenuously upon the back. He had a joke and a chuckle for all,
and his merry quips, dry as they were, were joyously quoted to all new-comers. His legal ingenuity
appeared miraculous, and it was confidently asserted in the Coffee House that he could turn
black to white with so persuasive an argument that there was no Judge on the Bench to confute
him. But he was not omnipotent, and his zeal encountered many a serious check. At times he
failed to save the necks even of his intimates, since, when once a ruffian was notorious, Moll
and the Clerk fought vainly for his release. Thus it was that Cheney, the famous wrestler,
whom Ralph had often backed against all comers, died at Tyburn. He had been taken by the troopers
red-handed upon the highway. Seized after a desperate resistance, he was wounded wellnigh to
death, and Briscoe quoted a dozen precedents to prove that he was unfit to be tried or hanged.
Argument failing, the munificent Clerk offered fifty pounds for the life of his friend. But
to no purpose: the valiant wrestler was carried to the cart in a chair, and so lifted to the
gallows, which cured him of his gaping wounds.

When the Commonwealth administered justice with pedantic severity, Briscoe's influence still
further declined. There was no longer scope in the State for men of spirit; even the gaols
were handed over to the stern mercy of crop-eared Puritans; Moll herself had fallen upon evil
times; and Ralph Briscoe determined to make a last effort for wealth and retirement. At the
very moment when his expulsion seemed certain, an heiress was thrown into Newgate upon a charge
of murdering a too importunate suitor. The chain of evidence was complete: the dagger plunged
in his heart was recognised for her own; she was seen to decoy him to the secret corner of
a wood, where his raucous love-making was silenced for ever. Taken off her guard, she had even
hinted confession of her crime, and nothing but intrigue could have saved her gentle neck from
the gallows. Briscoe, hungry for her money-bags, promised assistance. He bribed, he threatened,
he cajoled, he twisted the law as only he could twist it, he suppressed honest testimony, he
procured false; in fine, he weakened the case against her with so resistless an effrontery,
that not the Hanging Judge himself could convict the poor innocent.

At the outset he had agreed to accept a handsome bribe, but as the trial approached, his avarice
increased, and he would be content with nothing less than the lady's hand and fortune. Not
that he loved her; his heart was long since given to Moll Cutpurse; but he knew that his career
of depredation was at an end, and it became him to provide for his declining years. The victim
repulsed his suit, regretting a thousand times that she had stabbed her ancient lover. At last,
bidden summarily to choose between Death and the Clerk, she chose the Clerk, and thus Ralph
Briscoe left Newgate the richest squire in a western county. Henceforth he farmed his land
like a gentleman, drank with those of his neighbours who would crack a bottle with him, and
unlocked the strange stores of his memory to bumpkins who knew not the name of Newgate. Still
devoted to sport, he hunted the fox, and made such a bull-ring as his youthful imagination
could never have pictured. So he lived a life of country ease, and died a churchwarden. And
he deserved his prosperity, for he carried the soul of Falstaff in the shrunken body of Justice
Shallow.

GILDEROY AND THE SIXTEEN-STRING JACK

I--GILDEROY

HE stood six feet ten in his stockinged feet, and was the tallest ruffian that ever cut a purse
or held up a coach on the highway. A mass of black hair curled over a low forehead, and a glittering
eye intensified his villainous aspect; nor did a deep scar, furrowing his cheek from end to
end, soften the horror of his sudden apparition. Valiant men shuddered at his approach; women
shrank from the distant echo of his name; for fifteen years he terrorised Scotland from Caithness
to the border; and the most partial chronicler never insulted his memory with the record of
a good deed.

He was born to a gentle family in the Calendar of Monteith, and was celebrated even in boyhood
for his feats of strength and daring. While still at school he could hold a hundredweight at
arm's-length, and crumple up a horseshoe like a wisp of hay. The fleetest runner, the most
desperate fighter in the country, he was already famous before his name was besmirched with
crime, and he might have been immortalised as the Hercules of the seventeenth century, had
not his ambition been otherwise flattered. At the outset, though the inclination was never
lacking, he knew small temptation to break the sterner laws of conduct. His pleasures were
abundantly supplied by his father's generosity, and he had no need to refrain from such vices
as became a gentleman. If he was no drunkard, it was because his head was equal to the severest
strain, and, despite his forbidding expression, he was always a successful breaker of hearts.
His very masterfulness overcame the most stubborn resistance; and more than once the pressure
of his dishonourable suit converted hatred into love. At the very time that he was denounced
for Scotland's disgrace, his praises were chanted in many a dejected ballad. 'Gilderoy was
a bonny boy,' sang one heart-broken maiden:

               Had roses till his shoon,
          His stockings were of silken soy,
               Wi' garters hanging doon.

But in truth he was admired less for his amiability than for that quality of governance which,
when once he had torn the decalogue to pieces, made him a veritable emperor of crime.

His father's death was the true beginning of his career. A modest patrimony was squandered
in six months, and Gilderoy had no penny left wherewith to satisfy the vices which insisted
upon indulgence. He demanded money at all hazards, and money without toil. For a while his
more loudly clamant needs were fulfilled by the amiable simplicity of his mother, whom he blackmailed
with insolence and contempt. And when she, wearied by his shameless importunity, at last withdrew
her support, he determined upon a monstrous act of vengeance. With a noble affectation of penitence
he visited his home; promised reform at supper; and said good-night in the broken accent of
reconciliation. No sooner was the house sunk in slumber than he crawled stealthily upstairs
in order to forestall by theft a promised generosity. He opened the door of the bed-chamber
in a hushed silence; but the wrenching of the cofferlid awoke the sleeper, and Gilderoy, having
cut his mother's throat with an infamous levity, seized whatever money and jewels were in the
house, cruelly maltreated his sister, and laughingly burnt the house to the ground, that the
possibility of evidence might be destroyed.

Henceforth his method of plunder was assured. It was part of his philosophy to prevent detection
by murder, and the flames from the burning walls added a pleasure to his lustful eye. His march
across Scotland was marked by slaughtered families and ruined houses. Plunder was the first
cause of his exploits, but there is no doubt that death and arson were a solace to his fierce
spirit; and for a while this giant of cruelty knew neither check nor hindrance. Presently it
became a superstition with him that death was the inevitable accompaniment of robbery, and,
as he was incapable of remorse, he grew callous, and neglected the simplest precautions. At
Dunkeld he razed a rifled house to the ground, and with the utmost effrontery repeated the
performance at Aberdeen. But at last he had been tracked by a company of soldiers, who, that
justice might not be cheated of her prey, carried him to gaol, where after the briefest trial
he was condemned to death.

Gilderoy, however, was still master of himself. His immense strength not only burst his bonds,
but broke prison, and this invincible Samson was once more free in Aberdeen, inspiring that
respectable city with a legendary dread. The reward of one hundred pounds was offered in vain.
Had he shown himself on the road in broad daylight, none would have dared to arrest him, and
it was not until his plans were deliberately laid, that he crossed the sea. The more violent
period of his career was at an end. Never again did he yield to his passion for burning and
sudden death; and, if the world found him unconquerable, his self-control is proved by the
fact that in the heyday of his strength he turned from his unredeemed brutality to a gentler
method. He now deserted Scotland for France, with which, like all his countrymen, he claimed
a cousinship; and so profoundly did he impose upon Paris with his immense stature, his elegant
attire, his courtly manners (for he was courtesy itself, when it pleased him), that he was
taken for an eminent scholar, or at least a soldier of fortune.

Prosperity might doubtless have followed a discreet profession, but Gilderoy must still be
thieving, and he reaped a rich harvest among the unsuspicious courtiers of France. His most
highly renowned exploit was performed at St. Denis, and the record of France's humiliation
is still treasured. The great church was packed with ladies of fashion and their devout admirers.
Richelieu attended in state; the king himself shone upon the assembly. The strange Scotsman,
whom no man knew and all men wondered at, attracted a hundred eyes to himself and his magnificent
equipment. But it was not his to be idle, and at the very moment whereat Mass was being sung,
he contrived to lighten Richelieu's pocket of a purse. The king was a delighted witness of
the theft; Gilderoy, assuming an air of facile intimacy, motioned him to silence; and he, deeming
it a trick put upon Richelieu by a friend, hastened, at the service-end, to ask his minister
if perchance he had a purse of gold upon him. Richelieu instantly discovered the loss, to the
king's uncontrolled hilarity, which was mitigated when it was found that the thief, having
emptied the king's pocket at the unguarded moment of his merriment, had left them both the poorer.

Such were Gilderoy's interludes of gaiety; and when you remember the cynical ferocity of his
earlier performance, you cannot deny him the credit of versatility. He stayed in France until
his ominous reputation was too widely spread; whereupon he crossed the Pyrenees, travelling
like a gentleman, in a brilliant carriage of his own. From Spain he carried off a priceless
collection of silver plate; and he returned to his own country, fatigued, yet unsoftened, by
the grand tour. Meanwhile, a forgetful generation had not kept his memory green. The monster,
who punished Scotland a year ago with fire and sword, had passed into oblivion, and Gilderoy
was able to establish for himself a new reputation. He departed as far as possible from his
ancient custom, joined the many cavaliers, who were riding up and down the country, pistol
in hand, and presently proved a dauntless highwayman. He had not long ridden in the neighbourhood
of Perth before he met the Earl of Linlithgow, from whom he took a gold watch, a diamond ring,
and eighty guineas. Being an outlaw, he naturally espoused the King's cause, and would have
given a year of his life to meet a Regicide. Once upon a time, says rumour, he found himself
face to face with Oliver Cromwell, whom he dragged from his coach, set ignominiously upon an
ass, and so turned adrift with his feet tied under the beast's belly. The story is incredible,
not only because the loyal historians of the time caused Oliver to be robbed daily on every
road in Great Britain, but because our Gilderoy, had he ever confronted the Protector, most
assuredly would not have allowed him to escape with his life.

Tired of scouring the highway, Gilderoy resolved upon another enterprise. He collected a band
of fearless ruffians, and placed himself at their head. With this army to aid, he harried Sutherland
and the North, lifting cattle, plundering homesteads, and stopping wayfarers with a humour
and adroitness worthy of Robin Hood. No longer a lawless adventurer, he made his own conditions
of life, and forced the people to obey them. He who would pay Gilderoy a fair contribution
ran no risk of losing his sheep or oxen. But evasion was impossible, and the smallest suspicion
of falsehood was punished by death. The peaceably inclined paid their toll with regret; the
more daring opposed the raider to their miserable undoing; the timid satisfied the utmost exactions
of Gilderoy, and deemed themselves fortunate if they left the country with their lives.

Thus Scotland became a land of dread; the most restless man within her borders hardly dare
travel beyond his byre. The law was powerless against this indomitable scourge, and the reward
of a thousand marks would have been offered in vain, had not Gilderoy's cruelty estranged his
mistress. This traitress--Peg Cunningham was her name--less for avarice than in revenge for
many insults and infidelities, at last betrayed her master. Having decoyed him to her house,
she admitted fifty armed men, and thus imagined a full atonement for her unnumbered wrongs.
But Gilderoy was triumphant to the last. Instantly suspecting the treachery of his mistress,
he burst into her bed-chamber, and, that she might not enjoy the price of blood, ripped her
up with a hanger. Then he turned defiant upon the army arrayed against him, and killed eight
men before the others captured him.

Disarmed after a desperate struggle, he was loaded with chains and carried to Edinburgh, where
he was starved for three days, and then hanged without the formality of a trial on a gibbet,
thirty feet high, set up in the Grassmarket. Even then Scotland's vengeance was unsatisfied.
The body, cut down from its first gibbet, was hung in chains forty feet above Leith Walk, where
it creaked and gibbered as a warning to evildoers for half a century, until at last the inhabitants
of that respectable quarter petitioned that Gilderoy's bones should cease to rattle, and that
they should enjoy the peace impossible for his jingling skeleton.

Gilderoy was no drawing-room scoundrel, no villain of schoolgirl romance. He felt remorse as
little as he felt fear, and there was no crime from whose commission he shrank. Before his
death he confessed to thirty-seven murders, and bragged that he had long since lost count of
his robberies and rapes. Something must be abated for boastfulness. But after all deduction
there remains a tale of crime that is unsurpassed. His most admirably artistic quality is his
complete consistence. He was a ruffian finished and rotund; he made no concession, he betrayed
no weakness. Though he never preached a sermon against the human race, he practised a brutality
which might have proceeded from a gospel of hate. He spared neither friends nor relatives,
and he murdered his own mother with as light a heart as he sent a strange widow of Aberdeen
to her death. His skill is undoubted, and he proved by the discipline of his band that he was
not without some talent of generalship. But he owed much of his success to his physical strength,
and to the temperament, which never knew the scandal of hesitancy or dread.

A born marauder, he devoted his life to his trade; and, despite his travels in France and Spain,
he enjoyed few intervals of merriment. Even the humour, which proved his redemption, was as
dour and grim as Scotland can furnish at her grimmes: and dourest. Here is a specimen will
serve as well as another: three of Gilderoy's gang had been hanged according to the sentence
of a certain Lord of Session, and the Chieftain, for his own vengeance and the intimidation
of justice, resolved upon an exemplary punishment. He waylaid the Lord of Session, emptied
his pockets, killed his horses, broke his coach in pieces, and having bound his lackeys, drowned
them in a pond. This was but the prelude of revenge, for presently (and here is the touch of
humour) he made the Lord of Session ride at dead of night to the gallows, whereon the three
malefactors were hanging. One arm of the crossbeams was still untenanted. 'By my soul, mon,'
cried Gilderoy to the Lord of Session, 'as this gibbet is built to break people's craigs, and
is not uniform without another, I must e'en hang you upon the vacant beam.' And straightway
the Lord of Session swung in the moonlight, and Gilderoy had cracked his black and solemn joke.

This sense of fun is the single trait which relieves the colossal turpitude of Gilderoy. And,
though even his turpitude was melodramatic in its lack of balance, it is a unity of character
which is the foundation of his greatness. He was no fumbler, led away from his purpose by the
first diversion; his ambition was clear before him, and he never fell below it. He defied Scotland
for fifteen years, was hanged so high that he passed into a proverb, and though his handsome,
sinister face might have made women his slaves, he was never betrayed by passion (or by virtue)
to an amiability.

II--SIXTEEN-STRING JACK

THE 'Green Pig' stood in the solitude of the North Road. Its simple front, its neatly balanced
windows, curtained with white, gave it an air of comfort and tranquillity. The smoke which
curled from its hospitable chimney spoke of warmth and good fare.

To pass it was to spurn the last chance of a bottle for many a weary mile, and the prudent
traveller would always rest an hour by its ample fireside, or gossip with its fantastic hostess.
Now, the hostess of the little inn was Ellen Roach, friend and accomplice of Sixteen-String
Jack, once the most famous woman in England, and still after a weary stretch at Botany Bay
the strangest of companions, the most buxom of spinsters. Her beauty was elusive even in her
triumphant youth, and middle-age had neither softened her traits nor refined her expression.
Her auburn hair, once the glory of Covent Garden, was fading to a withered grey; she was never
tall enough to endure an encroaching stoutness with equanimity; her dumpy figure made you marvel
at her past success; and hardship had furrowed her candid brow into wrinkles. But when she
opened her lips she became instantly animated. With a glass before her on the table, she would
prattle frankly and engagingly of the past. Strange cities had she seen; she had faced the
dangers of an adventurous life with calmness and good temper. And yet Botany Bay, with its
attendant horrors, was already fading from her memory. In imagination she was still with her
incomparable hero, and it was her solace, after fifteen years, to sing the praise and echo
the perfections of Sixteen-String Jack.

'How well I remember,' she would murmur, as though unconscious of her audience, 'the unhappy
day when Jack Rann was first arrested.

It was May, and he came back travel-stained and weary in the brilliant dawn. He had stopped
a one-horse shay near the nine-mile stone on the Hounslow Road--every word of his confession
is burnt into my brain--and had taken a watch and a handful of guineas. I was glad enough of
the money, for there was no penny in the house, and presently I sent the maid-servant to make
the best bargain she could with the watch. But the silly jade, by the saddest of mishaps, took
the trinket straight to the very man who made it, and he, suspecting a theft, had us both arrested.
Even then Jack might have been safe, had not the devil prompted me to speak the truth. Dismayed
by the magistrate, I owned, wretched woman that I was, that I had received the watch from Rann,
and in two hours Jack also was under lock and key. Yet, when we were sent for trial I made
what amends I could. I declared on oath that I had never seen Sixteen-String Jack in my life;
his name came to my lips by accident; and, hector as they would, the lawyers could not frighten
me to an acknowledgment. Meanwhile Jack's own behaviour was grand. I was the proudest woman
in England as I stood by his side in the dock. When you compared him with Sir John Fielding,
you did not doubt for an instant which was the finer gentleman. And what a dandy was my Jack!
Though he came there to answer for his life, he was all ribbons and furbelows. His irons were
tied up with the daintiest blue bows, and in the breast of his coat he carried a bundle of
flowers as large as a birch-broom. His neck quivered in the noose, yet he was never cowed to
civility. 'I know no more of the matter than you do,' he cried indignantly, 'nor half so much
neither,' and if the magistrate had not been an ill-mannered oaf, he would not have dared to
disbelieve my true-hearted Jack. That time we escaped with whole skins; and off we went, after
dinner, to Vauxhall, where Jack was more noticed than the fiercest of the bloods, and where
he filled the heart of George Barrington with envy. Nor was he idle, despite his recent escape:
he brought away two watches and three purses from the Garden, so that our necessities were
amply supplied. Ah, I should have been happy in those days if only Jack had been faithful.
But he had a roving eye and a joyous temperament; and though he loved me better than any of
the baggages to whom he paid court, he would not visit me so often as he should. Why, once
he was hustled off to Bow Street because the watch caught him climbing in at Doll Frampton's
window. And she, the shameless minx, got him off by declaring in open court that she would
be proud to receive him whenever he would deign to ring at her bell. That is the penalty of
loving a great man: you must needs share his affection with a set of unworthy wenches. Yet
Jack was always kind to me, and I was the chosen companion of his pranks.

'Never can I forget the splendid figure he cut that day at Bagnigge Wells. We had driven down
in our coach, and all the world marvelled at our magnificence. Jack was brave in a scarlet
coat, a tambour waistcoat, and white silk stockings. From the knees of his breeches streamed
the strings (eight at each), whence he got his name, and as he plucked off his lace-hat the
dinner-table rose at him. That was a moment worth living for, and when, after his first bottle,
Jack rattled the glasses, and declared himself a highwayman, the whole company shuddered. "But,
my friends," quoth he, "to-day I am making holiday, so that you have naught to fear." When
the wine 's in, the wit 's out, and Jack could never stay his hand from the bottle. The more
he drank, the more he bragged, until, thoroughly fuddled, he lost a ring from his finger, and
charged the miscreants in the room with stealing it. "However," hiccupped he, "'tis a mere
nothing, worth a paltry hundred pounds--less than a lazy evening's work. So I'll let the trifling
theft pass." But the cowards were not content with Jack's generosity, and seizing upon him,
they thrust him neck and crop through the window. They were seventeen to one, the craven-hearted
loons; and I could but leave the marks of my nails on the cheek of the foremost, and follow
my hero into the yard, where we took coach, and drove sulkily back to Covent Garden.

'And yet he was not always in a mad humour; in fact, Sixteen-String Jack, for all his gaiety,
was a proud, melancholy man. The shadow of the tree was always upon him, and he would make
me miserable by talking of his certain doom. "I have a hundred pounds in my pocket," he would
say; "I shall spend that, and then I shan't last long." And though I never thought him serious,
his prophecy came true enough. Only a few months before the end we had visited Tyburn together.
With his usual carelessness, he passed the line of constables who were on guard.

"It is very proper," said he, in his jauntiest tone, "that I should be a spectator on this
melancholy occasion." And though none of the dullards took his jest, they instantly made way
for him. For my Jack was always a gentleman, though he was bred to the stable, and his bitterest
enemy could not have denied that he was handsome. His open countenance was as honest as the
day, and the brown curls over his forehead were more elegant than the smartest wig. Wherever
he went the world did him honour, and many a time my vanity was sorely wounded. I was a pretty
girl, mind you, though my travels have not improved my beauty; and I had many admirers before
ever I picked up Jack Rann at a masquerade. Why, there was a Templar, with two thousand a year,
who gave me a carriage and servants while I still lived at the dressmaker's in Oxford Street,
and I was not out of my teens when the old Jew in St. Mary Axe took me into keeping. But when
Jack was by, I had no chance of admiration. All the eyes were glued upon him, and his poor
doxy had to be content with a furtive look thrown over a stranger's shoulder. At Barnet races,
the year before they sent me across the sea, we were followed by a crowd the livelong day;
and truly Jack, in his blue satin waistcoat laced with silver, might have been a peer. At any
rate, he had not his equal on the course, and it is small wonder that never for a moment were
we left to ourselves.

'But happiness does not last for ever; only too often we were gravelled for lack of money,
and Jack, finding his purse empty, could do naught else than hire a hackney and take to the
road again, while I used to lie awake listening to the watchman's raucous voice, and praying
God to send back my warrior rich and scatheless. So times grew more and more difficult. Jack
would stay a whole night upon the heath, and come home with an empty pocket or a beggarly half
crown. And there was nothing, after a shabby coat that he hated half so much as a sheriff's
officer. "Learn a lesson in politeness," he said to one of the wretches who dragged him off
to the Marshalsea. "When Sir John Fielding's people come after me they use me genteelly; they
only hold up a finger, beckon me, and I follow as quietly as a lamb. But you bluster and insult,
as though you had never dealings with gentlemen." Poor Jack, he was of a proud stomach, and
could not abide interference; yet they would never let him go free. And he would have been
so happy had he been allowed his own way. To pull out a rusty pistol now and again, and to
take a purse from a traveller--surely these were innocent pleasures, and he never meant to
hurt a fellow-creature. But for all his kindness of heart, for all his love of splendour and
fine clothes, they took him at last.

'And this time, too, it was a watch which was our ruin. How often did I warn him: "Jack," I
would say, "take all the money you can. Guineas tell no tale. But leave the watches in their
owners' fobs." Alas! he did not heed my words, and the last man he ever stopped on the road
was that pompous rascal, Dr. Bell, then chaplain to the Princess Amelia. "Give me your money,"
screamed Jack, "and take no notice or I'll blow your brains out." And the doctor gave him all
that he had, the mean-spirited devil-dodger, and it was no more than eighteenpence. Now what
should a man of courage do with eighteenpence? So poor Jack was forced to seize the parson's
watch and trinkets as well, and thus it was that a second time we faced the Blind Beak.

When Jack brought home the watch, I was seized with a shuddering presentiment, and I would
have given the world to throw it out of the window. But I could not bear to see him pinched
with hunger, and he had already tossed the doctor's eighteenpence to a beggar woman. So I trudged
off to the pawnbroker's, to get what price I could, and I bethought me that none would know
me for what I was so far away as Oxford Street. But the monster behind the counter had a quick
suspicion, though I swear I looked as innocent as a babe; he discovered the owner of the watch,
and infamously followed me to my house.

'The next day we were both arrested, and once more we stood in the hot, stifling Court of the
Old Bailey. Jack was radiant as ever, the one spot of colour and gaiety in that close, sodden
atmosphere. When we were taken from Bow Street a thousand people formed our guard of honour,
and for a month we were the twin wonders of London. The lightest word, the fleetest smile of
the renowned highwayman, threw the world into a fit of excitement, and a glimpse of Rann was
worth a king's ransom. I could look upon him all day for nothing! And I knew what a fever of
fear throbbed behind his mask of happy contempt. Yet bravely he played the part unto the very
end. If the toasts of London were determined to gaze at him, he assured them they should have
a proper salve for their eyes. So he dressed himself as a light-hearted sportsman. His coat
and waistcoat were of pea-green cloth; his buckskin breeches were spotlessly new, and all tricked
out with the famous strings; his hat was bound round with silver cords; and even the ushers
of the Court were touched to courtesy. He would whisper to me, as we stood in the dock, "Cheer
up, my girl. I have ordered the best supper that Covent Garden can provide, and we will make
merry to-night when this foolish old judge has done his duty." The supper was never eaten.
Through the weary afternoon we waited for acquittal. The autumn sun sank in hopeless gloom.
The wretched lamps twinkled through the jaded air of the court-house. In an hour I lived a
thousand years of misery, and when the sentence was read, the words carried no sense to my
withered brain. It was only in my cell I realised that I had seen Jack Rann for the last time;
that his pea-green coat would prove a final and ineffaceable memory.

'Alas! I, who had never been married, was already a hempen widow; but I was too hopelessly
heartbroken for my lover's fate to think of my own paltry hardship. I never saw him again.
They told me that he suffered at Tyburn like a man, and that he counted upon a rescue to the
very end. They told me (still bitterer news to hear) that two days before his death he entertained
seven women at supper, and was in the wildest humour. This almost broke my heart; it was an
infidelity committed on the other side of the grave. But, poor Jack, he was a good lad, and
loved me more than them all, though he never could be faithful to me.' And thus, bidding the
drawer bring fresh glasses, Ellen Roach would end her story. Though she had told it a hundred
times, at the last words a tear always sparkled in her eye. She lived without friend and without
lover, faithful to the memory of Sixteen-String Jack, who for her was the only reality in the
world of shades. Her middle-age was as distant as her youth. The dressmaker's in Oxford Street
was as vague a dream as the inhospitable shore of Botany Bay. So she waited on to a weary eld,
proud of the 'Green Pig's' well-ordered comfort, prouder still that for two years she shared
the glory of Jack Rann, and that she did not desert her hero, even in his punishment.

III--A PARALLEL

(GILDEROY AND SIXTEEN-STRING JACK)

THEIR closest parallel is the notoriety which dogged them from the very day of their death.
Each, for his own exploits, was the most famous man of his time, the favourite of broadsides,
the prime hero of the ballad-mongers. And each owed his fame as much to good fortune as to
merit, since both were excelled in their generation by more skilful scoundrels. If Gilderoy
was unsurpassed in brutality, he fell immeasurably below Hind in artistry and wit, nor may
he be compared to such accomplished highwaymen as Mull Sack or the Golden Farmer. His method
was not elevated by a touch of the grand style. He stamped all the rules of the road beneath
his contemptuous foot, and cared not what enormity he committed in his quest for gold. Yet,
though he lived in the true Augustan age, he yielded to no one of his rivals in glorious recognition.
So, too, Jack Rann, of the Sixteen Strings, was a near contemporary of George Barrington. While
that nimble-fingered prig was making a brilliant appearance at Vauxhall, and emptying the pockets
of his intimates, Rann was riding over Hounslow Heath, and flashing his pistol in the eye of
the wayfarer. The very year in which Jack danced his last jig at Tyburn, Barrington had astonished
London by a fruitless attempt to steal Prince Orloff's miraculous snuff-box. And not even Ellen
Roach herself would have dared to assert that Rann was Barrington's equal in sleight of hand.
But Rann holds his own against the best of his craft, with an imperishable name, while a host
of more distinguished cracksmen are excluded even from the Newgate Calendar.

In truth, there is one quality which has naught to do with artistic supremacy; and in this
quality both Rann and Gilderoy were rich beyond their fellows. They knew (none better) how
to impose upon the world. Had their deserts been even less than they were, they would still
have been bravely notorious. It is a common superstition that the talent for advertisement
has but a transitory effect, that time sets all men in their proper places.

Nothing can be more false; for he who has once declared himself among the great ones of the
earth, not only holds his position while he lives, but forces an unreasoning admiration upon
the future. Though he declines from the lofty throne, whereon his own vanity and love of praise
have set him, he still stands above the modest level which contents the genuinely great. Why
does Euripides still throw a shadow upon the worthier poets of his time? Because he had the
faculty of displacement, because he could compel the world to profess an interest not only
in his work but in himself. Why is Michael Angelo a loftier figure in the history of art than
Donatello, the supreme sculptor of his time? Because Donatello had not the temper which would
bully a hundred popes, and extract a magnificent advertisement from each encounter. Why does
Shelley still claim a larger share of the world's admiration than Keats, his indubitable superior?
Because Shelley was blessed or cursed with the trick of interesting the world by the accidents
of his life.

So by a similar faculty Gilderoy and Jack Rann have kept themselves and their achievements
in the light of day. Had they lived in the nineteenth century they might have been the vendors
of patent pills, or the chairmen of bubble companies. Whatever trade they had followed, their
names would have been on every hoarding, their wares would have been puffed in every journal.
They understood the art of publicity better than any of their contemporaries, and they are
remembered not because they were the best thieves of their time, but because they were determined
to interest the people in their misdeeds. Gilderoy's brutality, which was always theatrical,
ensured a constant remembrance, and the lofty gallows added to his repute; while the brilliant
inspiration of the strings, which decorated Rann's breeches, was sufficient to conquer death.
How should a hero sink to oblivion who had chosen for himself so splendid a name as Sixteen-String
Jack?

So far, then, their achievement is parallel. And parallel also is their taste for melodrama.
Each employed means too great or too violent for the end in view. Gilderoy burnt houses and
ravished women, when his sole object was the acquisition of money. Sixteen-String Jack terrified
Bagnigge Wells with the dreadful announcement that he was a highwayman, when his kindly, stupid
heart would have shrunk from the shedding of a drop of blood. So they both blustered through
the world, the one in deed, the other in word; and both played their parts with so little refinement
that they frightened the groundlings to a timid admiration. Here the resemblance is at an end.
In the essentials of their trade Gilderoy was a professional, Rann a mere amateur. They both
bullied; but, while Sixteen-String Jack was content to shout threats, and pick up half-a-crown,
Gilderoy breathed murder, and demanded a vast ransom. Only once in his career did the 'disgraceful
Scotsman' become gay and debonair. Only once did he relax the tension of his frown, and pick
pockets with the lightness and freedom of a gentleman. It was on his voyage to France that
he forgot his old policy of arson and pillage, and truly the Court of the Great King was not
the place for his rapacious cruelty. Jack Rann, on the other hand, would have taken life as
a prolonged jest, if Sir John Fielding and the sheriffs had not checked his mirth. He was but
a bungler on the road, with no more resource than he might have learned from the common chap-book,
or from the dying speeches, hawked in Newgate Street. But he had a fine talent for merriment;
he loved nothing so well as a smart coat and a pretty woman. Thieving was no passion with him,
but a necessity. How could he dance at a masquerade or court his Ellen with an empty pocket?
So he took to the road as the sole profession of an idle man, and he bullied his way from Hounslow
to Epping in sheer lightness of heart. After all, to rob Dr. Bell of eighteenpence was the
work of a simpleton. It was a very pretty taste which expressed itself in a pea-green coat
and deathless strings; and Rann will keep posterity's respect rather for the accessories of
his art than for the art itself. On the other hand, you cannot imagine Gilderoy habited otherwise
than in black; you cannot imagine this monstrous matricide taking pleasure in the smaller elegancies
of life. From first to last he was the stern and beetle-browed marauder, who would have despised
the frippery of Sixteen-String Jack as vehemently as his sudden appearance would have frightened
the foppish lover of Ellen Roach.

Their conduct with women is sufficient index of their character. Jack Rann was too general
a lover for fidelity. But he was amiable, even in his unfaithfulness; he won the undying affection
of his Ellen; he never stood in the dock without a nosegay tied up by fair and nimble fingers;
he was attended to Tyburn by a bevy of distinguished admirers. Gilderoy, on the other hand,
approached women in a spirit of violence. His Sadic temper drove him to kill those whom he
affected to love. And his cruelty was amply repaid. While Ellen Roach perjured herself to save
the lover, to whose memory she professed a lifelong loyalty, it was Peg Cunningham who wreaked
her vengeance in the betrayal of Gilderoy. He remained true to his character, when he ripped
up the belly of his betrayer. This was the closing act of his life.

Rann, also, was consistent, even to the gallows. The night before his death he entertained
seven women at supper, and outlaughed them all. The contrast is not so violent as it appears.
The one act is melodrama, the other farce. And what is farce, but melodrama in a happier shape?

THOMAS PURENEY

THOMAS PURENEY, Archbishop among Ordinaries, lived and preached in the heyday of Newgate. His
was the good fortune to witness Sheppard's encounter with the topsman, and to shrive the battered
soul of Jonathan Wild. Nor did he fall one inch below his opportunity. Designed by Providence
to administer a final consolation to the evil-doer, he permitted no false ambition to distract
his talent. As some men are born for the gallows, so he was born to thump the cushion of a
prison pulpit; and his peculiar aptitude was revealed to him before he had time to spend his
strength in mistaken endeavour.

For thirty years his squat, stout figure was amiably familiar to all such as enjoyed the Liberties
of the Jug. For thirty years his mottled nose and the rubicundity of his cheeks were the ineffaceable
ensigns of his intemperance. Yet there was a grimy humour in his forbidding aspect. The fusty
black coat, which sat ill upon his shambling frame, was all besmirched with spilled snuff,
and the lees of a thousand quart pots. The bands of his profession were ever awry upon a tattered
shirt. His ancient wig scattered dust and powder as he went, while a single buckle of some
tawdry metal gave a look of oddity to his clumsy, slipshod feet. A caricature of a man, he
ambled and chuckled and seized the easy pleasures within his reach. There was never a summer's
day but he caught upon his brow the few faint gleams of sunlight that penetrated the gloomy
yard. Hour after hour he would sit, his short fingers hardly linked across his belly, drinking
his cup of ale, and puffing at a half-extinguished tobacco-pipe. Meanwhile he would reflect
upon those triumphs of oratory which were his supreme delight. If it fell on a Monday that
he took the air, a smile of satisfaction lit up his fat, loose features, for still he pondered
the effect of yesterday's masterpiece. On Saturday the glad expectancy of to-morrow lent him
a certain joyous dignity. At other times his eye lacked lustre, his gesture buoyancy, unless
indeed he were called upon to follow the cart to Tyburn, or to compose the Last Dying Speech
of some notorious malefactor. 

A List of Coblers Temples Ties, To keep the Hair out of their Eyes; From whence 'tis plain the
Diadem That Princes wear, derives from them. And therefore Crowns are now-a-days Adorn'd with
Golden Stars and Rays, Which plainly shews the near Alliance 'Twixt cobling and the Planets
Science.

Besides, that slow-pac'd Sign Bootes, As 'tis miscall'd, we know not who 'tis? But Partridge
ended all Disputes, He knew his Trade, and call'd it **Boots.

The Horned Moon, which heretofore Upon their Shoes the Romans wore, Whose Wideness kept their Toes
from Corns, And whence we claim our Shooing-Horns; Shows how the Art of Cobling bears A near
Resemblance to the Spheres.

A Scrap of Parchment hung by Geometry (A great Refinement in Barometry) Can, like the Stars,
foretel the Weather; And what is Parchment else but Leather? Which an Astrologer might use,
Either for Almanacks or Shoes.

Thus Partridge, by his Wit and Parts, At once did practise both these
Arts; And as the boading Owl (or rather The Bat, because her Wings
are Leather) Steals from her private Cell by Night, And flies about
the Candle-Light; So learned Partridge could as well Creep in the
Dark from Leathern Cell, And, in his Fancy, fly as fair, To peep upon
a twinkling Star.

Besides, he could confound the Spheres, And set the Planets by the Ears; To shew his Skill,
he Mars could join To Venus in Aspect Mali'n; Then call in Mercury for Aid, And cure the Wounds
that Venus made.

Great Scholars have in Lucian read, When Philip, King of Greece was dead, His Soul and Spirit
did divide, And each Part took a diff'rent Side; One rose a Star, the other fell Beneath, and
mended Shoes in Hell.

Thus Partridge still shines in each Art, The Cobling and Star-gazing Part, And is install'd as
good a Star As any of the Caesars are.

Triumphant Star! some Pity shew On Coblers militant below, Whom roguish Boys in stormy Nights Torment,
by pissing out their Lights; Or thro' a Chink convey their Smoke; Inclos'd Artificers to choke.

Thou,
high exalted in thy Sphere, May'st follow still thy Calling there. To thee the Bull will lend
his hide, By Phoebus newly tann'd and dry'd. For thee they Argo's Hulk will tax, And scrape
her pitchy Sides for Wax. Then Ariadne kindly lends Her braided Hair to make thee Ends. The Point
of Sagittarius' Dart Turns to an awl, by heav'nly Art; And Vulcan, wheedled by his Wife, Will forge
for thee a Paring-Knife. For want of Room, by Virgo's Side, She'll strain a Point, and sit astride***,
To take thee kindly in between, And then the Signs will be Thirteen.

*Partridge was a Cobler.

** See his Almanack

***Tibi brachia contrahet ingens Scorpius, etc.

*****

An Epitaph on Partridge.

*****

Partridge's reply

'Squire Bickerstaff detected; or, the astrological impostor convicted;

by John Partridge, student in physick and astrology.

It is hard, my dear countrymen of these united nations, it is very hard that a Briton born, a Protestant
astrologer, a man of revolution principles, an assertor of the liberty
and property of the people, should cry out, in vain, for justice against
a Frenchman, a Papist, an illiterate pretender to science; that would
blast my reputation, most inhumanly bury me alive, and defraud my
native country of those services, that, in my double capacity, I daily
offer to the publick.

What great provocations I have receiv'd, let the impartial reader judge, and how unwillingly, even in
my own defence, I now enter the lists against falsehood, ignorance and envy: But I am exasperated,
at length, to drag out this cacus from the den of obscurity where he lurks, detect him by
the light of those stars he has so impudently traduced, and shew there's not a monster in the skies
so pernicious and malevolent to mankind, as an ignorant pretender to physick and astrology.
I shall not directly fall on the many gross errors, nor expose the notorious absurdities of this
prostituted libeller, till I have let the learned world fairly into the controversy depending, and
then leave the unprejudiced to judge of the merits and justice of the cause.

It was towards the conclusion of the year 1707, when an impudent pamphlet crept into the world,
intituled, 'Predictions, etc.' by Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq;--Amongst the many arrogant assertions
laid down by that lying spirit of divination, he was pleas'd to pitch on the Cardinal de Noailles
and myself, among many other eminent and illustrious persons, that were to die within the
compass of the ensuing year; and peremptorily fixes the month, day, and hour of our deaths: This,
I think, is sporting with great men, and publick spirits, to the scandal of religion, and reproach
of power; and if sovereign princes and astrologers must make diversion for the vulgar---- why
then farewel, say I, to all governments, ecclesiastical and civil.

But, I thank my better stars, I am alive to confront this false and audacious predictor, and
to make him rue the hour he ever affronted a man of science and resentment.

The Cardinal may take what measures he pleases with him; as his excellency is a foreigner, and
a papist, he has no reason to rely on me for his justification; I shall only assure the world
he is alive---- but as he was bred to letters, and is master of a pen, let him use it in his
own defence. In the mean time I shall present the publick with a faithful narrative of the ungenerous
treatment and hard usage I have received from the virulent papers and malicious practices of
this pretended astrologer.

A true and impartial account of the proceedings of Isaac Bickerstaff, Esq; against me----

The 28th of March, Anno Dom. 1708, being the night this sham-prophet had so impudently fix'd for my
last, which made little impression on myself; but I cannot answer for my whole family; for
my wife, with a concern more than usual, prevailed on me to take somewhat to sweat for a cold;
and, between the hours of eight and nine, to go to bed: The maid, as she was warming my bed,
with a curiosity natural to young wenches, runs to the window, and asks of one passing the street,
who the bell toll'd for? Dr. Partridge, says he, that famous almanack-maker, who died suddenly this
evening: The poor girl provoked, told him he ly'd like a rascal; the other very sedately reply'd,
the sexton had so informed him, and if false, he was to blame for imposing upon a stranger. She asked a
second, and a third, as they passed, and every one was in the same tone. Now I don't say these
are accomplices to a certain astrological 'squire, and that one Bickerstaff might be sauntring
thereabouts; because I will assert nothing here but what I dare attest, and plain matter of fact.
My wife at this fell into a violent disorder; and I must own I was
a little discomposed at the oddness of the accident.

In the mean time one knocks at my door, Betty runs down, and opening, finds a sober grave person,
who modestly enquires if this was Dr. Partridge's? She taking him for some cautious city-patient,
that came at that time for privacy, shews him into the dining room. As soon as I could compose myself,
I went to him, and was surprized to find my gentleman mounted on a table with a two-foot rule
in his hand, measuring my walls, and taking the dimensions of the room. Pray sir, says I, not
to interrupt you, have you any business with me? Only, sir, replies he, order the girl to bring me
a better light, for this is but a very dim one. Sir, says I, my name is Partridge: Oh! the Doctor's
brother, belike, cries he; the stair-case, I believe, and these two apartments hung in close
mourning, will be sufficient, and only a strip of bays round the other rooms. The Doctor must
needs die rich, he had great dealings in his way for many years; if he had no family coat, you
had as good use the escutcheons of the company, they are as showish, and will look as magnificent
as if he was descended from the blood royal. With that I assumed a great air of authority, and
demanded who employ'd him, or how he came there?

Why, I was sent, sir, by the Company of Undertakers, says he, and they were employed by the
honest gentleman, who is executor to the good Doctor departed; and our rascally porter, I believe,
is fallen fast asleep with the black cloth and sconces, or he had been here, and we might
have been tacking up by this time. Sir, says I, pray be advis'd by a friend, and make the
best of your speed out of my doors, for I hear my wife's voice, (which by the by, is pretty distinguishable)
and in that corner of the room stands a good cudgel, which somebody has felt e're now; if that
light in her hands, and she know the business you come about, without consulting the stars,
I can assure you it will be employed very much to the detriment of your person. Sir, cries he, bowing
with great civility, I perceive extreme grief for the loss of the Doctor disorders you a little
at present, but early in the morning I'll wait on you with all necessary materials. Now I mention
no Mr. Bickerstaff, nor do I say, that a certain star-gazing 'squire has been playing my executor
before his time; but I leave the world to judge, and if he puts things and things fairly together,
it won't be much wide of the mark.

Well, once more I got my doors clos'd, and prepar'd for bed, in hopes of a little repose after so
many ruffling adventures; just as I was putting out my light in order to it, another bounces
as hard as he can knock; I open the window, and ask who's there, and what he wants? I am Ned the
sexton, replies he, and come to know whether the Doctor left any orders for a funeral sermon,
and where he is to be laid, and whether his grave is to be plain or bricked? Why, sirrah, says
I, you know me well enough; you know I am not dead, and how dare you affront me in this manner?
Alack-a-day, replies the fellow, why 'tis in print, and the whole town knows you are dead; why, there's
Mr. White the joiner is but fitting screws to your coffin, he'll
be here with it in an instant: he was afraid you would have wanted
it before this time.

Sirrah, Sirrah, says I, you shall know tomorrow to your cost, that I am alive, and alive like
to be. Why, 'tis strange, sir, says he, you should make such a secret of your death to us that
are your neighbours; it looks as if you had a design to defraud the church of its dues; and
let me tell you, for one that has lived so long by the heavens, that's
unhandsomely done.

Hist, Hist, says another rogue that stood by him, away Doctor, in
your flannel gear as fast as you can, for here's a whole pack of dismals
coming to you with their black equipage, and how indecent will it
look for you to stand fright'ning folks at your window, when you should
have been in your coffin this three hours?

In short, what with undertakers, imbalmers, joiners, sextons, and
your damn'd elegy hawkers, upon a late practitioner in physick and
astrology, I got not one wink of sleep that night, nor scarce a moment's
rest ever since.

Now I doubt not but this villainous 'squire has the impudence to assert, that these are entirely
strangers to him; he, good man, knows nothing of the matter, and honest Isaac Bickerstaff, I warrant
you, is more a man of honour, than to be an accomplice with a pack of rascals, that walk the
streets on nights, and disturb good people in their beds; but he is out, if he thinks the whole
world is blind; for there is one John Partridge can smell a knave as far as Grubstreet,--tho'
he lies in the most exalted garret, and writes himself 'Squire:--

But I'll keep my temper, and proceed in the narration.

I could not stir out of doors for the space of three months after
this, but presently one comes up to me in the street; Mr Partridge,
that coffin you was last buried in I have not been yet paid for: Doctor,
cries another dog, How d'ye think people can live by making of graves
for nothing?

Next time you die, you may e'en toll out the bell yourself for Ned. A third rogue tips me by
the elbow, and wonders how I have the conscience to sneak abroad without paying my funeral expences.
Lord, says one, I durst have swore that was honest Dr. Partridge, my old friend; but poor
man, he is gone. I beg your pardon, says another, you look so like my old acquaintance that I
used to consult on some private occasions; but, alack, he's gone the way of all flesh----
Look, look, look, cries a third, after a competent space of staring at me, would not one think
our neighbour the almanack-maker, was crept out of his grave to take t'other peep at the stars
in this world, and shew how much he is improv'd in fortune-telling by having taken a journey to the
other?

Nay, the very reader, of our parish, a good sober, discreet person, has sent two or three times
for me to come and be buried decently, or send him sufficient reasons to the contrary, if I have
been interr'd in any other parish, to produce my certificate, as the act requires. My poor wife
is almost run distracted with being called Widow Partridge, when she knows its false; and once
a term she is cited into the court, to take out letters of administration. But the greatest
grievance is, a paultry quack, that takes up my calling just under
my nose, and in his printed directions with N.B. says, He lives in
the house of the late ingenious Mr. John Partridge, an eminent practitioner
in leather, physick and astrology.

But to show how far the wicked spirit of envy, malice and resentment can hurry some men, my nameless
old persecutor had provided me a monument at the stone-cutter's and would have erected it in the
parish-church; and this piece of notorious and expensive villany had actually succeeded, had
I not used my utmost interest with the vestry, where it was carried at last but by two voices,
that I am still alive.

That stratagem failing, out comes a long sable elegy, bedeck'd with hour-glasses, mattocks, sculls,
spades, and skeletons, with an epitaph as confidently written to abuse me, and my profession,
as if I had been under ground these twenty years.

And, after such barbarous treatment as this, can the world blame me, when I ask, What is become
of the freedom of an Englishman? And where is the liberty and property that my old glorious friend
came over to assert? We have drove popery out of the nation, and sent slavery to foreign climes.
The arts only remain in bondage, when a man of science and character shall be openly insulted
in the midst of the many useful services he is daily paying to the publick. Was it ever heard, even
in Turkey or Algiers, that a state-astrologer was banter'd out of his life by an ignorant
impostor, or bawl'd out of the world by a pack of villanous, deep-mouth'd
hawkers?

Though I print almanacks, and publish advertisements; though I produce certificates under the ministers
and church-wardens hands I am alive, and attest the same on oath at quarter-sessions, out comes
a full and true relation of the death and interment of John Partridge; Truth is bore down,
attestations neglected, the testimony of sober persons despised, and a man is looked upon by
his neighbours as if he had been seven years dead, and is buried alive in the midst of his friends
and acquaintance.

Now can any man of common sense think it consistent with the honour of my profession, and not much
beneath the dignity of a philosopher, to stand bawling before his own door?---- Alive! Alive
ho! The famous Dr. Partridge! No counterfeit, but all alive!---- As if I had the twelve celestial
monsters of the zodiac to shew within, or was forced for a livelihood to turn retailer to May
and Bartholomew Fairs. Therefore, if Her Majesty would but graciously be pleased to think a hardship
of this nature worthy her royal consideration, and the next parliament, in their great wisdom
cast but an eye towards the deplorable case of their old philomath, that annually bestows
his poetical good wishes on them, I am sure there is one Isaac Bickerstaff,
Esq; would soon be truss'd up for his bloody predictions, and putting
good subjects in terror of their lives: And that henceforward to murder
a man by way of prophecy, and bury him in a printed letter, either
to a lord or commoner, shall as legally entitle him to the present
possession of Tyburn, as if he robb'd on the highway, or cut your
throat in bed.

I shall demonstrate to the judicious, that France and Rome are at the bottom of this horrid
conspiracy against me; and that culprit aforesaid is a popish emissary, has paid his visits
to St. Germains, and is now in the measures of Lewis XIV. That in attempting my reputation,
there is a general massacre of learning designed in these realms; and through my sides there
is a wound given to all the Protestant almanack-makers in the universe.

Vivat Regina.

Mr. Partridge hath been lately pleased to treat me after a very rough manner, in that which
is called, his almanack for the present year: Such usage is very undecent from one gentleman to
another, and does not at all contribute to the discovery of truth, which ought to be the great
end in all disputes of the learned. I appeal to the learned world, whether in my last year's
predictions I gave him the least provocation for such unworthy treatment. Philosophers have
differed in all ages; but the discreetest among them have always differed as became philosophers.
Scurrility and passion, in a controversy among scholars, is just so much of nothing to the
purpose, and at best, a tacit confession of a weak cause: My concern
is not so much for my own reputation, as that of the Republick of
Letters, which Mr. Partridge hath endeavoured to wound through my
sides.

If men of publick spirit must be superciliously treated for their ingenious attempts, how will
true useful knowledge be ever advanced? I wish Mr. Partridge knew the thoughts which foreign
universities have conceived of his ungenerous proceedings with me; but I am too tender of his
reputation to publish them to the world. That spirit of envy and pride, which blasts so many
rising genius's in our nation, is yet unknown among professors abroad: The necessity of justifying
myself will excuse my vanity, when I tell the reader that I have near a hundred honorary letters
from several parts of Europe (some as far as Muscovy) in praise of my performance. Besides
several others, which, as I have been credibly informed, were open'd in the post-office and
never sent me. 'Tis true the Inquisition in Portugal was pleased to burn my predictions, and
condem the author and readers of them; but I hope at the same time,
it will be consider'd in how deplorable a state learning lies at present
in that kingdom: And with the profoundest veneration for crown'd heads,
I will presume to add, that it a little concerned His Majesty of Portugal,
to interpose his authority in behalf of a scholar and a gentleman,
the subject of a nation with which he is now in so strict an alliance.

But the other kingdoms and states of Europe have treated me with more candor and generosity. If I
had leave to print the Latin letters transmitted to me from foreign parts, they would fill a volume,
and be a full defence against all that Mr. Partridge, or his accomplices of the Portugal Inquisition,
will be able to object; who, by the way, are the only enemies my predictions have ever met
with at home or abroad. But I hope I know better what is due to the honour of a learned correspondence
in so tender a point. Yet some of those illustrious persons will perhaps excuse me from transcribing
a passage or two in my own vindication. The most learned Monsieur Leibnits thus addresses to
me his third letter: Illustrissimo Bickerstaffio Astrologiae instauratori,
etc. Monsieur le Clerc, quoting my predictions in a treatise he published
last year, is pleased to say, Ita nuperrime Bickerstaffius magnum
illud Angliae fidus. Another great professor writing of me, has these
words: Bickerstaffius, nobilis Anglus, Astrologorum hujusce Saeculi
facile Princeps. Signior Magliabecchi, the Great Duke's famous library-keeper,
spends almost his whole letter in compliments and praises. 'Tis true,
the renowned Professor of Astronomy at Utrecht, seems to differ from
me in one article; but it is in a modest manner, that becomes a philosopher;
as, Pace tanti viri dixerim: And pag.55, he seems to lay the error
upon the printer (as indeed it ought) and says, vel forsan error typographi,
cum alioquin Bickerstaffius ver doctissimus, etc.

If Mr. Partridge
had followed this example in the controversy between us, he might
have spared me the trouble of justifying myself in so publick a manner.
 But the knife was discovered by his warder's vigilance,
and taken from him after a desperate struggle. At the scaffold he behaved with admirable gravity:
confessing the wickeder of his robberies, and asking pardon for his enormous crimes. 'Of two
virtues,' he boasted at the self-same moment that the cart left him dancing without the music,
'I have ever cherished an honest pride: never have I stooped to friendship with Jonathan Wild,
or with any of his detestable thief-takers; and, though an undutiful son, I never damned my
mother's eyes.'

Thus died Jack Sheppard; intrepid burglar and incomparable artist, who, in his own separate
ambition of prison-breaking, remains, and will ever remain, unrivalled. His most brilliant
efforts were the result neither of strength nor of cunning; for so slight was he of build,
so deficient in muscle, that both Edgworth Bess and Mistress Maggot were wont to bang him to
their own mind and purpose. And an escape so magnificently planned, so bravely executed as
was his from the Strong Room, is far greater than a mere effect of cunning. Those mysterious
gifts which enable mankind to batter the stone walls of a prison, or to bend the iron bars
of a cage, were pre-eminently his. It is also certain that he could not have employed his gifts
in a more reputable profession.

II--LOUIS-DOMINIQUE CARTOUCHE

Of all the heroes who have waged a private and undeclared war upon their neighbours, Louis-Dominique
Cartouche was the most generously endowed. It was but his resolute contempt for politics, his
unswerving love of plunder for its own sake, that prevented him from seizing a throne or questing
after the empire of the world. The modesty of his ambition sets him below Cæsar, or Napoleon,
but he yields to neither in the genius of success: whatever he would attain was his on the
instant, nor did failure interrupt his career, until treachery, of which he went in perpetual
terror, involved himself and his comrades in ruin. His talent of generalship was unrivalled.
None of the gang was permitted the liberty of a free-lance. By Cartouche was the order given,
and so long as the chief was in repose, Paris might enjoy her sleep. When it pleased him to
join battle a whistle was enough.

Now, it was revealed to his intelligence that the professional thief, who devoted all his days
and such of his nights as were spared from depredation to wine and women, was more readily
detected than the valet-de-chambre, who did but crack a crib or cry 'Stand and deliver!' on
a proper occasion. Wherefore, he bade his soldiers take service in the great houses of Paris,
that, secure of suspicion, they might still be ready to obey the call of duty. Thus, also,
they formed a reconnoitring force, whose vigilance no prize might elude; and nowhere did Cartouche
display his genius to finer purpose than in this prudent disposition of his army. It remained
only to efface himself, and therein he succeeded admirably by never sleeping two following
nights in the same house: so that, when Cartouche was the terror of Paris, when even the King
trembled in his bed, none knew his stature nor could recognise his features. In this shifting
and impersonal vizard, he broke houses, picked pockets, robbed on the pad. One night he would
terrify the Faubourg St. Germain; another he would plunder the humbler suburb of St. Antoine;
but on each excursion he was companioned by experts, and the map of Paris was rigidly apportioned
among his followers. To each district a captain was appointed, whose business it was to apprehend
the customs of the quarter, and thus to indicate the proper season of attack.

Ever triumphant, with yellow-boys ever jingling in his pocket, Cartouche lived a life of luxurious
merriment. A favourite haunt was a cabaret in the Rue Dauphine, chosen for the sanest of reasons,
as his Captain Ferrand declared, that the landlady was a femme d'esprit. Here he would sit
with his friends and his women, and thereafter drive his chariot across the Pont Neuf to the
sunnier gaiety of the Palais-Royal. A finished dandy, he wore by preference a grey-white coat
with silver buttons; his breeches and stockings were on a famous occasion of black silk; while
a sword, scabbarded in satin, hung at his hip.

But if Cartouche, like many another great man, had the faculty of enjoyment, if he loved wine
and wit, and mistresses handsomely attired in damask, he did not therefore neglect his art.
When once the gang was perfectly ordered, murder followed robbery with so instant a frequency
that Paris was panic-stricken. A cry of 'Cartouche' straightway ensured an empty street. The
King took counsel with his ministers: munificent rewards were offered, without effect. The
thief was still at work in all security, and it was a pretty irony which urged him to strip
and kill on the highway one of the King's own pages. Also, he did his work with so astonishing
a silence, with so reasoned a certainty, that it seemed impossible to take him or his minions
red-handed.

Before all, he discouraged the use of firearms. 'A pistol,' his philosophy urged, 'is an excellent
weapon in an emergency, but reserve it for emergencies. At close quarters it is none too sure;
and why give the alarm against yourself?' Therefore he armed his band with loaded staves, which
sent their enemies into a noiseless and fatal sleep. Thus was he wont to laugh at the police,
deeming capture a plain impossibility. The traitor, in sooth, was his single, irremediable
fear, and if ever suspicion was aroused against a member of the gang, that member was put to
death with the shortest shrift.

It happened in the last year of Cartouche's supremacy that a lily-livered comrade fell in love
with a pretty dressmaker. The indiscretion was the less pardonable since the dressmaker had
a horror of theft, and impudently tried to turn her lover from his trade. Cartouche, discovering
the backslider, resolved upon a public exhibition. Before the assembled band he charged the
miscreant with treason, and, cutting his throat, disfigured his face beyond recognition. Thereafter
he pinned to the corse the following inscription, that others might be warned by so monstrous
an example: 'Ci git Jean Rebâti, qui a eu le traitement qu'il méritait: ceux qui en feront
autant que lui peuvent attendre le même sort.' Yet this was the murder that led to the hero's
own capture and death.

Du Châtelet, another craven, had already aroused the suspicions of his landlady: who, finding
him something troubled the day after the traitor's death, and detecting a spot of blood on
his neckerchief, questioned him closely. The coward fumbling at an answer, she was presently
convinced of his guilt, and forthwith denounced him for a member of the gang to M. Pacome,
an officer of the Guard. Straightly did M. Pacôme summon Du Chtelet, and, assuming his guilt
for certitude, bade him surrender his captain. 'My friend,' said he, 'I know you for an associate
of Cartouche. Your hands are soiled with murder and rapine. Confess the hiding-place of Cartouche,
or in twenty-four hours you are broken on the wheel.' Vainly did Du Châtelet protest his ignorance.
M. Pacôme was resolute, and before the interview was over the robber confessed that Cartouche
had given him rendezvous at nine next day.

In the grey morning thirty soldiers crept forth guided by the traitor, 'en habits de bourgeois
et de chasseur,' for the house where Cartouche had lain. It was an inn, kept by one Savard,
near la Haulte Borne de la Courtille; and the soldiers, though they lacked not numbers, approached
the chieftain's lair shaking with terror. In front marched Du Châtelet; the rest followed in
Indian file, ten paces apart. When the traitor reached the house, Savard recognised him for
a friend, and entertained him with familiar speech. 'Is there anybody upstairs?' demanded Du
Châtelet. 'No,' replied Savard. 'Are the four women upstairs?' asked Du Châtelet again. 'Yes,
they are,' came the answer: for Savard knew the password of the day. Instantly the soldiers
filled the tavern, and, mounting the staircase, discovered Cartouche with his three lieutenants,
Balagny, Limousin, and Blanchard. One of the four still lay abed; but Cartouche, with all the
dandy's respect for his clothes, was mending his breeches. The others hugged a flagon of wine
over the fire.

So fell the scourge of Paris into the grip of justice. But once under lock and key, he displayed
all the qualities which made him supreme. His gaiety broke forth into a light-hearted contempt
of his gaolers, and the Lieutenant Criminel, who would interrogate him, was covered with ridicule.
Not for an instant did he bow to fate: all shackled as he was, his legs engarlanded in heavy
chains--which he called his garters--he tempered his merriment with the meditation of escape.
From the first he denied all knowledge of Cartouche, insisting that his name was Charles Bourguignon,
and demanding burgundy, that he might drink to his country and thus prove him a true son of
the soil. Not even the presence of his mother and brother abashed him. He laughed them away
as impostors, hired by a false justice to accuse and to betray the innocent. No word of confession
crossed his lips, and he would still entertain the officers of the law with joke and epigram.

Thus he won over a handful of the Guard, and, begging for solitude, he straightway set about
escape with a courage and an address which Jack Sheppard might have envied. His delicate ear
discovered that a cellar lay beneath his cell; and with the old nail which lies on the floor
of every prison he made his way downwards into a boxmaker's shop. But a barking dog spoiled
the enterprise: the boxmaker and his daughter were immediately abroad, and once more Cartouche
was lodged in prison, weighted with still heavier garters.

Then came a period of splendid notoriety: he held his court, he gave an easy rein to his wit,
he received duchesses and princes with an air of amiable patronage. Few there were of his visitants
who left him without a present of gold, and thus the universal robber was further rewarded
by his victims. His portrait hung in every house, and his thin, hard face, his dry, small features
were at last familiar to the whole of France. M. Grandval made him the hero of an epic--'Le
Vice Puni.' Even the theatre was dominated by his presence; and while Arlequin-Cartouche was
greeted with thunders of applause at the Italiens, the more serious Français set Cartouche
upon the stage in three acts, and lavished upon its theme the resources of a then intelligent
art. M. Le Grand, author of the piece, deigned to call upon the king of thieves, spoke some
words of argot with him, and by way of conscience money gave him a hundred crowns.

Cartouche set little store by such patronage. He pocketed the crowns, and then put an end to
the comedy by threatening that if it were played again the companions of Cartouche would punish
all such miscreants as dared to make him a laughing stock. For Cartouche would endure ridicule
at no man's hand. At the very instant of his arrest, all bare-footed as he was, he kicked a
constable who presumed to smile at his discomfiture. His last days were spent in resolute abandonment.
True, he once attempted to beat out his brains with the fetters that bound him; true, also,
he took a poison that had been secretly conveyed within the prison. But both attempts failed,
and, more scrupulously watched, he had no other course than jollity. Lawyers and priests he
visited with a like and bitter scorn, and when, on November 27, 1721, he was led to the scaffold,
not a word of confession or contrition had been dragged from him. 

It now only remains for me to return my most sincere thanks to the many friends to whose kindness
I have been so much indebted during the continuance of this long and anxious undertaking. To
his Excellency the Governor I feel that I can never be sufficiently grateful for the very kind,
prompt, and liberal support and encouragement which I have invariably experienced, and to which
I have been mainly indebted for the means of accomplishing even the
little I have done.

Of his gang, forty were in the service of Mlle. de Montpensier, who was already in Spain; while
two obeyed the Duchesse de Ventadour as valets-de-pied. His confession, in brief, was so dangerous
a document, it betrayed the friends and servants of so many great houses, that the officers
of the Law found safety for their patrons in its destruction, and not a line of the hero's
testimony remains. The trial of his comrades dragged on for many a year, and after Cartouche
had been cruelly broken on the wheel, not a few of the gang, of which he had been at once the
terror and inspiration, suffered a like fate. Such the career and such the fitting end of the
most distinguished marauder the world has known. Thackeray, with no better guide than a chap-book,
was minded to belittle him, now habiting him like a scullion, now sending him forth on some
petty errand of cly-faking. But for all Thackeray's contempt his fame is still undimmed, and
he has left the reputation of one who, as thief unrivalled, had scarce his equal as wit and
dandy even in the days when Louis the Magnificent was still a memory and an example.

III--A PARALLEL

(SHEPPARD AND CARTOUCHE)

IF the seventeenth century was the golden age of the hightobyman, it was at the advent of the
eighteenth that the burglar and street-robber plied their trade with the most distinguished
success, and it was the good fortune of both Cartouche and Sheppard to be born in the nick
of time. Rivals in talent, they were also near contemporaries, and the Scourge of Paris may
well have been famous in the purlieus of Clare Market before Jack the Slip-String paid the
last penalty of his crimes. As each of these great men harboured a similar ambition, so their
careers are closely parallel. Born in a humble rank of life, Jack, like Cartouche, was the
architect of his own fortune; Jack, like Cartouche, lived to be flattered by noble dames and
to claim the solicitude of his Sovereign; and each owed his pre-eminence rather to natural
genius than to a sympathetic training.

But, for all the Briton's artistry, the Frenchman was in all points save one the superior.
Sheppard's brain carried him not beyond the wants of to-day and the extortions of Poll Maggot.

Who knows but he might have been a respectable citizen, with never a chance for the display
of his peculiar talent, had not hunger and his mistress's greed driven him upon the pad? History
records no brilliant robbery of his own planning, and so circumscribed was his imagination
that he must needs pick out his own friends and benefactors for depredation. His paltry sense
of discipline permitted him to be betrayed even by his brother and pupil, and there was no
cracksman of his time over whose head he held the rod of terror. Even his hatred of Jonathan
Wild was the result not of policy but of prejudice. Cartouche, on the other hand, was always
perfect when at work. The master of himself, he was also the master of his fellows. There was
no detail of civil war that he had not made his own, and he still remains, after nearly two
centuries, the greatest captain the world has seen. Never did he permit an enterprise to fail
by accident; never was he impelled by hunger or improvidence to fight a battle unprepared.
His means were always neatly fitted to their end, as is proved by the truth that, throughout
his career, he was arrested but once, and then not by his own inadvertence but by the treachery
of others.

Yet from the moment of arrest Jack Sheppard asserted his magnificent superiority. If Cartouche
was a sorry bungler at prison-breaking, Sheppard was unmatched in this dangerous art. The sport
of the one was to break in, of the other to break out. True, the Briton proved his inferiority
by too frequently placing himself under lock and key; but you will forgive his every weakness
for the unexampled skill wherewith he extricated himself from the stubbornest dungeon. Cartouche
would scarce have given Sheppard a menial's office in his gang. How cordially Sheppard would
have despised Cartouche's solitary experiment in escape! To be foiled by a dog and a boxmaker's
daughter! Would not that have seemed contemptible to the master breaker of those unnumbered
doors and walls which separate the Castle from the freedom of Newgate roof? 

It was evident, that I could never hope to take my party across the lake, and it was equally evident,
that I should not be able to travel around its shores, from the total
absence of all fresh water, grass, or wood, whilst the very saline
nature of the soil in the surrounding country, made even the rain
water salt, after lying for an hour or two upon the ground.

My only chance of success now lay in the non-termination of Flinders range, and in the prospect
it held out to me, that by continuing our course along it we might be able to procure grass and water
in its recesses, until we were either taken beyond Lake Torrens, or led to some practicable
opening to the north.

With a heavy heart I turned towards the mountains, and steering N. E. for ten miles, halted at
dark, where there was nothing for our horses to eat or drink, and we were consequently obliged to
tie them up for the night. We had still a few oats left and gave each horse three pints. A short
time before encamping, I had observed that Lake Torrens was trending
more to the eastward, and that when we halted, it was not at any very
great distance from us.

July 9.--One of our horses having got loose last night, pulled the cork out of the keg in which
was our small stock of the dirty brackish water we had found yesterday, and rolling the keg
over, destroyed its contents; we were thus deprived of our breakfasts, and consequently had
but little delay in starting. I intended to push on steadily for the hills, but after travelling
six miles came to a puddle in the plains, with tolerable grass around, and at this I halted
for the day, to rest the horses. Though
their trade demanded physical strength, each was small and slender of build. 'A little, slight-limbed
lad,' says the historian of Sheppard. 'A thin, spare frame,' sings the poet of Cartouche. Here,
then, neither had the advantage, and if in the shades Cartouche despises the clumsiness and
vulgarity of his rival, Sheppard may still remember the glory of Newgate, and twit the Frenchman
with the barking of the boxmaker's dog. But genius is the talent of the dead, and the wise,
who are not partisans, will not deny to the one or to the other the possession of the rarer gift.

VAUX

TO Haggart, who babbled on the Castle Rock of Willie Wallace and was only nineteen when he
danced without the music; to Simms, alias Gentleman Harry, who showed at Tyburn how a hero
could die; to George Barrington, the incomparably witty and adroit--to these a full meed of
honour has been paid. Even the coarse and dastardly Freney has achieved, with Thackeray's aid
(and Lever's) something of a reputation. But James Hardy Vaux, despite his eloquent bid for
fame, has not found his rhapsodist. Yet a more consistent ruffian never pleaded for mercy.
From his early youth until in 1819 he sent forth his Memoirs to the world, he lived industriously
upon the cross. There was no racket but he worked it with energy and address. Though he practised
the more glorious crafts of pickpocket and shoplifter, he did not despise the begging-letter,
and he suffered his last punishment for receiving what another's courage had conveyed. His
enterprise was not seldom rewarded with success, and for a decade of years he continued to
preserve an appearance of gentility; but it is plain, even from his own narrative, that he
was scarce an artist, and we shall best understand him if we recognise that he was a Philistine
among thieves. He lived in an age of pocket-picking, and skill in this branch is the true test
of his time. A contemporary of Barrington, he had before him the most brilliant of examples,
which might properly have enforced the worth of a simple method. But, though he constantly
brags of his success at Drury Lane, we take not his generalities for gospel, and the one exploit
whose credibility is enforced with circumstance was pitiful both in conception and performance.
A meeting of freeholders at the 'Mermaid Tavern,' Hackney, was the occasion, and after drawing
blank upon blank, Vaux succeeded at last in extracting a silver snuff-box. Now, his clumsiness
had suggested the use of the scissors, and the victim not only discovered the scission in his
coat, but caught the thief with the implements of his art upon him. By a miracle of impudence
Vaux escaped conviction, but he deserved the gallows for his want of principle, and not even
sympathy could have let drop a tear, had justice seized her due. On the straight or on the
cross the canons of art deserve respect; and a thief is great, not because he is a thief, but
because, in filling his own pocket, he preserves from violence the legitimate traditions of
his craft.

But it was in conflict with the jewellers that Vaux best proved his mettle. It was his wont
to clothe himself 'in the most elegant attire,' and on the pretence of purchase to rifle the
shops of Piccadilly. For this offence--'pinching' the Cant Dictionary calls it--he did his
longest stretch of time, and here his admirable qualities of cunning and coolness found their
most generous scope. A love of fine clothes he shared with all the best of his kind, and he
visited Mr Bilger--the jeweller who arrested him--magnificently arrayed. He wore a black coat
and waistcoat, blue pantaloons, Hessian boots, and a hat 'in the extreme of the newest fashion.'
He was also resplendent with gold watch and eye-glass. His hair was powdered, and a fawney
sparkled on his dexter fam. The booty was enormous, and a week later he revisited the shop
on another errand. This second visit was the one flash of genius in a somewhat drab career:
the jeweller was so completely dumfounded, that Vaux might have got clean away. But though
he kept discreetly out of sight for a while, at last he drifted back to his ancient boozing-ken,
and was there betrayed to a notorious thief-catcher. The inevitable sentence of death followed.
It was commuted after the fashion of the time, and Vaux, having sojourned a while at the Hulks,
sought for a second time the genial airs of Botany Bay.

His vanity and his laziness were alike invincible. He believed himself a miracle of learning
as well as a perfect thief, and physical toil was the sole 'lay' for which he professed no
capacity. For a while he corrected the press for a printer, and he roundly asserts that his
knowledge of literature and of foreign tongues rendered him invaluable. It was vanity again
that induced him to assert his innocence when he was lagged for so vulgar a crime as stealing
a wipe from a tradesman in Chancery Lane. At the moment of arrest he was on his way to purchase
base coin from a Whitechapel bit-faker: but, despite his nefarious errand, he is righteously
wrathful at what he asserts was an unjust conviction, and henceforth he assumed the crown of
martyrdom. His first and last ambition during the intervals of freedom was gentility, and so
long as he was not at work he lived the life of a respectable grocer. Although the casual Cyprian
flits across his page, he pursued the one flame of his life for the good motive, and he affects
to be a very model of domesticity. The sentiment of piety also was strong upon him, and if
he did not, like the illustrious Peace, pray for his jailer, he rivalled the Prison Ordinary
in comforting the condemned. Had it only been his fate to die on the gallows, how unctuous
had been his croak!

The text of his 'Memoirs' having been edited, it is scarce possible to define his literary
talent. The book, as it stands, is an excellent piece of narrative, but it loses somewhat by
the pretence of style. The man's invulnerable conceit prevented an absolute frankness, and
there is little enough hilarity to correct the acid sentiment and the intolerable vows of repentance.
Again, though he knows his subject, and can patter flash with the best, his incorrigible respectability
leads him to ape the manner of a Grub Street hack, and to banish to a vocabulary those pearls
of slang which might have added vigour and lustre to his somewhat tiresome page. However, the
thief cannot escape his inevitable defects. The vanity, the weakness, the sentimentality of
those who are born beasts of prey, yet have the faculty of depredation only half-developed,
are the foes of truth, and it is well to remember that the autobiography of a rascal is tainted
at its source. A congenial pickpocket, equipped with the self-knowledge and the candour which
would enable him to recognise himself an outlaw and justice his enemy rather than an instrument
of malice, would prove a Napoleon rather than a Vaux. So that we must e'en accept our Newgate
Calendar with its many faults upon its head, and be content. For it takes a man of genius to
write a book, and the thief who turns author commonly inhabits a paradise of the second-rate.

GEORGE BARRINGTON

AS Captain Hind was master of the road, George Barrington was (and remains for ever) the absolute
monarch of pickpockets. Though the art, superseding the cutting of purses, had been practised
with courage and address for half a century before Barrington saw the light, it was his own
incomparable genius that raised thievery from the dangerous valley of experiment, and set it,
secure and honoured, upon the mountain height of perfection. To a natural habit of depredation,
which, being a man of letters, he was wont to justify, he added a sureness of hand, a fertility
of resource, a recklessness of courage which drove his contemporaries to an amazed respect,
and from which none but the Philistine will withhold his admiration. An accident discovered
his taste and talent. At school he attempted to kill a companion--the one act of violence which
sullies a strangely gentle career; and outraged at the affront of a flogging, he fled with
twelve guineas and a gold repeater watch. A vulgar theft this, and no presage of future greatness;
yet it proves the fearless greed, the contempt of private property, which mark as with a stigma
the temperament of the prig. His faculty did not rust long for lack of use, and at Drogheda,
when he was but sixteen, he encountered one Price, half barnstormer, half thief. Forthwith
he embraced the twin professions, and in the interlude of more serious pursuits is reported
to have made a respectable appearance as Jaffier in Venice Preserved. For a while he dreamed
of Drury Lane and glory; but an attachment for Miss Egerton, the Belvidera to his own Jaffier,
was more costly than the barns of Londonderry warranted, and, with Price for a colleague, he
set forth on a tour of robbery, merely interrupted through twenty years by a few periods of
enforced leisure.

His youth, indeed, was his golden age. For four years he practised his art, chilled by no shadow
of suspicion, and his immunity was due as well to his excellent bearing as to his sleight of
hand. In one of the countless chap-books which dishonour his fame, he is unjustly accused of
relying for his effects upon an elaborate apparatus, half knife, half scissors, wherewith to
rip the pockets of his victims. The mere backbiting of envy! An artistic triumph was never
won save by legitimate means; and the hero who plundered the Dulce of L--r at Ranelagh, who
emptied the pockets of his acquaintance without fear of exposure, who all but carried off the
priceless snuff-box of Count Orloff, most assuredly followed his craft in full simplicity and
with a proper scorn of clumsy artifice. At his first appearance he was the master, sumptuously
apparelled, with Price for valet. At Dublin his birth and quality were never questioned, and
when he made a descent upon London it was in company with Captain W. H--n, who remained for
years his loyal friend. He visited Brighton as the chosen companion of Lord Ferrers and the
wicked Lord Lyttelton. His manners and learning were alike irresistible. Though the picking
of pockets was the art and interest of his life, he was on terms of easy familiarity with light
literature, and he considered no toil too wearisome if only his conversation might dazzle his
victims. Two maxims he charactered upon his heart: the one, never to run a large risk for a
small gain; the other, never to forget the carriage and diction of a gentleman.

He never stooped to pilfer, until exposure and decay had weakened his hand. In his first week
at Dublin he carried off £1000, and it was only his fateful interview with Sir John Fielding
that gave him poverty for a bedfellow. Even at the end, when he slunk from town to town, a
notorious outlaw, he had inspirations of his ancient magnificence, and--at Chester--he eluded
the vigilance of his enemies and captured £600, wherewith he purchased some months of respectability.
Now, respectability was ever dear to him, and it was at once his pleasure and profit to live
in the highest society. Were it not blasphemy to sully Barrington with slang you would call
him a member of the swell-mob, but, having cultivated a grave and sober style for himself,
he recoiled in horror from the flash lingo, and his susceptibility demands respect.

He kept a commonplace book! Was ever such thrift in a thief? Whatever images or thoughts flashed
through his brain, he seized them on paper, even 'amidst the jollity of a tavern, or in the
warmth of an interesting conversation.' Was it then strange that he triumphed as a man of fashionable
and cultured leisure? He would visit Ranelagh with the most distinguished, and turn a while
from epigram and jest to empty the pocket of a rich acquaintance. And ever with so tactful
a certainty, with so fine a restraint of the emotions, that suspicion was preposterous. To
catalogue his exploits is superfluous, yet let it be recorded that once he went to Court, habited
as a clergyman, and came home the richer for a diamond order, Lord C--'s proudest decoration.
Even the assault upon Prince Orloff was nobly planned. Barrington had precise intelligence
of the marvellous snuff-box--the Empress's own gift to her lover; he knew also how he might
meet the Prince at Drury Lane; he had even discovered that the Prince for safety hid the jewel
in his vest. But the Prince felt the Prig's hand upon the treasure, and gave an instant alarm.
Over-confidence, maybe, or a too liberal dinner was the cause of failure, and Barrington, surrounded
in a moment, was speedily in the lock-up. It was the first rebuff that the hero had received,
and straightway his tact and ingenuity left him. The evidence was faulty, the prosecution declined,
and naught was necessary for escape save presence of mind. Even friends were staunch, and had
Barrington told his customary lie, his character had gone unsullied. Yet having posed for his
friends as a student of the law, at Bow Street he must needs declare himself a doctor, and
the needless discrepancy ruined him. Though he escaped the gallows, there was an end to the
diversions of intellect and fashion; as he discovered when he visited the House of Lords to
hear an appeal, and Black Rod ejected him at the persuasion of Mr. G--. As yet unused to insult,
he threatened violence against the aggressor, and finding no bail he was sent on his first
imprisonment to the Bridewell in Tothill Fields. Rapid, indeed, was the descent. At the first
grip of adversity, he forgot his cherished principles, and two years later the loftiest and
most elegant gentlemen that ever picked a pocket was at the Hulks--for robbing a harlot at
Drury Lane! Henceforth, his insolence and artistry declined, and, though to the last there
were intervals of grandeur, he spent the better part of fifteen years in the commission of
crimes, whose very littleness condemned them. At last an exile from St. James's and Ranelagh,
he was forced into a society which still further degraded him. Hitherto he had shunned the
society of professed thieves; in his golden youth he had scorned to shelter him in the flash
kens, which were the natural harbours of pickpockets. But now, says his biographer, he began
to seek evil company, and, the victim of his own fame, found safety only in obscene concealment.

At the Hulks he recovered something of his dignity, and discretion rendered his first visit
brief enough. Even when he was committed on a second offence, and had attempted suicide, he
was still irresistible, and he was discharged with several years of imprisonment to run. But,
in truth, he was born for honour and distinction, and common actions, common criminals, were
in the end distasteful to him. In his heyday he stooped no further than to employ such fences
as might profitably dispose of his booty, and the two partners of his misdeeds were both remarkable.

James, the earlier accomplice affected clerical attire, and in 1791 'was living in a Westphalian
monastery, to which he some years ago retired, in an enviable state of peace and penitence,
respected for his talents, and loved for his amiable manners, by which he is distinguished
in an eminent degree.' The other ruffian, Lowe by name, was known to his own Bloomsbury Square
for a philanthropic and cultured gentleman, yet only suicide saved him from the gallows. And
while Barrington was wise in the choice of his servants, his manners drove even strangers to
admiration. Policemen and prisoners were alike anxious to do him honour. Once when he needed
money for his own defence, his brother thieves, whom he had ever shunned and despised, collected
£100 for the captain of their guild. Nor did gaoler and judge ever forget the respect due to
a gentleman. When Barrington was tried and condemned for the theft of Mr. Townsend's watch
at Enfield Races--September 15, 1790, was the day of his last transgression--one knows not
which was the more eloquent in his respect, the judge or the culprit.

But it was not until the pickpocket set out for Botany Bay that he took full advantage of his
gentlemanly bearing. To thrust 'Mr.' Barrington into the hold was plainly impossible, even
though transportation for seven years was his punishment. Wherefore he was admitted to the
boatswain's mess, was allowed as much baggage as a first-class passenger, and doubtless beguiled
the voyage (for others) with the information of a well-stored mind. By an inspiration of luck
he checked a mutiny, holding the quarter-deck against a mob of ruffians with no weapon but
a marline-spike. The day was, however, wild and boisterous; and in my attempts to get through
the surf, to set the lines, I was thrown down, together with the large stone I was carrying,
and my leg severely cut and bruised. The weather was extremely cold, too, and being without coat
or jacket of any kind, I suffered severely from it.

The 15th was another cold day, with the wind at south-west, and we could neither set the lines,
nor spear sting-ray, whilst the supply we had before obtained was now nearly exhausted. One of the
horses was taken ill, and unable to rise, from the effects of the cold; his limbs were cramped and stiff,
and apparently unable to sustain the weight of his body.

          After plucking dry grass, and making
               a bed for him, placing a breakwind of boughs round, and making a
fire near him, we left him for the night.

Late in the evening, the overseer and boy returned from the westward, and reported, that the
cliffs were sixteen miles away; that they had dug for water, but that none could be found, and
that there was hardly a blade of grass any where, whilst the whole region around was becoming
densely scrubby; through much of which we should have to pass before we reached the cliffs.
Altogether, the overseer seemed quite discouraged by the appearance of the country, and to dread
the idea of moving on in that direction, often saying, that he wished he was back, and that
he thought he could retrace his steps to Fowler's Bay, where a supply
of provisions had been buried.

     I was vexed at these remarks, because
     I felt that I could not coincide in them, and because I knew that
when the moment for decision came, my past experience, and the strong
reasons which had produced in my own mind quite a different conviction,
would compel me to act in opposition to the wishes of the only European
with me, and he a person, too, whom I sincerely respected for the
fidelity and devotion with which he had followed me through all my
wanderings.

I was afraid, too, that the native boys, hearing his remarks, and perceiving that he had no
confidence in our future movements, would catch up the same idea, and that, in addition to
the other difficulties and anxieties I had to cope with, would be the still more frightful
one of disaffection and discontent.

Another subject of uneasiness arose from the nature of our diet;--for some few days we had all
been using a good deal of the sting-ray fish, and though at first we had found it palatable, either from
confining ourselves too exclusively to it, or from eating too much, it had latterly disagreed
with us. The overseer declared it made him ill and weak, and that he could do nothing whilst living
upon it. The boys said the same; and yet we had nothing else to supply its place, and the small quantity
of flour left would not admit of our using more than was barely necessary to sustain life. At this
time we had hardly any fish left, and the whole party were ravenously
hungry.

In this dilemma, I determined to have the sick horse killed for food. It was impossible he could
ever recover, and by depriving him of life a few hours sooner than the natural course of events
would have done, we should be enabled to get a supply of food to last us over a few days more,
by which time I hoped we might again be able to venture on, and attempt another push to the
westward.

Early on the morning of the 16th, I sent the overseer to kill the unfortunate horse, which was
still alive, but unable to rise from the ground, having never moved
from the place where he had first been found lying yesterday morning.

The miserable animal was in the most wretched state possible, thin and emaciated by dreadful and
long continued sufferings, and labouring under some complaint, that in a very few hours at the
farthest, must have terminated its life.

After a great portion of the meat had been cut off from the carcase, in thin slices, they were
dipped in salt water and hung up upon strings to dry in the sun. I could not bring myself to eat any
to-day, so horrible and revolting did it appear to me, but the overseer
made a hearty dinner, and the native boys gorged themselves to excess,
remaining the whole afternoon by the carcase, where they made a fire,
cutting off and roasting such portions as had been left.

They looked like ravenous wolves about their prey, and when they
returned to the camp at night, they were loaded with as much cooked
meat as they could carry, and which they were continually eating during
the night; I made a meal upon some of the sting-ray that was still
left, but it made me dreadfully sick, and I was obliged to lie down,
seriously ill.

April 17.--Being rather better to-day, I was obliged
to overcome my repugnance to the disagreeable food we were compelled
to resort to, and the ice once broken, I found that although it was
far from being palatable, I could gradually reconcile myself to it.

The boys after breakfast again went down to the carcase, and spent
the whole day roasting and eating, and at night they again returned
to the camp loaded.

We turned all the meat upon the strings and redipped it in sea water again to-day, but the
weather was unfavourable for drying it, being cold and damp. Both yesterday and to-day light showers
fell sufficient to moisten the grass.

April 18.--The day being much warmer, many large flies were about, and I was obliged to have a fire
kept constantly around the meat, to keep them away by the smoke. I now put the natives upon
an allowance of five pounds of flesh each per day, myself and the overseer using about half that quantity.

On
the 19th, I sent out one of the boys to try and get a sting-ray to vary our diet, but he returned
unsuccessful. During the forenoon I was seized with a violent attack of dysentery, accompanied with diabetes,
from which I suffered extremely. The overseer was affected also, but in a less violent degree.
The origin of this complaint was plainly traceable to the food we had used for the last day
or two; it rendered us both incapable of the least exertion of any
kind, whilst the disorder continued, and afterwards left us very languid
and weak.

In the evening upon examining the meat, a great deal of it was found to be getting putrid, or
fly-blown, and we were obliged to pick it over, and throw what was tainted away.

April 20.--To-day I had all the meat boiled, as I thought it would keep better cooked than raw,
we had only a small tin saucepan without a handle, to effect our cooking operations with, and the
preparation of the meat therefore occupied the whole of the day. The overseer was again attacked
with dysentery. At night the clouds gathered heavily around, and the weather being mild and soft,
I fully expected rain; after dark, however, the wind rose high and the threatened storm passed
away.

On the 21st, I was seized again with illness. The overseer continued to be affected also, and
we were quite unable to make the necessary preparations for our journey
to the westward, which I fully intended to have commenced to-morrow.

For several hours we were in the greatest agony, and could neither lie down, sit up, nor stand, except
with extreme pain. Towards the afternoon the violence of the symptoms abated a little, but we
were exceedingly weak.

April 22.--Upon weighing the meat this morning, which as usual was left out upon the strings
at night, I discovered that four pounds had been stolen by some of the boys, whilst we were
sleeping. I had suspected that our stock was diminishing rapidly for a day or two past, and
had weighed it overnight that I might ascertain this point, and if it were so, take some means
to prevent it for the future. With so little food to depend upon, and where it was so completely
in the power of any one of the party, to gratify his own appetite at the expense of the others,
during their absence, or when they slept, it became highly necessary to enforce strict honesty towards
each other; I was much grieved to find that the meat had been taken by the natives, more particularly
as their daily allowance had been so great.

We had, moreover, only two days' supply of the meat left for the party, and being about to commence
the long journey before us, it was important to economise our provisions to support us under
the fatigue and labours we should then have to undergo.

Having deducted the four pounds stolen during the night, from the daily rations of the three boys,
I gave them the remainder, (eight pounds) telling them the reason why their quantity was less
to-day than usual, and asking them to point out the thief, who alone should be punished and
the others would receive their usual rations. The youngest of the three boys, and the King George's
Sound native, resolutely denied being concerned in the robbery; but the other native doggedly
refused to answer any questions about it, only telling me that he and the native from King
George's Sound would leave me and make their way by themselves. I pointed out to them the folly,
in fact the impossibility almost, of their succeeding in any attempt of the kind; advised them
to remain quietly where they were, and behave well for the future, but concluded by telling
them that if they were bent upon going they might do so, as I would not attempt to stop them.

For
some time past the two eldest of the boys, both of whom were now nearly grown up to manhood,
had been far from obedient in their general conduct. Ever since we had been reduced to a low scale
of diet they had been sulky and discontented, never assisting in the routine of the day, or
doing what they were requested to do with that cheerfulness and alacrity that they had previously
exhibited. Unaccustomed to impose the least restraint upon their appetites or passions, they
considered it a hardship to be obliged to walk as long as any horses were left alive, though
they saw those horses falling behind and perishing from fatigue; they considered it a hardship,
too, to be curtailed in their allowance of food, as long as a mouthful was left unconsumed; and
in addition to this, they had imbibed the overseer's idea that we
never should succeed in our attempt to get to the westward, and got
daily more dissatisfied at remaining idle in camp, whilst the horses
were recruiting.

The excess of animal food they had had at their command for some few days after the horse was killed,
made them forget their former scarcity, and in their folly they imagined that they could supply
their own wants, and get on better and more rapidly than we did, and they determined to attempt
it. Vexed as I had been at finding out they had not scrupled to plunder the small stock of provisions
we had left, I was loth to let them leave me foolishly without making an effort to prevent
it. One of them had been with me a great length of time, and the other I had brought from his
country and his friends, and to both I felt bound by ties of humanity to prevent if possible their
taking the rash step they meditated; my remonstrances and expostulations
were however in vain, and after getting their breakfasts, they took
up some spears they had been carefully preparing for the last two
days, and walked sulkily from the camp in a westerly direction.

The youngest boy had, it seemed, also been enticed to join them, for he was getting up with the
intention of following, when I called him back and detained him in the camp, as he was too young
to know what he was doing, and had only been led astray by the others. I had intended to have
moved on myself to-day, but the departure of the natives made me change my intention, for I deemed
it desirable that they should have at least three or four days start of us. Finding that the
single sheep we had left would now be the cause of a good deal of trouble, I had it killed this
afternoon, that we might have the full advantage of it whilst we had plenty of water, and might
be enabled to hoard our bread a little. We had still a little of the horse-flesh left, and made
a point of using it all up before the mutton was allowed to be touched.

The morning of the 23rd broke cool and cloudy, with showers gathering
from seawards; the wind was south-west, and the sky wild and lowering
in that direction.

During the forenoon light rain fell, but scarcely more than sufficient to moisten the grass;
it would, however, probably afford our deserters a drink upon the cliffs. Towards evening the
sky cleared, and the weather became frosty.

On the following day we still remained in camp, hoping for rain;--a single heavy shower would
so completely have freed us from the danger of attempting to force a passage through the great
extent of arid country before us, that I was unwilling to move on until the very last moment. Our
rations were however rapidly disappearing whilst we were idling in camp, the horse-flesh was
all consumed, and to-day we had commenced upon the mutton, so that soon we should be compelled to
go, whether it rained or not. Month after month however had passed away without any fall of
rain, and the season had now arrived when, under ordinary circumstances, much wet might be expected;
and though each day, as it passed without gratifying our hopes, but added to our disappointment,
yet did every hour we lingered give us a better chance of being relieved
by showers in our route round the last cliffs of the Bight.

The evening set in mild but close, with the wind at north-east, and I had great hopes that showers
would fall.

April 25.--During the night dense clouds, accompanied by gusts of wind and forked lightning,
passed rapidly to the south-west, and this morning the wind changed to that quarter. Heavy
storms gathered to seawards with much thunder and lightning, but no rain fell near us; the sea appearing
to attract all the showers. The overseer shot a very large eagle to-day and made a stew of
it, which was excellent. I sent the boy out to try and shoot a wallabie, but he returned without
one.

In the evening, a little before dark, and just as we had finished
our tea, to my great astonishment our two runaway natives made their
appearance, the King George's Sound native being first.

He came frankly up, and said that they were both sorry for what they had done, and were anxious
to be received again, as they found they could get nothing to eat for themselves. The other boy
sat silently and sullenly at the fire, apparently more chagrined at being compelled by necessity
to come back to us than sorry for having gone away. Having given them a lecture, for they both
now admitted having stolen meat, not only on the night they were detected but previously, I
gave each some tea and some bread and meat, and told them if they behaved well they would be
treated in every respect as before, and share with us our little
stock of provisions as long as it lasted.

I now learnt that they had fared in the bush but little better than I should have done myself.
They had been absent four days, and had come home nearly starved. For the first two days they
got only two small bandicoots and found no water; they then turned back, and obtaining a little
water in a hollow of the cliffs, left by the shower which had passed over, they halted under
them to fish, and speared a sting-ray; this they had feasted on yesterday, and to-day came
from the cliffs to look for us without any thing to eat at all.

During the night some heavy clouds passed over our heads, and once a drop or two of rain fell. The 26th
broke wild and stormy to the east and west, and I determined to remain
one day longer in camp, in the hope of rain falling, but principally
to rest the two natives a little after the long walk from which they
had returned.

Breakfast being over, I sent the overseer and one native to the beach, to try to get a sting-ray,
and to the other I gave my gun to shoot wallabie: no fish was procured, but one wallabie was
got, half of which I gave to the native who killed it, for his dinner.

Being determined to break up camp on the 27th, I sent the King George's Sound native on a-head,
as soon as he had breakfasted, that, by preceding the party, he might have time to spear a
sting-ray against we overtook him. The day was dull, cloudy, and warm, and still looking likely
for rain, with the wind at north-east. At eleven we were ready, and moved away from a place where
we had experienced so much relief in our extremity, and at which our necessities had compelled
us to remain so long. For twenty-eight days we had been encamped at the sand-drifts, or at the first
water we had found, five miles from them.
 'The keek-cloy,' he
wrote, in his hints to young sportsmen, 'is easily picked. If the notes are in the long fold
just tip them the forks; but if there is a purse or open money in the case, you must link it.'
The breast-pocket, on the other hand, is a severer test. 'Picking the suck is sometimes a kittle
job,' again the philosopher speaks. 'If the coat is buttoned it must be opened by slipping
past. Then bring the lil down between the flap of the coat and the body, keeping your spare
arm across your man's breast, and so slip it to a comrade; then abuse the fellow for jostling you.'

Not only did he master the tradition of thievery; he vaunted his originality with the familiar
complacence of the scoundrel. Forgetting that it was by burglary that he was undone, he explains
for his public glorification that he was wont to enter the houses of Leith by forcing the small
window above the outer door. This artifice, his vanity grumbles, is now common; but he would
have all the world understand that it was his own invention, and he murmurs with the pedantry
of the convicted criminal that it is now set forth for the better protection of honest citizens.
No less admirable in his own eyes was that other artifice which induced him to conceal such
notes as he managed to filch in the collar of his coat. Thus he eluded the vigilance of the
police, which searched its prey in those days with a sorry lack of cunning. In truth, Haggart's
wits were as nimble as his fingers, and he seldom failed to render a profitable account of
his talents. He beguiled one of his sojourns in gaol by manufacturing tinder wherewith to light
the prisoners' pipes, and it is not astonishing that he won a general popularity. In Ireland,
when the constables would take him for a Scot, he answered in high Tipperary, and saved his
skin for a while by a brogue which would not have shamed a modern patriot. But quick as were
his wits, his vanity always outstripped them, and no hero ever bragged of his achievements
with a louder effrontery.

     Now all you ramblers in mourning go,
     For the prince of ramblers is lying low,
     And all you maidens that love the game,
     Put on your mourning veils again.

Thus he celebrated his downfall in a ballad that has the true Newgate ring, and verily in his
own eyes he was a hero who carried to the scaffold a dauntless spirit unstained by treachery.

He believed himself an adept in all the arts; as a squire of dames he held himself peerless,
and he assured the ineffable Combe, who recorded his flippant utterance with a credulous respect,
that he had sacrificed hecatombs of innocent virgins to his importunate lust. Prose and verse
trickled with equal facility from his pen, and his biography is a masterpiece. Written in the
pedlar's French as it was misspoken in the hells of Edinburgh, it is a narrative of uncommon
simplicity and directness, marred now and again by such superfluous reflections as are the
natural result of thievish sentimentality. He tells his tale without paraphrase or adornment,
and the worthy Writer to the Signet, who prepared the work for the Press, would have asked
three times the space to record one-half the adventures. 'I sunk upon it with my forks and
brought it with me'; 'We obtained thirty-three pounds by this affair'--is there not the stalwart
flavour of the epic in these plain, unvarnished sentences?

His other accomplishments are pallid in the light of his brilliant left hand. Once, at Derry--he
attended a cock-fight, and beguiled an interval by emptying the pockets of a lucky bookmaker.
An expert, who watched the exploit in admiration, could not withhold a compliment. 'You are
the Switcher,' he exclaimed; 'some take all, but you leave nothing.' And it is as the Switcher
that Haggart keeps his memory green.

II--GENTLEMAN HARRY

'DAMN ye both! stop, or I will blow your brains out!' Thus it was that Harry Simms greeted
his victims, proving in a phrase that the heroic age of the rumpad was no more. Forgotten the
debonair courtesy of Claude Duval! Forgotten the lightning wit, the swift repartee of the incomparable
Hind! No longer was the hightoby-gloak a 'gentleman' of the road; he was a butcher, if not
a beggar, on horseback; a braggart without the courage to pull a trigger; a swashbuckler, oblivious
of that ancient style which converted the misery of surrender into a privilege. Yet Harry Simms,
the supreme adventurer of his age, was not without distinction; his lithe form and his hard-ridden
horse were the common dread of England; his activity was rewarded with a princely treasure;
and if his method were lacking in urbanity, the excuse is that he danced not to the brilliant
measure of the Cavaliers, but limped to the clumsy fiddle-scraping of the early Georges.

At Eton, where a too-indulgent grandmother had placed him, he ransacked the desks of his school-fellows,
and avenged a birching by emptying his master's pockets. Wherefore he lost the hope of a polite
education, and instead of proceeding with a clerkly dignity to King's College, in the University
of Cambridge, he was ignominiously apprenticed to a breeches-maker. The one restraint was as
irksome as the other, and Harry Simms abandoned the needle, as he had scorned the grammar,
to go upon the pad. Though his early companions were scragged at Tyburn, the light-fingered
rascal was indifferent to their fate, and squandering such booty as fell to his share, he bravely
'turned out' for more. Tottenham Court Fair was the theatre of his childish exploits, and there
he gained some little skill in the picking of pockets. But a spell of bad trade brought him
to poverty, and he attempted to replenish an empty pocket by the childish expedient of a threatening
letter.

The plan was conceived and executed with a futility which ensured an instant capture. The bungler
chose a stranger at haphazard, commanding him, under penalty of death, to lay five guineas
upon a gun in Tower Wharf; the guineas were cunningly deposited, and the rascal, caught with
his hand upon the booty, was committed to Newgate. Youth, and the intercession of his grandmother,
procured a release, unjustified by the infamous stupidity of the trick. Its very clumsiness
should have sent him over sea; and it is wonderful that from a beginning of so little promise,
he should have climbed even the first slopes of greatness. However, the memory of gaol forced
him to a brief interlude of honesty; for a while he wore the pink coat of Colonel Cunningham's
postillion, and presently was promoted to the independence of a hackney coach.

Thus employed, he became acquainted with the famous Cyprians of Covent Garden, who, loving
him for his handsome face and sprightly gesture, seduced him to desert his cab for an easier
profession. So long as the sky was fair, he lived under their amiable protection; but the summer
having chased the smarter gentry from town, the ladies could afford him no more than would
purchase a horse and a pair of pistols, so that Harry was compelled to challenge fortune on
the high road. His first journey was triumphantly successful. A post-chaise and a couple of
coaches emptied their wealth into his hands, and, riding for London, he was able to return
the favours lavished upon him by Covent Garden. At the first touch of gold he was transformed
to a finished blade. He purchased himself a silver-hilted sword, which he dangled over a discreet
suit of black velvet; a prodigious run of luck at the gaming-tables kept his purse well lined;
and he made so brilliant an appearance in his familiar haunts that he speedily gained the name
of 'Gentleman Harry.' But the money, lightly won, was lightly spent. The tables took back more
than they gave, and before long Simms was astride his horse again, flourishing his irons, and
crying: 'Stand and deliver'! upon every road in England.

Epping Forest was his general hunting-ground, but his enterprise took him far afield, and if
one night he galloped by starlight across Bagshot Heath, another he was holding up the York
stage with unbridled insolence. He robbed, he roared, he blustered with praiseworthy industry;
and good luck coming to the aid of caution, he escaped for a while the necessary punishment
of his crimes. It was on Stockbridge Downs that he met his first check.

He had stopped a chariot, and came off with a hatful of gold, but the victims, impatient of
disaster, raised the county, and Gentleman Harry was laid by the heels. Never at a loss, he
condescended to a cringing hypocrisy: he whined, he whimpered, he babbled of reform, he plied
his prosecutors with letters so packed with penitence, that they abandoned their case, and
in a couple of days Simms had eased a collector at Eversey Bank of three hundred pounds. For
this enterprise two others climbed the gallows, and the robber's pride in his capture was miserably
lessened by the shedding of innocent blood.

But he forgot his remorse as speedily as he dissipated his money, and sentimentality neither
damped his enjoyment nor restrained his energy. Even his brief visits to London were turned
to the best account; and, though he would have the world believe him a mere voluptuary, his
eye was bent sternly upon business. If he did lose his money in a gambling hell, he knew who
won it, and spoke with his opponent on the homeward way. In his eyes a fuddled rake was always
fair game, and the stern windows of St. Clement's Church looked down upon many a profitable
adventure. His most distinguished journey was to Ireland, whither he set forth to find a market
for his stolen treasure. But he determined that the road should bear its own charges, and he
reached Dublin a richer man than he left London. In three months he was penniless, but he did
not begin trade again until he had recrossed the Channel, and, having got to work near Chester,
he returned to the Piazza fat with bank-notes.

With success his extravagance increased, and, living the life of a man about town, he was soon
harassed by debt. More than once he was lodged in the Marshalsea, and as his violent temper
resented the interference of a dun, he became notorious for his assaults upon sheriff's officers.
And thus his poor skill grew poorer: forgetting his trade, he expected that brandy would ease
his embarrassment. At last, sodden with drink, he enlisted in the Guards, from which regiment
he deserted, only to be pressed aboard a man-of-war. Freed by a clever trick, he took to the
road again, until a paltry theft from a barber transported him to Maryland. There he turned
sailor, and his ship, The Two Sisters, being taken by a privateer, he contrived to scramble
into Portugal, whence he made his way back to England, and to the only adventure of which he
was master. He landed with no more money than the price of a pistol, but he prigged a prancer
at Bristol horsefair, and set out upon his last journey. The tide of his fortune was at flood.
He crammed his pockets with watches; he was owner of enough diamonds to set up shop in a fashionable
quarter; of guineas he had as many as would support his magnificence for half a year; and at
last he resolved to quit the road, and to live like the gentleman he was. To this prudence
he was the more easily persuaded, because not only were the thief-takers eager for his capture,
but he was a double-dyed deserter, whose sole chance of quietude was a decent obscurity.

His resolution was taken at St. Albans, and over a comfortable dinner he pictured a serene
and uneventful future. On the morrow he would set forth to Dublin, sell his handsome stock
of jewels, and forget that the cart ever lumbered up Tyburn Hill. So elated was he with his
growing virtue, that he called for a second bottle, and as the port heated his blood his fingers
tingled for action. A third bottle proved beyond dispute that only the craven were idle; 'and
why,' he exclaimed, generous with wine, 'should the most industrious ruffler of England condescend
to inaction?' Instantly he summoned the ostler, screaming for his horse, and before Redburn
he had emptied four pockets, and had exchanged his own tired jade for a fresh and willing beast.
Still exultant in his contempt of cowardice, he faced the Warrington stage, and made off with
his plunder at a drunken gallop. Arrived at Dunstable, he was so befogged with liquor and pride,
that he entered the 'Bull Inn,' the goal of the very coach he had just encountered. He had
scarce called for a quartern of brandy when the robbed passengers thronged into the kitchen;
and the fright gave him enough sobriety to leave his glass untasted, and stagger to his horse.
In a wild fury of arrogance and terror, of conflicting vice and virtue, he pressed on to Hockcliffe,
where he took refuge from the rain, and presently, fuddled with more brandy, he fell asleep
over the kitchen fire.

By this time the hue and cry was raised; and as the hero lay helpless in the corner three troopers
burst into the inn, levelled their pistols at his head, and threatened death if he put his
hand to his pocket. Half asleep, and wholly drunk, he made not he smallest show of resistance;
he surrendered all his money, watches, and diamonds, save a little that was sewn into his neckcloth,
and sulkily crawled up to his bed-chamber. Thither the troopers followed him, and having restored
some nine pounds at his urgent demand, they watched his heavy slumbers. For all his brandy
Simms slept but uneasily, and awoke in the night sick with the remorse which is bred of ruined
plans and a splitting head. He got up wearily, and sat over the fire 'a good deal chagrined,'
to quote his own simple phrase, at his miserable capture. Escape seemed hopeless indeed; there
crouched the vigilant troopers, scowling on their prey. A thousand plans chased each other
through the hero's fuddled brain, and at last he resolved to tempt the cupidity of his guardians,
and to make himself master of their fire-arms. There were still left him a couple of seals,
one gold, the other silver, and watching his opportunity, Simms flung them with a flourish
in the fire. It fell out as he expected; the hungry troopers made a dash to save the trinkets;
the prisoner seized a brace of pistols and leapt to the door. But, alas, the pistols missed
fire, Harry was immediately overpowered, and on the morrow was carried, sick and sorry, before
the Justice. From Dunstable he travelled his last journey to Newgate, and, being condemned
at the Old Bailey, he was hanged till he was dead, and his body thereafter was carried for
dissection to a surgeon's in that same Covent Garden where he first deserted his hackney cab
for the pleasures of the town.

'Gentleman Harry' was neither a brilliant thief nor a courteous highwayman. There was no touch
of the grand manner even in his prettiest achievement. His predecessors had made a pistol and
a vizard an overwhelming terror, and he did but profit by their tradition when he bade the
cowed traveller stand and deliver. His profession, as he practised it, neither demanded skill
nor incurred danger. Though he threatened death at every encounter, you never hear that he
pulled a trigger throughout his career. If his opponent jeered and rode off, he rode off with
a whole skin and a full pocket. Once even this renowned adventurer accepted the cut of a riding-whip
across his face, nor made any attempt to avenge the insult. But his manifold shortcomings were
no hindrance to his success. Wherever he went, between London and York, he stopped coaches
and levied his tax. A threatening voice, an arched eyebrow, an arrogant method of fingering
an unloaded pistol, conspired with the craven, indolent habit of the time to make his every
journey a procession of triumph. He was capable of performing all such feats as the age required
of him. But you miss the spirit, the bravery, the urbanity, and the wit, which made the adventurer
of the seventeenth century a figure of romance.

One point only of the great tradition did Harry Simms remember. He was never unwilling to restore
a trinket made precious by sentiment. Once when he took a gold ring from a gentleman's finger
a gentlewoman burst into tears, exclaiming, 'There goes your father's ring.' Whereupon Simms
threw all his booty into a hat, saying, 'For God's sake, take that or anything else you please.'
In all other respects he was a bully, with the hesitancy of a coward, rather than the proper
rival of Hind or Duval. Apart from the exercise of his trade, he was a very Mohock for brutality.
He would ill-treat his victims, whenever their drunkenness permitted the freedom, and he had
no better gifts for the women who were kind to him than cruelty and neglect. One of his many
imprisonments was the result of a monstrous ferocity. 'Unluckily in a quarrel,' he tells you
gravely, 'I ran a crab-stick into a woman's eye'; and well did he deserve his sojourn in the
New Prison. At another time he rewarded the keeper of a coffee-house, who supported him for
six months, by stealing her watch; and, when she grumbled at his insolence, he reflected, with
a chuckle, that she could more easily bear the loss of her watch than the loss of her lover.
Even in his gaiety there was an unpleasant spice of greed and truculence. Once, when he was
still seen in fashionable company, he went to a masquerade, dressed in a rich Spanish habit,
lent him by a Captain in the Guards, and he made so fine a show that he captivated a young
and beautiful Cyprian, whom, when she would have treated him with generosity, he did but reward
with the loss of all her jewels.

Moreover, he had so small a regard for his craft, that he would spoil his effects by drink
or debauchery; and, though a highwayman, he cared so little for style, that he would as lief
trick a drunken gamester as face his man on Bagshot Heath or beneath the shade of Epping Forest.
You admire not his success, because, like the success of the popular politician, it depended
rather upon his dupes than upon his merit. You approve not his raffish exploits in the hells
of Covent Garden or Drury Lane. But you cannot withhold respect from his consistent dandyism,
and you are grateful for the record that, engaged in a mean enterprise, he was dressed 'in
a green velvet frock and a short lac'd waistcoat.' Above all, his picturesque capture at Hockcliffe
atones for much stupidity. The resolution, wavering at the wine glass, the last drunken ride
from St. Albans--these are inventions in experience, which should make Simms immortal. And
when he sits 'by the fireside a good deal chagrined,' he recalls the arrest of a far greater
man--even of Cartouche, who was surprised by the soldiers at his bedside stitching a torn pair
of breeches. His autobiography, wherein 'he relates the truth as a dying man,' seemed excellent
in the eyes of Borrow, who loved it so well that he imagined a sentence, ascribed it falsely
to Simms, and then rewarded it with extravagant applause.

But Gentleman Harry knew how to tell a simple story, and the book, 'all wrote by myself while
under sentence of death,' is his best performance. In action he had many faults, for, if he
was a highwayman among rakes, he was but a rake among highwaymen.

A PARALLEL

(THE SWITCHER AND GENTLEMAN HARRY)

HAGGART and Simms are united in the praise of Borrow, and in the generous applause of posterity.
Each resumes for his own generation the prowess of his kind. Each has assured his immortality
by an experiment in literature; and if epic simplicity and rapid narrative are the virtues
of biography, it is difficult to award the prize. The Switcher preferred to write in the rough
lingo, wherein he best expressed himself. He packs his pages with ill-spelt slang, telling
his story of thievery in the true language of thieves. Gentleman Harry, as became a person
of quality, mimicked the dialect wherewith he was familiar in the more fashionable gambling-dens
of Covent Garden. Both write with out the smallest suggestion of false shame or idle regret,
and a natural vanity lifts each of them out of the pit of commonplace on to the tableland of
the heroic. They set forth their depredation, as a victorious general might record his triumphs,
and they excel the nimblest Ordinary that ever penned a dying speech in all the gifts of the
historian.

But when you leave the study for the field, the Switcher instantly declares his superiority.
He had the happiness to practise his craft in its heyday, while Simms knew but the fag-end
of a noble tradition. Haggart, moreover, was an expert, pursuing a difficult art, while Simms
was a bully, plundering his betters by bluff. Simms boasted no quality which might be set off
against the accurate delicacy of Haggart's hand. The Englishman grew rich upon a rolling eye
and a rusty pistol. He put on his 'fiercest manner,' and believed that the world would deny
him nothing. The Scot, rejoicing in his exquisite skill, went to work without fuss or bluster,
and added the joy of artistic pride to his delight in plunder. Though Simm's manner seems the
more chivalrous, it required not one tithe of the courage which was Haggart's necessity. On
horseback, with the semblance of a fire-arm, a man may easily challenge a coachful of women.
It needs a cool brain and a sound courage to empty a pocket in the watchful presence of spies
and policemen. While Gentleman Harry chose a lonely road, or the cover of night for his exploits,
the Switcher always worked by day, hustled by a crowd of witnesses.

Their hours of leisure furnish a yet more striking contrast. Simms was a polished dandy delighting
in his clothes, unhappy if he were deprived of his bottle and his game. Haggart, on the other
hand, was before all things sealed to his profession. He would have deserted the gayest masquerade,
had he ever strayed into so light a frivolity, for the chance of lightening a pocket. He tasted
but few amusements without the limits of his craft, and he preserved unto the end a touch of
that dour character which is the heritage of his race. But, withal, he was an amiable decent
body, who would have recoiled in horror from the drunken brutality of Gentleman Harry. Though
he bragged to George Combe of his pitiless undoing of wenches, he never thrust a crab-stick
into a woman's eye, and he was incapable of rewarding a kindness by robbery and neglect. Once--at
Newcastle--he arrayed himself in a smart white coat and tops, but the splendour ill became
his red-headed awkwardness, and he would have stood aghast at the satin frocks and velvet waistcoats
of him who broke the hearts of Drury Lane. But if he were gentler in his life, Haggart was
prepared to fight with a more reckless courage when his trade demanded it. It was the Gentleman's
boast that he never shed the blood of man. When David found a turnkey between himself and freedom,
he did not hesitate to kill, though his remorse was bitter enough when he neared the gallows.
In brief, Haggart was not only the better craftsman, but the honester fellow, and though his
hands were red with blood, he deserved his death far less than did the more truculent, less
valiant Simms. Each had in his brain the stuff whereof men of letters are made: this is their
parallel. And, by way of contrast, while the Switcher was an accomplished artist, Gentleman
Harry was a roystering braggart.

DEACON BRODIE AND CHARLES PEACE

I--DEACON BRODIE

AS William Brodie stood at the bar, on trial for a his life, he seemed the gallantest gentleman
in court. Thither he had been carried in a chair, and, still conscious of the honour paid him,
he flashed a condescending smile upon his judges. His step was jaunty as ever; his superb attire
well became the Deacon of a Guild. His coat was blue, his vest a very garden of flowers; while
his satin breeches and his stockings of white silk were splendid in their simplicity. Beneath
a cocked hat his hair was fully dressed and powdered, and even the prosecuting counsel assailed
him with the respect due to a man of fashion. The fellow's magnificence was thrown into relief
by the squalor of his accomplice. For George Smith had neither the money nor the taste to disguise
himself as a polished rogue, and he huddled as far from his master as he could in the rags
of his mean estate. Nor from this moment did Brodie ever abate one jot of his dignity. He faced
his accusers with a clear eye and a frigid amiability; he listened to his sentence with a calm
contempt; he laughed complacently at the sorry interludes of judicial wit; and he faced the
last music with a bravery and a cynicism which bore the stamp of true greatness.

It was not until after his crime that Brodie's heroism approved itself. And even then his was
a triumph not of skill but of character. Always a gentleman in manner and conduct, he owed
the success and the failure of his life to this one quality. When in flight he made for Flushing
on board the Endeavour, the other passengers, who knew not his name, straightway christened
him 'the gentleman.' The enterprise itself would have been impossible to one less persuasively
gifted, and its proper execution is a tribute to the lofty quality of his mind. There was he
in London, a stranger and a fugitive; yet instead of crawling furtively into a coal-barge he
charters a ship, captures the confidence of the captain, carries the other passengers to Flushing,
when they were bound for Leith, and compels every one to confess his charm! The thief, also,
found him irresistible; and while the game lasted, the flash kens of Edinburgh murmured the
Deacon's name in the hushed whisper of respect.

His fine temperament disarmed treachery. In London he visited an ancient doxy of his own, who,
with her bully, shielded him from justice, though betrayal would have met with an ample reward.
Smith, if he knew himself the superior craftsman, trembled at the Deacon's nod, who thus swaggered
it through life, with none to withhold the exacted reverence. To this same personal compulsion
he owed his worldly advancement. Deacon of the Wrights' Guild while still a young man, he served
upon the Council, was known for one of Edinburgh's honoured citizens, and never went abroad
unmarked by the finger of respectful envy. He was elected in 1773 a member of the Cape Club,
and met at the Isle of Man Arms in Craig's Close the wittiest men of his time and town. I had done
this, too, under circumstances of great difficulty, toil, and anxiety, and not without the constant
risk of losing my horses, from the fatigues and privations of the forced labours I was obliged
to impose upon them.

Having ascertained these particulars, and at so much hazard, relative to Lake Torrens, for so great
a part of its course, what conclusion could I arrive at with regard to the character of its other
half to the north-east, and east of Flinders ranges, as seen from Mount Hopeless, and Mount
Serle points, nearly ninety miles apart! The appearances from the ranges were similar; the trend
of all the watercourses was to the same basin, and undoubtedly that basin, if traced far enough,
must be of nearly the same level on the eastern, as on the western side of the ranges. I had
completely ascertained that Flinders range had terminated to the eastward, the north-east,
and the north; that there were no hills or elevations connected with it beyond, in any of these
directions, and that the horizon every where was one low uninterrupted level.

With such data, and under such circumstances, what other opinion could I possibly arrive at, than that
the bed of Lake Torrens was nearly similar in its character, and
equally impracticable in its eastern, as its western arm; and that,
considering the difficulties I had encountered, and the hazards I
had subjected myself to, in ascertaining these points so minutely
on the western side, I could not be justified in renewing those risks
to the eastward, where the nature and extent of the impediments were
so self-evidently the same, and where there was not the slightest
hope of any useful result being attained by it.

I was now more than a hundred miles away from my party; and having sent them orders to move back
towards Mount Arden, I had no time to lose in following them. With bitter feelings of disappointment
I turned from the dreary and cheerless scene around me, and pushing the horses on as well as
circumstances would allow, succeeded in retracing ten miles of my course by a little after dark, having
completed a stage of fully forty-five miles during the day. Here there was tolerable good grass,
and plenty of water from the late rains, so that the horses were more fortunate on this excursion
than usual. I observed the variation to be 4 degrees E.

September 3.--Travelling early, we made a long stage of about forty miles, and encamped with
good grass and water.

The humours of the situation were all the Deacon's own. He dressed the part in black; his respectability
grinned behind a vizard; and all the while he trifled nonchalantly with a pistol. Breaking
the silence with snatches from The Beggar's Opera, he promised that all their lead should turn
to gold, christened the coulter and the crow the Great and Little Samuel, and then went off
to drink and dice at the Vintner's. How could anger prevail against this undying gaiety? And
if Smith were peevish at failure, he was presently reconciled, and prepared once more to die
for his Deacon.

Even after escape, the amateur is still apparent. True, he managed the trip to Flushing with
his ancient extravagance; true, he employed all the juggleries of the law to prevent his surrender
at Amsterdam. But he knew not the caution of the born criminal, and he was run to earth, because
he would still write to his friends like a gentleman. His letters, during this nightmare of
disaster, are perfect in their carelessness and good-fellowship. In this he demands news of
his children, as becomes a father and a citizen, and furnishes a schedule of their education;
in that he is curious concerning the issue of a main, and would know whether his black cock
came off triumphant. Nor, even in flight, did he forget his proper craft, but would have his
tools sent to Charleston, that in America he might resume the trade that had made him Deacon.

But his was the art of conduct, not of guile, and he deserved capture for his rare indifference.
Why, then, with no natural impulsion, did he risk the gallows? Why, being no born thief, and
innocent of the thief's cunning, did he associate with so clever a scoundrel as George Smith,
with cowards craven as Brown and Ainslie? The greed of gold, doubtless, half persuaded him,
but gold was otherwise attainable, and the motive was assuredly far more subtle. Brodie, in
fact, was of a romantic turn. He was, so to say, a glorified schoolboy, surfeited with penny
dreadfuls. He loved above all things to patter the flash, to dream himself another Macheath,
to trick himself out with all the trappings of a crime he was unfit to commit. It was never
the job itself that attracted him: he would always rather throw the dice than force a neighbour's
window. But he must needs have a distraction from the respectability of his life. Everybody
was at his feet; he was Deacon of his Guild, at an age whereat his fellows were striving to
earn a reputable living; his masterpieces were fashioned, and the wrights' trade was already
a burden. To go upon the cross seemed a dream of freedom, until he snapped his fingers at the
world, filled his mouth with slang, prepared his alibi, and furnished him a whole wardrobe
of disguises.

With a conscious irony, maybe, he buried his pistols beneath the domestic hearth, jammed his
dark lantern into the press, where he kept his game-cocks, and determined to make an inextricable
jumble of his career. Drink is sometimes a sufficient reaction against the orderliness of a
successful life.

But drink and cards failed with the Deacon, and at the Vintner's of his frequentation he encountered
accomplices proper for his schemes. Never was so outrageous a protest offered against domesticity.
Yet Brodie's resolution was romantic after its fashion, and was far more respectable than the
blackguardism of the French Revolution, which distracted housewifely discontent a year after
the Deacon swung. Moreover, it gave occasion for his dandyism and his love of display. If in
one incarnation he was the complete gentleman, in another he dressed the part of the perfect
scoundrel, and the list of his costumes would have filled one of his own ledgers.

But, when once the possibility of housebreaking was taken from him, he returned to his familiar
dignity. Being questioned by the Procurator Fiscal, he shrugged his shoulders, regretting that
other affairs demanded his attention. As who should say: it is unpardonable to disturb the
meditations of a gentleman. He made a will bequeathing his knowledge of law to the magistrates
of Edinburgh, his dexterity in cards and dice to Hamilton the chimney-sweeper, and all his
bad qualities to his good friends and old companions, Brown and Ainslie, not doubting, however,
that their own will secure them 'a rope at last.' In prison it was his worst complaint that,
though the nails of his toes and fingers were not quite so long as Nebuchadnezzar's, they were
long enough for a mandarin, and much longer than he found convenient. Thus he preserved an
untroubled demeanour until the day of his death. Always polite, and even joyous, he met the
smallest indulgence with enthusiasm. When Smith complained that a respite of six weeks was
of small account, Brodie exclaimed, 'George, what would you and I give for six weeks longer?
Six weeks would be an age to us.'

The day of execution was the day of his supreme triumph. As some men are artists in their lives,
so the Deacon was an artist in his death. We had now none, and were suffering greatly from the
heat, and from thirst, the day being calm and clear, and intolerably hot. When we had first
unyoked the horses, I made the man and native boy lay down in the shade, to sleep, whilst I attended
to the animals, and kept an eye on the natives. About noon I called them up again, and we all
made our dinner off a little bread, and some of the fruit that grew around us, the moisture of
which alone enabled us to eat at all, our mouths were so thoroughly dry and parched.

A movement was now observed among the natives; and gathering up their spears, they all went
off. Having placed the native boy upon an eminence to watch them, the man and I at once set to
work to carry our baggage to the top of a sand-hill, that it might
be buried at some distance from the dray.

We had hardly commenced our labours, however, before the boy called out that the natives were returning,
and in a little time they all occupied their former position; either they had only gone as a
ruse to see what we intended to do, or they had been noticing us, and had seen us removing our
baggage, or else they had observed the boy watching them, and wished to disappoint him. Whatever
the inducement was, there they were again, and we had as little prospect of being able to accomplish
our object as ever. If any thing could have palliated aggressive measures towards the aborigines,
it would surely be such circumstances as we were now in; our own safety, and the lives of our
horses, depended entirely upon our getting rid of them. Yet with the full power to compel them
(for we were all armed), I could not admit the necessity of the case as any excuse for our acting
offensively towards those who had been friendly to us, and who knew not the embarrassment and
danger which their presence caused us.

Strongly as our patience had been exercised in the morning, it was
still more severely tested in the afternoon--for eight long hours
had those natives sat opposite to us watching.

From eight in the morning until four in the afternoon, we had been doomed to disappointment.
About this time, however, a general movement again took place; once more they collected their
spears, shouldered their wallets, and moved off rapidly and steadily towards the south-east.
It was evident they had many miles to go to their encampment, and I now knew we should be troubled
with them no more. Leaving the boy to keep guard again upon the hill, the man and I dug a large
hole, and buried all our provisions, harness, pack-saddles, water-casks, etc. leaving the
dray alone exposed in the plains. After smoothing the surface of the ground, we made a large fire
over the place where the things were concealed, and no trace remained of the earth having been disturbed.

We
had now no time to lose, and moving away slowly, drove the horses
before us towards the water.

The delay, however, had been fatal; the strength of the poor animals was too far exhausted, and
before we had gone seven miles, one of them could not proceed, and we were obliged to leave
him; at three miles further two more were unable to go on, and they, too, were abandoned,
though within twelve miles of the water. We had still two left, just able to crawl along, and these,
by dint of great perseverance and care, we at last got to the water about four o'clock in the morning
of the 6th. They were completely exhausted, and it was quite impossible they could go back
the same day, to take water to those we had left behind. The man, myself, and the boy were
in but little better plight; the anxiety we had gone through, the great heat of the weather,
and the harassing task of travelling over the heavy sandy hills, covered with scrub, in the
dark, and driving jaded animals before us, added to the want of water we were suffering under, had
made us exceedingly weak, and rendered us almost incapable of further exertion. In the evening
I sent the man, who had been resting all day, to try and bring the
two horses nearest to us a few miles on the road, whilst I was to
meet him with water in the morning.

Native fires were seen to the north-east of us at night, but the people did not seem to have been at
the water at the sand-hills for their supply, no traces of their having recently visited it
being found.
 So for twenty years he wavered between the
crowbar and the prison house, now perfecting a brilliant scheme, now captured through recklessness
or drink. Once when a mistake at Manchester sent him to the Hulks, he owned his failure was
the fruit of brandy, and after his wont delivered (from the dock) a little homily upon the
benefit of sobriety.

Meanwhile his art was growing to perfection. He had at last discovered that a burglary demands
as diligent a forethought as a campaign; he had learnt that no great work is achieved by a
multitude of minds. Before his boat carried off a goodly parcel of silk from Nottingham, he
was known to the neighbourhood as an enthusiastic and skilful angler. One day he dangled his
line, the next he sat peacefully at the same employ; and none suspected that the mild mannered
fisherman had under the cloud of night despatched a costly parcel to London. Even the years
of imprisonment were not ill-spent. Peace was still preparing the great achievement of his
life, and he framed from solitary reflection as well as from his colleagues in crime many an
ingenious theory afterwards fearlessly translated into practice. And when at last he escaped
the slavery of the gaol, picture-framing was the pursuit which covered the sterner business
of his life. His depredation involved him in no suspicion; his changing features rendered recognition
impossible. When the exercise of his trade compelled him to shoot a policeman at Whalley Range,
another was sentenced for the crime; and had he not encountered Mrs. Dyson, who knows but he
might have practised his art in prosperous obscurity until claimed by a coward's death? But
a stormy love-passage with Mrs. Dyson led to the unworthy killing of the woman's husband--a
crime unnecessary and in no sense consonant to the burglar's craft; and Charles Peace was an
outlaw, with a reward set upon his head.

And now came a period of true splendour. Like Fielding, like Cervantes, like Sterne, Peace
reserved his veritable masterpiece for the certainty of middle-life. His last two years were
nothing less than a march of triumph. If you remember his constant danger, you will realise
the grandeur of the scheme. From the moment that Peace left Bannercross with Dyson's blood
upon his hands, he was a hunted man. His capture was worth five hundred pounds; his features
were familiar to a hundred hungry detectives. Had he been less than a man of genius, he might
have taken an unavailing refuge in flight or concealment. But, content with no safety unattended
by affluence, he devised a surer plan: he became a householder. Now, a semi-detached villa
is an impregnable stronghold. Respectability oozes from the dusky mortar of its bricks, and
escapes in clouds of smoke from its soot-grimed chimneys. No policeman ever detects a desperate
ruffian in a demure black-coated gentleman who day after day turns an iron gate upon its rusty
hinge. And thus, wrapt in a cloak of suburban piety, Peace waged a pitiless and effective war
upon his neighbours.

He pillaged Blackheath, Greenwich, Peckham, and many another home of honest worth, with a noiselessness
and a precision that were the envy of the whole family. The unknown and intrepid burglar was
a terror to all the clerkdom of the City, and though he was as secret and secluded as Peace,
the two heroes were never identified. At the time of his true eminence he 'resided' in Evelina
Road, Peckham, and none was more sensible than he how well the address became his provincial
refinement. There he installed himself with his wife and Mrs. Thompson. His drawing-room suite
was the envy of the neighbourhood; his pony-trap proclaimed him a man of substance; his gentle
manners won the respect of all Peckham. Hither he would invite his friends to such entertainments
as the suburb expected. His musical evenings were recorded in the local paper, while on Sundays
he chanted the songs of Zion with a zeal which Clapham herself might envy.

The house in Evelina Road was no mere haunt of quiet gentility. It was chosen with admirable
forethought and with a stern eye upon the necessities of business. Beyond the garden wall frowned
a railway embankment, which enabled the cracksman to escape from his house without opening
the front door. By the same embankment he might, if he chose, convey the trophies of the night's
work; and what mattered it if the windows rattled to the passing train?

At least a cloud of suspicion was dispelled. Here he lived for two years, with naught to disturb
his tranquillity save Mrs. Thompson's taste for drink. The hours of darkness were spent in
laborious activity, the open day brought its own distractions. There was always Bow Street
wherein to loaf, and the study of the criminal law lost none of its excitement from the reward
offered outside for the bald-headed fanatic who sat placidly within. And the love of music
was Peace's constant solace. Whatever treasures he might discard in a hurried flight, he never
left a fiddle behind, and so vast became his pilfered collection that he had to borrow an empty
room in a friend's house for its better disposal.

Moreover, he had a fervent pride in his craft; and you might deduce from his performance the
whole theory and practice of burglary. He worked ever without accomplices. He knew neither
the professional thief nor his lingo; and no association with gaol-birds involved him in the
risk of treachery and betrayal. His single colleague was a friendly fence, and not even at
the gallows' foot would he surrender the fence's name. His master quality was a constructive
imagination. Accident never marred his design. He would visit the house of his breaking until
he understood its ground-plan, and was familiar with its inhabitants. This demanded an amazing
circumspection, but Peace was as stealthy as a cat, and he would keep silent vigil for hours
rather than fail from an over keen anxiety. Having marked the place of his entry, and having
chosen an appropriate hour, he would prevent the egress of his enemies by screwing up the doors.

He then secured the room wherein he worked, and the job finished, he slung himself into the
night by the window, so that, ere an alarm could be raised, his pony-trap had carried the booty
to Evelina Road.

Such was the outline of his plan; but, being no pedant, he varied it at will: nor was he likely
to court defeat through lack of resource. Accomplished as he was in his proper business, he
was equally alert to meet the accompanying risks. He had brought the art of cozening strange
dogs to perfection; and for the exigence of escape, his physical equipment was complete. He
would resist capture with unparalleled determination, and though he shuddered at the shedding
of blood, he never hesitated when necessity bade him pull the trigger. Moreover, there was
no space into which he would not squeeze his body, and the iron bars were not yet devised through
which he could not make an exit. Once--it was at Nottingham--he was surprised by an inquisitive
detective who demanded his name and trade. 'I am a hawker of spectacles,' replied Peace, 'and
my licence is downstairs. Wait two minutes and I'll show it you.' The detective never saw him
again. Six inches only separated the bars of the window, but Peace asked no more, and thus
silently he won his freedom. True, his most daring feat--the leap from the train--resulted
not in liberty, but in a broken head. But he essayed a task too high even for his endeavour,
and, despite his manacles, at least he left his boot in the astonished warder's grip.

No less remarkable than his skill and daring were his means of evasion. Even without a formal
disguise he could elude pursuit. At an instant's warning, his loose, plastic features would
assume another shape; out shot his lower jaw, and, as if by magic, the blood flew into his
face until you might take him for a mulatto. Or, if he chose, he would strap his arm to his
side, and let the police be baffled by a wooden mechanism, decently finished with a hook. Thus
he roamed London up and down unsuspected, and even after his last failure at Blackheath, none
would have discovered Charles Peace in John Ward, the Single-Handed Burglar, had not woman's
treachery prompted detection. Indeed, he was an epitome of his craft, the Complete Burglar
made manifest.

Not only did he plan his victories with previous ingenuity, but he sacrificed to his success
both taste and sentiment. His dress was always of the most sombre; his only wear was the decent
black of everyday godliness. The least spice of dandyism might have distinguished him from
his fellows, and Peace's whole vanity lay in his craft. Nor did the paltry sentiment of friendship
deter him from his just course. When the panic aroused by the silent burglar was uncontrolled,
a neighbour consulted Peace concerning the safety of his house. The robber, having duly noted
the villa's imperfections, and having discovered the hiding-place of jewellery and plate, complacently
rifled it the next night. Though his self-esteem sustained a shock, though henceforth his friend
thought meanly of his judgment, he was rewarded with the solid pudding of plunder, and the
world whispered of the mysterious marauder with a yet colder horror. In truth, the large simplicity
and solitude of his style sets him among the Classics, and though others have surpassed him
at single points of the game, he practised the art with such universal breadth and courage
as were then a revolution, and are still unsurpassed.

But the burglar ever fights an unequal battle. One false step, and defeat o'erwhelms him. For
two years had John Ward intimidated the middle-class seclusion of South London; for two years
had he hidden from a curious world the ugly, furrowed visage of Charles Peace. The bald head,
the broad-rimmed spectacles, the squat, thick figure--he stood but five feet four in his stockings,
and adds yet another to the list of little-great men--should have ensured detection, but the
quick change and the persuasive gesture were omnipotent, and until the autumn of 1878 Peace
was comfortably at large. And then an encounter at Blackheath put him within the clutch of
justice. His revolver failed in its duty, and, valiant as he was, at last he met his match.
In prison he was alternately insolent and aggrieved. He blustered for justice, proclaimed himself
the victim of sudden temptation, and insisted that his intention had been ever innocent.

But, none the less, he was sentenced to a lifer, and, the mask of John Ward being torn from
him, he was sent to Sheffield to stand his trial as Charles Peace. The leap from the train
is already recorded; and at his last appearance in the dock he rolled upon the floor, a petulant
and broken man. When once the last doom was pronounced, he forgot both fiddle and crowbar;
he surrendered himself to those exercises of piety from which he had never wavered. The foolish
have denounced him for a hypocrite, not knowing that the artist may have a life apart from
his art, and that to Peace religion was an essential pursuit. So he died, having released from
an unjust sentence the poor wretch who at Whalley Range had suffered for his crime, and offering
up a consolatory prayer for all mankind. In truth, there was no enemy for whom he did not intercede.
He prayed for his gaolers, for his executioner, for the Ordinary, for his wife, for Mrs. Thompson,
his drunken doxy, and he went to his death with the sure step of one who, having done his duty,
is reconciled with the world. The mob testified its affectionate admiration by dubbing him
'Charley,' and remembered with effusion his last grim pleasantry. 'What is the scaffold?' he
asked with sublime earnestness. And the answer came quick and sanctimonious: 'A short cut to
Heaven!'

III--A PARALLEL

(DEACON BRODIE AND CHARLES PEACE)

NOT a parallel, but a contrast, since at all points Peace is Brodie's antithesis. The one is
the austerest of Classics, caring only for the ultimate perfection of his work. The other is
the gayest of Romantics, happiest when by the way he produces a glittering effect, or dazzles
the ear by a vain impertinence. Now, it is by thievery that Peace reached magnificence. A natural
aptitude drove him from the fiddle to the centre-bit. He did but rob, because genius followed
the impulse. He had studied the remotest details of his business; he was sternly professional
in the conduct of his life, and, as became an old gaol-bird, there was no antic of the policeman
wherewith he was not familiar. Moreover, not only had he reduced house-breaking to a science,
but, being ostensibly nothing better than a picture-frame maker, he had invented an incomparable
set of tools wherewith to enter and evade his neighbour's house. Brodie, on the other hand,
was a thief for distraction. His method was as slovenly as ignorance could make it. Though
by trade a wright, and therefore a master of all the arts of joinery, he was so deficient in
seriousness that he stole a coulter wherewith to batter the walls of the Excise Office. While
Peace fought the battle in solitude, Brodie was not only attended by a gang, but listened to
the command of his subordinates, and was never permitted to perform a more intricate duty than
the sounding of the alarm. And yet here is the ironical contrast. Peace, the professional thief,
despised his brothers, and was never heard to patter a word of flash. Brodie, the amateur,
courted the society of all cross coves, and would rather express himself in Pedlar's French
than in his choicest Scots. While the Englishman scraped Tate and Brady from a one-stringed
fiddle, the Scot limped a chaunt from The Beggar's Opera, and thought himself a devil of a
fellow. The one was a man about town masquerading as a thief; the other the most serious among
housebreakers, singing psalms in all good faith.

But if Peace was incomparably the better craftsman, Brodie was the prettier gentleman. Peace
would not have permitted Brodie to drive his pony-trap the length of Evelina Road. But Brodie,
in revenge, would have cut Peace had he met him in the Corn-market. The one was a sombre savage,
the other a jovial comrade, and it was a witty freak of fortune that impelled both to follow
the same trade. And thus you arrive at another point of difference. The Englishman had no intelligence
of life's amenity. He knew naught of costume: clothes were the limit of his ambition. Dressed
always for work, he was like the caterpillar which assumes the green of the leaf, wherein it
hides: he wore only such duds as should attract the smallest notice, and separate him as far
as might be from his business. But the Scot was as fine a dandy as ever took (haphazard) to
the cracking of kens. If his refinement permitted no excess of splendour, he went ever gloriously
and appropriately apparelled. He was well-mannered, cultured, with scarce a touch of provincialism
to mar his gay demeanour: whereas Peace knew little enough outside the practice of burglary,
and the proper handling of the revolver.

Our Charles, for example, could neither spell nor write; he dissembled his low origin with
the utmost difficulty, and at the best was plastered over (when not at work) with the parochialism
of the suburbs. The latter had set out from Saint Petersburg on the 17th of September; and the
King and Queen of Prussia awaited him at Koenigsberg, where he arrived on the 18th. The Duke
of Montebello had the honor of receiving him at Bromberg amid a salute of twenty-one cannon. Alighting
from his carriage, the Emperor Alexander mounted his horse, accompanied by the Marshals of the Empire,
Soult, Duke of Dalmatia, and Lannes, Duke of Montebello, and set
off at a gallop to meet the Nansouty division, which awaited him arranged
in line of battle.

He was welcomed by a new salute, and by oft repeated cries of "Long live the Emperor Alexander."
The monarch, while reviewing the different corps which formed this fine division, said to the
officers, "I think it a great honor, messieurs, to be amongst such brave men and splendid soldiers."

By
orders of Marshal Soult, who simply executed those given by Napoleon, relays of the post had
been arranged on all the roads which the Monarch of the North would pass over, and they were
forbidden to receive any compensation. At each relay were escorts of dragoons or light cavalry,
who rendered military honors to the Czar as he passed.

After having dined with the generals of the Nansouty division, the Emperor of Russia re-entered
his carriage, a barouche with two seats, and seated the Duke of Montebello beside him, who
afterwards told me with how many marks of esteem and kind feeling
the Emperor overwhelmed him during the journey, even arranging the
marshal's cloak around his shoulders while he was asleep.

His Imperial Russian Majesty arrived at Weimar the evening of the 26th, and next day continued
his journey to Erfurt, escorted by Marshal Soult, his staff, and the superior officers of the Nansouty
division, who had not left him since he had started from Bromberg, and met Napoleon a league
and a half from Erfurt, to which place the latter had come on horseback for this purpose.

The
moment the Czar perceived the Emperor, he left his carriage, and advanced towards his Majesty,
who had also alighted from his horse. They embraced each other with the affection of two college
friends who meet again after a long absence; then both mounted their horses, as did also the Grand
Duke Constantine, and passing at a gallop in front of the regiments, all of which presented
arms at their approach, entered the town, while the troops, with
an immense crowd collected from twenty leagues around, made the air
resound with their acclamations.

The Emperor of Russia wore on entering Erfurt the grand decoration of the Legion of Honor, and
the Emperor of the French that of Saint Andrew of Russia; and the two sovereigns during their stay
continued to show each other these marks of mutual deference, and it was also remarked that in
his palace the Emperor always gave the right to Alexander. On the evening of his arrival, by
his Majesty's invitation, Alexander gave the countersign to the grand marshal, and it was
afterwards given alternately by the two sovereigns.

They went first to the palace of Russia, where they remained an hour; and later, when Alexander
came to return the visit of the Emperor, he received him at the foot of the staircase, and accompanied
him when he left as far as the entrance of the grand hall. At six o'clock the two sovereigns dined
at his Majesty's residence, and it was the same each day. At nine o'clock the Emperor escorted the
Emperor of Russia to his palace; and they then held a private conversation, which continued more
than an hour, and in the evening the whole city was illuminated. The day after his arrival the
Emperor received at his levee the officers of the Czar's household, and granted them the grand
entry during the rest of their Stay.

The two sovereigns gave to each other proofs of the most sincere friendship and most confidential
intimacy. The Emperor Alexander almost every morning entered his Majesty's bedroom, and conversed
freely with him. One day he was examining the Emperor's dressing-case in silver gilt, which
cost six thousand francs, and was most conveniently arranged and beautifully carved by the goldsmith
Biennais, and admired it exceedingly.

As soon as he had gone, the Emperor ordered me to have a dressing-case sent to the Czar's palace
exactly similar to that which had just been received from Paris.

Another time the Emperor Alexander remarked on the elegance and durability of his Majesty's
iron bedstead; and the very next day by his Majesty's orders, conveyed
by me, an exactly similar bed was set up in the room of the Emperor
of Russia, who was delighted with these polite attentions, and two
days after, as an evidence of his satisfaction, ordered M. de Remusat
to hand me two handsome diamond rings. Not until the darkness he loved
so fervently covered the earth would he escape from the dull respectability of Entrammes, nor
did he ever thus escape unaccompanied by his famous valise. The grey suit was an effectual
disguise to his calling, and so jealous was he of the Church's honour that he never--unless
in his cups--disclosed his tonsure. One of his innumerable loves confessed in the witness-box
that Bruneau always retained his hat in the glare of the Café, protesting that a headache rendered
him fatally susceptible to draught; and such was his thoughtful punctilio that even in the
comparative solitude of a guilty bed-chamber he covered his shorn locks with a nightcap.

And while his conduct at Laval was unimpeachable, he always proved a nice susceptibility in
his return. A cab carried him within a discreet distance of his home, whence, having exchanged
the grey for the more sober black, he would tramp on foot, and thus creep in tranquil and unobserved.
But simple as it is to enjoy, enjoyment must still be purchased, and the Abbé was never guilty
of a meanness. The less guilty scheme was speedily staled, and then it was that the Abbé bethought
him of murder.

His first victim was the widow Bourdais, who pursued the honest calling of a florist at Laval.
Already the curate was on those terms of intimacy which unite the robber with the robbed; for
some months earlier he had imposed a forced loan of sixty francs upon his victim. But on the
15th of July 1893, he left Entrammes, resolved upon a serious measure. The black valise was
in his hand, as he set forth upon the arid, windy road. Before he reached Laval he had made
the accustomed transformation, and it was no priest, but a layman, doucely dressed in grey,
that awaited Mme. Bourdais' return from the flower-market. He entered the shop with the coolness
of a friend, and retreated to the door of the parlour when two girls came to make a purchase.
No sooner had the widow joined him than he cut her throat, and, with the ferocity of the beast
who loves blood as well as plunder, inflicted some forty wounds upon her withered frame. His
escape was simple and dignified; he called the cabman, who knew him well, and who knew, moreover,
what was required of him; and the priest was snugly in bed, though perhaps exhausted with blood
and pleasure, when the news of the murder followed him to his village.

Next day the crime was common gossip, and the Abbé's friends took counsel with him. One there
was astonished that the culprit remained undiscovered. 'But why should you marvel?' said Bruneau.
'I could kill you and your wife at your own chimney-corner without a soul knowing. Had I taken
to evil courses instead of to good I should have been a terrible assassin.' There is a touch
of the pride which De Quincey attributes to Williams in this boastfulness, and throughout the
parallel is irresistible. Williams, however, was the better dandy; he put on a dress-coat and
patent-leather pumps because the dignity of his work demanded a fitting costume. And Bruneau
wore the grey suit not without a hope of disguise. Yet you like to think that the Abbé looked
complacently upon his valise, and had forethought for the cut of his professional coat; and
if he be not in the first flight of artistry, remember his provincial upbringing, and furnish
the proper excuse.

Meanwhile the scandal of the murdered widow passed into forgetfulness, and the Abbé was still
impoverished. Already he had robbed his vicar, and the suspicion of the Abbé Fricot led on
to the final and the detected crime. Now Fricot had noted the loss of money and of bonds, and
though he refrained from exposure he had confessed to a knowledge of the criminal. M. Bruneau
was naturally sensitive to suspicion, and he determined upon the immediate removal of this
danger to his peace. On January 2, 1894, M. Fricot returned to supper after administering the
extreme unction to a parishioner. While the meal was preparing, he went into his garden in
sabots and bareheaded, and never again was seen alive. The supper cooled, the vicar was still
absent; the murderer, hungry with his toil, ate not only his own, but his victim's share of
the food, grimly hinting that Fricot would not come back. Suicide was dreamed of, murder hinted;
up and down the village was the search made, and none was more zealous than the distressed curate.

At last a peasant discovered some blocks of wood in the well, and before long blood-stains
revealed themselves on the masonry. Speedily was the body recovered, disfigured and battered
beyond recognition, and the voice of the village went up in denunciation of the Abbé Bruneau.
Immunity had made the culprit callous, and in a few hours suspicion became certainty. A bleeding
nose was the lame explanation given for the stains which were on his clothes, on the table,
on the keys of his harmonium. A quaint and characteristic folly was it that drove the murderer
straight to the solace of his religion. You picture him, hot and red-handed from murder, soothing
his battered conscience with some devilish Requiem for the unshrived soul he had just parted
from its broken body, and leaving upon the harmonium the ineradicable traces of his guilt.
Thus he lived, poised between murder and the Church, spending upon the vulgar dissipation of
a Breton village the blood and money of his foolish victims. But for him 'les tavernes et les
filles' of Laval meant a veritable paradise, and his sojourn in the country is proof enough
of a limited cunning. Had he been more richly endowed, Paris had been the theatre of his crimes.
As it is, he goes down to posterity as the Man in the Grey Suit, and the best friend the cabmen
of Laval ever knew. Them, indeed, he left inconsolable.

MONSIEUR L'ABBÉ

The childhood of the Abbé Rosselot is as secret as his origin, and no man may know whether
Belfort or Bavaria smiled upon his innocence. A like mystery enshrouds his early manhood, and
the malice of his foes, who are legion, denounces him for a Jesuit of Innsbruck. But since
he has lived within the eye of the world his villainies have been revealed as clearly as his
attainments, and history provides him no other rival in the corruption of youth than the infamous
Thwackum.

It is not every scholar's ambition to teach the elements, and Rosselot adopted his modest calling
as a cloak of crime. No sooner was he installed in a mansion than he became the mansion's master,
and henceforth he ruled his employer's domain with the tyrannical severity of a Grand Inquisitor.
His soul wrapped in the triple brass of arrogance, he even dared to lay his hands upon food
before his betters were served; and presently, emboldened by success, he would order the dinners,
reproach the cook with a too lavish use of condiments, and descend with insolent expostulation
into the kitchen. In a week he had opened the cupboards upon a dozen skeletons, and made them
rattle their rickety bones up and down the draughty staircases, until the inmates shivered
with horror and the terrified neighbours fled the haunted castle as a lazar-house. Once in
possession of a family secret, he felt himself secure, and henceforth he was free to browbeat
his employer and to flog his pupil to the satisfaction of his waspish nature. Moreover, he
was endowed with all the insight and effrontery of a trained journalist. So sedulous was he
in his search after the truth, that neither man nor woman could deny him confidence. And, as
vinegar flowed in his veins for blood, it was his merry sport to set wife against husband and
children against father. Not even were the servants safe from his watchful inquiry, and housemaids
and governesses alike entrusted their hopes and fears to his malicious keeping. And when the
house had retired to rest, with what a sinister delight did he chuckle over the frailties and
infamies, a guilty knowledge of which he had dragged from many an unwilling sinner! To oust
him, when installed, was a plain impossibility, for this wringer of hearts was only too glib
in the surrender of another's scandal; and as he accepted the last scurrility with Christian
resignation, his unfortunate employer could but strengthen his vocabulary and patiently endure
the presence of this smiling, demoniacal tutor. 

The history of the one which I carried from him to the Princess Pauline
is singular enough to be related here, although it may have been already
told.

The Princess Pauline showed much pleasure in receiving the Emperor's present, and enjoyed displaying
her cloak for the admiration of the household. One day, when she was in the midst of a circle
of ladies, to whom she was dilating on the quality and excellence of this fur, M. de Canouville arrived,
and the princess asked his opinion of the present she had received from the Emperor. The handsome
colonel not appearing as much struck with admiration as she expected, she was somewhat piqued, and
exclaimed, "What, monsieur, you do not think it exquisite?"-- "No, madame."--"In order to punish
you I wish you to keep this cloak; I give it to you, and require you to wear it; I wish it,
you understand." It is probable that there had been some disagreement between her Imperial
highness and her protege, and the princess had seized the first means of establishing peace;
but however that may be, M. de Canouville needed little entreaty, and the rich fur was carried
to his house.

A few days after, while the Emperor was holding a review on the Place du Carrousel, M, de
Canouville appeared on an unruly horse, which he had great difficulty in controlling. This
caused some confusion, and attracted his Majesty's attention, who, glancing at M. de Canouville,
saw the cloak which he had given his sister metamorphosed into a hussar's cape. The Emperor had great
difficulty in controlling his anger. "M. de Canouville," he cried, in a voice of thunder,
"your horse is young, and his blood is too warm; you will go and cool it in Russia." Three
days after M. de Canouville had left Paris.

CHAPTER XII.

The Emperor Alexander never tired of showing his regard for actors by presents and compliments;
and as for actresses, I have told before how far he would have gone with one of them if Napoleon
had not deterred. him. Each day the Grand Duke Constantine got up parties of pleasure with Murat
and other distinguished persons, at which no expense was spared,
and some of these ladies did the honors. And what furs and diamonds
they carried away from Erfurt! The two Emperors were not ignorant
of all this, and were much amused thereby; and it was the favorite
subject of conversation in the morning. Constantine had conceived
an especial affection for King Jerome; the king even carried his affection
so far as to 'tutoy' him, and wished him to do the same. But the Marquis loved not the lean, ogling instructor
of his sons, and presently began to assail him with all the abuse of which he was master. He
charged the Abbé with unspeakable villainy; salop and saligaud were the terms in which he would
habitually refer to him. He knew the rascal for a spy, and no modesty restrained him from proclaiming
his knowledge. But whatever insults were thrown at the Abbé he received with a grin complacent
as Shylock's, for was he not conscious that when he liked the pound of flesh was his own!

With a fiend's duplicity he laid his plans of ruin and death. The Marquise, swayed to his will,
received him secretly in the blue room (whose very colour suggests a guilty intrigue), though
never, upon the oath of an Abbé, when the key was turned in the lock. A journey to Switzerland
had freed him from the haunting suspicion of the Marquis, and at last he might compel the wife
to denounce her husband as a murderer. The terrified woman drew the indictment at the Abbé's
dictation, and when her husband returned to St. Amand he was instantly thrust into prison.
Nothing remained but to cajole the sons into an expressed hatred of their father, and the last
enormity was committed by a masterpiece of cunning. 'Your father's one chance of escape,' argued
this villain in a cassock, 'is to be proved an inhuman ruffian. Swear that he beat you unmercifully
and you will save him from the guillotine.' All the dupes learned their lesson with a certainty
which reflects infinite credit upon the Abbé's method of instruction.

For once in his life the Abbé had been moved by greed as well as by villainy. His early exploits
had no worse motive than the satisfaction of an inhuman lust for cruelty and destruction. But
the Marquise was rich, and when once her husband's head were off, might not the Abbé reap his
share of the gathered harvest? The stakes were high, but the game was worth the playing, and
Rosselot played it with spirit and energy unto the last card. His appearance in court is ever
memorable, and as his ferret eyes glinted through glass at the President, he seemed the villain
of some Middle Age Romance. His head, poised upon a lean, bony frame, was embellished with
a nose thin and sharp as the blade of a knife; his tightly compressed lips were an indication
of the rascal's determination. He says that on Monday (5th), he was left in the station hut whilst
his brother came into town, and that about ten or eleven natives surrounded his hut, and wished for
something to eat. He gave them bread and rice--all he had, and as they endeavoured to force themselves
into his hut, he went out and fastened the door, standing on the outside with his gun by his side
and a sword in his hand, which he held for the purpose of fighting
them. He did not make any signs of using them. He told his monstrous story with a cynical contempt, which
has scarce its equal in the history of crime; and priest, as he was, he proved that he did
not yield to the Marquis himself in the Rabelaisian amplitude of his vocabulary. He brought
charges against the weird world of Presles with an insouciance and brutality which defeated
their own aim. He described the vices of his master and the sins of the servants in a slang
which would sit more gracefully upon an idle roysterer than upon a pious Abbé. And, his story
ended, he leered at the Court with the satisfaction of one who had discharged a fearsome duty. 

Then he took his wondering brothers home with him to stay in his fine house, where his Egyptian wife
and their little children lived; and after a time he sent them away, laden with presents, and
with wagons to bring down their children and their old father Jacob
into Egypt.
He left behind for our consolation a snatch of philosophy which helps to explain his last and
greatest achievement. 'Those who have money exist only to be fleeced.' Thus he spake with a
reckless revelation of self. Yet the mystery of his being is still unpierced. He is traitor,
schemer, spy; but is he an Abbé? Perhaps not. At any rate, he once attended the 'Messe des
Morts,' and was heard to mumble a 'Credo,' which, as every good Catholic remembers, has no
place in that solemn service.

