The health of the King, meanwhile, visibly declining, Madame des Ursins feared lest she should
entirely fall into the clutches of M. d'Orleans. She fully resolved, therefore, to make off,
without knowing, however, where to fix herself; and asked permission of the King to come and
take leave of him at Marly.  She came there from Paris on Tuesday, the 6th of August, so as
to arrive as he left dinner, that is, about ten o'clock. She was immediately admitted into
the cabinet of the King, with whom she remained tete-a-tete full half an hour.  She passed
immediately to the apartments of Madame de Maintenon, with whom she remained an hour; and then
got into her coach and returned to Paris.  I only knew of this leave-taking by her arrival
at Marly, where I had some trouble in meeting her.  As chance would have it, I went in search
of her coach to ask her people what had become of her, and was speaking to them when, to and
behold! she herself arrived.  She seemed very glad to see me, and made me mount with her into
her coach, where for little less than an hour we discoursed very freely.  She did not dissimulate
from me her fears; the coldness the King and Madame de Maintenon had testified for her through
all their politeness; the isolation she found herself in at the Court, even in Paris; and the
uncertainty in which she was as to the choice of a retreat; all this in detail, and nevertheless
without complaint, without regret, without weakness; always reassured and superior to events,
as though some one else were in question.  She touched lightly upon Spain, upon the ascendency
the Queen was acquiring already over the King, giving me to understand that it could not be
otherwise; running lightly and modestly over the Queen, and always praising the goodness of
the King of Spain.  Fear, on account of the passers-by, put an end to our conversation.  She
was very gracious to me; expressed regret that we must part; proceeded to tell me when she
should start in time for us to have another day together; sent many compliments to Madame de
Saint-Simon; and declared herself sensible of the mark of friendship I had given her, in spite
of my engagement with M. d'Orleans.  As soon as I had seen her off, I went to M. d'Orleans,
to whom I related what I had just done; said I had not paid a visit, but had had simply a meeting;
that it was true I could not hinder myself from seeking it, without prejudice to the final
visit he had allowed me.  Neither he nor Madame la Duchesse d'Orleans complained.  They had
fully triumphed over their enemy, and were on the point of seeing her leave France for ever,
without hope in Spain.

Until now, Madame des Ursins amused by a residue of friends, increased by those of M. de Noirmoutiers
with whom she lodged and who had money, had gently occupied herself with the arrangement of
her affairs, changed as they were, and in withdrawing her effects from Spain.  The fear lest
she should find herself in the power of a Prince whom she had so cruelly offended, and who
showed, since her arrival in France, that he felt it, hurried all her measures.  Her terror
augmented by the change in the King that she found at this last audience had taken place since
her first. She no longer doubted that his end was very near; and all her attention was directed
to the means by which she might anticipate it, and be well informed of his health; this she
believed her sole security in France. Terrified anew by the accounts she received of it, she
no longer gave herself time for anything, but precipitately set out on the 14th August, accompanied
as far as Essonne by her two nephews.  She had no time to inform me, so that I have never seen
her since the day of our conversation at Marly in her coach.  She did not breathe until she
arrived at Lyons.

She had abandoned the project of retiring into Holland, where the States- General would not
have her.  She herself, too, was disgusted with the equality of a republic, which counterbalanced
in her mind the pleasure of the liberty enjoyed there.  But she could not resolve to return
to Rome, the theatre of her former reign, and appear there proscribed and old, as in an asylum.
She feared, too, a bad reception, remembering the quarrels that had taken place between the
Courts of Rome and Spain.  She had lost many friends and acquaintances; in fifteen years of
absence all had passed away, and she felt the trouble she might be subjected to by the ministers
of the Emperor, and by those of the two Crowns, with their partisans.  Turin was not a Court
worthy of her; the King of Sardinia had not always been pleased with her, and they knew too
much for each other. At Venice she would have been out of her element.

Whilst agitated in this manner, without being able to make up her mind, she learned that the
King was in extreme danger, a danger exaggerated by rumour.  Fear seized her lest he should
die whilst she was in his realm. She set off immediately, therefore, without knowing where
to go; and solely to leave France went to Chambery, as the nearest place of safety, arriving
there out of breath, so to say.

Every place being well examined, she preferred Genoa; its liberty pleased her; there was intercourse
there with a rich and numerous nobility; the climate and the city were beautiful; the place
was in some sort a centre and halting-point between Madrid, Paris, and Rome, with which places
she was always in communication, and always hungered after all that passed there.  Genoa determined
on, she went there.  She was well received, hoped to fix her tabernacle there, and indeed stayed
some years.  But at last ennui seized her; perhaps vexation at not being made enough of.  She
could not exist without meddling, and what is there for a superannuated woman to meddle with
at Genoa?  She turned her thoughts, therefore, towards Rome.  Then, on sounding, found her
course clear, quitted Genoa, and returned to her nest.

She was not long there before she attached herself to the King and Queen of England (the Pretender
and his wife), and soon governed them openly. What a poor resource!  But it was courtly and
had a flavour of occupation for a woman who could not exist without movement.  She finished
her life there remarkably healthy in mind and body, and in a prodigious opulence, which was
not without its use in that deplorable Court.  For the rest, Madame des Ursins was in mediocre
estimation at Rome, was deserted by the Spanish, little visited by the French, but always faithfully
paid by France and Spain, and unmolested by the Regent.  She was always occupied with the world,
and with what she had been, but was no longer; yet without meanness, nay, with courage and dignity.

The loss she experienced in January, 1720, of the Cardinal de la Tremoille, although there
was no real friendship between them, did not fail, to create a void in her.  She survived him
three years, preserved all her health, her strength, her mind until death, and was carried
off, more than eighty years of age, at Rome, on the 5th of December, 1722, after a very short
illness.

She had the pleasure of seeing Madame de Maintenon forgotten and annihilated in Saint-Cyr,
of surviving her, of seeing at Rome her two enemies, Giudice and Alberoni, as profoundly disgraced
as she,--one falling from the same height, and of relishing the forgetfulness, not to say contempt,
into which they both sank.  Her death, which, a few years before, would have resounded throughout
all Europe, made not the least sensation.  The little English Court regretted her, and some
private friends also, of whom I was one.  I did not hide this, although,--on account of M.
le Duc d'Orleans, I had kept up no intercourse with her; for the rest, nobody seemed to perceive
she had disappeared.  She was, nevertheless, so extraordinary a person, during all the course
of her long life, everywhere, and had so grandly figured, although in various ways; had such
rare intellect, courage, industry, and resources; reigned so publicly and so absolutely in
Spain; and had a character so sustained and so unique, that her life deserves to be written,
and would take a place among the most curious fragments of the history of the times in which
she lived.

CHAPTER LVI

But I must return somewhat now, in order to make way for a crowd of events which have been
pressing forward all this time, but which I have passed by, in going straightforward at once
to the end of Madame des Ursins' history.

On Monday, the 30th April, 1714., the King took medicine, and worked after dinner with Pontchartrain.
This was at Marly.  About six o'clock, he went to M. le Duc de Berry, who had had fever all
night.  M. le Duc de Berry had risen without saying anything, had been with the King at the
medicine-hour, and intended to go stag-hunting; but on leaving the King's chamber shivering
seized him, and forced him to go back again.  He was bled while the King was in his chamber,
and the blood was found very bad; when the King went to bed the doctors told him the illness
was of a nature to make them hope that it might be a case of contagion.  M. le Duc de Berry
had vomited a good deal--a black vomit.  Fagon said, confidently, that it was from the blood;
the other doctors fastened upon some chocolate he had taken on the Sunday.  From this day forward
I knew what was the matter.  Boulduc, apothecary of the King, and extremely attached to Madame
de Saint-Simon and to me, whispered in my ear that M. le Duc de Berry would not recover, and
that, with some little difference, his malady was the same as that of which the Dauphin and
Dauphine died. He repeated this the next day, and never once varied afterwards; saying to me
on the third day, that none of the doctors who attended the Prince were of a different opinion,
or hid from him what they thought.

On Tuesday, the 1st of May, the Prince was bled in the foot at seven o'clock in the morning,
after a very bad night; took emetics twice, which had a good effect; then some manna; but still
there were two accesses. The King went to the sick-room afterwards, held a finance council,
would not go shooting, as he had arranged, but walked in his gardens.  The doctors, contrary
to their custom, never reassured him.  The night was cruel.  On Wednesday; the 2nd of May,
the King went, after mass, to M. le Duc de Berry, who had been again bled in the foot.  The
King held the Council of State, as usual, dined in Madame de Maintenon's rooms, and afterwards
reviewed his Guards. The planters are thereby obligated to deposit their crops in warehouses,
over which sworn inspectors preside, who rigidly examine every hogshead, and if found to be of
mercantile quality, grant the owner a certificate, by which instrument only he sells his produce.
The purchaser is hereby safe in buying these certificates. The tobacco to which they refer
is delivered to the holder on presentation to the inspector. I mention this not as applicable
here at present, but it most probably may hereafter.

When the colony is suffering severely for the want of labor, it may by some be deemed inopportune
in offering remarks upon this article of commerce. To such dissentients I will remark, that
a great portion of the work can be performed by women and children. A moiety of our anticipated
increase of population will be available for this hitherto mismanaged source of wealth. At present
the quantity grown in the colony is equal to three-fourths of its consumption, and which production
is of a very inferior quality to the imported. These facts tend to show that my notice of the subject
is not inopportune, and particularly so when the object is to point out those errors so generally
adopted by the tobacco growers here. Years of practical experience, of personal observation upon
the plantations of North America, and my having been, I believe, the grower of the greatest quantity
of tobacco in the colony, qualify me to afford instructions thereon; whereby, if attended to,
our tobacco will become fully equal to the American, as was proved
to be the case by the crops I grew here (upwards of 40 tons),[56]
which were sold in Sydney by the Commissariat Department at public
auction, at an advance of twenty per cent. more than the imported
leaf.

  It was reported that this accident had happened by
an effort M. de Berry made when out hunting on the previous Thursday, the day the Elector of
Bavaria arrived.  His horse slipped; in drawing the animal up, his body struck against the
pommel of the saddle, so it was said, and ever since he had spit blood every day.  The vomiting
ceased at nine o'clock in the morning, but the patient was no better.  The King, who was going
stag- hunting, put it off.  At six o'clock at night M. de Berry was so choked that he could
no longer remain in bed; about eight o'clock he found himself so relieved that he said to Madame,
he hoped he should not die; but soon after, the malady increased so much that Pere de la Rue
said it was no longer time to think of anything but God, and of receiving the sacrament.  The
poor Prince himself seemed to desire it.

A little after ten o'clock at night the King went to the chapel, where a consecrated Host had
been kept prepared ever since the commencement of the illness.  M. le Duc de Berry received
it, with extreme unction, in presence of the King, with much devotion and respect.  The King
remained nearly an hour in the chamber, supped alone in his own, did not receive the Princesses
afterwards, but went to bed.  M. le Duc d'Orleans, at ten o'clock in the morning, went again
to Versailles, as Madame la Duchesse de Berry wished still to come to Marly.  M. le Duc de
Berry related to Pere de la Rue, who at least said so, the accident just spoken of; but, it
was added, "his head was then beginning to wander."  After losing the power of speech, he took
the crucifix Pere de la Rue held, kissed it, and placed it upon his heart.  He expired on Friday,
the 4th of May, 1714, at four o'clock in the morning, in his twenty-eighth year, having been
born at Versailles, the last day of August, 1686.

M. le Duc de Berry was of ordinary height, rather fat, of a beautiful blonde complexion, with
a fresh, handsome face, indicating excellent health.  He was made for society, and for pleasure,
which he loved; the best, gentlest, most compassionate and accessible of men, without pride,
and without vanity, but not without dignity or self-appreciation.  He was of medium intellect,
without ambition or desire, but had very good sense, and was capable of listening, of understanding,
and of always taking the right side in preference to the wrong, however speciously put.  He
loved truth, justice, and reason; all that was contrary to religion pained him to excess, although
he was not of marked piety.  He was not without firmness, and hated constraint.  This caused
it to be feared that he was not supple enough for a younger son, and, indeed, in his early
youth he could not understand that there was any difference between him and his eldest brother,
and his boyish quarrels often caused alarm.

He was the most gay, the most frank, and consequently the most loved of the three brothers;
in his youth nothing was spoken of but his smart replies to Madame and M. de la Rochefoucauld.
He laughed at preceptors and at masters--often at punishment.  He scarcely knew anything except
how to read and write; and learned nothing after being freed from the necessity of learning.
This ignorance so intimidated him, that he could scarcely open his mouth before strangers,
or perform the most ordinary duties of his rank; he had persuaded himself that he was an ass
and a fool; fit for nothing.  He was so afraid of the King that he dared not approach him,
and was so confused if the King looked hard at him, or spoke of other things than hunting,
or gaming, that he scarcely understood a word, or could collect his thoughts.  As may be imagined,
such fear does not go hand in hand with deep affection.

He commenced life with Madame la Duchesse de Berry as do almost all those who marry very young
and green.  He became extremely amorous of her; this, joined to his gentleness and natural
complaisance, had the usual effect, which was to thoroughly spoil her.  He was not long in
perceiving it; but love was too strong for him.  He found a woman proud, haughty, passionate,
incapable of forgiveness, who despised him, and who allowed him to see it, because he had infinitely
less head than she; and because, moreover, she was supremely false and strongly determined.
She piqued herself upon both these qualities, and on her contempt for religion, ridiculing
M. le Duc de Berry for being devout; and all these things became insupportable to him.  Her
gallantries were so prompt, so rapid, so unmeasured, that he could not help seeing them.  Her
endless private interviews with M. le Duc d'Orleans, in which everything languished if he was
present, made him furious.  Violent scenes frequently took place between them; the last, which
occurred at Rambouillet, went so far that Madame la Duchesse de Berry received a kick * * *
* , and a menace that she should be shut up in a convent for the rest of her life; and when
M. le Duc de Berry fell ill, he was thumbing his hat, like a child, before the King, relating
all his grievances, and asking to be delivered from Madame la Duchesse de Berry.  Hitherto
I have only alluded to Madame la Duchesse de Berry, but, as will be seen, she became so singular
a person when her father was Regent, that I will here make her known more completely than I
have yet done.

She was tall, handsome, well made, with, however, but little grace, and had something in her,
eyes which made you fear what she was.  Like her father and mother, she spoke well and with
facility.  Timid in trifles, yet in other things terrifyingly bold,--foolishly haughty sometimes,
and sometimes mean to the lowest degree,--it may be said that she was a model of all the vices,
avarice excepted; and was all the more dangerous because she had art and talent.  I am not
accustomed to over-colour the picture I am obliged to present to render things understood,
and it will easily be perceived how strictly I am reserved upon the ladies, and upon all gallantries,
not intimately associated with what may be called important matters.  I should be so here,
more than in any other case, from self-love, if not from respect for the sex and dignity of
the person.  The considerable part I played in bringing about Madame la Duchesse de Berry's
marriage, and the place that Madame de Saint-Simon, in spite of herself and of me, occupied
in connection with her, would be for me reasons more than enough for silence, if I did not
feel that silence would throw obscurity over all the sequel of this history.  It is then to
the truth that I sacrifice my self-love, and with the same truthfulness I will say that if
I had known or merely suspected, that the Princess was so bad as she showed herself directly
after her marriage, and always more and more since, she would never have become Duchesse de Berry.

