She did not put it precisely in these words, but what she said came to the same thing; and
then, having petted and fondled her little man sufficiently, she proceeded to business.

'The poor dean is still alive,' said she.

'So I hear, so I hear,' said the bishop. 'I'll go to the deanery directly after breakfast to-morrow.'

'We are going to this party at Ullathorne to-morrow morning, my dear; we must be there early,
you know,--by twelve o'clock I suppose.'

'Oh,--ah!' said the bishop; 'then I'll certainly call the next day.

'Was much said about it at--?' asked Mrs Proudie.

'About what?' said the bishop.

'Filling up the dean's place,' said Mrs Proudie. As she spoke a spark of the wonted fire returned
to her eye, and the bishop felt himself to be a little less comfortable than before.

'Filling up the dean's place; that is, if the dean dies?--very little, my dear. It was mentioned,
just mentioned.'

'And what did you say about it, bishop?'

'Why I said that I thought that if, that is, should--should the dean die, that is, I said I
thought--' As he went on stammering and floundering, he saw that his wife's eye was fixed sternly
on him. Why should he encounter such evil for a man whom he loved so slightly as Mr Slope?
Why should he give up his enjoyments and his ease, and such dignity as might be allowed to
him, to fight a losing battle for a chaplain? The chaplain after all, if successful, would
be as great a tyrant as his wife. Why fight at all? Why contend? Why be uneasy? From that moment
he determined to fling Mr Slope to the winds, and take the goods the gods provided.

'I am told,' said Mrs Proudie, speaking very slowly, 'that Mr Slope is looking to be the new dean.'

'Yes,--certainly, I believe he is,' said the bishop.

'And what does the archbishop say about that?' asked Mrs Proudie.

'Well, my dear, to tell the truth, I promised Mr Slope to speak to the archbishop. Mr Slope
spoke to me about it. It was very arrogant of him, I must say,--but that is nothing to me.'

'Arrogant!' said Mrs Proudie; 'it is the most impudent piece of pretension I ever heard in
my life. Mr Slope dean of Barchester, indeed! And what did you do in the matter, bishop?'

'Why, my dear, I did speak to the archbishop.'

'You don't mean to tell me,' said Mrs Proudie, 'that you are going to make yourself ridiculous
by lending your name to such preposterous attempts as this? Mr Slope dean of Barchester indeed!'
And she tossed her head, and put her arms a-kimbo, with an air of confident defiance that made
her husband quite sure that Mr Slope never would be Dean of Barchester. In truth, Mrs Proudie
was all but invincible; had she married Petruchio, it may be doubted whether that arch wife-tamer
would have been able to keep her legs out of those garments which are presumed by men to be
peculiarly unfitted for feminine use.

'It is preposterous, my dear.'

'Then why have you endeavoured to assist him?'

'Why,--my dear, I haven't assisted him--much.'

'But why have you done it at all? Why have you mixed your name up in any thing so ridiculous?
What was it you did say to the archbishop?'

'Why, I did just mention it; I just did say that--that in the event of the poor dean's death,
Mr Slope would--would--'

'Would what?'

'I forget how I put it,--would take it if he could get it; something of that sort. I didn't
say much more than that.'

'You shouldn't have said anything at all. And what did the archbishop say?'

'He didn't say anything; he just bowed and rubbed his hands. Somebody else came up at the moment,
and as we were discussing the new parochial universal school committee, the matter of the new
dean dropped; after that I didn't think it was wise to renew it.'

'Renew it! I am very sorry you ever mentioned it. What will the archbishop think of that?'

'You may be sure, my dear, that the archbishop thought very little about it.'

'But why did you think about it, bishop? How could you think of making such a creature as that
Dean of Barchester?--Dean of Barchester! I suppose he'll be looking for bishoprics some of
these days--a man that hardly knows who his father was; a man that I found without bread to
his mouth, or a coat to his back. Dean of Barchester indeed! I'll dean him.'

Mrs Proudie considered herself to be in politics a pure Whig; all her family belonged to the
Whig party. Now among all ranks of Englishmen and Englishwomen (Mrs Proudie should, I think,
be ranked among the former, on the score of her great strength of mind), no one is so hostile
to lowly born pretenders to high station as the pure Whig.

The bishop thought it necessary to exculpate himself. 'Why, my dear,' said he, 'it appeared
to me that you and Mr Slope did not get on quite as well as you used to do.'

'Get on!' said Mrs Proudie, moving her foot uneasily on the hearth-rug, and compressing her
lips in a manner that betokened such danger to the subject of their discourse.

'I began to find that he was objectionable to you,'--Mrs Proudie's foot worked on the hearth-rug
with great rapidity,--'and that you would be more comfortable if he was out of the palace,'
Mrs Proudie smiled, as a hyena may probably smile before he begins his laugh,--'and therefore
I thought that if he got this place, and so ceased to be my chaplain, you might be pleased
at such an arrangement.'

And then the hyena laughed loud. Pleased at such an arrangement! pleased at having her enemy
converted into a dean with twelve hundred a year! Medea, when she describes the customs of
her native country (I am quoting from Robson's edition), assures her astonished auditor that
in her land captives, when taken, are eaten. 'You pardon them!' says Medea. 'We do indeed,'
says the mild Grecian. 'We eat them!' says she of Colchis, with terrible energy. Mrs Proudie
was the Medea of Barchester; she had no idea of not eating Mr Slope. Pardon him! merely get
rid of him! make a dean of him! It was not so they did with their captives in her country,
among people of her sort! Mr Slope had no such mercy to expect; she would pick him to the very
last bone.

'Oh, yes, my dear, of course he'll cease to be your chaplain,' said she. 'After what has passed,
that must be a matter of course. I couldn't for a moment think of living in the same house
with such a man. Besides, he has shown himself quite unfit for such a situation; making broils
and quarrels among the clergy, getting you, my dear, into scrapes, and taking upon himself
as though he was as good as bishop himself. Of course he'll go. But because he leaves the palace,
that is no reason why he should get into the deanery.'

'Oh, of course not!' said the bishop; 'but to save appearances you know, my dear--'

'I don't want to save appearances; I want Mr Slope to appear just what he is--a false, designing,
mean, intriguing man. I have my eye on him; he little knows what I see. He is misconducting
himself in the most disgraceful way with that lame Italian woman. That family is a disgrace
to Barchester, and Mr Slope is a disgrace to Barchester! If he doesn't look well to it, he'll
have his gown stripped off his back instead of having a dean's hat on his head. Dean, indeed!
The man has gone mad with arrogance.

The bishop said nothing further to excuse either himself or his chaplain, and having shown
himself passive and docile was again taken into favour. They soon went to dinner, and he spent
the pleasantest evening he had had in his own house for a long time. His daughter played and
sang to him as he sipped his coffee and read his newspaper, and Mrs Proudie asked good-natured
little questions about the archbishop; and then he went happily to bed, and slept as quietly
as though Mrs Proudie had been Griselda herself. While shaving himself in the morning and preparing
for the festivities of Ullathorne, he fully resolved to run no more tilts against a warrior
so fully armed at all points as was Mrs Proudie.

CHAPTER XXXIV

OXFORD--THE MASTER AND TUTOR OF LAZARUS

Mr Arabin, as we have said, had but a sad walk of it under the trees of Plumstead churchyard.
He did not appear to any of the family till dinner time, and then he assumed, as far as their
judgment went, to be quite himself. He had, as was his wont, asked himself a great many questions,
and given himself a great many answers; and the upshot of this was that he had set himself
down for an ass. He had determined that he was much too old and much to rusty to commence the
manouvres of lovemaking; that he had let the time slip through his hands which should have
been used for such purposes; and that now he must lie on his bed as he had made it. Then he
asked himself whether in truth he did love this woman; and he answered himself, not without
a long struggle, but at last honestly, that he certainly did love her. He then asked himself
whether he did not also love her money; and he again answered himself that he did so. But here
he did not answer honestly. It was and ever had been his weakness to look for impure motives
for his own conduct. No doubt, circumstanced as he was, with a small living and a fellowship,
accustomed as he had been to collegiate luxuries and expensive comforts, he might have hesitated
to marry a penniless woman had he felt ever so strong a predilection for the woman herself;
no doubt Eleanor's fortune put all such difficulties out of the question; but it was equally
without doubt that his love for her had crept upon him without the slightest idea on his part
that he could ever benefit his own condition by sharing her wealth.

When he had stood on the hearth-rug, counting the pattern, and counting also the future chances
of his own life, the remembrances of Mrs Bold's comfortable income had not certainly damped
his first assured feeling of love for her. And why should it have done so? Need it have done
so with the purest of men? Be that as it may, Mr Arabin decided against himself; he decided
that it had done so in his case, and that he was not the purest of men.

He also decided, which was more to his purpose, that Eleanor did not care a straw for him,
and that very probably did not care a straw for his rival. Then he made up his mind not to
think of her any more, and went on thinking of her till he was almost in a state to drown himself
in the little brook which was at the bottom of the archdeacon's grounds.

And ever and again his mind would revert to the Signora Neroni, and he would make comparisons
between her and Eleanor Bold, not always in favour of the latter. The signora had listened
to him, and flattered him, and believed in him; at least she had told him so. Mrs Bold had
also listened to him, but had never flattered him; had not always believed in him: and now
had broken from him in violent rage. The signora, too, was the more lovely woman of the two,
and had also the additional attraction of her affliction; for to him it was an attraction.

But he never could have loved the Signora Neroni as he felt that he now loved Eleanor! and
so he flung stones into the brook, instead of flinging in himself, and sat down on its margin
as sad a gentleman as you shall meet in a summer's day.

He heard the dinner-bell ring from the churchyard, and he knew that it was time to recover
his self possession. He felt that he was disgracing himself in his own eyes, that he had been
idling his time and neglecting the high duties which he had taken upon himself to perform.
He should have spent the afternoon among the poor at St Ewold's, instead of wandering about
Plumstead, an ancient love-lorn swain, dejected and sighing, full of imaginary sorrows and
Wertherian grief. He was thoroughly ashamed of himself, and determined to lose no time in retrieving
his character, so damaged in his own eyes. Thus when he appeared at dinner he was as animated
as ever, and was the author of most of the conversation which graced the archdeacon's board
on that evening. Mr Harding was ill at ease and sick at heart, and did not care to appear more
comfortable than he really was; what little he did say was said to his daughter. He thought
the archdeacon and Mr Arabin had leagued together against Eleanor's comfort; and his wish now
was to break away from the pair, and undergo in his Barchester lodgings whatever Fate had in
store for him. He hated the name of the hospital; his attempt to regain his lost inheritance
there had brought upon him so much suffering. As far as he was concerned, Mr Quiverful was
now welcome to the place.

And the archdeacon was not very lively. The poor dean's illness was of course discussed in
the first place. Dr Grantly did not mention Mr Slope's name in connexion with the expected
event of Dr Trefoil's death; he did not wish to say anything about Mr Slope just at present,
nor did he wish to make known his own sad surmises; but the idea that his enemy might possibly
become Dean of Barchester made him very gloomy. Should such an even take place, such a dire
catastrophe come about, there would be an end to his life as far as his life was connected
with the city of Barchester. He must give up all his old haunts, all his old habits, and live
quietly as a retired rector at Plumstead. It had been a severe trial for him to have Dr Proudie
in the palace; but with Mr Slope also in the deanery, he felt that he should be unable to draw
his breath in Barchester close.

Thus it came to pass that in spite of the sorrow at his heart, Mr Arabin was apparently the
gayest of the party. Both Mr Harding and Mrs Grantly were in a slight degree angry with him
on account of his want of gloom. To the one it appeared as though he were triumphing at Eleanor's
banishment, and to the other that he was not affected as he should have been by all the sad
circumstances of the day, Eleanor's obstinacy, Mr Slope's success, and the poor dean's apoplexy.
And so they were all at cross purposes.

Mr Harding left the room almost together with the ladies, and the archdeacon opened his heart
to Mr Arabin. He still harped upon the hospital. 'What did that fellow mean,' said he, 'by
saying in his letter to Mrs Bold, that if Mr Harding would call on the bishop it would be all
right? Of course I would not be guided by anything he might say; but still it may be well that
Mr Harding should see the bishop. It would be foolish to let the thing slip through our fingers
because Mrs Bold is determined to make a fool of herself.'

Mr Arabin hinted that he was not quite so sure that Mrs Bold would make a fool of herself.
He said that he was not convinced that she did regard Mr Slope so warmly as she was supposed
to do. The archdeacon questioned and cross-questioned him about this, but elicited nothing;
and at least remained firm in his own conviction that he was destined, malgre lui, to be the
brother-in-law of Mr Slope. Mr Arabin strongly advised that Mr Harding should take no step
regarding the hospital in connexion with, or in consequence of, Mr Slope's letter. 'If the
bishop really means to confer the appointment on Mr Harding,' argued Mr Arabin, 'he will take
care to let him have some other intimation than a message conveyed through a letter to a lady.
Were Mr Harding to present himself at the palace he might merely be playing Mr Slope's game;'
and thus it was settled that nothing should be done till the great Dr Gwynne's arrival, or
at any rate without that potentate's sanction.

