"Mammy said dem cornshuckin's meant jus' as much fun and jollification as wuk. Dey gathered
Marster's big corn crap and 'ranged it in long, high piles, and sometimes it tuk sev'ral days
for dem cornshuckers to git it all shucked, but evvybody stayed right dar on de job 'til it
was finished. At night, dey wukked by de light of big fires and torches, den dey had de big
supper and started dancin'. Dey stopped so often to swig dat corn liquor Marster pervided for
'em dat 'fore midnight folkses started fallin' out and drappin' down in de middle of de dance
ring. De others would git 'em by de heels and drag 'em off to one side 'til dey come to and
was ready to drink more liquor and dance again. Dat was de way dey went on de rest of de night.

"Corpses! Buryin's! Graveyards! Why, Miss, dere warn't nigh so many folkses a-dyin' all de
time dem days as dere is now. Folkses lived right and was tuk better keer of and dere warn't
so much reason for 'em to die out den. When somebody did die, folkses come from miles and miles
around to de buryin'. Dey give de slaves de same sort of funerals de white folkses had. De
corpses was washed good all over wid hot water and home-made soap, den dey was dressed and
laid out on de coolin' boards 'til de cyarpenter man had time to make up de coffins. Lordy,
Missy, ain't you never seed no coolin' board? I 'spects dey is all gone now though. Dey looked
a good deal lak ironin' boards, only dey had laigs to stand on. Lots of times dey didn't dress
de corpses, but jus' wropped 'em in windin' sheets. Dem home-made, pine coffins didn't look
so bad atter dey got 'em painted up and lined nice. Dey driv de wagon what had de corpse on
it right slow to de graveyard. De preacher talked a little and prayed; den atter de mourners
had done sung somepin on de order of Harps [HW: Hark?] From De Tomb, dey shovelled in de dirt
over de coffin whilst de preacher said comfortin' words to de fambly of de daid. Evvy plantation
had its own graveyard wid a fence around it, and dere was a place in it for de slaves 'nigh
whar deir white folks was buried.

"Honey, didn't you never hear tell of Dr. Frank Jackson? He was sho' a grand doctor. Dr. Jackson
made up his own medicines and toted 'em 'round wid him all de time. He was close kin to our
Marse Andy Jackson's fambly. All dem Jacksons down in 'Conee was good white folks.

"Us stayed on wid Old Marster for a little while atter de war was over, and den right away
Mammy died and Daddy hired me out to Mrs. Sidney Rives (Reaves?). I 'spects one reason she
was so mighty good to me was 'cause I was so little den. I was nigh grown when I left her to
wuk for Dr. Palmer's fambly. All his chillun was little den and I was deir nuss. One of de
best of his chillun was little Miss Eunice. She is done growed to be a school teacher and dey
tells me she is still a-teachin'. It warn't long atter my Daddy died dat I left de Palmers
and started wukkin' for Mr. Dock Dorsey's fambly. If dere ever was a good Christian 'oman in
dis here old world it was Miss Sallie Dorsey, Mr. Dock Dorsey's wife. She had been Miss Sallie
Chappell 'fore she married Mr. Dorsey. Miss Sallie tried to git evvybody what stayed 'round
her to live right too, and she wanted all her help to go to church reg'lar. If Miss Sallie
and Marse Dock Dorsey was livin' now, dey would pervide for Old 'Delia jus' lak dey used to
do. All deir chillun was nice. Miss Fannie and Miss Sue, dey was extra good gals, but somehow
I jus' can't call back de names of dem other ones now. Dey all had to be good wid de sort of
mammy and daddy dey had. Miss Sallie, she was sick a long time 'fore she died, and dey let
me wait on her. Missy, I tell you de gospel truth, I sho' did love dat 'oman. Not long 'fore
she passed on to Heben, she told her husband dat atter she was gone, she wanted him to marry
up wid her cousin, Miss Hargrove, so as he would have somebody to help him raise up her chillun,
and he done 'zactly what she axed him to. All of my own white folkses has done died out, and
Old 'Delia won't be here much longer. One of de Thorntons here--I forgits which one--married
up wid my young Mist'ess, Rebecca Jackson. Her gal got married up wid Dr. Jago, a horse-doctor.
A insurance man named Mr. Speer married into de Jackson fambly too. He moved his fambly from
here to de mountains on account of his son's health, and I jus' los' track of 'em den.

"Lordy, Chile! What you want to know 'bout my weddin' for, nowhow? Dere ain't never gwine to
be no more weddin's lak dey had back dere in dem times 'cause folkses thinks dey got to have
too much nowadays. When folkses got married den dey was a-thinkin' 'bout makin' sho' 'nough
homes for deyselfs, and gittin' married meant somepin sort of holy. Mammy said dat most times
when slaves got married dey jus' jumped backwards over a broomstick whilst deir Marster watched
and den he pernounced dat dey was man and wife. Now dey is got to go to de courthouse and pay
out good money for a license and den go git a preacher or somebody lak a jestice jedge to say
de marriage words over 'em.

"Me and Solomon Thomas had to go buy us a license too, but us didn't mind 'bout 'puttin out
'dat money cause us was so much in love. I wore a pretty white dress and a breakfast shawl,
and atter us had done went to de preacher man's house and got married, us come right on here
to dis very house what had b'longed to Solomon's daddy 'fore it was Solomon's. Us built two
more rooms on de house, but all de time Solomon lived us tried to keep de place lookin' a good
deal lak it was de day us got married.

"Atter Solomon died, I sold off most of de land to de railroad for de right of way for dat
dere track what you sees out dere, and it sho' has made plenty of wuk for me to keep dat soot
what dem engines is all time a-spittin' out cleaned off my things in de house. It draps down
through dem big holes overhead, and I can't git hold of no money to have de roof patched up.

"Me and Solomon, us had 11 chillun, but dey is all daid out but three. One of my boys is in
Baltimore and another boy lives in Louisiana somewhar. My gal, Delia, she stays over in de
Newtown part of Athens here. She would love to help her old Mammy, but my Delia's got chillun
of her own and she can't git nothin' to do 'cept a little washin' for de white folkses, and
she ain't able to pervide what her own household needs to eat. Dem boys of mine is done got
so fur off dey's done forgot all 'bout deir old Mammy.

"When us fust got married, Solomon wukked at Mr. Orr's cotton house, and he stayed dere a long
time 'fore he went to wuk for Mr. Moss and Mr. Levy. All dem white folks was good to me and
Solomon. I kept on wukkin' for de Dorseys 'til us had so many chillun I had to stay home and
look atter 'em. Solomon got sick and he lay dere sufferin' a long, long time, but Mr. Moss
and Mr. Levy seed dat he didn't want for nothin'. Even atter Solomon died dem good white mens
kept on comin' out now and den to see if me and Solomon's chillun had what us needed.

"Solomon, my Solomon, he went out of dis here world, in dat dere room whar you sees dat old
bed, and dat is perzactly whar I wants to be when de Blessed Lord lays his hands on me and
tells me to come on Home to Glory. I wants to be toted out of dat room, through dis hall and
on out to de graveyard jus' lak my man was. I knows dat evvything would be done nice jus' lak
I wants it if Mr. Moss and Mr. Levy was a-livin' 'cause dey was both Masons, and members of
de Masons is all done swore a oath to look atter deir own folkses. Dey said Solomon and his
fambly was lak deir own folkses, Mr. Moss and Mr. Levy did. Most of de folkses, both white
and black, dat I has knowed and loved has done gone on over de Jordan, out of dis world of
trouble, and it will be happy days for all of us when us meets again in de place 'of many mansions'
whar dere won't be nothin' for none of us to pester ourselfs 'bout no more.

"All of my life, I'se had a great desire to travel, jus' to go evvywhar, but atter all dese
years of busy livin' I 'spects all de trav'lin' I'll ever do will be on de road to Glory. Dat
will be good enough for me 'cause I got so many more of 'em I loves over dar dan is left here."

As the visitor passed out of earshot of Cordelia's cabin the last words she heard from the
old Negress were: "Good-bye again, Missy. Talkin' to you has been a heap of consolation to me."

[HW: Dist-2 Ex Slave #105] Alberta Minor Re-search Worker

FOLKLORE EX-SLAVE--IKE THOMAS Heidt Bridges Farm near Rio Georgia Interviewed

September 4, 1936 [Date Stamp: MAY 8 1937]

[TR: This interview contained many handwritten edits; where text was transposed or meaning
was significantly changed, it has been noted.]

Ike Thomas was born near Monticello in Jasper County on the Thomas plantation. His mother and
father were sold when he was a little boy, and "Missus" Thomas, in picking her house boy, took
Ike to raise for a carriage boy. She picked her little niggers by the way they wore their hats.
If they set them on the back of their heads, they grew up to be "high-minded", but if they
pulled them over their eyes, they'd grow up to be "sneaky and steal".

Mrs. Thomas let him sleep on a trundle bed pulled out at night and put under her bed in the
day and fed him under the table. She'd put a piece of meat in a biscuit and hand it down to
him and warned him if they had company not to holler when he was thru so he'd touch her on
the knee but his mouth was so big and he'd eat so fast that he "jes kep' on teching her on
the knee."

During the war, when they got word the Yankees were coming, Mrs. Thomas would hide her "little
niggers" sometimes in the wardrobe back of her clothes, sometimes between the mattresses, or
sometimes in the cane brakes. After the Yankees left, she'd ring a bell and they would know
they could come out of hiding. (When they first heard the slaves were free, they didn't believe
it so they just stayed on with their "white folks".) [HW: Transpose to page 3.]

If the negroes were mean or ran away, they would be chased by hounds and brought back for punishment.

When still a young man, Ike ran away with a negro couple coming in a buggy to Blanton Mill
near Griffin and worked for Mr. William Blanton until he died. After he had been here a while,
he got married. His wife's people had the wedding supper and party. He was a fiddler so had
to fiddle most all night then the next day his "white folks" gave him the food for the wedding
dinner that he had at his own house.

Ike says every seven [HW: 7] years the locusts come and its sure to be a short crop that "God
sends all sorts of cusses" (curses) sometimes its the worms that eat the cotton or the corn
or the bugs that eat the wheat. He doesn't believe in "hants" or "conjurin'". It seems Sid
Scott was a "mean nigger", [HW: and] everyone was afraid of [HW: him]. He was cut in two by
the saw mill and after his funeral whenever anyone pass his house at night that could hear
his "hant" going "rat-a-tat-tat-bang, bang, bang" like feet running.

One night when Ike was coming home from "fiddlin'" at a white folks party, he had to pass Scott's
house. Now they kept the cotton seed in half of the house and the other half was empty. When
Ike got close, he made a racket and sure enough the noise started. "The moon was about an hour
up" and he saw these funny white things run out from under the house and scatter. It scared
him at first but he looked and looked and saw they were sheep that [HW: having] found a hole
into the cotton seed would go in at night to eat.

Before the war the negroes had a big celebration on the 4th of July, a big barbecue, ball game,
wrestling matches, lots of music and singing. They had to have a pass from their Masters to
attend and pay to get in. The "patta-roll" came by to see your pass and if you didn't have
one, they'd whip you and send you home. [HW: When the Negroes first heard that they were free,
they didn't believe it so they just stayed on with their white folks.]

After he came to Blanton's, the Negroes could come and go as they pleased for they were free.
Ike has been a member of several "Societies" but something has always happened to the President
and Secretary or they ran off with the money so now he just has a sick and accident policy.

Ike will be 94 years old next month. His hair is white, his eyes blurred with age, but he's
quite active tho' he does walk with a stick.

[HW: Dist 1 Ex-Slave #107]

JANE MICKENS TOOMBS OF WASHINGTON-WILKES Age approx. 82

by Minnie Branham Stonestreet Washington-Wilkes GEORGIA [Date Stamp: JAN 26 1937] [Date Stamp:
MAY 8 1937]

A story of happiness and contentment on a big plantation where there were "a heap of us slaves"
is told by Jane Mickens Toombs who said she was "five er six years ole when de Wah come on
(1860), or maby a lit'le ol'er."

She is a bright old woman, well and spry despite the fact she "wuz conjured onst when I wuz
young an' dat lef' me lame an' dis eye plum' out an' de t'other bad."

When asked about the conjuring she said: "No'm, I don't 'zackly know how t'wuz, but enyhow
somebody whut knowed how ter 'wu'k roots' got me lame on dis side, an' my eye out, jess kase
I wuz a decent, nice lookin' gal, an' went on 'tendin' ter my business an' payin' dem no mind.
Dat's de way dey done in dem days, jess jealous of nice colored niggers. Yassum, I wuz sick
fer nigh on ter two years an' de doctuhs never knowed what ailed me. Dey done everything dey
could, but I wuz conjured an' dey couldn't hep' me. A doctuh-man frum up yander in New Yalk
cum down here ter see his folks, an' he tried to kure [HW: cyore] me, but doctuhs kain't [HW:
kaan't] kure [HW: cyore] conjured folks, so I had ter lay an' suffer 'til de conjure wore out.
Dem whut done dat knowed dey done me wrong, but I kep' trustin' in my Lawd, an' now dey's gone
an' I'se er stumblin' roun' yit. No mam, I never knowed jess whut dey done ter me, but hit
wuz bad, I kin tell yer dat, hit might nigh kilt me."

Aunt Jane was born on the Gullatt Plantation on the line of Wilkes and Lincoln counties. Her
Mother was Liza Gullatt and her father John Mickens who belonged to Mr. Augustus McMekin. "Yassum,
my Pa wuz John 'Mickens an' his Marster bought him in Alabamy. All de slaves whut belonged
to de McMekins called dey selves 'Mickens. I wuz one of fifteen chillun an' cum er long in
betweenst de oldest 'uns an' de youngest sum'ers. I wuz named fer my Mistess Jane Gullatt whut
died. Young Marse George Gullatt choosed me out, dough, an' I'd er been his'en ef Freedom hadn't
er come. You know dat's de way dey use ter do back in slavery time, de young Mistesses an'
Marsters choosed out de little niggers dey wanted fer their'n."

This is another case where the father and mother belonged to different families. The father
had a pass to go and come as he pleased, although his family lived a little distance away.
Jane said her father's master would have bought her mother if the War hadn't come on and they
were set free.

Jane told of the log cabins in the Quarters where all the negroes lived. She said they were
all in a row "wid er street in de front, er wide street all set thick wid white mulberry trees
fer ter mak' shade fer de chillun ter play in." They never had any punishment only [HW: except]
switchings by their Mistess, and that was not often. They played dolls, "us had home-made rag
dolls, nice 'uns, an' we'd git dem long grass plumes (Pampas grass) an' mak' dolls out'n dem
too. Us played all day long every day. My Mistess' chillun wuz all growed up so jess us little
niggers played tergether.

"My Mother spun an' wove de cloth, an' dyed hit, but our Mistess made our clothes. My Grandma,
Nancy, wuz de cook an' she fed all de little 'uns in de big ole kitchen whut sot out in de
yard. She had a tray she put our victuals on an Uh, Uh, whut good things we had ter eat, an'
er plenty of everything! Us et jess whut our white folks had, dey didn't mak' no difference
in us when hit cum ter eatin'. My Grandaddy looked atter de meat, he done everything 'bout
dat, an' he sho' knowed how ter fix it, too.

"De fust thing I recollects is bein' round in de kitchen when dey wuz makin' ginger cakes an'
my Mistess givin' me de pan she made 'em in fer me ter sop hit out. Dey ain't nothin' whut
smells good lak' de cookin' in dem days, I kain't smell no victuals lak' dat now. Everything
wuz cooked on a big ole open fire place in one end of de kitchen. Dem good ole days done gone
now. Folkes done got wiser an' wickeder--dey ain't lak' dey use ter be."

At Christmas Santa Claus found his way to the Quarters on the Gollatt plantation and each little
slave had candy, apples, and "sich good things as dat." Aunt Jane gave a glowing description
of the preparation for the Christmas season: "Lawdy, how de folks wu'ked gittin' ready fer
Chris'mus, fer three er fo' days dey stayed in de kitchen er cookin' an' er bakin'--daye wuz
de bes' light bread--great big loaves baked on de fire place, an' cakes an' mo' good ginger
cakes. Dey wuz plenty cooked up to las' er long time. An' another thing, dare want no cookin'
on Sunday, no mam, no wu'k of no kind. My Mistess had de cook cookin' all day Fridays an' Saddays
so when Sunday come dare wuz hot coffee made an' dat wuz all, everything else wuz cooked up
an' cold. Everybody went to Church, de grown folks white and black, went to de preachin' an'
den all de little niggers wuz called in an de Bible read an' 'splained ter dem.

"Dare wuz preachin' down in de Quarters, but dat wuz at night an' wuz led by de colored preachers.
I recollects one night dare wuz a service gwine on in one of de cabins an' all us wuz dare
an' ole Uncle Alex Frazier wuz up a linin' off a hymn 'bout

  'Broad is de road dat leads ter Death
   An' there an' here we travel.'

when in come some mens atter a colored feller whut had stole some sheep an' hogs. Dey kotch
'im, but sho broke up de meetin'. In de hot summer time Uncle George Gullatt use ter preach
ter de slaves out under de trees. Uncle George waz a kind of er preacher.

"My Pa didn't 'low his chillun ter go 'roun'. No'm, he kep' us home keerful lak. Young folks
in dem days didn't go all over de country lak dey does now, dey stayed at home, an' little
chillun wuz kep' back an' dey didn' know no badness lak de chillun do terday. Us never even
heared de ole folks talk nothin' whut we oughtn't ter hear. Us jess played an' stayed in a
child's place. When we wuz sick de white folks seed dat we wuz 'tended to. Dey use ter mak
Jerusalem Oak candy an' give us. Dey took de leaves of dat bush an' boiled 'em an' den use
dat water dey wuz boiled in an' put sugar 'nough in hit ter mak candy. An dey used plenty of
turpentine on us too--plenty ov hit, an' I believes in dat terday, hit's er good medicine."

When asked about the War, Aunt Jane said she didn't remember much about it. "But dare's one
thing 'bout hit I sho' does 'member, an' dat's my young Mistess Beckie's husband, Mr. Frazier,
being off fightin' in de Wah, an' she gittin' er letter frum him sayin' he wuz comin' home
sich an' sich er day. She wuz so happy she had all de grown slaves wu'kin' gittin' ready fer
him. Den dey brung her er letter sayin' he had been kilt, an' she wuz in de yard when she read
hit an' if dey hadn't er kotch her she'd ov fell. I 'members de women takin' her in de house
an' gittin' her ter bed. She wuz so up sot an' took hit so hard. Dem wuz sho' hard times an'
sad 'uns too. 'Course I wuz too small ter know much whut wuz gwine on, but I could tell hit
wuz bad frum de way de older folks looked.

"I recollects when dey say Freedom had cum. Dare wuz a speakin' fer de slaves up here in town
in Barnett's Grove. Dat mornin' Ole Miss sont all de oldes' niggers to de speakin' an' kep'
us little 'uns dat day. She kep' us busy sweepin' de yards an' sich as dat. An' she cooked
our dinner an' give hit to us herself. I 'members de grown folks leavin' early dat mornin'
in a great big waggin.

"A while after de Wah, Pa took us over to de McMekins place an' we lived dare fer a long time.
He died an' lef' us an' den us had ter do de bes' we could. Col. Tolbert hired me fer ter nuss
his chillun an' I went over ter his place ter live."

Aunt Jane said she isn't superstitious, but likes to see the new moon clear and bow to it for
good luck. She said it is better to show it a piece of money, but as she doesn't always have
money handy, she "jess bows to hit nice an' polite". She keeps up with the weather by her rheumatism
and the cat: "Ef I has de reumatics I knows hit's gwine ter rain, an' when de cat comes 'round
an' sets washin' her face, look fer rain, kase hit's er comin'. I've heared folks say dat hit's
bad luck ter stump yo' lef' foot, but I don't know boud dat. But I tell yer, when I meets er
cat I allus turns er round 'fore I goes on, dat turns de bad luck er way."

When 19 years of age Jane married Albert Toombs. He belonged to the Toombs family of Wilkes
county. Aunt Jane said Albert brought her many gifts while he was courting: "He warnt much
on bringin' candy an' nothin' lak dat ter eat, but he brung me shawls an' shoes--sumpin' I
could wear." They had four children, but only one is living.

"When I wuz a growin' up", said Aunt Jane, "folks had ter wu'k." She worked on the farm, spun,
wove, "done seamster wu'k" and knitted stockings, sox and gloves. She said she carded too,
"an' in dem times ef a nigger wanted ter git de kinks out'n dey hair, dey combed hit wid de
cards. Now dey puts all kinds ov grease on hit, an' buy straightenin' combs. Sumpin' dat costs
money, dat's all dey is, old fashion cards'll straighten hair jess as well as all dis high
smellin' stuff dey sells now."

Aunt Jane likes to tell of those days of long ago. Her memory is excellent and she talks well.
She says she is living out her Miss Jane's time. "Yassum, my Miss Jane died when she wuz so
young, I specks I jess livin' out her days kase I named fer her. But I does miss dem good ole
days whut's gone. I'se hungry fer de sight ov a spinnin' wheel--does you know whare's one?
Things don't look lak' dey use ter, an' as fer whut we has ter eat, dare ain't no victuals
ever smelled an' et as good as dem what dey use ter have on de plantation when I wuz a comin'
on. Yassum, folkes has got wiser an' know mo' dan dey did, but dey is wickeder--dey kills now
'stid er conjurin' lak' dey did me."

[HW: Dist. This was the fourth child in a family which finally numbered thirteen. Phil, as
he was called, does not recall many incidents on this estate as the family moved when he was
in his teens. His grandfather and grandmother were brought here from Africa and their description
of the cruel treatment they received is his most vivid recollection. His grandmother, Hannah,
lived to be 129 years of age.

Mr. George Towns, called "Governor" by all of his slaves as well as his intimate friends, moved
to Georgia and settled at Reynolds in Taylor County. Here he purchased a huge tract of land--1350
acres--and built his new home upon this level area on the Flint River. The "big house," a large
unpainted structure which housed a family of eighteen, was in the midst of a grove of trees
near the highway that formed one of the divisions of the plantation. It was again divided by
a local railway nearly a mile from the rear of the house. Eighty-eight slaves were housed in
the "quarters" which were on each side of the highway a little below the planter's home.

These "quarters" differed from those found in the surrounding territory as the size of the
houses varied with the number in the family. The interiors were nicely furnished and in most
instances the families were able to secure any furniture they desired. Feather mattresses,
trundle beds and cribs were common and in families where there were many children, large fireplaces--some
as many as eight feet wide--were provided so that every one might be [TR: 'able to keep' crossed
out] comfortable in winter. A variety of cooking utensils were given and large numbers of waffle
irons, etc., then considered luxuries, were found here.

To consider only the general plan of operation, this plantation was no different from the average
one in pre-civil war days but there was a phase of the life here which made it a most unusual
home. "Governor" was so exceptionally kind to his slaves that they were known as "Gov. Towns'
free negroes" to those on the neighboring farms. He never separated families, neither did he
strike a slave except on rare occasions. Two things which might provoke his anger to this extent,
were: to be told a lie, and to find that a person had allowed some one to take advantage of
him. They were never given passes but obtained verbal consent to go where they wished and always
remained as long as they chose.

Phil Towns' father worked in the field and his mother did light work in the house, such as
assisting in spinning. Mothers of three or more children were not compelled to work, as the
master felt that their children needed care. From early childhood boys and girls were given
excellent training. A boy who robbed a bird's nest or a girl who frolicked in a boisterous
manner was severely reprimanded. Separate bedrooms for the two sexes were maintained until
they married. The girls passed thru two stages--childhood, and at sixteen they became "gals".
Three years later they might marry if they chose but the husband had to be older--at least
21. Courtships differed from those of today because there were certain hours for visiting and
even though the girl might accompany her sweetheart away from home she had to be back at that
hour. They had no clocks but a "time mark" was set by the sun. A young man was not allowed
to give his girl any form of gift, and the efforts of some girls to secretly receive gifts
which they claimed to have "found", were in vain, for these were taken from them. After the
proposal, the procedure was practically the same as is observed today. The consent of the parent
and the master was necessary. Marriages were mostly held at night and no pains were spared
to make them occasions to be remembered and cherished. Beautiful clothes--her own selections--were
given the bride, and friends usually gave gifts for the house. These celebrations, attended
by visitors from many plantations, and always by the Towns family, ended in gay "frolics" with
cakes, wine, etc., for refreshments.

During the first year of married life the couple remained with the bride's mother who instructed
her in the household arts. Disputes between the newlyweds were not tolerated and punishment
by the parents was the result of "nagging". At the end of a year, another log cabin was added
to the quarters and the couple began housekeeping. The moral code was exceedingly high; the
penalty for offenders--married or single, white or colored--was to be banished from the group
entirely. Thus illegitimate children were rare enough to be a novelty.

Young Phil was in his teens when he began his first job--coach driver for "Gov." Towns. This
was just before they moved to Georgia. He traveled with him wherever he went, and as the Gov.
purchased a plantation in Talbot County, (the house still stands), and a home in Macon, (the
site of Mt. De Sales Academy), a great deal of his time was spent on the road. Phil never did
any other work except to occasionally assist in sweeping the large yard. The other members
of this group split rails, did field work, spinning, tailoring and any of the many things that
had to be done. Each person might choose the type of work he liked best.

Opportunities to make cash money were plentiful. Some made baskets and did hand work which
was sold and the money given the maker. A man or woman who paid Gov. Towns $150.00 might hire
himself to the Gov. for a year. When this was done he was paid cash for all the work he did
and many were able to clear several hundred dollars in a year. In addition to this opportunity
for earning money, every adult had an acre of ground which he might cultivate as he chose.
Any money made from the sale of this produce was his own.

Recreation was not considered important so no provision was made in the regular routine. It
was, however, possible to obtain "time off" at frequent intervals and these might be termed
irregular vacation periods. Evening entertainment at which square dancing was the main attraction,
were common. Quill music, from a homemade harmonica, was played when banjoes were not available.
These instruments were made by binding with cane five to ten reeds of graduated lengths. A
hole was cut in the upper end of each and the music obtained by blowing up and down the scale.
Guests came from all neighboring farms and engaged in the "Green Corn" dance which was similar
to what is now called Buck dancing. Near the end of such a hilarious evening, the guests were
served with persimmon beer and ginger cakes,--then considered delicacies.

"Gov." Towns was interested in assisting any one [HW: wanting to learn]. [TR: Original reads
'desirous of learning.'] The little girls who expressed the desire to become "ladies" were
kept in the "big house" and very carefully trained. The tastes of these few were developed
to the extent that they excelled the ordinary "quarter" children and were the envy of the group
at social affairs.

Sunday was a day of Reverence and all adults were required to attend religious services. The
trip was usually made in wagons, oxcarts, etc., although the young women of the big house rode
handsome saddle horses. At each church there was placed a stepping block by which they descended
from their steeds. White and colored worshipped at the same church, constructed with a partition
separating the two parts of the congregation but not extending to the pulpit. Professions of
faith were accepted at the same altar while Baptismal services ware held at a local creek and
all candidates were baptized on the same day. Regular clothing was worn at this service. Children
were not allowed to attend church, and christenings were not common. Small boys, reared entirely
apart from strict religious observances, used to slip away and shoot marbles on Sunday.

The health problem was not acute as these people were provided with everything necessary for
a contented mind and a robust body. [TR: original line: The health problem was not a very acute
one as these people were provided with everything conducive to a contented mind which plays
a large part in maintaining a robust body.] However, a Doctor who lived nearby cared for the
sick. Two fees were set--the larger one being charged if the patient recovered. Home remedies
were used for minor ills--catnip tea for thrash, tea from Samson Snakeroot for cramps, redwood
and dogwood bark tea [HW: and horehound candy] for worms, [HW: many] root teas used [HW: medicinally]
by this generation. Peach brandy was given to anyone suspected of having pneumonia,--if the
patient coughed, it was certain that he was a victim of the disease.

In these days, a mother named her children by a name [TR: unreadable] during pregnancy. [TR:
original line: In these days, it was always thought best for the mother to name her children
if the proper name for the babe was theoretically revealed to her during pregnancy.] If another
name was given the child, the correct one would be so firmly implanted in his subconscious
mind that he would never be able to resist the impulse to turn his head when that name was
called. The seventh child was always thought to be exceptionally lucky, and [TR: unreadable
HW replaces 'the bond of affection between the parents and this child was greater']. This belief
persists today in many localities.

Every family was given a weekly supply of food but this was more for convenience than anything
else as they were free to eat anything their appetites called for. They killed chickens, ate
vegetables, meats, etc. at any time. The presence of guests at the "quarters" roused Mrs. Towns
to activity and she always helped to prepare the menu. One of her favorite items was chicken--prepared
four different ways, in pie, in stew, fried, and baked. She gave full directions for the preparation
of these delicacies to unskilled cooks. Pound cake was another favorite and she insisted that
a pound of butter and a dozen eggs be used in each cake. When the meal was nearly ready, she
usually made a trip to the cabin to see if it had been well prepared. The hostess could always
tell without any comment whether she had satisfied her mistress, for if she had, a serving
was carried back to the big house. Fishing was a form of remunerative recreation enjoyed by
all. Everyone usually went on Saturday afternoon, but if only a few made the trip, the catch
was shared by all.

Sewing was no easy job as there were few small women among the servants. The cloth made at
home, was plentiful, however, and sufficient clothing was made for all. Some persons preferred
making their own clothes and this privilege was granted; otherwise they were made in a common
sewing room. Ten yards was the average amount of cloth in a dress, homespun and gingham, the
usual materials. The men wore suits of osnaburg and jeans. This was dyed to more durable colors
through the use of [HW: with] indigo [HW: (blue)] and a dye made from railroad bark (brown).

Phil believes that the screeching of an owl, the bellowing of a cow, and the howling of a dog
after dark are signs of death because the [HW: immediate] death of a human being is revealed
to animals, which [TR: illegible. 'in turn'?] warn humans. Though we may find some way to rid
ourselves of the fear of the warning--the death will occur just the same.

On nearly all plantations there were some slaves who, trying to escape work, hid themselves
in the woods. [TR: original line: On nearly all plantations there were some slaves who did
not wish to work, consequently, for this, or similar reasons, hid themselves in the woods.]
They smuggled food to their hiding place by night, and remained away [HW: lost] in some instances,
many months. Their belief in witchcraft caused them to resort to most ridiculous means of avoiding
discovery. Phil told the story of a man who visited a conjurer to obtain a "hand" for which
he paid fifty dollars in gold. The symbol was a hickory stick which he used whenever he was
being chased, and in this manner warded off his pursuers. The one difficulty in this procedure
was having to "set up" at a fork or cross roads. Often the fugitive had to run quite a distance
to reach such a spot, but when the stick was so placed human beings and even bloodhounds lost
his trail. With this assistance, he was able to remain in the woods as long as he liked.

Snakes ware frequent visitor in the cabins of the "quarters". One morning while Betty, a cook,
was confined to bed, she sent for Mrs. Towns to tell her that a snake had lain across her chest
during the previous night and had tried to get under the cover where her young baby lay asleep.
Mrs. Towns was skeptical about the size and activities of the reptile but sent for several
men to search the house. They had given up the search when one chanced to glance above the
sick woman's bed and there lay the reptile on a shelf. The bed was roped and moved to another
part of the room and preparations made to shoot him. Quilts were piled high on the bed so that
the noise of the gun would not frighten the baby. When all was ready Mrs. Towns asked the old
man with the gun--

"Daddy Luke, can you kill the snake?"

"Yessum, mistress," he replied.

"Daddy Luke, can you kill the snake?"

"Yessum, mistress."

"Daddy Luke, can you kill the snake?"

"Yessum, mistress."

"Shoot!!"

He took careful aim and fired. The huge reptile rolled to the floor.

When the men returned to the yard to work near the woodpile, the mate was discovered by one
of the dogs that barked until a log was moved and the second snake killed.

[HW: In those days] small snakes were not feared and for several years it was customary for
women to carry a tiny green snake in their bosoms. This fad was discontinued when one of the
women was severely injured through a bite on her chest.

Phil remembers when the stars fell in 1833. "They came down like rain," he said. When asked
why he failed to keep some, he replied that he was afraid to touch them even after they became
black.

[TR: The following paragraphs contain many crossouts replaced by unreadable handwritten edits,
and will be indicated by: 'deleted words' replaced by ??.]

Freedom was discussed on the plantation [TR: ??] for many years before the Civil War began.
As contented as [TR: 'they' replaced by ??] were [TR: 'there was something to look forward
to when they thought of' replaced by ??] being absolutely free. An ex-slave's description of
the real cause of the Civil War, deserves a place here. It seems that Lincoln had sent several
messages to Davis requesting that he free the slaves. No favorable response was received. Lincoln
had a conference with Mr. Davis and to this meeting he carried a Bible and a gun. He tried
in vain to convince Davis that he was wrong according to the Bible, so he finally threw the
two upon the table and asked Davis to take his choice. He chose the gun. Lincoln grasped the
Bible and rushed home. Thus Davis began the war but Lincoln had God on his side and so he ended it.

One of Gov. Towns' sons went to the army and Phil was sent to care for him while he was there;
an aristocratic man never went to the war without his valet. His [HW: Phil's] duty was to cook
for him, keep his clothes clean, and to bring the body home if he was killed. Poor soldiers
were either buried [HW: where they fell] or left lying on the field for vultures to consume.
Food was not so plentiful in the [TR: 'army' replaced by ??] and their diet of flapjacks and
canned goods was varied only by coffee and whiskey given when off duty. All cooking was done
between two battles or during the lull in a battle. John Towns was soon sent back home as they
[HW: the officers] felt he was too [TR: 'valuable a Southerner' crossed out] important to be
killed in battle, and his services were needed at home.

Near the close of the war, Sherman made a visit to this vicinity. As was his usual habit, he
had [TR: 'obtained' replaced by 'learned'?] the reputation of Gov. Towns before he arrived.
He found conditions so ideal [TR: 'that not one thing was touched' replaced by ??]. He talked
with [HW: slaves and owners, he] went [TR: 'gaily' deleted] on his way. Phil was so impressed
by Sherman that he followed him and camped with the Yankees about where Central City Park is
now. He thought that anything a Yankee said was true. [HW: When] One [HW: of them] gave him
a knife and told him to go and cut the first man he met, he followed instructions even though
he knew the man. [HW: Later] Realizing how foolishly he had acted, he readily apologized and
explained why. [HW: The Yankee soldiers robbed beehives barehanded and were never stung, they]
seemed to fear nothing but lizards. Never having seen such reptiles they would run in terror
at the sight of one. The Confederates never discovered this.

After the close of the war they [HW: federal soldiers] were stationed in the towns to keep
order. Union flags were placed everywhere, and a Southerner was accused of not respecting the
flag if he even passed under one without bowing. Penalties for this offense were, to be hung
up by the thumbs, to carry greasy [HW: greased] poles for a certain time, and numerous other
punishments which caused a deal of discomfort to the victims but sent the soldiers and ex-slaves
into peals of laughter. The sight of a Yankee soldier sent a Confederate one into hysteria.

[HW: Phil says his fellow] slaves laughed when told they were free, but Gov. Towns was almost
indifferent. His slaves, he said, were always practically free, so a little legal form did
not [TR: 'add' replaced by ??] much to them. Nearly every one remained there and worked for wages.

For the past thirty-five years, Phil Towns has been almost totally disabled. Long life seems
no novelty to him for he says everyone used to live longer when they honored their elders more.
He has eighty-four relatives in Virginia--all older than he, but states that friends who have
visited there say he looks more aged than any of them. His great desire is to return to Virginia,
as he believes he will be able to find the familiar landmarks in spite of the changes that
have taken place.

Mr. Alex Block, of Macon, makes no charges for the old shack in which Phil lives; his food
furnished by the Department of Public Welfare is supplemented by interested friends. A magnificent
water oak shaded the vine-covered porch where a rocking chair and swing offered a comfortable
place to rest.

"Good mornin', Miss," was the smiling greeting of the aged Negro man who answered a knock on
the front door. "How is you? Won't you come in? I would ax you to have a cheer on the porch,
but I has to stay in de house cause de light hurts my eyes." He had hastily removed a battered
old felt hat, several sizes too large for him, and as he shuffled down the hall his hair appeared
almost white as it framed his black face. His clean, but faded blue overalls and shirt were
patched in several places and heavy brogans completed his costume. The day was hot and humid
and he carefully placed two chairs where they would have the advantage of any breeze that might
find its way through the open hallway.

"Miss, I'se mighty glad you come today," he began, "cause I does git so lonesome here by myself.
My old 'oman wuks up to de court'ouse, cookin' for de folkses in jail, and it's allus late
when she gits back home. 'Scuse me for puttin' my old hat back on, but dese old eyes jus' can't
stand de light even here in the hall, less I shades 'em."

When asked to tell the story of his life, he chuckled. "Lawsy, Missy," he said. "Does you mean
dat you is willin' to set here and listen to old Neal talk? 'Tain't many folkses what wants
to hear us old Niggers talk no more. I jus' loves to think back on dem days 'cause dem was
happy times, so much better'n times is now. Folkses was better den. Dey was allus ready to
holp one another, but jus' look how dey is now!

"I was borned on Marster Frank Upson's place down in Oglethorpe County, nigh Lexin'ton, Georgy.
Marster had a plantation, but us never lived dar for us stayed at de home place what never
had more'n 'bout 80 acres of land 'round it. Us never had to be trottin' to de sto' evvy time
us started to cook, 'cause what warn't raised on de home place, Marster had 'em raise out on
de big plantation. Evvything us needed t'eat and wear was growed on Marse Frank's land.

"Harold and Jane Upson was my Daddy and Mammy; only folkses jus' called Daddy 'Hal.' Both of
'em was raised right der on de Upson place whar dey played together whilst dey was chillun.
Mammy said she had washed and sewed for Daddy ever since she was big enough, and when dey got
grown dey jus' up and got married. I was deir only boy and I was de baby chile, but dey had
four gals older'n me. Dey was: Cordelia, Anna, Parthene, and Ella. Ella was named for Marse
Frank's onliest chile, little Miss Ellen, and our little Miss was sho a good little chile.

"Daddy made de shoes for all de slaves on de plantation and Mammy was called de house 'oman.
She done de cookin' up at de big 'ouse, and made de cloth for her own fambly's clothes, and
she was so smart us allus had plenty t'eat and wear. I was little and stayed wid Mammy up at
de big 'ouse and jus' played all over it and all de folkses up der petted me. Aunt Tama was
a old slave too old to wuk. She was all de time cookin' gingerbread and hidin' it in a little
trunk what sot by de fireplace in her room. When us chillun was good Aunt Tama give us gingerbread,
but if us didn't mind what she said, us didn't git none. Aunt Tama had de rheumatiz and walked
wid a stick and I could git in dat trunk jus' 'bout anytime I wanted to. I sho' did git 'bout
evvything dem other chillun had, swappin' Aunt Tama's gingerbread. When our white folkses went
off, Aunt Tama toted de keys, and she evermore did make dem Niggers stand 'round. Marse Frank
jus' laughed when dey made complaints 'bout her.

"In summertime dey cooked peas and other veg'tables for us chillun in a washpot out in de yard
in de shade, and us et out of de pot wid our wooden spoons. Dey jus' give us wooden bowls full
of bread and milk for supper.

"Marse Frank said he wanted 'em to larn me how to wait on de white folkses' table up at de
big 'ouse, and dey started me off wid de job of fannin' de flies away. Mist'ess Serena, Marse
Frank's wife, made me a white coat to wear in de dinin' room. Missy, dat little old white coat
made me git de onliest whuppin' Marse Frank ever did give me." Here old Neal paused for a hearty
laugh. "Us had comp'ny for dinner dat day and I felt so big showin' off 'fore 'em in dat white
coat dat I jus' couldn't make dat turkey wing fan do right. Dem turkey wings was fastened on
long handles and atter Marster had done warned me a time or two to mind what I was 'bout, the
old turkey wing went down in de gravy bowl and when I jerked it out it splattered all over
de preacher's best Sunday suit. Marse Frank got up and tuk me right out to de kitchen and when
he got through brushin' me off I never did have no more trouble wid dem turkey wings.

"Evvybody cooked on open fireplaces dem days. Dey had swingin' racks what dey called cranes
to hang de pots on for bilin'. Dere was ovens for bakin' and de heavy iron skillets had long
handles. One of dem old skillets was so big dat Mammy could cook 30 biscuits in it at one time.
I allus did love biscuits, and I would go out in de yard and trade Aunt Tama's gingerbread
to de other chilluns for deir sheer of biscuits. Den dey would be skeered to eat de gingerbread
'cause I told 'em I'd tell on 'em. Aunt Tama thought dey was sick and told Marse Frank de chilluns
warn't eatin' nothin'. He axed 'em what was de matter and dey told him dey had done traded
all deir bread to me. Marse Frank den axed me if I warn't gittin' enough t'eat, 'cause he 'lowed
dere was enough dar for all. Den Aunt Tama had to go and tell on me. She said I was wuss dan
a hog atter biscuits, so our good Marster ordered her to see dat li'l Neal had enough t'eat.

"I ain't never gwine to forgit dat whuppin' my own daddy give me. He had jus' sharpened up
a fine new axe for hisself, and I traded it off to a white boy named Roar what lived nigh us
when I seed him out tryin' to cut wood wid a sorry old dull axe. I sold him my daddy's fine
new axe for 5 biscuits. When he found out 'bout dat, he 'lowed he was gwine to give me somepin
to make me think 'fore I done any more tradin' of his things. Mist'eas, let me tell you, dat
beatin' he give me evermore was a-layin' on of de rod.

"One day Miss Serena put me in de cherry tree to pick cherries for her, and she told me not
to eat none 'til I finished; den I could have all I wanted, but I didn't mind her and I et
so many cherries I got sick and fell out of de tree. Mist'ess was skeered, but Marse Frank
said: 'It's good enough for him, 'cause he didn't mind.'

"Mammy never did give me but one whuppin' neither. Daddy was gwine to de circus and I jus'
cut up 'bout it 'cause I wanted to go so bad. Mist'ess give me some cake and I hushed long
as I was eatin', but soon as de last cake crumb was swallowed I started bawlin' again. She
give me a stick of candy and soon as I et dat I was squallin' wuss dan ever. Mammy told Mist'ess
den det she knowed how to quiet me and she retch under de bed for a shoe. When she had done
finished layin' dat shoe on me and put it back whar she got it, I was sho willin' to shet my
mouth and let 'em all go to de circus widout no more racket from me.

"De fust school I went to was in a little one-room 'ouse in our white folkses' back yard. Us
had a white teacher and all he larnt slave chillun was jus' plain readin' and writin'. I had
to pass Dr. Willingham's office lots and he was all de time pesterin' me 'bout spellin'. One
day he stopped me and axed me if I could spell 'bumble bee widout its tail,' and he said dat
when I larnt to spell it, he would gimme some candy. Mr. Sanders, at Lexin'ton, gimme a dime
onct. It was de fust money I ever had. I was plumb rich and I never let my Daddy have no peace
'til he fetched me to town to do my tradin'. I was all sot to buy myself a hat, a sto-bought
suit of clothes, and some shoes what warn't brogans, but Missy, I wound up wid a gingercake
and a nickel's wuth of candy. I used to cry and holler evvy time Miss Serena went off and left
me. Whenever I seed 'em gittin' out de carriage to hitch it up, I started beggin' to go. Sometimes
she laughed and said; 'All right Neal.' But when she said, 'No Neal,' I snuck out and hid under
de high-up carrigge seat and went along jus' de same. Mist'ess allus found me 'fore us got
back home, but she jus' laughed and said: 'Well, Neal's my little nigger anyhow.'

"Dem old cord beds was a sight to look at, but dey slept good. Us cyarded lint cotton into
bats for mattresses and put 'em in a tick what us tacked so it wouldn't git lumpy. Us never
seed no iron springs dem days. Dem cords, criss-crossed from one side of de bed to de other,
was our springs and us had keys to tighten 'em wid. If us didn't tighten 'em evvy few days
dem beds was apt to fall down wid us. De cheers was homemade too and de easiest-settin' ones
had bottoms made out of rye splits. Dem oak-split cheers was all right, and sometimes us used
cane to bottom de cheers but evvybody laked to set in dem cheers what had bottoms wove out
of rye splits.

"Marster had one of dem old cotton gins what didn't have no engines. It was wuked by mules.
Dem old mules was hitched to a long pole what dey pulled 'round and 'round to make de gin do
its wuk. Dey had some gins in dem days what had treadmills for de mules to walk in. Dem old
treadmills looked sorter lak stairs, but most of 'em was turned by long poles what de mules
pulled. You had to feed de cotton by hand to dem old gins and you sho had to be keerful or
you was gwine to lose a hand and maybe a arm. You had to jump in dem old cotton presses and
tread de cotton down by hand. It tuk most all day long to gin two bales of cotton and if dere
was three bales to be ginned us had to wuk most all night to finish up.

"Dey mixed wool wid de lint cotton to spin thread to make cloth for our winter clothes. Mammy
wove a lot of dat cloth and de clothes made out of it sho would keep out de cold. Most of our
stockin's and socks was knit at home, but now and den somebody would git hold of a sto-bought
pair for Sunday-go-to-meetin' wear.

"Colored folkses went to church wid deir own white folkses and sot in de gallery. One Sunday
us was all settin' in dat church listenin' to de white preacher, Mr. Hansford, tellin' how
de old debbil was gwine to git dem what didn't do right." Here Neal burst into uncontrollable
laughter. His sides shook and tears ran down his face. Finally he began his story again: "Missy,
I jus' got to tell you 'bout dat day in de meetin' 'ouse. A Nigger had done run off from his
marster and was hidin' out from one place to another. At night he would go steal his somepin
t'eat. He had done stole some chickens and had 'em wid him up in de church steeple whar he
was hidin' dat day. When daytime come he went off to sleep lak Niggers will do when dey ain't
got to hustle, and when he woke up Preacher Hansford was tellin' 'em 'bout de debbil was gwine
to git de sinners. Right den a old rooster what he had stole up and crowed so loud it seemed
lak Gabriel's trumpet on Judment Day. Dat runaway Nigger was skeered 'cause he knowed dey was
gwine to find him sho, but he warn't skeered nuffin' compared to dem Niggers settin' in de
gallery. Dey jus' knowed dat was de voice of de debbil what had done come atter 'em. Dem Niggers
never stopped prayin' and testifyin' to de Lord, 'til de white folkses had done got dat runaway
slave and de rooster out of de steeple. His marster was der and tuk him home and give him a
good, sound thrashin'.

"Slaves was 'lowed to have prayermeetin' on Chuesday (Tuesday) and Friday 'round at de diffunt
plantations whar deir marsters didn't keer, and dere warn't many what objected. De good marsters
all give deir slaves prayermeetin' passes on dem nights so de patterollers wouldn't git 'em
and beat 'em up for bein' off deir marster's lands. Dey 'most nigh kilt some slaves what dey
cotch out when dey didn't have no pass. White preachers done de talkin' at de meetin'houses,
but at dem Chuesday and Friday night prayermeetin's, it was all done by Niggers. I was too
little to 'member much 'bout dem meetin's, but my older sisters used to talk lots 'bout 'em
long atter de war had brung our freedom. Dere warn't many slaves what could read, so dey jus'
talked 'bout what dey had done heared de white preachers say on Sunday. One of de fav'rite
texties was de third chapter of John, and most of 'em jus' 'membered a line or two from dat.
Missy, from what folkses said 'bout dem meetin's, dere was sho a lot of good prayin' and testifyin',
'cause so many sinners repented and was saved. Sometimes at dem Sunday meetin's at de white
folkses' church dey would have two or three preachers de same dey. De fust one would give de
text and preach for at least a hour, den another one would give a text and do his preachin',
and 'bout dat time another one would rise up and say dat dem fust two brudders had done preached
enough to save 3,000 souls, but dat he was gwine to try to double dat number. Den he would
do his preachin' and atter dat one of dem others would git up and say: 'Brudders and Sisters,
us is all here for de same and only purpose--dat of savin' souls. Dese other good brudders
is done preached, talked, and prayed, and let the gap down; now I'm gwine to raise it. Us is
gwine to git 'ligion enough to take us straight through dem pearly gates. Now, let us sing
whilst us gives de new brudders and sisters de right hand of fellowship. One of dem old songs
went sort of lak dis:

  'Must I be born to die
   And lay dis body down?'

"When dey had done finished all de verses and choruses of dat dey started:

  'Amazin' Grace, How sweet de sound
   Dat saved a wretch lak me.'

"'Fore dey stopped dey usually got 'round to singin':

  'On Jordan's stormy banks I stand,
   And cast a wishful eye,
   To Canaan's fair and happy land
   Whar my possessions lie.'

"Dey could keep dat up for hours and it was sho' good singin', for dat's one thing Niggers
was born to do--to sing when dey gits 'ligion.

"When old Aunt Flora come up and wanted to jine de church she told 'bout how she had done seed
de Hebenly light and changed her way of livin'. Folkses testified den 'bout de goodness of
de Lord and His many blessin's what He give to saints and sinners, but dey is done stopped
givin' Him much thanks any more. Dem days, dey 'zamined folkses 'fore dey let 'em jine up wid
de church. When dey started 'zaminin' Aunt Flora, de preacher axed her: 'Is you done been borned
again and does you believe dat Jesus Christ done died to save sinners?' Aunt Flora she started
to cry; and she said: 'Lordy, Is He daid? Us didn't know dat. If my old man had done 'scribed
for de paper lak I told him to, us would have knowed when Jesus died?" Neal giggled. "Missy,"
he said, "ain't dat jus' lak one of dem old-time Niggers? Dey jus' tuk dat for ign'ance and
let her come on into de church.

"Dem days it was de custom for marsters to hire out what slaves dey had dat warn't needed to
wuk on deir own land, so our marster hired out two of my sisters. Sis' Anna hired to a fambly
'bout 16 miles from our place. She didn't lak it dar so she run away and I found her hid out
in our 'tater 'ouse. One day when us was playin' she called to me right low and soft lak and
told me she was hongry and for me to git her somepin t'eat but not to tell nobody she was dar.
She said she had been dar widout nothin' t'eat for several days. She was skeered Marster might
whup her. She looked so thin and bad I thought she was gwine to die, so I told Mammy. Her and
Marster went and brung Anna to de 'ouse and fed her. Dat pore chile was starved most to death.
Marster kept her at home for 3 weeks and fed her up good, den he carried her back and told
dem folkses what had hired her dat dey had better treat Anna good and see dat she had plenty
t'eat. Marster was drivin' a fast hoss dat day, but bless your heart, Anna beat him back home
dat day. She cried and tuk on so, beggin' him not to take her back dar no more dat he told
her she could stay home. My other sister stayed on whar she was hired out 'til de war was over
and dey give us our freedom.

"Daddy had done hid all Old Marster's hosses when de yankees got to our plantation. Two of
de ridin' hosses was in de smokehouse and another good trotter was in de hen 'ouse. Old Jake
was a slave what warn't right bright. He slep' in de kitchen, and he knowed whar Daddy had
hid dem hosses, but dat was all he knowed. Marster had give Daddy his money to hide too, and
he tuk some of de plasterin' off de wall in Marster's room and put de box of money inside de
wall. Den he fixed dat plasterin' back so nice you couldn't tell it had ever been tore off.
De night dem yankees come, Daddy had gone out to de wuk 'ouse to git some pegs to fix somepin
(us didn't have no nails dem days). When de yankees rid up to de kitchen door and found Old
Jake right by hisself, dat pore old fool was skeered so bad he jus' started right off babblin'
'bout two hosses in de smoke'ouse and one in de hen 'ouse, but he was tremblin' so he couldn't
talk plain. Old Marster heared de fuss dey made and he come down to de kitchen to see what
was de matter. De yankees den ordered Marster to git 'em his hosses. Marster called Daddy and
told him to git de hosses, but Daddy, he played foolish lak and stalled 'round lak he didn't
have good sense. Dem sojers raved and fussed all night long 'bout dem hosses, but dey never
thought 'bout lookin' in de smoke'ouse and hen 'ouse for 'em and 'bout daybreak dey left widout
takin' nothin'. Marster said he was sho proud of my Daddy for savin' dem good hosses for him.

[TR: 'Horses saved' written in margin.]

"Marster had a long pocketbook what fastened at one end wid a ring. One day when he went to
git out some money he dropped a roll of bills dat he never seed, but Daddy picked it up and
handed it back to him right away. Now my Daddy could have kept dat money jus' as easy, but
he was a 'ceptional man and believed evvbody ought to do right.

"Aunt Tama's old man, Uncle Griff, come to live wid her on our place atter de war was over.
'Fore den he had belonged to a man named Colquitt.[HW: !!] Marster pervided a home for him
and Aunt Tama 'til dey was both daid. When dey was buildin' de fust colored Methodist church
in dat section Uncle Griff give a whole hundred dollars to de buildin' fund. Now it tuk a heap
of scrimpin' for him to save dat much money 'cause he never had made over $10 a month. Aunt
Tama had done gone to Glory a long time when Uncle Griff died. Atter dey buried him dey come
back and was 'rangin' de things in his little cabin. When dey moved dat little trunk what Aunt
Tama used to keep gingerbread in, dey found jus' lots of money in it. Marster tuk keer of dat
money 'til he found Uncle Griff's own sister and den he give it all to her.

"One time Marster missed some of his money and he didn't want to 'cuse nobody, so he 'cided
he would find out who had done de debbilment. He put a big rooster in a coop wid his haid stickin'
out. Den he called all de Niggers up to de yard and told 'em somebody had been stealin' his
money, and dat evvybody must git in line and march 'round dat coop and tetch it. He said dat
when de guilty ones tetched it de old rooster would crow. Evvybody tetched it 'cept one old
man and his wife; dey jus' wouldn't come nigh dat coop whar dat rooster was a-lookin' at evvybody
out of his little red eyes. Marster had dat old man and 'oman sarched and found all de money
what had been stole.

"Mammy died about a year atter de war, and I never will forgit how Mist'ess cried and said:
'Neal, your mammy is done gone, and I don't know what I'll do widout her.' Not long atter dat,
Daddy bid for de contract to carry de mail and he got de place, but it made de white folkses
mighty mad, 'cause some white folkses had put in bids for dat contract. Dey 'lowed dat Daddy
better not never start out wid dat mail, 'cause if he did he was gwine to be sorry. Marster
begged Daddy not to risk it and told him if he would stay dar wid him he would let him have
a plantation for as long as he lived, and so us stayed on dar 'til Daddy died, and a long time
atter dat us kept on wukin' for Old Marster.

"White folkses owned us back in de days 'fore de war but our own white folkses was mighty good
to deir slaves. Dey had to larn us 'bedience fust, how to live right, and how to treat evvybody
else right; but de best thing dey larned us was how to do useful wuk. De onliest time I 'member
stealin' anything 'cept Aunt Tama's gingerbread was one time when I went to town wid Daddy
in de buggy. When us started back home a man got in de seat wid Daddy and I had to ride down
in de back of de buggy whar Daddy had hid a jug of liquor. I could hear it slushin' 'round
and so I got to wantin' to know how it tasted. I pulled out de corncob stopper and tuk one
taste. It was so good I jus' kep' on tastin' 'til I passed out, and didn't know when us got
home or nuffin else 'til I waked up in my own bed next day. Daddy give me a tannin' what I
didn't forgit for a long time, but dat was de wussest drunk I ever was. Lord, but I did love
to follow my Daddy.

"Folkses warn't sick much in dem days lak dey is now, but now us don't eat strong victuals
no more. Us raked out hot ashes den and cooked good old ashcakes what was a heap better for
us dan dis bread us buys from de stores now. Marster fed us plenty ashcake, fresh meat, and
ash roasted 'taters, and dere warn't nobody what could out wuk us.

"A death was somepin what didn't happen often on our plantation, but when somebody did die
folkses would go from miles and miles around to set up and pray all night to comfort de fambly
of de daid. Dey never made up de coffins 'til atter somebody died. Den dey measured de corpse
and made de coffin to fit de body. Dem coffins was lined wid black calico and painted wid lampblack
on de outside. Sometimes dey kivvered de outside wid black calico lak de linin'. Coffins for
white folkses was jus' lak what dey had made up for deir slaves, and dey was all buried in
de same graveyard on deir own plantations.

"When de war was over dey closed de little one-room school what our good Marster had kept in
his back yard for his slaves, but out young Miss Ellen larnt my sister right on 'til she got
whar she could teach school. Daddy fixed up a room onto our house for her school and she soon
had it full of chillun. Dey made me study too, and I sho did hate to have to go to school to
my own aister for she evermore did take evvy chance to lay dat stick on me, but I s'pects she
had a right tough time wid me. When time come 'round to celebrate school commencement, I was
one proud little Nigger 'cause I never had been so dressed up in my life before. I had on a
red waist, white pants, and a good pair of shoes; but de grandest thing of all 'bout dat outfit
was dat Daddy let me wear his watch. Evvybody come for dat celebration. Dere was over 300 folks
at dat big dinner, and us had lots of barbecue and all sorts of good things t'eat. Old Marster
was dar, and when I stood up 'fore all dem folks and said my little speech widout missin' a
word, Marster sho did laugh and clap his hands. He called me over to whar he was settin' and
said: 'I knowed you could larn if you wanted to.' Best of all, he give me a whole dollar. [TR:
'for reciting a speech' written in margin.] I was rich den, plumb rich. One of my sisters couldn't
larn nothin'. De only letters she could ever say was 'G-O-D.' No matter what you axed her to
spell she allus said 'G-O-D.' She was a good field hand though and a good 'oman and she lived
to be more dan 90 years old.

"Now, talkin' 'bout frolickin', us really used to dance. What I means, is sho 'nough old-time
break-downs. Sometimes us didn't have no music 'cept jus' beatin' time on tin pans and buckets
but most times Old Elice Hudson played his fiddle for us, and it had to be tuned again atter
evvy set us danced. He never knowed but one tune and he played dat over and over. Sometimes
dere was 10 or 15 couples on de floor at de same time and us didn't think nothin' of dancin'
all night long. Us had plenty of old corn juice for refreshment, and atter Elice had two or
three cups of dat juice, he could git 'Turkey in de Straw' out of dat fiddle lak nobody's business.

"One time a houseboy from another plantation wanted to come to one of our Saddy night dances,
so his marster told him to shine his boots for Sunday and fix his hoss for de night and den
he could git off for de frolic. Abraham shined his marster's boots 'till he could see hisself
in 'em, and dey looked so grand he was tempted to try 'em on. Dey was a little tight but he
thought he could wear 'em, and he wanted to show hisself off in 'em at de dance. Dey warn't
so easy to walk in and he was 'fraid he might git 'em scratched up walkin' through de fields,
so he snuck his Marster's hoss out and rode to de dance. When Abraham rid up dar in dem shiny
boots, he got all de gals' 'tention. None of 'em wanted to dance wid de other Niggers. Dat
Abraham was sho sruttin' 'til somebody run in and told him his hoss had done broke its neck.
He had tied it to a limb and sho 'nough, some way, dat hoss had done got tangled up and hung
its own self. Abraham begged de other Nigger boys to help him take de deid hoss home, but he
had done tuk deir gals and he didn't git no help. He had to walk 12 long miles home in dem
tight shoes. De sun had done riz up when he got dar and it warn't long 'fore his Marster was
callin': 'Abraham, bring, me my boots.' Dat Nigger would holler out: 'Yas sah! I'se a-comin'.
But dem boots wouldn't come off 'cause his foots had done swelled up in 'em. His marster kept
on callin' and when Abraham seed he couldn't put it off no longer, he jus' cut dem boots off
his foots and went in and told what he had done. His marster was awful mad and said he was
a good mind to take de hide off Abraham's back. 'Go git my hoss quick, Nigger, 'fore I most
kills you,' he yelled. Den Abraham told him: 'Marster I knows you is gwine to kill me now,
but your hoss is done daid.' Den pore Abraham had to out and tell de whole story and his marster
got to laughin' so 'bout how he tuk all de gals away from de other boys and how dem boots hurt
him dat it looked lak he never would stop. When he finally did stop laughin' and shakin' his
sides he said: 'Dat's all right Abraham. Don't never let nobody beat your time wid de gals.'
And dat's all he ever said to Abraham 'bout it.

"When my sister got married, us sho did have a grand time. Us cooked a pig whole wid a shiny
red apple in its mouth and set it right in de middle of de long table what us had built out
in de yard. Us had evvything good to go wid dat pig, and atter dat supper, us danced all night
long. My sister never had seed dat man but one time 'fore she married him.

"My Daddy and his cousin Jim swore wid one another dat if one died 'fore de other dat de one
what was left would look atter de daid one's fambly and see dat none of de chillun was bound
out to wuk for nobody. It warn't long atter dis dat Daddy died. I was jus' fourteen, and was
wukin' for a brick mason larnin' dat trade. Daddy had done been sick a while, and one night
de fambly woke me up and said he was dyin'. I run fast as I could for a doctor but Daddy was
done daid when I got back. Us buried him right side of Mammy in de old graveyard. It was most
a year atter dat 'fore us had de funeral sermon preached. Dat was de way folkses done den.
Now Mammy and Daddy was both gone, but old Marster said us chillun could live dar long as us
wanted to. I went on back to wuk, 'cause I was crazy to be as good a mason as my Daddy was.
In Lexin'ton dere is a rock wall still standin' 'round a whole square what Daddy built in slavery
time. Long as he lived he blowed his bugle evvy mornin' to wake up all de folkses on Marse
Frank's plantation. He never failed to blow dat bugle at break of day 'cep on Sundays, and
evvybody on dat place 'pended on him to wake 'em up.

"I was jus' a-wukin' away one day when Cousin Jim sent for me to go to town wid him. Missy,
dat man brung ne right here to Athens to de old courthouse and bound me out to a white man.
He done dat very thing atter swearin' to my Daddy he wouldn't never let dat happen. I didn't
want to wuk dat way, so I run away and went back home to wuk. De sheriff come and got me and
said I had to go back whar I was bound out or go to jail. Pretty soon I runned away again and
went to Atlanta, and dey never bothered me 'bout dat no more.

"De onliest time I ever got 'rested was once when I come to town to see 'bout gittin' somebody
to pick cotton for me and jus' as I got to a certain Nigger's house de police come in and caught
'em in a crap game. Mr. McCune, de policeman, said I would have to go 'long wid de others to
jail, but he would help me atter us got der and he did. He 'ranged it so I could hurry back home.

"'Bout de best times us had in de plantation days was de corn shuckin's, log rollin's and syrup
cookin's. Us allus finished up dem syrup cookin's wid a candy pullin'.

"Atter he had all his corn gathered and put in big long piles, Marster 'vited de folkses from
all 'round dem parts. Dat was de way it was done; evvybody holped de others git de corn shucked.
Nobody thought of hirin' folkses and payin' out cash money for extra wuk lak dat. Dey 'lected
a gen'ral to lead off de singin' and atter he got 'em to keepin' time wid de singin' de little
brown jug was passed 'round. When it had gone de rounds a time or two, it was a sight to see
how fast dem Niggers could keep time to dat singin'. Dey could do all sorts of double time
den when dey had swigged enough liquor. When de corn was all shucked dey feasted and den drunk
more liquor and danced as long as dey could stand up. De logrollin's and candy pullin's ended
de same way. Dey was sho grand good times.

"I farmed wid de white folkses for 32 years and never had no trouble wid nobody. Us allus settled
up fair and square and in crop time dey never bothered to come 'round to see what Neal was
doin', 'cause dey knowed dis Nigger was wukin' all right. Dey was all mighty good to me. Atter
I got so old I couldn't run a farm no more I wuked in de white folkses' gyardens and tended
deir flowers. I had done been wukin' out Mrs. Steve Upson's flowers and when she 'come to pay,
she axed what my name was. When I told her it was Neal Upson she wanted to know how I got de
Upson name. I told her Mr. Frank Upson had done give it to me when I was his slave. She called
to Mr. Steve and dey lak to have talked me to death, for my Marse Frank and Mr. Steve's daddy
was close kinfolkses.

"Atter dat I wuked deir flowers long as I was able to walk way off up to deir place, but old
Neal can't wuk no more. Mr. Steve and his folkses comes to see me sometimes and I'se allus
powerful glad to see 'em.

"I used to wuk some for Miss Mary Bacon. She is a mighty good 'oman and she knowed my Daddy
and our good Old Marster. Miss Mary would talk to me 'bout dem old days and she allus said:
'Neal, let's pray,' 'fore I left. Miss Mary never did git married. She's one of dem solitary
ladies.

"Now, Missy, how come you wants to know 'bout my weddin'? I done been married two times, but
it was de fust time dat was de sho 'nough 'citin' one. I courted dat gal for a long, long time
while I was too skeered to ax her Daddy for her. I went to see her evvy Sunday jus' 'termined
to ax him for her 'fore I left, and I would stay late atter supper, but jus' couldn't git up
nerve enough to do it. One Sunday I promised myself I would ax him if it kilt me, so I went
over to his house early dat mornin' and told Lida, dat was my sweetheart's name--I says to
her: 'I sho is gwine to ax him today.' Well, dinnertime come, suppertime come, and I was gittin'
shaky in my jints when her Daddy went to feed his hogs and I went along wid him. Missy, dis
is de way I finally did ax him for his gal. He said he was goin' to have some fine meat come
winter. I axed him if it would be enough for all of his fambly, and he said: 'How come you
ax dat, boy?' Den I jus' got a tight hold on dat old hog pen and said: 'Well, Sir, I jus' thought
if you didn't have enough for all of 'em, I could take Lida.' I felt myself goin' down. He
started laughin' fit to kill. 'Boy,' he says, 'Is you tryin' to ax for Lida? If so, I don't
keer 'cause she's got to git married sometime.' I was so happy I left him right den and run
back to tell Lida dat he said it was all right.

"Us didn't have no big weddin'. Lida had on a new calico dress and I wore new jeans pants.
Marster heared us was gittin' married dat day and he sont his new buggy wid a message for us
to come right dar to him. I told Lida us better go, so us got in dat buggy and driv off, and
de rest of de folkses followed in de wagon. Marster met us in front of old Salem Church. He
had de church open and Preacher John Gibson waitin' der to marry us. Us warn't 'spectin' no
church weddin', but Marster said dat Neal had to git married right. He never did forgit his
Niggers. Lida she's done been daid a long time, and I'se married again, but dat warn't lak
de fust time."

By now, Neal was evidently tired out but as the interviewer prepared to leave, Neal said: "Missy,
I'se sho got somepin to tell my old 'oman when she gits home. She don't lak to leave me here
by myself. I wish dere was somebody for me to talk to evvyday, for I'se had sich a good time
today. I don't s'pect it's gwine to be long 'fore old Neal goes to be wid dem I done been tellin'
you 'bout, so don't wait too long to come back to see me again." His shabby work clothes were
clean and carefully mended, and he leaned on a cane for support.

John was looking for the "Farm Bureau Office," but he agreed to return for an interview after
he had transacted his business. When he reappeared a short time later and settled down in a
comfortable chair he gave the story of his early life with apparent enjoyment.

In language remarkably free of dialect, John began by telling his full name and added that
he was well known in Georgia and the whole country. "Until I retired," he remarked, "I taught
school in North Carolina, and in Hall, Jackson, and Rabun Counties, in Georgia. I am farming
now about five miles from Athens in the Sandy Creek district. I was born in 1862 in Macon County,
North Carolina, on the George Seller's plantation, which borders the Little Tennessee River.

"I don't know anything much, first hand, about the war period, as I was quite a child when
that ended, but I can tell you all about the days of Reconstruction. What I know about the
things that took place during the war was told me by my mother and other old people.

"My father was Bas Van Hook and he married Mary Angel, my mother. Mother was born on Marse
Dillard Love's plantation, and when his daughter, Miss Jenny, married Marse Thomas Angel's
son, Marse Dillard gave Mother to Miss Jenny and when Little Miss Jenny Angel was born, Mother
was her nurse. Marse Thomas and Miss Jenny Angel died, and Mother stayed right there keeping
house for Little Miss Jenny and looking after her. Mother had more sense than all the rest
of the slaves put together, and she even did Little Miss Jenny's shopping.

"My father was the only darkey Old Man Isaac Van Hook owned, and he did anything that came
to hand: he was a good carpenter and mechanic and helped the Van Hooks to build mills, and
he made the shoes for that settlement. Thomas Aaron, George, James, Claude, and Washington
were my five brothers, and my sisters were Zelia, Elizabeth, and Candace. Why, Miss, the only
thing I can remember right off hand that we children done was fight and frolic like youngsters
will do when they get together. With time to put my mind on it, I would probably recollect
our games and songs, if we had any.

"Our quarters was on a large farm on Sugar Fork River. The houses were what you would call
log huts and they were scattered about promiscuously, no regular lay-out, just built wherever
they happened to find a good spring convenient. There was never but one room to a hut, and
they wern't particular about how many darkies they put in a room.

"White folks had fine four-poster beds with a frame built around the top of the bed, and over
the frame hung pretty, ruffled white curtains and a similar ruffled curtain was around the
bottom of the bed; the curtains made pretty ornaments. Slaves had beds of this general kind,
but they warn't quite as pretty and fine. Corded springs were the go then. The beds used by
most of the slaves in that day and time were called 'Georgia beds,' and these were made by
boring two holes in the cabin wall, and two in the floor, and side pieces were run from the
holes in the wall to the posts and fastened; then planks were nailed around the sides and foot,
box-fashion, to hold in the straw that we used for mattresses; over this pretty white sheets
and plenty of quilts was spreaded. Yes, mam, there was always plenty of good warm cover in
those days. Of course, it was home-made, all of it.

"My grandfather was a blacksmith and farmhand owned by Old Man Dillard Love. According to my
earliest recollection my grandmother Van Hook was dead and I have no memories about her. My
great, great grandmother, Sarah Angel, looked after slave children while their mothers were
at work. She was a free woman, but she had belonged to Marse Tommy Angel and Miss Jenny Angel;
they were brother and sister. The way Granny Sarah happened to be free was; one of the women
in the Angel family died and left a little baby soon after one of Granny's babies was born,
and so she was loaned to that family as wet nurse for the little orphan baby. They gave her
her freedom and took her into their home, because they did not want her sleeping in slave quarters
while she was nursing the white child. In that settlement, it was considered a disgrace for
a white child to feed at the breast of a slave woman, but it was all right if the darkey was
a free woman. After she got too old to do regular work, Granny Sarah used to glean after the
reapers in the field to get wheat for her bread. She had been a favored slave and allowed to
do pretty much as she pleased, and after she was a free woman the white folks continued to
look after her every need, but she loved to do for herself as long as she was able to be up
and about.

"What did we have to eat then? Why, most everything; ash cakes was a mighty go then. Cornbread
dough was made into little pones and placed on the hot rocks close to the fire to dry out a
little, then hot ashes were raked out to the front of the fireplace and piled over the ash
cakes. When thoroughly done they were taken out and the ashes washed off; they were just like
cake to us children then. We ate lots of home-made lye hominy, beans, peas, and all kinds of
greens, cooked with fat meat. The biggest, and maybe the best thing in the way of vegetables
that we had then was the white-head cabbage; they grew large up there in Carolina where I lived.
There was just one big garden to feed all the folks on that farm.

"Marse George had a good 'possum dog that he let his slaves use at night. They would start
off hunting about 10 o'clock. Darkies knew that the best place to hunt for 'possums was in
a persimmon tree. If they couldn't shake him out, they would cut the tree down, but the most
fun was when we found the 'possum in a hollow log. Some of the hunters would get at one end
of the log, and the others would guard the other end, and they would build a fire to smoke
the 'possum out. Sometimes when they had to pull him out, they would find the 'possum in such
a tight place that most of his hair would be rubbed off before they could get him out. Darkies
hunted rabbits, squirrels, coons, all kinds of birds, and 'specially they was fond of going
after wild turkeys. Another great sport was hunting deer in the nearby mountains. I managed
to get a shot at one once. Marse George was right good about letting his darkies hunt and fish
at night to get meat for themselves. Oh! Sure, there were lots of fish and they caught plenty
of 'em in the Little Tennessee and Sugar Fork Rivers and in the numerous creeks that were close
by. Red horse, suckers, and salmon are the kinds of fish I remember best. They were cooked
in various ways in skillets, spiders, and ovens on the big open fireplace.

"Now, about the clothes we wore in the days of the war, I couldn't rightly say, but my Mother
said we had good comfortable garments. In the summer weather, boys and men wore plain cotton
shirts and jeans pants. The home-made linsey-woolsy shirts that we wore over our cotton shirts,
and the wool pants that we wore in winter, were good and warm; they had brogan shoes in winter
too. Folks wore the same clothes on Sundays as through the week, but they had to be sure that
they were nice and clean on Sundays. Dresses for the women folks were made out of cotton checks,
and they had sunbonnets too.

"Marse George Sellars, him that married Miss Ca'line Angel, was my real master. They had four
children, Bud, Mount, Elizabeth, and, and er; I just can't bring to recollect the name of their
other girl. They lived in a two-story frame house that was surrounded by an oak grove on the
road leading from Franklin, North Carolina, to Clayton, Georgia. Hard Sellars was the carriage
driver, and while I am sure Marse George must have had an overseer, I don't remember ever hearing
anybody say his name.

"Really, Miss, I couldn't say just how big that plantation was, but I am sure there must have
been at least four or five hundred acres in it. One mighty peculiar thing about his slaves
was that Marse George never had more than 99 slaves at one time; every time he bought one to
try to make it an even hundred, a slave died. This happened so often, I was told, that he stopped
trying to keep a hundred or more, and held on to his 99 slaves, and long as he did that, there
warn't any more deaths than births among his slaves. His slaves had to be in the fields when
the sun rose, and there they had to work steady until the sun went down. Oh! Yes, mam, Marse
Tommy Angel was mighty mean to his slaves, but Miss Jenny, his sister, was good as could be;
that is the reason she gave my mother to her sister, Miss Ca'line Sellars; because she thought
Marse Tommy was too hard on her.

"I heard some talk as to how after the slaves had worked hard in the field all day and come
to the house at night, they were whipped for mighty small offenses. Marse George would have
them tied hand and foot over a barrel and would beat them with a cowhide, or cat-o'-nine tails
lash. They had a jail in Franklin as far back as I can recollect. Old Big Andy Angel's white
folks had him put in jail a heap of times, because he was a rogue and stole everything he could
get his hands on. Nearly everybody was afraid of him; he was a great big double jointed man,
and was black as the ace of spades. No, mam, I never saw any slaves sold, but my father's mother
and his sister were sold on the block. The white folks that bought 'em took them away. After
the war was over my father tried to locate 'em, but never once did he get on the right track
of 'em.

"Oh! Why, my white folks took a great deal of pains teaching their slaves how to read and write.
My father could read, but he never learned to write, and it was from our white folks that I
learned to read and write. Slaves read the Bible more than anything else. There were no churches
for slaves on Marse George's plantation, so we all went to the white folks' church, about two
miles away; it was called Clarke's Chapel. Sometimes we went to church at Cross Roads; that
was about the same distance across Sugar Fork River. My mother was baptized in that Sugar Fork
River by a white preacher, but that is the reason I joined the Baptist church, because my mother
was a Baptist, and I was so crazy about her, and am 'til yet.

"There were no funeral parlors in those days. They just funeralized the dead in their own homes,
took them to the graveyard in a painted home-made coffin that was lined with thin bleaching
made in the loom on the plantation, and buried them in a grave that didn't have any bricks
or cement about it. That brings to my memory those songs they sung at funerals. One of them
started off something like this, I Don't Want You to Grieve After Me. My mother used to tell
me that when she was baptized they sung, You Shall Wear a Lily-White Robe. Whenever I get to
studying about her it seems to me I can hear my mother singing that song again. She did love
it so much.

"No, mam, there didn't none of the darkies on Marse George Sellar's place run away to the North,
but some on Marse Tommy Angel's place ran to the West. They told me that when Little Charles
Angel started out to run away a bird flew in front of him and led him all the way to the West.
Understand me, I am not saying that is strictly so, but that is what I heard old folks say,
when I was young. When darkies wanted to get news to their girls or wives on other plantations
and didn't want Marse George to know about it, they would wait for a dark night and would tie
rags on their feet to keep from making any noise that the paterollers might hear, for if they
were caught out without a pass, that was something else. Paterollers would go out in squads
at night and whip any darkies they caught out that could not show passes. Adam Angel was a
great big man, weighing about 200 pounds, and he slipped out one night without a pass. When
the paterollers found him, he was at his girl's place where they were out in the front yard
stewing lard for the white folks. They knew he didn't belong on that plantation, so they asked
him to show his pass. Adam didn't have one with him, and he told them so. They made a dive
for him, and then, quick as a flash, he turned over that pot of boiling lard, and while they
were getting the hot grease off of them he got away and came back to his cabin. If they had
caught Adam, he would have needed some of that spilt grease on him after the beating they would
have give him. Darkies used to stretch ropes and grapevines across the road where they knew
paterollers would be riding; then they would run down the road in front of them, and when they
got to the rope or vine they would jump over it and watch the horses stumble and throw the
paterollers to the ground. That was a favorite sport of slaves.

"After the darkies got in from the field at night, ate their supper, and finished up the chores
for the day, on nights when the moon shone bright the men would work in their own cotton patches
that Marse George allowed them; the women used their own time to wash, iron, patch, and get
ready for the next day, and if they had time they helped the men in their cotton patches. They
worked straight on through Saturdays, same as any other day, but the young folks would get
together on Saturday nights and have little parties.

"How did they spend Sundays? Why, they went to church on Sunday and visited around, holding
prayermeetings at one another's cabins. Now, Christmas morning! Yes, mam, that was a powerful
time with the darkies, if they didn't have nothing but a little sweet cake, which was nothing
more than gingerbread. However, Marse George did have plenty of good things to eat at that
time, such as fresh pork and wild turkeys, and we were allowed to have a biscuit on that day.
How we did frolic and cut up at Christmas! Marse George didn't make much special to do on New
Year's Day as far as holiday was concerned; work was the primary object, especially in connection
with slaves.

"Oh-oo-h! Everybody had cornshuckings. The man designated to act as the general would stick
a peacock tail feather in his hat and call all the men together and give his orders. He would
stand in the center of the corn pile, start the singing, and keep things lively for them. Now
and then he would pass around the jug. They sang a great deal during cornshuckings, but I have
forgotten the words to those songs. Great excitement was expressed whenever a man found a red
ear of corn, for that counted 20 points, a speckled ear was 10 points and a blue ear 5 points,
toward a special extra big swig of liquor whenever a person had as many as 100 points. After
the work was finished they had a big feast spread on long tables in the yard, and dram flowed
plentiful, then they played ball, tussled, ran races, and did anything they knew how to amuse
themselves.

"Now, Ladies," John said, "please excuse me. I left my wife at home real sick, and I just must
hurry to the drug store and get some flaxseed so I can make a poultice for her." As he made
a hasty departure, he agreed to complete the story later at his home, and gave careful directions
for finding the place.

A month later, two visitors called on John at his small, unpainted house in the center of a
hillside cotton patch.

A tall, thin Negress appeared in the doorway. "Yes, mam, John Van Hook lives here. He's down
in the field with his hoe, digging 'taters." She leaned from the porch and called, "Daddy,
Daddy! Somebody wants to see you." Asked if John was her father, she answered "No, mam, he
is my husband. I started calling him Daddy when our child was little, so I've been calling
him that ever since. My name is Laney."

The walls of the room into which John invited his callers were crudely plestered with newspapers
and the small space was crowded with furniture of various kinds and periods. The ladder-back
chairs he designated for his guests were beautiful. "They are plantation-made," he explained,
"and we've had 'em a mighty long time." On a reading table a pencil and tablet with a half-written
page lay beside a large glass lamp. Newspapers and books covered several other tables. A freshly
whitewashed hearth and mantel were crowned by an old-fashioned clock, and at the end of the
room a short flight of steps led to the dining room, built on a higher floor level.

"Now, let's see! Where was I?," John began. "Oh, yes, we were talking about cornshuckings,
when I had to leave your office. Well, I haven't had much time to study about those cornshucking
songs to get all the words down right, but the name of one was General Religh Hoe, and there
was another one that was called, Have a Jolly Crowd, and a Little Jolly Johnny.

"Now you needn't to expect me to know much about cotton pickings, for you know I have already
told you I was raised in North Carolina, and we were too far up in the mountains for cotton
growing, but I have lived in a cotton growing country for forty-odd years.

"As to parties and frolics, I guess I could have kept those things in mind, but when I realized
that being on the go every night I could get off, week in and week out, was turning my mind
and heart away from useful living, I tried to put those things out of my life and to train
myself to be content with right living and the more serious things of life, and that's why
I can't remember more of the things about our frolics that took place as I was growing up.
About all I remember about the dances was when we danced the cotillion at regular old country
break-downs. Folks valued their dances very highly then, and to be able to perform them well
was a great accomplishment. Turkey in the Straw is about the oldest dance tune I can remember.
Next to that is Taint Gonna Rain No More, but the tune as well as words to that were far different
from the modern song by that name. Rabbit Hair was another favorite song, and there were dozens
of others that I just never tried to remember until you asked me about them.

"My father lived in Caswell County and he used to tell us how hard it was for him to get up
in the morning after being out most of the night frolicking. He said their overseer couldn't
talk plain, and would call them long before crack of dawn, and it sounded like he was saying,
'Ike and a bike, Ike and a bike.' What he meant was, 'Out and about! Out and about!'

"Marriage in those days was looked upon as something very solemn, and it was mighty seldom
that anybody ever heard of a married couple trying to get separated. Now it's different. When
a preacher married a couple, you didn't see any hard liquor around, but just a little light
wine to liven up the wedding feast. If they were married by a justice of the peace, look out,
there was plenty of wine and," here his voice was almost awe-stricken, "even whiskey too."

Laney interrupted at this stage of the story with, "My mother said they used to make up a new
broom and when the couple jumped over it, they was married. Then they gave the broom to the
couple to use keeping house." John was evidently embarrassed. "Laney," he said, "that was never
confirmed. It was just hearsay, as far as you know, and I wouldn't tell things like that.

"The first colored man I ever heard preach was old man Johnny McDowell. He married Angeline
Pennon and William Scruggs, uncle to Ollie Scruggs, who lives in Athens now. After the wedding
they were all dancing around the yard having a big time and enjoying the wine and feast, and
old man McDowell, sitting there watching them, looked real thoughtful and sad; suddenly he
said: 'They don't behave like they knew what's been done here today. Two people have been joined
together for life. No matter what comes, or what happens, these two people must stand by each
other, through everything, as long as they both shall live.' Never before had I had such thoughts
at a wedding. They had always just been times for big eats, dancing, frolicking, and lots of
jokes, and some of them pretty rough jokes, perhaps. What he said got me to thinking, and I
have never been careless minded at a wedding since that day. Brother McDowell preached at Clarke's
Chapel, about five miles south of Franklin, North Ca'lina, on the road leading from England
to Georgia; that road ran right through the Van Hook place."

Again Laney interrupted her husband. "My mother said they even had infare dinners the next
day after the wedding. The infare dinners were just for the families of the bride and groom,
and the bride had a special dress for that occasion that she called her infare dress. The friends
of both parties were there at the big feast on the wedding day, but not at the infare dinner."

"And there was no such a thing as child marriages heard of in those days," John was speaking
again. "At least none of the brides were under 15 or 16 years old. Now you can read about child
brides not more than 10 years old, 'most ever' time you pick up a paper.

"I don't remember much, about what I played until I got to be about 10 years old. I was a terrible
little fellow to imitate things. Old man Tommy Angel built mills, and I built myself a little
toy mill down on the branch that led to Sugar Fork River. There was plenty of nice soapstone
there that was so soft you could cut it with a pocket knife and could dress it off with a plane
for a nice smooth finish. I shaped two pieces of soapstone to look like round millstones and
set me up a little mill that worked just fine.

"We run pretty white sand through it and called that our meal and flour. My white folks would
come down to the branch and watch me run the little toy mill. I used to make toy rifles and
pistols and all sorts of nice playthings out of that soapstone. I wish I had a piece of that
good old soapstone from around Franklin, so I could carve some toys like I used to play with
for my boy."

"We caught real salmon in the mountain streams," John remarked. "They weighed from 3 to 25
pounds, and kind of favored a jack fish, only jack fishes have duck bills, and these salmon
had saw teeth. They were powerful jumpers and when you hooked one you had a fight on your hands
to get it to the bank no matter whether it weighed 3 or 25 pounds. The gamest of all the fish
in those mountain streams were red horses. When I was about 9 or 10 years old I took my brother's
fish gig and went off down to the river. I saw what looked like the shadow of a stick in the
clear water and when I thrust the gig at it I found mighty quick I had gigged a red horse.
I did my best to land it but it was too strong for me and pulled loose from my gig and darted
out into deep water. I ran fast as I could up the river bank to the horseshoe bend where a
flat bottom boat belonging to our family was tied. I got in that boat and chased that fish
'til I got him. It weighed 6 pounds and was 2 feet and 6 inches long. There was plenty of excitement
created around that plantation when the news got around that a boy, as little as I was then,
had landed such a big old fighting fish."

"Suckers were plentiful and easy to catch but they did not give you the battle that a salmon
or a red horse could put up and that was what it took to make fishing fun. We had canoes, but
we used a plain old flat boat, a good deal like a small ferry boat, most of the time. There
was about the same difference in a canoe and a flat boat that there is in a nice passenger
automobile and a truck."

When asked if he remembered any of the tunes and words of the songs he sang as a child, John
was silent for a few moments and then began to sing:

  "A frog went courtin'
   And he did ride
     Uh hunh
   With a sword and pistol
   By his side
     Uh hunh.

  "Old uncle Rat laughed,
   Shook his old fat side;
   He thought his niece
   Was going to be the bride.
     Uh hunh, uh hunh

  "Where shall the wedding be?
     Uh hunh
   Where shall the wedding be?
     Uh hunh

  "Way down yonder
   In a hollow gum tree.
     Uh hunh, un hunh, uh hunh.

  "Who shall the waiters be?
     Uh hunh
   Granddaddy Louse and a
   Black-eyed flea.
     Uh hunh, uh hunh, uh hunh."

Laney reminded him of a song he used to sing when their child was a baby. "It is hard for me
to formulate its words in my mind. I just cannot seem to get them," he answered, "but I thought
of this one the other night and promised myself I would sing it for you sometime. It's Old
Granny Mistletoe.

   "Old Granny Mistletoe,
    Lyin' in the bed,
    Out the window
     She poked her head.

  "She says, 'Old Man,
     The gray goose's gone,
   And I think I heard her holler,
     King-cant-you-O, King-cant-you-O!'

  "The old fox stepped around,
     A mighty fast step.
   He hung the old gray goose
     Up by the neck.

  "Her wings went flip-flop
     Over her back,
   And her legs hung down.
     Ding-downy-O, ding-downy-O.

  "The old fox marched
     On to his den.
   Out come his young ones,
     Some nine or ten.

  "Now we will have
     Some-supper-O, some-summer-O.
   Now we will have
     Some-supper-O, some-supper-O."

"The only riddle I remember is the one about: 'What goes around the house, and just makes one
track?' I believe they said it was a wheelbarrow. Mighty few people in that settlement believed
in such things as charms. They were too intelligent for that sort of thing.

"Old man Dillard Love didn't know half of his slaves. They were called 'Love's free niggers.'
Some of the white folks in that settlement would get after their niggers and say 'who do you
think you are, you must think you are one of Dillard Love's free niggers the way you act.'
Then the slave was led to the whipping post and brushed down, and his marster would tell him,
'now you see who is boss.'

"Marse Dillard often met a darkey in the road, he would stop and inquire of him, 'Who's nigger
is you?' The darkey would say 'Boss I'se your nigger.' If Marse Dillard was feeling good he
would give the darkey a present. Heaps of times he gave them as much as five dollars, 'cording
to how good he was feeling. He treated his darkies mighty good.

"My grandfather belonged to Marse Dillard Love, and when the war was declared he was too old
to go. Marse George Sellars went and was wounded. You know all about the blanket rolls they
carried over their shoulders. Well, that bullet that hit him had to go all the way through
that roll that had I don't know how many folds, and its force was just about spent by the time
it got to his shoulder; that was why it didn't kill him, otherwise it would have gone through
him. The bullet was extracted, but it left him with a lame shoulder.

"Our Mr. Tommy Angel went to the war, and he got so much experience shooting at the Yankees
that he could shoot at a target all day long, and then cover all the bullet holes he made with
the palm of one hand. Mr. Tommy was at home when the Yankees come though.

"Folks around our settlement put their darkies on all their good mules and horses, and loaded
them down with food and valuables, then sent them to the nearby mountains and caves to hide
until the soldiers were gone. Mr. Angel himself told me later that lots of the folks who came
around pilfering after the war, warn't northerners at all, but men from just anywhere, who
had fought in the war and came back home to find all they had was gone, and they had to live
some way.

"One day my father and another servant were laughing fit to kill at a greedy little calf that
had caught his head in the feed basket. They thought it was just too funny. About that time
a Yankee, in his blue uniform coming down the road, took the notion the men were laughing at
him. 'What are you laughing at?' he said, and at that they lit out to run. The man called my
father and made him come back, 'cause he was the one laughing so hard. Father thought the Yankee
vas going to shoot him before he could make him understand they were just laughing at the calf.

"When the war was over, Mr. Love called his slaves together and told them they had been set
free. He explained everything to them very carefully, and told them he would make farming arrangements
for all that wanted to stay on there with him. Lots of the darkies left after they heard about
folks getting rich working on the railroads in Tennessee and about the high wages that were
being paid on those big plantations in Mississippi. Some of those labor agents were powerful
smart about stretching the truth, but those folks that believed them and left home found out
that it's pretty much the same the world over, as far as folks and human nature is concerned.
Those that had even average common sense got along comfortable and all right in Tennessee and
Mississippi, and those that suffered out there were the sort that are so stupid they would
starve in the middle of a good apple pie. My brother that went with the others to Tennessee
never came back, and we never saw him again.

"My father did not want me to leave our home at Franklin, North Carolina, and come to Georgia,
for he had been told Georgia people were awful mean. There was a tale told us about the Mr.
Oglethorpe, who settled Georgia, bringing over folks from the jails of England to settle in
Georgia and it was said they became the ruling class of the State. Anyway, I came on just the
same, and pretty soon I married a Georgia girl, and have found the people who live here are
all right."

Laney eagerly took advantage of the pause that followed to tell of her mother's owner. "Mother
said that he was an old, old man and would set in his big armchair 'most all day. When he heard
good news from the soldiers he would drum his fingers on his chair and pat his feet, whilst
he tried to sing, 'Te Deum, Te Deum. Good news today! We won today!' Whenever he heard the
southern armies were losing, he would lie around moaning and crying out loud. Nobody could
comfort him then."

John was delighted to talk about religion. "Yes, mam, after the war, darkies used to meet at
each others' houses for religious services until they got churches of their own. Those meetings
were little more than just prayermeetings. Our white folks were powerful careful to teach their
slaves how to do the right thing, and long after we were free Mr. Tommy would give long talks
at our meetings. We loved to listen to him and have him interested in us, for we had never
been treated mean like heaps of the slaves in that neighborhood had.

"One white man in our county needed the help of the Lord. His name was Boney Ridley and he
just couldn't keep away from liquor. He was an uncle of that famous preacher and poet, Mr.
Caleb Ridley. One day when Mr. Boney had been drinking hard and kind of out of his head, he
was stretched out on the ground in a sort of stupor. He opened his eyes and looked at the buzzards
circling low over him and said, sort of sick and fretful-like, 'Git on off, buzzards; I ain't
dead yet.'"

"The Reverend Doctor George Truett was a fine boy and he has grown into a splendid man. He
is one of God's chosen ones. I well remember the first time I heard him speak. I was a janitor
at the State Normal School when he was a pupil there in 1887. I still think he is about the
greatest orator I ever listened to. In those days, back in 1887, I always made it convenient
to be doing something around the school room when time came for him to recite or to be on a
debate. After he left that school he went on to the Seminary at Louisville and he has become
known throughout this country as a great Christian.

"I started teaching in old field schools with no education but just what our white folks had
taught me. They taught me to read and write, and I must say I really was a mighty apt person,
and took advantage of every opportunity that came my way to learn. You know, teaching is a
mighty good way to learn. After I had been teaching for some time I went back to school, but
most of my knowledge was gotten by studying what books and papers I could get hold of and by
watching folks who were really educated; by listening carefully to them, I found I could often
learn a good deal that way."

Laney could be quiet no longer. "My husband," she said, "is a self-made man. His educated brother,
Claude, that graduated from Maryville School in Tennessee, says that he cannot cope with my
husband."

John smiled indulgently and continued: "We were in sad and woeful want after the war. Once
I asked my father why he let us go so hungry and ragged, and he answered: 'How can we help
it? Why, even the white folks don't have enough to eat and wear now.'

"Eleven years ago I rented a little farm from. Mr. Jasper Thompson, in Jackson County. After
the boll-weevil got bad I came to the other side of the river yonder, where I stayed 7 years.
By this time most of the children by my first two wives had grown up and gone off up north.
My first wife's children were Robert, Ella, the twins, Julius and Julia Anne, (who died soon
after they were grown-up), and Charlie, and Dan. Robert is in Philadelphia, Ella in Cincinnati,
and Dan is dead.

"Fred, George, and Johnny, my second wife's children are all living, but are scattered in far-off
places.

"Everybody was powerful sorry to hear about Lincoln's assassination. At that time Jefferson
Davis was considered the greatest man that ever lived, but the effect of Lincoln's life and
deeds will live on forever. His life grows greater in reputation with the years and his wisdom
more apparent.

"As long as we were their property our masters were mighty careful to have us doctored up right
when there was the least sign of sickness. There was always some old woman too old for field
work that nursed the sick on the big plantations, but the marsters sent for regular doctors
mighty quick if the patient seemed much sick.

"After the war we were slower to call in doctors because we had no money, and that's how I
lost my good right eye. If I had gone to the doctor when it first got hurt it would have been
all right now. When we didn't have money we used to pay the doctor with corn, fodder, wheat,
chickens, pork, or anything we had that he wanted.

"We learned to use lots of herbs and other home-made remedies during the war when medicine
was scarce at the stores, and some old folks still use these simple teas and poultices. Comfrey
was a herb used much for poultices on risings, boils, and the like, and tea made from it is
said to be soothing to the nerves. Garlic tea was much used for worms, but it was also counted
a good pneumonia remedy, and garlic poultices helped folks to breathe when they had grippe
or pneumonia. Boneset tea was for colds. Goldenrod was used leaf, stem, blossom, and all in
various ways, chiefly for fever and coughs. Black snake root was a good cure for childbed fever,
and it saved the life of my second wife after her last child was born. Slippery ellum was used
for poultices to heal burns, bruises, and any abrasions, and we gargled slippery ellum tea
to heal sore throats, but red oak bark tea was our best sore throat remedy. For indigestion
and shortness of the breath we chewed calamus root or drank tea made from it. In fact, we still
think it is mighty useful for those purposes. It was a long time after the war before there
were any darkies with enough medical education to practice as doctors. Dr. Doyle in Gainesville
was the first colored physician that I ever saw.

"The world seems to be gradually drifting the wrong way, and it won't get any better 'til all
people put their belief--and I mean by that--simple faith, in the Bible. What they like of
it they are in the habit of quoting, but they distort it and try to make it appear to mean
whatever will suit their wicked convenience. They have got to take the whole Bible and live
by it, and they must remember they cannot leave out those wise old laws of the Old Testament
that God gave for men everywhere to live by."

Laney had quietly left the room, but as the visitors were taking their departure she returned
with a small package. "This," she explained, "is some calamus root that I raised and dried
myself, and I hope it comes in handy whenever you ladies need something for the indigestion."

"Next time you come, I hope to have more songs remembered and written down for you," promised
John. The visitor scrambled up the steep incline to the vine covered porch, and a rap on the
front door brought prompt response. "Who dat?" asked a very black woman, who suddenly appeared
in the hall. "What you want?... Yassum, dis here's Addie, but dey calls me Mammy, 'cause I'se
so old. I s'pects I'se most nigh a hunnert and eight years old."

The old Negress is very short and stout. Her dark blue calico dress was striped with lines
of tiny polka dots, and had been lengthened by a band of light blue outing flannel with a darker
blue stripe, let in just below the waist line. Her high-topped black shoes were worn over grey
cotton hose, and the stocking cap that partially concealed her white hair was crowned by a
panama hat that flopped down on all sides except where the brim was fastened up across the
front with two conspicuous "safety-first" pins. Addie's eyesight is poor, and she claims it
was "plum ruint by de St. Vitus's dance," from which she has suffered for many years. She readily
agreed to tell of her early life, and her eyes brightened as she began: "Lawsy, Missy! Is dat
what you come 'ere for? Oh, dem good old days! I was thinkin' 'bout Old Miss jus' t'other day.

"I was borned down in Oconee County on Marse Ike Vinson's place. Old Miss was Marse Ike's mother.
My Mammy and Pappy was Peter and 'Nerva Vinson and dey was both field hands. Marse Ike buyed
my Pappy from Marse Sam Brightwell. Me and Bill, Willis, Maze, Harrison, Easter, and Sue was
all de chillun my Mammy and Pappy had. Dere warn't but four of us big enough to wuk when Marse
Ike married Miss Ann Hayes and dey tuk Mammy wid 'em to dey new home in town. I stayed dar
on de plantation and done lots of little jobs lak waitin' on table; totin' Old Miss' breakfast
to her in her room evvy mornin', and I holped 'tend to de grainery. Dey says now dat folkses
is livin' in dat old grainery house.

"Dat was a be-yootiful place, wid woods, cricks, and fields spread out most as fur as you could
see. De slave quarters would'a reached from here to Milledge Avenue. Us lived in a one-room
log cabin what had a chimbly made out of sticks and mud. Dem homemade beds what us slep' on
had big old high posties wid a great big knob on de top of each post. Our matt'esses was coarse
home-wove cloth stuffed wid field straw. You know I laked dem matt'esses 'cause when de chinches
got too bad you could shake out dat straw and burn it, den scald de tick and fill it wid fresh
straw, and rest in peace again. You can't never git de chinches out of dese cotton matt'esses
us has to sleep on now days. Pillows? What you talkin' 'bout? You know Niggers never had no
pillows dem days, leaseways us never had none. Us did have plenty of kivver dough. Folkses
was all time a-piecin' quilts and having quiltin's. All dat sort of wuk was done at night.

"Pappy's Ma and Pa was Grandma Nancy and Grandpa Jacob. Day was field hands, and dey b'longed
to Marse Obe Jackson. Grandma Lucy and Grandpa Toney Murrah was owned by Marse Billy Murrah.
Marse Billy was a preacher what sho could come down wid de gospel at church. Grandma Lucy was
his cook. Miss Sadie LeSeur got Grandma Lucy and tuk her to Columbus, Georgy, and us never
seed our grandma no more. Miss Sadie had been one of de Vinson gals. She tuk our Aunt Haley
'long too to wait on her when she started out for Europe, and 'fore dey got crost de water,
Aunt Haley, she died on de boat. Miss Sarah, she had a time keepin' dem boatsmens from th'owing
Aunt Haley to de sharks. She is buried in de old country somewhar.

"Now Missy, how was Nigger chillun gwine to git holt of money in slavery time? Old Marse, he
give us plenty of somepin t'eat and all de clothes us needed, but he sho kep' his money for
his own self.

"Now 'bout dat somepin t'eat. Sho dat! Us had plenty of dem good old collards, turnips, and
dem sort of oatments, and dar was allus a good chunk of meat to bile wid 'em. Marse Ike, he
kep' plenty of evvy sort of meat folkses knowed about dem days. He had his own beef cattle,
lots of sheep, and he killed more'n a hunnert hogs evvy year. Dey tells me dat old bench dey
used to lay de meat out on to cut it up is standin' dar yet.

"'Possums? Lawd, dey was plentiful, and dat ain't all dere was on dat plantation. One time
a slave man was 'possum huntin' and, as he was runnin' 'round in de bresh, he looked up and
dar was a b'ar standin' right up on his hind laigs grinnin' and ready to eat dat Nigger up.
Oh, good gracious, how dat Nigger did run! Dey fetched in 'possums in piles, and dere was lots
of rabbits, fixes, and coons. Dem coon, fox and 'possum hounds sho knowed deir business. Lawsy,
I kin jus' smell one of dem good old 'possums roastin' right now, atter all dese years. You
parbiled de 'possum fust, and den roasted him in a heavy iron skillet what had a big old thick
lid. Jus' 'fore de 'possum got done, you peeled ash-roasted 'taters and put 'em all 'round
da 'possum so as day would soak up some of dat good old gravy, and would git good and brown.
Is you ever et any good old ashcake? You wropped de raw hoecake in cabbage or collard leafs
and roasted 'em in de ashes. When dey got done, you had somepin fit for a king to eat.

"De kitchen was sot off a piece from de big house, and our white folkses wouldn't eat deir
supper 'fore time to light de lamps to save your life; den I had to stan' 'hind Old Miss' cheer
and fan her wid a turkey-feather fan to keep de flies off. No matter how rich folkses was dem
days dere warn't no screens in de houses.

"I never will forgit pore old Aunt Mary; she was our cook, and she had to be tapped evvy now
and den 'cause she had de drapsy so bad. Aunt Mary's old man was Uncle Harris, and I 'members
how he used to go fishin' at night. De udder slaves went fishin' too. Many's de time I'se seed
my Mammy come back from Barber's Crick wid a string of fish draggin' from her shoulders down
to de ground. Me, I laked milk more'n anything else. You jus' oughta seed dat place at milkin'
time. Dere was a heap of cows a fightin', chillun hollerin', and sich a bedlam as you can't
think up. Dat old plantation was a grand place for chillun, in summertime 'specially, 'cause
dere was so many branches and cricks close by what us chillun could hop in and cool off.

"Chillun didn't wear nothin' but cotton slips in summer, but de winter clothes was good and
warm. Under our heavy winter dresses us wore quilted underskirts dat was sho nice and warm.
Sunday clothes? Yes Mar'm, us allus had nice clothes for Sunday. Dey made up our summertime
Sunday dresses out of a thin cloth called Sunday-parade. Dey was made spenser fashion, wid
ruffles 'round de neck and waist. Our ruffled petticoats was all starched and ironed stiff
and slick, and us jus' knowed our long pantalettes, wid deir scalloped ruffles, was mighty
fine. Some of de 'omans would wuk fancy eyelets what dey punched in de scallops wid locust
thorns. Dem pantalettes was buttoned on to our drawers. Our Sunday dresses for winter was made
out of linsey-woolsey cloth. White ladies wore hoopskirts wid deir dresses, and dey looked
lak fairy queens. Boys wore plain shirts in summer, but in winter dey had warmer shirts and
quilted pants. Dey would put two pair of britches togedder and quilt 'em up so you couldn't
tell what sort of cloth dey was made out of. Dem pants was called suggins.

"All de Niggers went barfoots in summer, but in winter us all wore brogans. Old Miss had a
shoe shop in de cellar under de big house, and when dem two white 'omans dat she hired to make
our shoes come, us knowed wintertime was nigh. Dem 'omans would stay 'til day had made up shoes
enough to last us all winter long, den dey would go on to de next place what dey s'pected to
make shoes.

"Marse Ike Vinson was sho good to his Niggers. He was de hanger, 'cept he never hung nobody.
Him and Miss Ann had six chillun. Dey was Miss Lucy, Miss Myrt, Miss Sarah, Miss Nettie, Marse
Charlie, and Marse Tom. Marse Ike's ma, Old Miss, wouldn't move to town wid him and Miss Ann;
she stayed on in de big house on de plantation. To tell de truf I done forgot Old Miss' name.
De overseer and his wife was Mr. Edmond and Miss Betsey, and dey moved up to de big house wid
old Miss atter Marse Ike and Miss Ann moved to town. Stiles Vinson was de carriage driver,
and he fotched Marse Ike out to de plantation evvy day. Lord! Gracious alive! It would take
a week to walk all over dat plantation. Dere was more'n a thousand acres in it and, countin'
all de chillun, dere was mighty nigh a hunnert slaves.

"Long 'fore day, dat overseer blowed a bugle to wake up de Niggers. You could hear it far as
High Shoals, and us lived dis side of Watkinsville. Heaps of folkses all over dat part of de
country got up by dat old bugle. I will never forgit one time when de overseer said to us chillun,
'You fellows go to do field and fetch some corn tops.' Mandy said: 'He ain't talkin' to us
'cause us ain't fellows and I ain't gwine.' Bless your sweet life, I runned and got dem corn
tops, 'cause I didn't want no beatin'. Dem udder 'chillun got deir footses most cut off wid
dem switches whan dat overseer got to wuk to sho 'em dey had to obey him. Dat overseer sho
did wuk de Niggers hard; he driv' 'em all de time. Dey had to go to de field long 'fore sunup,
and it was way atter sundown 'fore dey could stop dat field wuk. Den dey had to hustle to finish
deir night wuk in time for supper, or go to bed widout it.

[HW sidenote: Beating]

"You know dey whupped Niggers den. Atter dey had done wukked hard in de fields all day long,
de beatin' started up, and he allus had somepin in mind to beat 'em about. When dey beat my
Aunt Sallie she would fight back, and once when Uncle Randall said somepin he hadn't oughta,
dat overseer beat him so bad he couldn't wuk for a week. He had to be grez all over evvy day
wid hoalin' ointment for a long time 'fore dem gashes got well.

"Rita and Retta was de Nigger 'omans what put pizen in some collards what dey give Aunt Vira
and her baby to eat. She had been laughin' at a man 'cause his coattail was a-flappin' so funny
whilst he was dancin', and dem two Jezebels thought she was makin' fun of dem. At de graveyard,
'fore dey buried her, dey cut her open and found her heart was all decayed. De overseer driv
dem 'omans clear off de plantation, and Marster, he was mighty mad. He said he had done lost
'bout $2,000. If he had kotched dem 'omans he woulda hung 'em, cause he was de hanger. In 'bout
two weeks dat overseer left dar, and Old Marse had to git him anudder man to take his place.

"Sho! Dere was a jail for slaves and a hangin' place right in front of de jail, but none of
Old Marster's Niggers warn't never put in no jailhouse. Oh God! Yes, dey sold slaves. My own
granddaddy was made to git up on dat block, and dey sold him. One time I seed Old Marse buy
four boys." At this point the narrative ceased when Addie suddenly remembered that she must
stop to get supper for the daughter, who would soon be returning from work.

The visitor called early in the morning of the following day, and found Addie bent over her
washtubs in the back yard. "Have dat cheer," was the greeting as the old Negress lifted a dripping
hand to point out a chair under the spreading branches of a huge oak tree, "You knows you don't
want to hear no more 'bout dat old stuff," she said, "and anyhow, is you gittin' paid for doin'
dis?" When the visitor admitted that these interviews were part of her salaried work, Addie
quickly asked: "What is you gwine to give me?"

When the last piece of wash had been hung on the line and Addie had turned a large lard can
upside down for a stool, she settled down and began to talk freely.

"No Ma'm, dey didn't low Niggers to larn how to read and write. I had to go wid de white chillun
to deir school on Hog Mountain road evvy day to wait on 'em. I toted water for 'em kep' de
fire goin', and done all sorts of little jobs lak dat. Miss Martha, de overseer's daughter,
tried to larn me to read and write, but I wouldn't take it in.

"No Ma'm dere warn't no churches for Niggers in slavery time, so slaves had to go to deir white
folkses churches. Us went to church at Betty Berry (Bethabara) and Mars Hill. When time come
for de sermon to de Niggers, sometimes de white folkses would leave and den again dey would
stay, but dat overseer, he was dar all de time. Old man Isaac Vandiver, a Nigger preacher what
couldn't read a word in de Bible, would git up in dat pulpit and talk from his heart. You know
dere's heaps of folkses what's got dat sort of 'ligion--it's deep in deir hearts. De Reverend
Freeman was de white folkses' preacher. I laked him best, for what he said allus sounded good
to me.

"At funerals us used to sing Hark From De Tomb A Doleful Sound. I never went to no funerals,
but Old Marster's and Aunt Nira's, 'fore de end of de war.

"When Old Marster went off to de war, he had all his slaves go to de musterin' ground to see
him leave. He was captain of his company from Oconee County, and 'fore he left he had de mens
in dat company bury deir silver and gold, deir watches, rings, and jus' anything dey wanted
to keep, on Hog Mountain. Ha lef' a guard to watch de hidin' place so as dey would have somepin
when dey come back home, den dey marched back to de musterin' ground dat was twixt de Hopkins'
plantation and Old Marster's place. Uncle Solomon went along to de war to tote Marster's gun,
cook for him, and sich lak. It warn't long 'fore old Marse was kilt in dat war, and Uncle Solomon
fetches him back in a coffin. All de slaves dat went to de buryin' jus' trembled when guns
was fired over Old Marster's grave. Dat was done to show dat Old Marster had been a powerful
high-up man in de army.

"Good Gracious! Dere didn't nary a Nigger go off from our place to de North, 'cause us was
skeered of dem Yankees. Dere was a white slave-trader named McRaleigh what used to come to
Old Marster's plantation to buy up Niggers to take 'em to de Mississippi bottoms. When us seed
him comin' us lit out for de woods. He got Aunt Rachel; you could hear her hollerin' a mile
down de road.

"Oh! Good Lord! Dem patterollers was awful. Folkses what dey cotched widout no paper, dey jus'
plum wore out. Old man John was de fiddler on our place, and when de patterollers cotched him
dey beat him up de wust of all, 'cause him and his fiddle was all de time drawin' Niggers out
to do dances.

"If Old Marster wanted to send a massage he sont Uncle Randall on a mule named Jim. Sometimes
dat old mule tuk a notion he didn't want to go; den he wouldn't budge. I ricollects one time
dey tuk a bundle of fodder and tied it to Old Jim's tail, but still he wouldn't move. Old Marster
kep' a special man to fetch and carry mail for de plantation in a road cyart, and nobody warn't
'lowed to go nigh dat cyart.

"When slaves got in from de fields at night dey cooked and et deir supper and went to bed.
Dey had done been wukin' since sunup. When dere warn't so much to do in de fields, sometimes
Old Marster let his Niggers lay off from wuk atter dinner on Saddays. If de chinches was most
eatin' de Niggers up, now and den de 'omans was 'lowed to stay to de house to scald evvything
and clear 'em out, but de menfolkses had to go on to de field. On Sadday nights de 'omans patched,
washed, and cut off peaches and apples to dry in fruit season. In de daytime dey had to cut
off and dry fruit for Old Miss. When slaves got smart wid deir white folkses, deir Marsters
would have 'em beat, and dat was de end of de matter. Dat was a heap better'n dey does now
days, 'cause if a Nigger gits out of place dey puts him on de chaingang. [TR: 'Whipping' written
in margin.]

"Sunday was a day off for all de slaves on our plantation. Cause, de mens had to look atter
de stock in de lot right back of de cabins. De 'omans cooked all day for de next week. If dey
tuk a notion to go to church, mules was hitched to wagons made lak dippers, and dey jigged
off down de road. Us had four days holiday for Christmas. Old Miss give us lots of good things
to eat dem four days; dere was cake, fresh meat, and all kinds of dried fruit what had been
done stored away. All de Niggers tuk dat time to rest but my Mammy. She tuk me and went 'round
to de white folkses' houses to wash and weave. Dey said I was a right smart, peart little gal,
and white folkses used to try to hire me from Old Miss. When dey axed her for me, Old Miss
allus told 'em: 'You don't want to hire dat gal; she ain't no 'count.' She wouldn't let nobody
hire her Niggers, 'cept Mammy, 'cause she knowed Mammy warn't gwine to leave her nohow. On
New Year's Day, if dere warn't too much snow on de ground, de Niggers burnt brush and cleared
new ground.

"When Aunt Patience led de singin' at cornshuckin's, de shucks sho'ly did fly. Atter de corn
was shucked, dey fed us lots of good things and give us plenty of liquor. De way cotton pickin'
was managed was dis: evvybody dat picked a thousand pounds of cotton in a week's time was 'lowed
a day off. Mammy picked her thousand pounds evvy week.

"Dances? Now you's talkin' 'bout somepin' sho' 'nough. Old John, de fiddler man, was right
dere on our plantation. Niggers dat had done danced half de night would be so sleepy when de
bugle sounded dey wouldn't have time to cook breakfast. Den 'bout de middle of de mawnin' dey
would complain 'bout bein' so weak and hongry dat de overseer would fetch 'em in and have 'em
fed. He let 'em rest 'bout a hour and a half; den he marched 'em back to de field and wuked
'em 'til slap black dark. Aunt Sook was called de lead wench. If de moon warn't out, she put
a white cloth 'round her shoulders and led 'em on.

"Didn't none of Old Marsters chillun marry in slavery time, but Old Miss, she let us see a
Nigger gal named Frances Hester git married. When I sot down to dat weddin' supper I flung
de chicken bones over my shoulder, 'cause I didn't know no better. I don't 'member what gals
played when I was little, but boys played ball all day long if dey was 'lowed to. One boy,
named Sam, played and run so hard he tuk his bed Monday and never got up no more.

"I heared tell of Raw Haid and Bloody Bones. Old folkses would skeer us most nigh to death
tellin' us he was comin'. Mankind! Us made for de house den. Missy, please mam, don't ax me
'bout dem ha'nts. I sees 'em all de time. Atter she had done died out, Old Miss used to come
back all de time. She didn't lak it 'cause day wropped her in a windin' sheet and buried her
by de doorsteps, but I reckon dey done fixed her by now, 'cause she don't come back no more.
Dere's a house in Athens, called de Bell House, dat nobody kin live in, 'cause a man run his
wife from home and atter she died, she come back and ha'nted dat house.

"Lawd have mercy! Look here, don't talk lak dat. I ain't told you before but part o' dis here
yard is conjured. A man comes here early evvy mornin' and dresses dis yard down wid conjuration.
Soon as I sot down here to talk to you, a pain started in my laigs, and it is done gone all
over me now. I started to leave you and go in de house. Come on. Let's leave dis yard right
now. Hurry!" On reaching the kitchen Addie hastily grasped the pepper box and shook its contents
over each shoulder and on her head, saying: "Anything hot lak dis will sho drive dis spell
away. De reason I shakes lak I does, one day I was in de yard and somepin cotch me. It helt
fast to my footses, den I started to shake all over, and I been shakin' ever since. A white
'oman gimme some white soap, and evvy mornin' I washes myself good wid dat soap 'fore I puts
on my clothes."

Leaving the kitchen, Addie entered the front room which serves as a bedroom. "Lawdy, Missy!"
she exclaimed, "Does you smell dat funny scent? Oh, Good Lawd! Jus' look at dem white powders
on my doorstep! Let me git some hot water and wash 'em out quick! Now Missy, see how dese Niggers
'round here is allus up to deir meanness? Dere's a man in de udder room bilin' his pizen right
now. I has to keep a eye on him all de time or dis here old Nigger would be in her grave. I
has to keep somepin hot all de time to keep off dem conjure spells. I got three pids of pepper
most ready to pick, and I'se gwine to tie 'em 'round my neck, den dese here spells folkses
is all de time tryin' to put on me won't do me no harm."

Addie now lowered her voice to a stage whisper. "I found a folded up piece of white paper under
our back doorstep dis very mornin'. Bless your life, I got a stick from de kitchen quick and
poked it in a crack in de steps and got it out 'fore I put my foots down on dem steps. I sho did."

Here Addie reverted to her story of the plantation. "Old Marster was mighty good to his Niggers,"
she said. When any of 'em got sick Old Miss sont to town for him, and he allus come right out
and fetched a doctor. Old Miss done her very best for Pappy when he was tuk sick, but he died
out jus' de same. Pappy used to drive a oxcart and, when he was bad off sick and out of his
haid, he hollered out: 'Scotch dat wheel! Scotch dat wheel!' In his mind, he was deep in de
bad place den, and didn't know how to pray. Old Miss, she would say: 'Pray, Pete, Pray.' Old
Miss made a heap of teas from diff'unt things lak pennyroyal, algaroba wood, sassafras, flat
tobacco, and mullein. Us wore rabbits foots, little bags of asfiddy (asafetida), and garlic
tabs 'round our necks to keep off mis'ries. I wishes I had a garlic tab to wear 'round my neck now.

"One day Old Miss called us togedder and told us dat us was free as jay birds. De Niggers started
hollerin': 'Thank de Lawd, us is free as de jay birds.' 'Bout dat time a white man come along
and told dem Niggers if he heared 'em say dat again he would kill de last one of 'em. Old Miss
axed us to stay on wid her and dar us stayed for 'bout three years. It paid us to stay dere
'stead of runnin' off lak some udder Niggars dat played de fool done. T'warn't long 'fore dem
Yankees come 'long, and us hustled off to town to see what dey looked lak. I never seed so
many mens at one time in my life before. When us got back to de plantation de overseer told
us not to drink no water out of de well, 'cause somebody had done put a peck of pizen in dar.
He flung a whole bushel of salt in de well to help git rid of de pizen.

"Atter de end of de war, I went to wuk as a plow-hand. I sho did keep out of de way of dem
Ku Kluxers. Folkses would see 'em comin' and holler out: 'De Ku Kluxers is ridin' tonight.
Keep out of deir way, or dey will sho kill you.' Dem what was skeered of bein' cotched and
beat up, done deir best to stay out of sight.

"It was a long time atter de war was done over 'fore schools for Niggers was sot up, and den
when Nigger chillun did git to go to school dey warn't 'lowed to use de old blue-back spellin'
book 'cause white folkses said it larn't 'em too much.

"It was two or three years atter de war 'fore any of de Niggers could save up enough money
to start buyin' land, and den, if dey didn't watch dey steps mighty keerful, de white folkses
would find a way to git dat land back from de Niggers.

"What! Is I got to tell you 'bout dat old Nigger I got married up wid? I don't want to talk
'bout dat low down, no 'count devil. Anyhow, I married Ed Griffeth and, sho dat, I had a weddin'.
My weddin' dress was jus' de purtiest thing; it was made out of parade cloth, and it had a
full skirt wid ruffles from de knees to de hem. De waist fitted tight and it was cut lowneck
wid three ruffles 'round de shoulder. Dem puff sleeves was full from de elbow to de hand. All
dem ruffles was aidged wid lace and, 'round my waist I wore a wide pink sash. De underskirt
was trimmed wid lace, and dere was lace on de bottom of de drawers laigs. Dat was sho one purty
outfit dat I wore to marry dat no 'count man in. I had bought dat dress from my young Mist'ess.

"Us had seven chillun and ten grandchillun. Most of 'em is livin' off up in Detroit. If Ed
ain't daid by now he ought to be; he was a good match for de devil.

"I reckon Mr. Lincoln and Mr. Jeff Davis done right as fur as dey knowed how and could. If
dem northern folkses hadn't fotched us here, us sho wouldn't never have been here in de fust
place. Den dey hauled off and said de South was mean to us Niggers and sot us free, but I don't
know no diffunce. De North sho let us be atter dat war, and some of de old Niggers is still
mad 'cause dey is free and ain't got no Marster to feed 'em and give 'em good warm clothes no more.

"Oh! You gits happy when you jines up wid de church. I sho don't want to go to de bad place.
Dere ain't but two places to go to, Heaven and hell, and I'se tryin' to head for Heaven. Folkses
says dat when Old Dives done so bad he had to go to de bad place, a dog was sot at his heels
for to keep him in dar. No Mam, if it's de Good Lawd's will to let me git to Heaven, I is sho
gwine to keep out of hell, if I kin.

"Goodbye, Missy. Next time you comes fetch me a garlic tab to keep de conjure spells 'way from
me," was Addie's parting request. Until the song was ended she quietly waited on the tiny porch
and looked out over the yard which was attractive with roses and other old-fashioned flowers;
then she knocked on the door.

Dragging footsteps and the tap, tap of a crutch sounded as Aunt Emma approached the door. "Come
in out of dat rain, chile, or you sho' will have de pneumony," she said. "Come right on in
and set here by my fire. Fire feels mighty good today. I had to build it to iron de white folkses
clothes." Aunt Emma leaned heavily on her crutch as she wielded the iron with a dexterity attainable
only by long years of experience. Asked if her lameness and use of a crutch made her work difficult,
she grinned and answered: "Lawsy chile, I'se jus' so used to it, I don't never think 'bout
it no more. I'se had to wuk all of my life, no matter what was in de way." The comfort, warmth
and cheer of the small kitchen encouraged intimate conversation and when Aunt Emma was asked
for the story of her childhood days and her recollections of slavery, she replied: "I was too
little to 'member much, but I'se heared my Ma tell 'bout dem days.

"My Pa and Ma was Louis and Mary Jackson. Dey b'longed to Marse John Montgomery, way down in
Oconee County. Marse John didn't have no wife den, 'cause he didn't git married 'til atter
de War. He had a big place wid lots of slaves. He was sho' good to 'em, and let 'em have plenty
of evvything. De slave quarters was log cabins wid big fireplaces, whar dey done de cookin'.
Dey had racks to hang pots on to bile and dey baked in ovens set on de harth (hearth). Dat
was powerful good eatin'. Dey had a big old gyarden whar dey raised plenty of corn, peas, cabbages,
potatoes, collards, and turnip greens. Out in de fields dey growed mostly corn, wheat, and
cotton. Marster kep' lots of chickens, cows, hogs, goats, and sheep; and he fed 'em all mighty
good.

"Marster let his slaves dance, and my Ma was sho' one grand dancer in all de breakdown's. Dey
give 'em plenty of toddy and Niggers is dancers f'um way back yonder while de toddy lasts.

"Slaves went to deir Marster's meetin's and sot in de back of de church. Dey had to be good
den 'cause Marster sho' didn't 'low no cuttin' up 'mongst his Niggers at de church. Ma said
he didn't believe in whuppin' his Niggers lessen it jus' had to be done, but den dey knowed
he was 'round dar when he did have to whup 'em.

"Ma said when dey had big baptizin's in de river dey prayed and shouted and sung 'Washin' 'way
my Sins,'--'Whar de Healin' Water Flows,' and 'Crossin' de River Jerdan.' De white preacher
baptized de slaves and den he preached--dat was all dere was to it 'ceppen de big dinner dey
had in de churchyard on baptizin' days.

"When slaves died, dey made coffins out of pine wood and buried 'em whar de white folkses was
buried. If it warn't too fur a piece to de graveyard, dey toted de coffin on three or four
hand sticks. Yessum, hand sticks, dat's what day called 'em. Dey was poles what dey sot de
coffin on wid a Nigger totin' each end of de poles. De white preacher prayed and de Niggers
sung 'Hark f'um de Tomb.'

"Ma said she had a grand big weddin'. She wore a white swiss dress wid a bleachin' petticoat,
made wid heaps of ruffles and a wreath of flowers 'round her head. She didn't have no flower
gals. Pa had on a long, frock tail, jim swinger coat lak de preacher's wore. A white preacher
married 'em in de yard at de big house. All de Niggers was dar, and Marster let 'em dance mos'
all night.

"I was de oldest of Ma's 10 chillun. Dey done all gone to rest now 'ceptin' jus' de three of
us what's lef in dis world of trouble. Yessum, dere sho' is a heap of trouble here.

"Atter de War, Ma and Pa moved on Mr. Bill Marshall's place to farm for him and dar's whar
I was born. Dey didn't stay dar long 'fore dey moved to Mr. Jim Mayne's place away out in de
country, in de forks of de big road down below Watkinsville. I sho' was a country gal. Yessum,
I sho' was. Mr. Mayne's wife was Mrs. Emma Mayne and she took a lakin' to me 'cause I was named
Emma. I stayed wid her chilluns all de time, slep' in de big house, and et dar too, jus' lak
one of dem, and when dey bought for dey chillun dey bought for me too.

"Us wore homespun dresses and brass toed shoes. Sometimes us would git mighty mad and fuss
over our games and den Miss Emma would make us come in de big house and set down. No Ma'am,
she never did whup us. She was good and she jus' talked to us, and told us us never would git
to Heb'en lessen us was good chillun. Us played games wid blocks and jumped de rope and, when
it was warm, us waded in de crick. Atter I was big 'nough, I tuk de white chillun to Sunday
School, but I didn't go inside den--jus' waited on de outside for 'em. I never got a chanct
to go to school none, but de white chilluns larnt me some.

"Marse Jim was mighty good to de Niggers what wukked for him, and us all loved him. He didn't
'low no patterollers or none of dem Ku Kluxers neither to bother de Niggers on his place. He
said he could look atter 'em his own self. He let 'em have dances, and evvy Fourth of July
he had big barbecues. Yessum, he kilt hogs, goats, sheep and sometimes a cow for dem barbecues.
He believed in havin' plenty to eat.

"I 'members dem big corn shuckin's. He had de mostes' corn, what was in great big piles put
in a circle. All de neighbors was axed to come and bring deir Niggers. De fus' thing to do
was to 'lect a gen'ral to stand in de middle of all dem piles of corn and lead de singin' of
de reels. No Ma'am, I don't 'member if he had no shuck stuck up on his hat or not, and I can't
ricollec' what de words of de reels was, 'cause us chillun was little den, but de gen'ral he
pulled off de fus' shuck. Den he started singin' and den dey all sung in answer to him, and
deir two hands a-shuckin' corn kep' time wid de song. As he sung faster, dey jus' made dem
shucks more dan fly. Evvy time de gen'ral would speed up de song, de Niggers would speed up
deir corn shuckin's. If it got dark 'fore dey finished, us chillun would hold torch lights
for 'em to see how to wuk. De lights was made out of big pine knots what would burn a long
time. Us felt mighty big when us was 'lowed to hold dem torches. When dey got done shuckin'
all de corn, dey had a big supper, and Honey, dem was sho' some good eatments--barbecue of
all sorts--jus' thinkin' 'bout dem pies makes me hongry, even now. Ma made 'em, and she couldn't
be beat on chicken pies and sweet potato pies. Atter dey done et and drunk all dey wanted,
Marse Jim would tell 'em to go to it. Dat was de word for de gen'ral to start up de dancin',
and dat lasted de rest of de night; dat is if dey didn't all fall out, for old time corn shuckin'
breakdowns was drag-outs and atter all dem 'freshments, hit sho' kept somebody busy draggin'
out dem what fell out. Us chillun was 'lowed to stay up long as us wanted to at corn shuckin's,
and sometimes us would git out and try to do lak de grown-up Niggers. Hit was de mos' fun.

"Dey went huntin' and fishin' and when dey cotch or kilt much, dey had a big supper. I 'members
de fus' time I ever cooked 'possum. Ma was sick in de bed, and de mens had done been 'possum
huntin'. Ma said I would jus' have to cook dem 'possums. She told me how to fix 'em and she
said to fix 'em wid potatoes and plenty of butter and red pepper. Den she looked at me right
hard and said dat dey had better be jus' right. Dat skeered me so I ain't never been so I could
eat no 'possum since den. Yessum, dey was cooked jus' right, but cookin' 'em jus' once when
I was skeered cured me of de taste for eatin' 'possum.

"Us chillun didn't git out and go off lak dey does dese days. Us stayed dar on de plantation.
In winter us had to wear plenty of clothes, wid flannel petticoats and sich lak, and us stayed
in by de fire. Big boys had clothes made out of jeans, but little boys wore homespun shirts.
On hot days us jus' wore one piece of clothes, a sort of shirt what was made long and had a
yoke in it.

"Dey made me use snuff to cure my sore eyes when I was little, and I never could quit usin'
it no more. When I was 'bout 15, Ma and Pa moved to Athens and I went to wuk for Mr. Joe Webb's
fambly. I wukked for 'em for 30 years and raised all deir chillun. Dey was all mighty good
to me and seed dat I had plenty of evvything. I would still be dar, but de old folkses all
done died out and gone to dey rest and de younguns done married and lef' here.

"I was wukkin' right in de house wid 'em when I 'cided to git married. Yes Ma'am, I sho' done
had one swell elegant weddin'. Jus' evvything heart could ask for. I married at my Ma's house,
but my white folkses was all right dar, and dey had done fixed de house up pretty wid flowers
all over it. Dey give me my white flannel weddin' dress and it was sho' pretty, but dey warn't
nothin' lackin' 'bout my second day dress. My white folkses bought dat too,--It was a bottle
green silk. Lawsy, but I was sho' one dressed up bride. It was 8 o'clock dat night when de
preacher got finished wid tyin' dat knot for me and Sam Virgel. My sister and her fellow stood
up wid us and us had a big crowd at our weddin' supper. Dere was one long table full of our
white folkses, 'sides all de Niggers, and I jus' never seed so much to eat. My white folkses
said dat Emma jus' had to have plenty for her weddin' feast and dey evermore did lay out good
things for dat supper, and dem Niggers sho' did hide dat chicken and cake away lak dey hadn't
never seed none before.

"I wukked on for de Webbs 'til dey was all gone. De old folks is in Heb'en whar I 'spects to
see 'em some day when de Lord done called me home. De younguns moved away, but I still loves
'em evvyone, 'cause dey looked atter old Emma so good when dey was here. Us never had no chillun
and Sam done been gone to his res' long years ago. I'se jus' a-wukkin and a-waitin 'til I gits
called to go too. I don't have plenty all de time now lak I used to, and nobody here looks
atter old Emma no more, but I makes out.

"I'se mighty glad it rained if dat's what sont you to my door. It's been nice to talk wid white
folkses again. I wisht I had somepin' nice for you! Let me cut you a bunch of my flowers?"
She carefully placed her iron on the hearth and hobbled out in the yard. The May shower had
been followed by sunshine as she handed her guest a huge bouquet of roses, Aunt Emma bowed
low. "Good-bye, Missy," she said, "please come back to see me."

[HW: Dist. 7 Ex-Slave #110] Adella S. Dixon

INTERVIEW WITH RHODUS WALTON, EX-SLAVE, Age 84 [Date Stamp: MAY 8 1937]

Ten years before the Emancipation Proclamation was signed, a son was born to Antony and Patience
Walton who lived in Lumpkin, Stewart County, Ga. When this son, Rhodus, was three weeks old,
his mother, along with the three younger children, was sold. His father and the thirteen sons
and daughters that she left behind were never seen again. His parents' birthplace and the name
they bore before moving to the Walton home are unknown to Rhodus and he never was able to trace
his family even after "freedom."

The Walton plantation, home of Mr. Sam B. Walton who purchased his mother, was a very large
one with the "Big House" on an elevation near the center. The majestic colonial home with its
massive columns was seen for miles around and from its central location the master was able
to view his entire estate.

Approximately one block from the planter's home, the "quarters" were clustered. These were
numerous loghouses with stick-and-clay chimneys in which the slave families dwelt. Each house
was composed of one room sparsely furnished. The beds were corded with rope and as large families
were stressed, it was often necessary for several members to sleep on the floor. There was
an open fireplace at which family meals were prepared. Equipment consisted of an iron pot suspended
by a hanger and a skillet with long legs that enabled the cook to place fire beneath it. Bread
known as "ash cake" was sometimes cooked on the hot coals.

The auction block was located not far from this old home. Here Rhodus Walton with other young
children watched slaves emerge from boxcars, where they had been packed so closely that there
was no room to sit, to be sold to the highest bidder. This was one of his most vivid recollections.

As Rhodus' father did not come to this home with his family, he knows nothing of him. Except
for brief intervals his mother worked in the house where cotton and wool were spun into thread
and then woven into cloth from which the slaves' clothing was made. An elder sister nursed
the master's smaller children. Rhodus' first duties were to drive the cows to and from the
pastures and to keep the calves from annoying the milkers.

His master was a very cruel man whose favorite form of punishment was to take a man (or woman)
to the edge of the plantation where a rail fence was located. His head was then placed between
two rails so that escape was impossible and he was whipped until the overseer was exhausted.
This was an almost daily occurrence, administered on the slightest provocation.

Saturday was the only afternoon off and Christmas was the only vacation period, but one week
of festivities made this season long remembered. Many "frolics" were given and everyone danced
where banjoes were available; also, these resourceful people secured much of their music from
an improvised fiddle fashioned from a hand saw. Immediately after these festivities, preparations
began for spring planting. New ground was cleared; old land fertilized and the corn fields
cleared of last year's rubbish.

Courtship began at a later age than is customary now but they were much more brief. Gifts to
one's sweetheart were not permitted, but verses such as:

  Roses are red,
  Violets blue,
  I don't love
  No one but you

were invariably recited to the loved one. Young negro men always "cocked" their hats on one
side of their heads when they became interested in the other sex. Marriages were performed
by the master. Common law situations did not exist.

Serious illnesses were not frequent and home remedies compounded of roots and herbes usually
sufficed. Queensy's light root, butterfly roots, scurry root, red shank root, bull tongue root
were all found in the woods and the teas made from their use were "cures" for many ailments.
Whenever an illness necessitated the services of a physician, he was called. One difference
in the old family doctor and those of today was the method of treatment. The former always
carried his medicine with him, the latter writes prescriptions. The fee was also much smaller
in olden times.

Food was distributed weekly in quantities according to the size of the family. A single man
would receive:

  1 pk. meal            on Sunday

  1 qt. syrup           flour (seconds)

  3-1/2 lbs. meat       Holidays--July 4th and Christmas
                                  fresh meat.

Peas, pepper grass, polk salad were plentiful in the fields. Milk and "pot likker" could be
had from the big house when desired, although every family cooked for itself. Saturday afternoon
was the general fishing time and each person might catch as many as he needed for his personal use.

The slaves did most of the weaving on the plantation, but after the cloth was woven the problem
of giving it color presented itself. As they had no commercial dye, certain plants were boiled
to give color. A plant called indigo, found in the cotton patch, was the chief type of dye,
although thare was another called copperas. The dresses made from this material were very plain.

Walton believes in most of the old signs and superstitions because he has "watched them and
found that they are true." The continuous singing of a whipporwill near a house is a sign of
death, but if an iron is placed in the fire and allowed to remain there, the bird will fly away.

When the news of the war finally reached the plantation, the slaves followed the progress with
keen interest and when battles were fought near Columbus, and firing of guns was heard, they
cried joyfully--"It ain't gonna be long now." Two of their master's sons fought in the Confederate
Army, but both returned home before the close of the war. One day news came that the Yankee
soldiers were soon to come, and Walton began to hide all valuables. The slaves were sent to
the cemetery to dig very deep graves where all manner of food was stored. They were covered
like real graves and wooden slabs placed at either end. For three days before the soldiers
were expected, all the house servants were kept busy preparing delicacies with which to tempt
the Yankees and thus avoid having their place destroyed. In spite of all this preparation,
they were caught unawares and when the "blue coats" were seen approaching, the master and his
two sons ran. The elder made his way to the woods; the younger made away on "Black Eagle" a
horse reputed to run almost a mile a minute. Nearly everything on the place was destroyed by
these invaders. One bit of information has been given in every interview where Northern soldiers
visited a plantation, they found, before coming, whether the Master was mean or kind and always
treated him as he had treated his slaves. Thus Mr. Walton was "given the works" as our modern
soldiers would say.

When the war ended the slaves were notified that they were free. Just before Rhodus' family
prepared to move, his mother was struck on the head by a drunken guest visiting at the "big
house." As soon as she regained consciousness, the family ran off without communicating with
an elder sister who had been sold to a neighbor the previous year. A year later, news of this
sister reached them through a wagoner who recognized the small boys as he passed them. He carried
the news to the family's new residence back to the lost sister and in a few weeks she arrived
at Cuthbert to make her home with her relatives.

For the past 9 years Rhodus has been unable to work as he is a victim of a stroke on his left
side; both sides have been ruptured, and his nerves are bad. He attributes his long life to
his faith in God.

[HW: Dist. 5 Ex-slave #111 (Ross)]

AN ACCOUNT Of SLAVERY RELATED BY WILLIAM WARD--EX-SLAVE [Date Stamp: 10-8-1937]

In a small one-room apartment located on one of Atlanta's back streets lives William Ward,
an ex-slave, whose physical appearance in no way justifies his claim to being 105 years of
age. He is about five ft. in height with a rather smooth brown complexion. What hair he has
is gray. He moves about like a much younger person. For a person of his age his thoughts and
speech are remarkably clear.

On a bright sunny afternoon in September this writer had an opportunity of talking with Mr.
Ward and in the course of the conversation some very interesting things were learned regarding
the institution of slavery and its customs. Ward took a dip of snuff from his little tin box
and began his story by saying that he is the son of Bill and Leana Ward who were brought to
this country from Jamaica, B.W.I. The first thing he remembers was the falling of the stars
in 1833. From that time until he was 9 years old he played around the yard with other slave
children. Then his parents were sent back to Jamaica by their master, the former Governor Joseph
E. Brown. While he was in bondage he carried the name of his masters instead of Ward, his parents'
name.

From the age of 9 until he was old enough to do heavy work, he kept the master's yard clean.

Although Mr. Brown owned between 50 and 75 slaves, he had no plantation but hired his slaves
out to other men who needed more help but were not able to own as many slaves as their work
required.

Mr. Ward and his fellow slaves lived in one-room houses in the rear of the master's home. The
furnishings consisted of a bed which was known as a "Grand Rascal" due to its peculiar construction.
The mattress made in the form of a large bag was stuffed with hat and dried grass.

At daybreak each morning they were called from these crude beds to prepare for the day's work.
Breakfast, which consisted of white bacon, corn bread, and imitation coffee, was served before
they left for the scene of their day's work. Incidentally the slaves under Mr. Brown's ownership
never had any other form of bread than corn bread.

This imitation coffee was made by putting corn meal in a pan, parching it until it reached
a deep golden brown and steeping it in boiling water. At noon, dinner was brought to them in
the field in wash tubs placed on carts drawn by oxen. Dinner consisted of fat meat, peas and
corn bread. Often all laundry was done in these same tubs.

The only time that this diet ever varied was at Christmas time when the master had all slaves
gathered in one large field. Then several hogs were killed and barbecued. Everyone was permitted
to eat as much as he could, but was forbidden to take anything home. When some one was fortunate
enough to catch a possum or a coon, he had a change of food.

On Sundays the slaves were permitted to have a religious meeting of their own. This usually
took place in the back yard or in a building dedicated for this purpose. They sang spirituals
which gave vent to their true feelings. Many of these songs are sung today. There was one person
who did the preaching. His sermon was always built according to the master's instructions which
were that slaves must always remember that they belonged to their masters and were intended
to lead a life of loyal servitude. None of the slaves believed this, although they pretended
to believe because of the presence of the white overseer. If this overseer was absent sometimes
and the preacher varied in the text of his sermon, that is, if he preached exactly what he
thought and felt, he was given a sound whipping.

Mr. Brown was a kind person and never mistreated his slaves, although he did furnish them with
the whip for infractions of rules such as fighting, stealing, visiting other plantations without
a "pass", etc. Ward vividly recalls that one of the soundest thrashings he ever got was for
stealing Mr. Brown's whisky. His most numerous offenses were fighting. Another form of punishment
used in those days was the stocks, such as those used in early times in England. Serious offenses
like killing another person was also handled by the master who might hang him to a tree by
the feet or by the neck, as he saw fit.

Few slaves ever attempted to escape from Mr. Brown, partially because of his kindliness and
partically because of the fear inspired by the pack of blood hounds which he kept. When an
escaped slave was caught he was returned to his master and a sound beating was administered.

As far as marriage was concerned on the Brown estate, Mr. Brown, himself placed every two individuals
together that he saw fit to. There was no other wedding ceremony. If any children were born
from the union, Mr. Brown named them. One peculiarity on the Brown estate was the fact that
the slaves were allowed no preference or choice as to who his or her mate would be. Another
peculiarity was these married couples were not permitted to sleep together except when the
husband received permission to spend the night with his wife. Ward is the father of 17 children
whose whereabouts he does not know.

At this point Ward began to smile, and when he was asked the cause of his mirth, he replied
that he was thinking about his fellow slaves beliefs in conjuring one another. This was done
by putting some sort of wild berries in the person's food. What he can't understand is why
some of this black magic was not tried on the white people since they were holding the Negroes
as slaves.

Ward recalls vividly Sherman's march through Georgia. When Sherman reached the present site
of Hapeville, he bombarded Atlanta with cannon, afterwards marching through and burning the
city. The white residents made all sorts of frantic attempts to hide their money and other
valuables. Some hiding places were under stumps of trees and in sides of hills. Incidentally
Sherman's army found quite a bit of the hidden wealth. Slaves were never allowed to talk over
events and so very few, if any, knew about the war or its results for them before it actually
happened. At the time that Sherman marched through Atlanta, Ward and other slaves were living
in an old mansion at the present site of Peachtree and Baker Streets. He says that Sherman
took him and his fellow slaves as far as Virginia to carry powder and shot to the soldiers.
He states that he himself did not know whether Sherman intended to keep him in slavery or free
him. At the close of the war, his master, Mr. Brown, became ill and died later. Before His
death he informed the slaves that they could remain on his property or go where they wanted
to. Ward was taken to Mississippi where he remained in another form of slavery (Peonage System)
for 40 years. He remembers when Atlanta was just a few hills without any buildings. Some of
the buildings he worked on are the Herman Building and the original Kimball House, a picture
of which is attached.

He attributes his old age to his belief in God and living a sane life. Whenever he feels bad
or in low spirits, a drink of coffee or a small amount of whisky is enough to brace him. He
believes that his remedy is better than that used in slavery which consisted mainly of pills
and castor oil.

With a cheerful good-bye, Ward asked that the writer stop in to see him again; said that he
would rather live in the present age under existing conditions than live in slavery.

Driskell JWL 10-12-37

[MR. WILLIAM WARD]

Following is Mr. William Ward's description of the bed called "The Grand Rascal."

"De beds dat all o' de slaves slept in wus called 'Grand Rascals'. Dey wus made on de same
order as a box. De way dey made 'em wus like dis: dey took four strips of narrow wood, each
one of 'em 'bout a foot wide, an' den dey nailed 'em together so dat dey wus in de shape of
a square. Den dey nailed a bottom onto dis square shape. Dis bottom wus called de slats. When
dis wus finished dey set dis box on some legs to keep it off'n de floor, an' den dey got busy
wid de mattress. Dey took ol' oat sacks an' filled 'em wid straw an' hay an' den dey put dis
in de box an' slept on it. Dere wusn't no springs on dese bunks an' everybody had a hard time
sleepin'.

"De real name of dese wus 'Sonova-Bitches' but de slaves called 'em 'Grand Rascals' 'cause
dey didn't want people to hear 'em use a bad word.

"After Sherman come through Atlanta he let de slaves go, an' when he did, me an' some of de
other slaves went back to our ol' masters. Ol' man Gov. Brown wus my boss man. After de war
wus over Ol' man Gordon took me an' some of de others out to Mississippi. I stayed in peonage
out dere fer 'bout forty years. I wus located at jes' 'bout forty miles south of Greenwood,
an' I worked on de plantations of Ol' man Sara Jones an' Ol' man Gordon.

"I couldn't git away 'cause dey watched us wid guns all de time. When de levee busted dat kinda
freed me. Man, dey was devils; dey wouldn't 'low you to go nowhere--not even to church. You
done good to git sumpin' to eat. Dey wouldn't give you no clothes, an' if you got wet you jes'
had to lay down in whut you got wet in.

"An', man, dey would whup you in spite of de devil. You had to ask to git water--if you didn't
dey would stretch you 'cross a barrel an' wear you out. If you didn't work in a hurry dey would
whup you wid a strap dat had five-six holes in it. I ain't talkin' 'bout whut I heard--I'm
talkin' 'bout whut I done see'd.

"One time dey sent me on Ol' man Mack Williams' farm here in Jasper County, Georgia. Dat man
would kill you sho. If dat little branch on his plantation could talk it would tell many a
tale 'bout folks bein' knocked in de head. I done seen Mack Williams kill folks an' I done
seen 'im have folks killed. One day he tol' me dat if my wife had been good lookin', I never
would sleep wid her again 'cause he'd kill me an' take her an' raise chilluns off'n her. Dey
uster take women away fum dere husbands an' put wid some other man to breed jes' like dey would
do cattle. Dey always kept a man penned up an' dey used 'im like a stud hoss.

"When you didn't do right Ol' Mack Williams would shoot you or tie a chain 'roun your neck
an' throw you in de river. He'd git dem other niggers to carry dem to de river an' if dey didn't
he'd shoot 'em down. Any time dey didn't do whut he said he would shoot 'em down. He'd tell
'em to "Ketch dat nigger", an' dey would do it. Den he would tell 'em to put de chain 'roun
dere neck an' throw 'em in de river. I ain't heard dis--I done seen it.

"In 1927 I wus still in peonage but I wus back in Mississippi on Gordon's farm. When de levee
broke in May of dat same year I lost my wife an' three chilluns. I climbed a tree an' stayed
dere fer four days an' four nights. Airplanes dropped food an' when I got ready to eat I had
to squeeze de water out of de bread. After four days I got out of de tree an' floated on logs
down de river 'till I got to Mobile, Alabama, an' I wade fum dere to Palmetto, Georgia, where
I got down sick. De boss mans dere called Gov. Harden an' he sent de Grady Hospital examiners
down dere an' got me an' I been in Atlanta since dat time."

Willie H. Cole 10-8-37

THE STORY OF AN EX-SLAVE [MRS. LULA WASHINGTON, Age 84]

Mrs. Lula Washington was born a slave. She claims to be eighty-four years old.

Mrs. Washington was confined to bed because of a recent accident in which she received a broken
leg.

She is the mother of twenty-three children of which only two are living. She lives in one room
at 64 Butler St., N.E. with one of her daughters. Since the death of her husband several years
ago she has been making her living as a dray-women, driving a mule and wagon.

Following are some of the events she remembers. "Ah wuz born in Randolph, Alabama on de plantation
of Marster John Terrell, de sixth child of my mammy and pappy".

"When ah wuz six years old marster John sold me an' my sister, Lize and brother, Ben to Marster
Charlie Henson."

"Marster Charlie wuz good to his niggers.

"He never whipped dem 'less dey done somethin' awful bad, like stealin chickens or slipping
off de plantation without permission."

"It wuz funny, de white folks would whipped de niggers for stealin' but if dey saw a hog in
de woods, dey would make the niggers catch de hog an kill him an hide him under dey bushes.
Den at night de niggers would hafta' go down to de spring, build a fire, heat water an skin
de hog."

"De man on de plantation next to us' shore wuz mean to his niggers, Marster Jim Roberts wus
his name. He would take his niggers an strip there clothes to dere waist an' lay dem 'cross
a barrel an beat dem 'til the blood run. Den he would pore salt water on de sore places."

"Oh 'member one time he tied two wimmen by dere thumbs to a limb of a tree for blessin' out
the missus."

"Us had plenty to eat and plenty to wear, calico dresses an' brogan shoes. Sometimes dere misses
would give the wimmen some of her old clothes".

"All de niggers on Marster Charlie's plantation had to work in de field 'cept Malindy Lu, a
Mulatto nigger gal. Marster Charlie kept her in de house to take care of Missus Jane, dat wuz
Marster Charlie wife."

"One thing 'bout de mulatto niggers, wuz, dey thought dey wuz better than de black niggers.
I guess it wuz 'cause dey was half white. Dere wuz a bad feelin' 'tween the mulatto slaves
an de black ones."

Asked, how did the slaves marry? She replied, "Ah jest don't 'member seeing any marry 'cause
ah wuz so small. Ah wuz jest eleven years old de time of de war but ah' members hearing some
of dem say dat when two slaves wanted to git married dey would hafta get permission from dere
marster. Den dey would come 'fore de marster an' he would have dem to jump over a broom an
den 'nounce dem married."

"When de Yankees come thru" de white folks told us to go down to de swamp an hide cause dey
would git us. When de war wuz over de white folks told us we wuz free."

"Marster Terrell gave my mammy an pappy a oxcart an mule an a bushel of meal. Den my pappy
an mammy come got me an my sister an' brother. Den we come from Randolph, Alabama to Georgia."

"Sometimes I wish I wuz back in slavery, times is so hard."

Mrs. Washington's chief concern now is getting her old-age pension.

As the visitor carefully ascended the shaky steps to his house a mulatto man, who was sitting
on the veranda, quickly arose. "Good morning," he said, "Yes mam, this is Green Willbanks.
Have a seat in the swing." The porch furniture was comprised of a chair, a swing, and a long
bench. Green is tall, slender, and stooped; a man with white hair and grizzled face. A white
broadcloth shirt, white cotton trousers, blue socks, and low-cut black shoes made up his far
from immaculate costume.

The old man's eyes brightened when he was asked to give the story of his life. His speech showed
but little dialect, except when he was carried away by interest and emotion, and his enunciation
was remarkably free from Negroid accent.

"I don't mind telling you what I know," he began, "but I was such a little chap when the war
ended that there's mighty little I can recollect about slavery time, and it seems that your
chief interest is in that period. I was born on a plantation the other side of Commerce, Georgia,
in Jackson County. My Ma and Pa were Mary and Isom Willbanks; they were raised on the same
plantation where I was born. Ma was a field hand, and this time of the year when work was short
in the field--laying-by time, we called it--and on rainy days she spun thread and wove cloth.
As the thread left the spinning wheel it went on a reel where it was wound into hanks, and
then it was carried to the loom to be woven into cloth. Pa had a little trade; he made shoes
and baskets, and Old Boss let him sell them. Pa didn't make shoes for the slaves on our plantation;
Old Boss bought them ready-made and had them shipped here from the West.

"Me and Jane, Sarah, Mitchell, and Willie were the five children in our family. Oh! Miss, I
was not big enough to do much work. About the most I done was pick up chips and take my little
tin bucket to the spring to get a cool, fresh drink for Old Miss. Us children stayed 'round
the kitchen and drunk lots of buttermilk. Old Miss used to say, 'Give my pickaninnies plenty
of buttermilk.' I can see that old churn now; it helt about seven or eight gallons.

"Our houses? Slaves lived in log cabins built the common way. There was lots of forest pine
in those days. Logs were cut the desired length and notches put in each end so they would fit
closely and have as few cracks as possible, when they stacked them for a cabin. They sawed
pine logs into blocks and used a frow to split them into planks that were used to cover the
cracks between the logs. Don't you know what a frow is? That's a wooden wedge that you drive
into a pine block by hitting it with a heavy wooden mallet, or maul, as they are more commonly
called. They closed the cracks in some of the cabins by daubing them with red mud. The old
stack chimneys were made of mud and sticks. To make a bed, they first cut four posts, usually
of pine, and bored holes through them with augers; then they made two short pieces for the
head and foot. Two long pieces for the sides were stuck through the auger holes and the bedstead
was ready to lay on the slats or cross pieces to hold up the mattress. The best beds had heavy
cords, wove crossways and lengthways, instead of slats. Very few slaves had corded beds. Mattresses
were not much; they were made of suggin sacks filled with straw. They called that straw 'Georgia
feathers.' Pillows were made of the same things. Suggin cloth was made of coarse flax wove
in a loom. They separated the flax into two grades; fine for the white folks, and coarse for
the Negroes.

"The only one of my grandparents I can bring to memory now is Grandma Rose on my Pa's side.
She was some worker, a regular man-woman; she could do any kind of work a man could do. She
was a hot horse in her time and it took an extra good man to keep up with her when it came to work.

"Children were not allowed to do much work, because their masters desired them to have the
chance to grow big and strong, and therefore they had few opportunities to earn money of their
own. I never did own any money during slavery days, but I saw plenty of ten cent greenbacks
(shinplasters).

"White children and slave children played around the plantation together but they were not
allowed to fight. They had to be on friendly terms with each other.

"What about our food? The biggest thing we had was buttermilk, some sweet milk, and plenty
of cornbread, hog meat, and peas. As a rule we had wheat bread once a week, usually on Sunday.
All kinds of fruits were plentiful in their seasons. Each slave family was permitted to have
separate garden space, in fact, Old Boss insisted that they work their own gardens, and they
raised plenty of vegetables. Grown folks had rabbits and 'possums but I never did get much
'quainted with them. We fished in the cricks and rills 'round the plantation and brought in
lots of hornyheads and perch. You never saw any hornyheads? Why they is just fish a little
bigger and longer than minnows and they have little horns on their heads. We caught a good
many eels too; they look like snakes, but folks call them eels. I wasn't much 'quainted with
them fish they brought from way down South; they called them mullets.

"The kitchen was a separate log house out in the back yard. The fireplace, where the cooking
was done, took up one end of the kitchen, and there was a rack acrost it to hang the cook-pots
on for biling. Baking and frying was done in ovens and heavy iron skillets that sat on trivets
so coals could be piled underneath, as well as over the lids.

"The long shirts slave boys wore in summer were straight like a meal sack open at both ends,
with holes in the sides for your arms to go through. You stuck your head in one end and it
came out the other; then you were fully dressed for any whole summer day. These summer shirts
were made of thin osnaburg. Our winter clothes were made of woolen cloth called merino. Old
Boss kept enough sheep to provide plenty of wool and some mighty good food. Slave children
had no extra or special clothes for Sunday; they wore the same kind of gowns, or long shirts,
seven days a week. Old Boss provided brass-toed brogans for winter, but we never thought of
such a thing as shoes to wear in hot weather.

"My owners were Marse Solomon and his wife, Miss Ann Willbanks. We called them Old Boss and
Old Miss. As I saw it, they were just as good as they could be. Old Boss never allowed nobody
to impose on his slave children. When I was a little chap playing around the big house, I would
often drop off to sleep the minute I got still. Good Old Boss would pick me up and go lay me
on his own bed and keep me there 'til Ma come in from the field.

"Old Boss and Old Miss had five children. The boys were Solomon, Isaac, James, and Wesley.
For the life of me I can't bring to memory the name of their only daughter. I guess that's
because we frolicked with the four boys, but we were not allowed to play with Little Miss.

"It was a right decent house they lived in, a log house with a fine rock chimney. Old Boss
was building a nice house when the war come on and he never had a chance to finish it. The
log house was in a cedar grove; that was the style then. Back of the house were his orchards
where fruit trees of every kind we knew anything about provided plenty for all to eat in season
as well as enough for good preserves, pickles, and the like for winter. Old Boss done his own
overseeing and, 'cording to my memory, one of the young bosses done the driving.

"That plantation covered a large space of land, but to tell you how many acres is something
I can't do. There were not so many slaves. I've forgot how they managed that business of getting
slaves up, but I do know we didn't get up before day on our place. Their rule was to work slaves
from sunup to sundown. Before they had supper they had a little piddlin' around to do, but
the time was their own to do as they pleased after they had supper. Heaps of times they got
passes and went off to neighboring plantations to visit and dance, but sometimes they went
to hold prayer-meetings. There were certain plantations where we were not permitted to go and
certain folks were never allowed on our place. Old Boss was particular about how folks behaved
on his place; all his slaves had to come up to a certain notch and if they didn't do that he
punished them in some way or other. There was no whipping done, for Old Boss never did believe
in whipping slaves.

"None of the slaves from our place was ever put in that county jail at Jefferson. That was
the only jail we ever heard of in those days. Old Boss attended to all the correction necessary
to keep order among his own slaves. Once a slave trader came by the place and offered to buy
Ma. Old Boss took her to Jefferson to sell her on the block to that man. It seemed like sales
of slaves were not legal unless they took place on the trading block in certain places, usually
in the county site. The trader wouldn't pay what Old Boss asked for her, and Old Miss and the
young bosses all objected strong to his selling her, so he brought Ma back home. She was a
fine healthy woman and would have made a nice looking house girl.

"The biggest part of the teaching done among the slaves was by our young bosses but, as far
as schools for slaves was concerned, there were no such things until after the end of the war,
and then we were no longer slaves. There were just a few separate churches for slaves; none
in our part of the country. Slaves went to the same church as their white folks and sat in
the back of the house or in a gallery. My Pa could read the Bible in his own way, even in that
time of slavery; no other slave on our place could do that.

"Not one slave or white person either died on our plantation during the part of slavery that
I can bring to memory. I was too busy playing to take in any of the singing at funerals and
at church, and I never went to a baptizing until I was a great big chap, long after slavery
days were over.

"Slaves ran off to the woods all right, but I never heard of them running off to no North.
Paterollers never came on Old Boss' place unless he sont for them, otherwise they knowed to
stay off. They sho was devils in sheeps' clothing; that's what we thought of them paterollers.
Slaves worked all day Saddays when there was work to be done, but that night was their free
time. They went where they pleased just so Old Boss gave them a pass to protect them from paterollers.

"After slaves went to church Sunday they were free the rest of the day as far as they knowed.
Lots of times they got 'em a stump speaker--usually a Negro--to preach to them. There were
not as many preachers then as now.

"'Bout Christmas Day? They always had something like brandy, cider, or whiskey to stimulate
the slaves on Christmas Day. Then there was fresh meat and ash-roasted sweet 'taters, but no
cake for slaves on our place, anyhow, I never saw no cake, and surely no Santa Claus. All we
knowed bout Christmas was eating and drinking. As a general thing there was a big day's work
expected on New Years Day because we had to start the year off right, even if there was nothing
for the slaves to do that day but clean fence corners, cut brush and briers, and burn off new
ground. New Years Day ended up with a big old pot of hog jowl and peas. That was for luck,
but I never really knowed if it brought luck or not.

"Well, yes, once a year they had big cornshuckings in our section and they had generals to
lead off in all the singing; that was done to whoop up the work. My Pa was one of the generals
and he toted the jug of liquor that was passed 'round to make his crowd hustle. After the corn
was shucked the crowd divided into two groups. Their object was to see which could reach the
owner of the corn first and carry him where he wanted to go. Usually they marched with him
on their shoulders to his big house and set him down on his porch, then he would give the word
for them to all start eating the good things spread out on tables in the yard. There was a
heap of drinking done then, and dancing too--just all kinds of dancing that could be done to
fiddle and banjo music. My Pa was one of them fiddlers in his young days. One of the dances
was the cotillion, but just anybody couldn't dance that one. There was a heap of bowing and
scraping to it, and if you were not 'quainted with it you just couldn't use it.

"When any of the slaves were bad sick Old Boss called in his own family doctor, Dr. Joe Bradbury.
His plantation hit up against ours. The main things they gave for medicine them days was oil
and turpentine. Sometimes folks got black snakeroot from the woods, biled it, and gave the
tea to sick folks; that was to clean off the stomach. Everybody wore buckeyes 'round their
necks to keep off diseases for we never knowed nothing about asefetida them days; that came later.

"When the Yankees came through after the surrender Old Boss and Old Miss hid their valuables.
They told us children, 'Now, if they ask you questions, don't you tell them where we hid a
thing.' We knowed enough to keep our mouths shut. We never had knowed nothing but to mind Old
Boss, and we were scared 'cause our white folks seemed to fear the Yankees.

"Old Boss had done told slaves they were free as he was and could go their own way, but we
stayed on with him. He provided for Pa and give him his share of the crops he made. All of
us growed up as field hands.

"Them night-riders were something else. They sho did beat on Negroes that didn't behave mighty
careful. Slaves didn't buy much land for a long time after the war because they didn't have
no money, but schools were set up for Negroes very soon. I got the biggest part of my education
in West Athens on Biggers Hill. When I went to the Union Baptist School my teacher was Professor
Lyons, the founder of that institution.

"When me and Molly Tate were married 50 years ago we went to the church, because that was the
cheapest place to go to have a big gathering. Molly had on a common, ordinary dress. Folks
didn't dress up then like they does now; it was quite indifferent. Of our 10 children, 8 are
living now and we have 14 grandchildren. Six of our children live in the North and two have
remained here in Athens. One of them is employed at Bernstein's Funeral Home and the other
works on the university campus. I thanks the Lord that Molly is still with me. We bought this
place a long time ago and have farmed here ever since. In fact, I have never done nothing but
farm work. Now I'm too old and don't have strength to work no more.

"I thinks Abraham Lincoln was a all right man; God so intended that we should be sot free.
Jeff Davis was all right in his way, but I can't say much for him. Yes mam, I'd rather be free.
Sho! Give me freedom all the time. Jesus said: 'If my Son sets you free, you shall be free indeed.'

"When I jined the church, I felt like I was rid of my burden. I sot aside the things I had
been doing and I ain't never been back to pick 'em up no more. I jined the Baptist church and
have been teaching a class of boys every Sunday that I'm able to go. I sho am free from sin
and I lives up to it.

"I wonder if Molly's got them sweet 'taters cooked what I dug this morning. They warn't much
'count 'cause the sun has baked them hard and it's been so dry. If you is through with me,
I wants to go eat one of them 'taters and then lay this old Nigger on the bed and let him go
to sleep." My mother was born at Mt. Airy, North Carolina, near the Virginia line, and always
went to school, across the line, in Virginia. Her grandfather was John Taliaferro, slave holder,
tobacco raiser, and farmer. The Negro quarters were near the main or Big House. Mother said
that great-grandfather would go to the back door each night and call every slave to come in
for family prayer. They came and knelt in the Big House, while old marster prayed. Mother said
it was like a camp-meeting when he died--wailing and weeping by the Negroes for their old Marster.
She said the slaves had the same food that the white family had and the same warm clothes for
winter. All clothing, bed sheeting, table linen, towels, etc. were hand woven. They raised
sheep for wool, and flax for linen, but I don't know where they got the cotton they used. The
work of the house and farm was divided as with a big family. Some of the women cooked, sewed,
wove, washed, milked, but was never sent to the field. None of the Toliver family believed
in women working in the field. When each of great-grandfather's children married, he or she
was given a few slaves. I think he gave my grandfather, Dickerson Taliaferro, three slaves,
and these he brought with him to Georgia when they settled in Whitfield County.

My grandfather was a member of the Legislature from Whitfield County for two terms. He was
as gentle with his slaves as a father would have been, and was never known to abuse one of
them. One of his slaves, who was a small boy at the close of the War, stayed with my grandfather
until he was a grown man, then after a few years away from home, came home to old Marster to
die. This is the picture of good slave holders, but sad to say all were not of that type. [TR:
deleted: 'See next sheet for'] a picture of horror, which was also told me by my mother. [TR:
deleted: 'The thought of it'] was like a nightmare to my childish mind.

The Story of little Joe.

[TR: deleted: 'Mother said there were'] two families lived on farms adjacent to her father.
They were the two Tucker brothers, tobacco raisers. One of the wives, Polly, or Pol, as she
was called, hated the family of her husband's brother because they were more affluent than
she liked them to be. It [HW: Her jealousy] caused the two families to live in disagreement.

Little Joe belonged to Pol's family, and was somewhere between ten and fourteen years old.
Mother said Pol made Joe work in the field at night, and forced him to sing so they would know
he wasn't asleep. He wore nothing in summer but an old shirt made of rough factory cloth which
came below his knees. She said the only food Pol would give him was swill [HW: scraps] from
the table--handed to him out the back door. Mother said Pol had some kind of impediment in
her speech, which caused her to say 'ah' at the close of a sentence. So, when she called Joe
to the back door to give him his mess of scraps, she would say, "Here, Joe, here's your truck,
ah." Mother was a little girl then, and she and grandmother felt so sorry for Joe that they
would bake baskets of sweet potatoes and slip [TR: 'to the field to give him' replaced with
illegible text ending 'in the field']. She said he would come through the corn, almost crawling,
so Pol wouldn't see him, and take the sweet potatoes in the tail of his shirt and scuttle back
through the tall stuff where he might hide and eat it them.

She had a Negro woman who had a baby (and there may have been other women) but this Negro woman
was not allowed to see her baby except just as a cow would be let in to her calf at certain
times during the day, [TR: 'then' replaced by ??] she had to go to the field and leave it alone.
Mother said that Pol either threw or kicked the baby into the yard because it cried, and it
died. I don't know why the authorities didn't arrest her, but she may have had an alibi, or
some excuse for the death of the child.

The Burning of the Tobacco Barn

The [HW: other] Tucker brother had made a fine crop of tobacco that year, more than a thousand
dollars worth in his big barn. Pol made one of her slaves go with her, [HW: when] and she set
fire to the tobacco barn of her brother-in-law's barn, and not being able to get away [HW:
unable to escape] before the flames [HW: brought] a crowd, she hid in the grass, right near
the path where the people were running to the fire. She had some kind of stroke, perhaps from
fright, or pure deviltry which 'put her out of business'. I wish I could remember whether it
killed her or just made a paralytic of her, but this is a true story. There was no front yard
and the front steps led up from the sidewalk into the house. A vegetable garden was visible
at the rear of the lot. The plump sweeper appeared to be about five feet tall. Her wooly white
hair was plaited in tiny braids, and she wore a brown print dress trimmed in red and blue.
A strand of red beads encircled her short neck, and a blue checked coat and high topped black
shoes completed her costume. Asked if Frances Willingham was at home, the woman replied: "Dis
is her you is a-talkin' to. Come right in and have a seat."

When Frances was asked for the story of her life, her daughter who had doubtless been eavesdropping,
suddenly appeared and interrupted the conversation with, "Ma, now don't you git started 'bout
dem old times. You knows your mind ain't no good no more. Tomorrow your tongue will be runnin'
lak a bell clapper a-talkin' to yourself." "Shut your big mouth, Henrietta." Frances answered.
"I been sick, and I knows it, but dere ain't nothin' wrong wid my mind and you knows it. What
I knows I'se gwine to tell de lady, and what I don't know I sho' ain't gwine tell no lie about.
Now, Missus, what does you want to know? Don't pay no 'tention to dis fool gal of mine 'cause
her mouth is big as dis room.

"I was born way off down in Twiggs County 'bout a mile from de town of Jeffersonville. My Pa
and Ma was Otto and Sarah Rutherford. Our Mist'ess, dat was Miss Polly, she called Ma, Sallie
for short. Dere was nine of us chillun, me and Esau, Harry, Jerry, Bob, Calvin, Otto, Sallie
and Susan. Susan was our half-sister by our Pa's last marriage. Us chillun never done much
but play 'round de house and yards wid de white chillun. I warn't but four years old when dey
made us free." Henrietta again interrupted, "See dere, I told you she don't know what she's
a-talkin' 'bout."

Frances ignored the interruption and continued: "Us lived in log cabins what had jus' one room
wid a stick and mud chimbly at de end. Our bedsteads was made out of rough planks and poles
and some of 'em was nailed to de sides of de cabins. Mattress ticks was made out of osnaburg
and us filled 'em wid wheat straw in season. When dat was used up us got grass from de fields.
Most any kind of hay was counted good 'nough to put in a slave's mattress. Dey let us mix some
cotton wid de hay our pillows was stuffed wid.

"My grandmas lived on another plantation. I 'members once Grandma Suck, she wes my Ma's mammy,
come to our house and stayed one or two days wid us. Daddy's Ma was named Puss. Both my grandmas
was field hands, but Ma, she was a house gal 'til she got big enough to do de cyardin' and
spinnin'. Aunt Phoebie done de weavin' and Aunt Polly was de seamster. All de lak of dat was
done atter de craps was done laid by.

"No Ma'am, nobody never give slave chillun no money in dem times. I never had none 'til atter
us had done been give our freedom. I used to see Old Marster countin' of it, but de slaves
never did git none of dat money.

"Our Old Marster was a pow'ful rich man, and he sho' b'lieved in givin' us plenty to eat. It
warn't nothin' fine, but it was good plain eatin' what filled you up and kept you well. Dere
was cornbread and meat, greens of all sorts, 'taters, roas'en-ears and more other kinds of
veg'tables dan I could call up all day. Marster had one big old gyarden whar he kept most evvything
a-growin' 'cept cabbages and 'matoes. He said dem things warn't fittin' for nobody to eat.
Marster let Daddy go huntin' enough to fetch in lots of 'possums, coons, rabbits, and squirrels.
Us cooked 'em 'bout lak us does now, only us never had no stoves den, and had to do all de
cookin' in open fireplaces in big old pots and long handled skillets what had big old heavy
lids. I'se seed Ma clean many a 'possum in hot ashes. Den she scalded him and tuk out his innards.
She par-boiled and den baked him and when she fetched him to de table wid a heap of sweet 'taters
'round him on de dish, dat was sho' somepin good to eat. Daddy done his fishin' in Muddy Crick
'cause slaves wern't 'lowed to leave de plantation for nothin' lak dat.

"Summertimes us wore homespun dresses, made wid full skirts sewed on to tight fittin' waisties
what was fastened down de back wid buttons made out of cows and rams horns. Our white petticoat
slips and pantalettes was made on bodices. In winter us wore balmorals what had three stripes
'round de bottom, and over dem us had on long sleeved ap'ons what was long as de balmorals.
Slave gals' pantalettes warn't ruffled and tucked and trimmed up wid lace and 'broidery lak
Miss Polly's chilluns' was. Ours was jus' made plain. Grown folks wore rough brogans, but me,
I wore de shoes what Miss Polly's chillun had done outgrowed. Dey called 'em Jackson shoes,
'cause dey was made wid a extra wide piece of leather sewed on de outside so as when you knocked
your ankles 'gainst one another, it wouldn't wear no holes in your shoes. Our Sunday shoes
warn't no diffunt from what us wore evvyday.

[TR: HW sidenote: 'durable', regarding Jackson Shoes]

"Marse Lish Jones and his wife--she was Miss Polly--was our Marster and Mist'ess. Dey sho'
did love to be good to deir little Niggers. Dey had five chillun of deir own, two gals and
three boys. Dey was: Mary, Anna Della, Steve, John, and Bob. 'Bout deir house! Oh, Missus,
dat was somepin to see for sho'. It was a big old fine two-story frame house wid a porch 'cross
de front and 'round both sides. Dere was five rooms on de fust floor and three upstairs. It
sho' did look grand a-settin' back dar in dat big old oak grove.

"Old Marster had a overseer but he never had no car'iage driver 'cause he loved to drive for
hisself so good. Oh Lord! How big was dat plantation? Why, it must have been as big as from
here to town. I never did know how many slaves Marster had, but dat old plantation was plumb
full of 'em. I ain't never seed Old Marster do nothin' 'cept drive his car'iage, walk a little,
and eat all he wanted to. He was a rich man, and didn't have to do nothin'.

"Our overseer got all de slaves up 'fore break of day and dey had to be done et deir breakfast
and in de field when de sun riz up. Dat sun would be down good 'fore dey got to de house at
night. I never seed none of de grown folks git whupped, but I sho' got a good beatin' myself
one time. I had done got up on top of de big house porch and was a-flappin' my arms and crowin'
lak a rooster. Dey told me to come on down, but I wouldn't mind nobody and kept on a-crowin'
and a-flappin', so dey whupped me down.

"Dey had jails in Jeffersonville, but dem jails was for white folks what didn't be-have deirselfs.
Old Marster, de overseer, and de patterollers kept de slaves straight. Dey didn't need no jails
for dem.

"I ain't never been to school a day in my life, 'cause when I was little, Niggers warn't 'lowed
to larn to read and write. I heared Ma say de colored preacher read out of de Bible, but I
never seed him do it, 'cause I never went to church none when I was a chap. Colored folks had
deir own church in a out settlement called John De Baptist. Dat's whar all de slaves went to
meetin'. Chilluns was 'lowed to go to baptizin's. Evvybody went to 'em. Dey tuk dem converts
to a hole in de crick what dey had got ready for dat purpose. De preacher went fust, and den
he called for de converts to come on in and have deir sins washed away.

"Our Marster sot aside a piece of ground 'long side of his own place for his Niggers to have
a graveyard. Us didn't know nothin' 'bout no fun'rals. When one of de slaves died, dey was
put in unpainted home-made coffins and tuk to de graveyard whar de grave had done been dug.
Dey put 'em in dar and kivvered 'em up and dat was all dey done 'bout it.

"Us heared a plenty 'bout patterollers beatin' up Niggers what dey cotched off deir Marsters'
plantations widout no passes. Sometimes dey cotched one of our Marster's slaves and sometimes
dey didn't, but dey was all time on deir job.

"When slaves come in from de fields at night de 'omans cleant up deir houses atter dey et,
and den washed and got up early next mornin' to put de clothes out to dry. Mens would eat,
set 'round talkin' to other mens and den go to bed. On our place evvybody wukked on Saddays
'til 'bout three or four o'clock and if de wuk was tight dey wukked right on 'til night lak
any other day. Sadday nights de young folks got together to have deir fun. Dey danced, frolicked,
drunk likker, and de lak of dat. Old Marster warn't too hard on 'em no time, but he jus' let
'em have dat night to frolic. On Sunday he give dem what wanted 'em passes to go to church
and visit 'round.

"Christmas times, chilluns went to bed early 'cause dey was skeered Santa Claus wouldn't come.
Us carried our stockin's up to de big house to hang 'em up. Next mornin' us found 'em full
of all sorts of good things, 'cept oranges. I never seed nary a orange 'til I was a big gal.
Miss Polly had fresh meat, cake, syrup puddin' and plenty of good sweet butter what she 'lowanced
out to her slaves at Christmas. Old Marster, he made syrup by de barrel. Plenty of apples and
nuts and groundpeas was raised right dar on de plantation. In de Christmas, de only wuk slaves
done was jus' piddlin' 'round de house and yards, cuttin' wood, rakin' leaves, lookin' atter
de stock, waitin' on de white folks and little chores lak dat. Hard work started again on de
day atter New Year's Day. Old Marster 'lowed 'em mighty little rest from den 'til atter de
craps was laid by.

"Course Marster let his slaves have cornshuckin's, cornshellin's, cotton pickin's, and quiltin's.
He had grove atter grove of pecan, chestnut, walnut, hickor'nut, scalybark, and chinquapin
trees. When de nuts was all gathered, Old Marster sold 'em to de big men in de city. Dat was
why he was so rich. Atter all dese things was gathered and tended to, he give his slaves a
big feast and plenty to drink, and den he let 'em rest up a few days 'fore dey started back
to hard wuk.

"I never seed but one marriage on Old Marster's plantation, and I never will forgit dat day.
Miss Polly had done gimme one of little Miss Mary's sho' 'nough pretty dresses and I wore it
to dat weddin', only dey never had no real weddin'. Dey was jus' married in de yard by de colored
preacher and dat was all dere was to it.

"Ma used to tell us if us didn't be-have Raw Head and Bloody Bones would come git us and take
us off. I tried to see him but I never did. Grown folks was all time skeerin' chillun. Then
us went to bed at night, us used to see ghosties, what looked lak goats tryin' to butt us down.
Ma said I evermore used to holler out in my sleep 'bout dem things I was so skeered of.

[HW sidenote: Home remedies]

"White folks was mighty good and kind when deir slaves got sick. Old Marster sont for Dr. 'Pree
(DuPree) and when he couldn't git him, he got Dr. Brown. He made us swallow bitter tastin'
powders what he had done mixed up in water. Miss Polly made us drink tea made out of Jerusalem
oak weeds. She biled dem weeds and sweetened de tea wid syrup. Dat was good for stomach trouble,
and us wore elder roots strung 'round our necks to keep off ailments.

"Mercy me! I'se seed plenty of dem yankees a-gwine and comin'. Dey come to our Marster's house
and stole his good mules. Dey tuk what dey wanted of his meat, chickens, lard and syrup and
den poured de rest of de syrup out on de ground. Atter de war was over Niggers got so rowdy
dem Ku Kluxers come 'long to make 'em be-have deirselfs.' Dem Niggers and Kluxers too jus'
went hog wild.

"What did Niggers have to buy no land wid, when dey never had no money paid 'em for nothin'
'til atter dey was free? Us jus' stayed on and wukked for Old Marster, 'cause dere warn't no
need to leave and go to no other place. I was raised up for a field hand, and I ain't never
wukked in no white folks house.

"Me I'se sho' glad Mr. Lincoln sot us free. Iffen it was still slav'ry time now old as I is,
I would have to wuk jus' de same, sick or no. Now I don't have to ax nobody what I kin do.
Dat's why I'se glad I'se free.

"Now, 'bout my marriage; I was a-living in Putnam County at dat time, and I got married up
wid Green Willingham. He had come dar from Jasper County. I didn't have no weddin'. Ma jus'
cooked a chicken for us, and I was married in a white dress. De waist had ruffles 'round de
neck and sleeves. Us had 17 chilluns in all, seven boys and 10 gals, dere was 19 grandchillun
and 21 great grandchillun. Dey ain't all of 'em livin', and my old man, he's done been daid
a long time ago."

Henrietta again made her appearance and addressed her mother: "Hush your mouth Ma, for you
knows you ain't got all dem chillun. I done told de lady you ain't got your right mind." Frances
retorted: "You shut up your mouth, Henrietta. I is so got my right mind, and I knows how many
chillun of mine dere was. One thing sho' you is got more mouth dan all de rest of my chillun
put together."

The interviewer closed her notebook and took her departure, leaving Frances dozing in her chair.

[HW: Dist-1-2 Ex-slave #114 (Mrs. Stonestreet)]

ADELINE WILLIS--EX-SLAVE [Date Stamp: MAY 8 1937]

Who is the oldest ex-slave in Wilkes County? This question was answered the other day when
the quest ended on the sunny porch of a little cottage on Lexington Road in Washington-Wilkes,
for there in a straight old-fashioned split-bottom chair sat "Aunt" Adeline Willis basking
in the warm October sunshine. She is remarkable for her age--she doesn't know just exactly
how old she is, from all she tells and what her "white folks" say she is around a hundred.
Her general health is good, she spends her days in the open and tires only on the days she
cannot be out in her place in the sun. She has the brightest eyes, her sight is so good she
has never had to wear glasses; she gets around in the house and yard on her cane. Her memory
is excellent, only a time or two did she slowly shake her head and say apologetically--"Mistress,
it's been so long er go, I reckon I done forgot".

From her long association with white people she uses very little Negro dialect and always refers
to her Mother as "Mother", never as Ma or Mammy as most Negroes do. This is very noticable.

Her mother was Marina Ragan, "cause she belonged to the Ragans," explained Aunt Adeline, "and
she was born on the Ragan Plantation right down on Little River in Greene County" (Georgia).
When Marina's "young Mistress" married young Mr. Mose Wright of Oglethorpe County, she took
Marina to her new home to be her own servant, and there is where Adeline was born. The place
was known as the Wright Plantation and was a very large one.

Adeline doesn't remember her father, and strange to say, she cannot recall how many brothers
and sisters she had though she tried hard to name them all. She is sure, however, there were
some older and some younger, "I reckon I must er come along about the middle", she said.

After a little while Aunt Adeline was living far back in the past and talked freely--with questions
now and then to encourage her reminiscences, she told many interesting things about her life
as a slave.

She told about the slaves living in the Quarters--log houses all in a long row near the "white
folks' house", and how happy they were. She couldn't remember how many slaves were on the plantation,
but was sure there were many: "Yas'm, my Marster had lots of niggers, jest how many, I don't
know, but there sho' was a sight of us". They were given their allowance of "rations" every
week and cooked their own meals in their cabins. They had good, plain, home-raised things to
eat--"and we was glad to get it too. We didn't have no fancy fixings, jest plain food". 'Silence!'
said I to him, 'you shall have a louis d'or for the job': for less than that he would have helped
me to burn the Hospital.

"We arrived at Lescaut's house. As it was late, M. de T---- left us on the way, promising to visit
us the next morning. The servant alone remained.

"I held Manon in such close embrace in my arms, that we occupied but one place in the coach. She
cried for joy, and I could feel her tears trickling down my cheeks.

"When we were about getting out at Lescaut's, I had a new difficulty
with the coachman, which was attended with the most unfortunate results.

I repented of having promised the fellow a louis d'or, not only because it was extravagant
folly, but for another stronger reason, that it was at the moment out of my power to pay him.
I called for Lescaut, and he came down to the door. I whispered to him the cause of my present
embarrassment. Being naturally rough, and not at all in the habit of treating hackney-coachmen with
respect, he answered that I could not be serious. 'A louis!' said he; 'twenty blows of a cane
would be the right payment for that rascal!' I entreated him not to destroy us; when he snatched
my cane from my hand, and was about to lay it on the coachman. The fellow had probably before experienced
the weight of a guardsman's arm, and instantly drove off, crying out, that I had cheated him,
and should hear of him again. I in vain endeavoured to stop him.

"His flight caused me, of course, the greatest alarm.

I had no doubt that he would immediately give information to the police. 'You have ruined
me,' said I to Lescaut; 'I shall be no longer safe at your house; we must go hence at once.' I gave Manon
my arm, and as quickly as possible got out of the dangerous neighbourhood. Lescaut accompanied
us."

The Chevalier des Grieux having occupied more than an hour with his story, I begged him to give
himself a little rest, and meanwhile to share our supper.

He saw, by the attention we paid him, that we were amused, and promised that we should hear something
of perhaps greater interest in the sequel. When we had finished supper, he continued in the
following words.

[1] A favourite tenet of the Mystics, advocated by Madame de Guyon, and adopted by the amiable and
eloquent Fenelon, was, that the love of the Supreme Being must be pure and disinterested; that
is, exempt from all views of interest, and all hope of reward. See the controversy between Bossuet
and Fenelon.

[2] The first proposition of the Jansenists was, that there are divine precepts which good men,
notwithstanding their desire to observe them, are nevertheless absolutely unable to obey: God not
having given them such a measure of grace as is essentially necessary to render them capable
of obedience.--Mosheim's Eccles.

Hist., ii. 397.

VII

. . . How chances mock, And changes fill the cup of alteration With divers liquors. SHAKESPEARE.

"How
inscrutably does Providence connect events! We had hardly proceeded for five minutes on our way,
when a man, whose face I could not see, recognised Lescaut. He had no doubt been watching for
him near his home, with the horrible intention which he now unhappily
executed.

'It IS Lescaut!' said he, snapping a pistol at his head; 'he shall sup tonight with the angels!'
He then instantly disappeared.

Lescaut fell, without the least sign of life. I pressed Manon to fly, for we could be of no use
to a dead man, and I feared being arrested by the police, who would certainly be soon upon
the spot. I turned down the first narrow street with her and the servant: she was so overpowered
by the scene she had just witnessed, that I could hardly support her. At last, at the end of
the street, I perceived a hackney-coach; we got into it, but when the coachman asked whither
he should drive, I was scarcely able to answer him.

I had no certain asylum--no confidential friend to whom I could have recourse. I was almost
destitute of money, having but one dollar left in my purse.

Fright and fatigue had so unnerved Manon, that she was almost fainting at my side. My imagination
too was full of the murder of Lescaut, and I was not without strong apprehensions of the patrol.
What was to be done? I luckily remembered the inn at Chaillot, where we first went to reside
in that village. I hoped to be not only secure, but to continue there for some time without being
pressed for payment. 'Take us to Chaillot,' said I to the coachman. He refused to drive us so
far at that late hour for less than twelve francs. A new embarrassment!

At last we agreed for half that sum--all that my purse contained.

"I tried to console Manon as we went along, but despair was rankling in my own heart. I should
have destroyed myself a thousand times over, if I had not felt that I held in my arms all that
could attach me to life: this reflection reconciled me. 'I possess her at least,' said I; 'she loves
me! she is mine! Vainly does Tiberge call this a mere phantom of happiness.' I could, without
feeling interest or emotion, see the whole world besides perish around me. Why? Because I
have in it no object of affection beyond her.

"This sentiment was true; however, while I so lightly esteemed the good things of the world,
I felt that there was no doing without some little portion of them, were it only to inspire
a more thorough contempt for the remainder. Love is more powerful than wealth--more attractive
than grandeur or fame; but, alas! it cannot exist without certain artificial aids; and there is
nothing more humiliating to the feelings, of a sensitive lover, than to find himself, by want
of means, reduced to the level of the most vulgar minds.

"It was eleven o'clock when we arrived at Chaillot. They received us at the inn as old acquaintances,
and expressed no sort of surprise at seeing Manon in male attire,
for it was the custom in Paris and the environs to adopt all disguises.

I took care to have her served with as much attention as if I had been in prosperous circumstances.
She was ignorant of my poverty, and I carefully kept her so, being resolved to return alone
the following day to Paris, to seek some cure for this vexatious kind of malady.

"At supper she appeared pale and thin; I had not observed this at the Hospital, as the room in
which I saw her was badly lighted. I asked her if the excessive paleness were not caused by
the shock of witnessing her brother's death? She assured me that, horrified as she naturally
was at the event, her paleness was purely the effect of a three months' absence from me. 'You
do love me then devotedly?' I exclaimed.

"'A thousand times more than I can tell!' was her reply.

"'You will never leave me again?' I added.

"'No! never, never!' answered she.

"This assurance was confirmed by so many caresses and vows, that it
appeared impossible she could, to the end of time, forget them.

I have never doubted that she was at that moment sincere. What motive could she have had for
dissembling to such a degree? But she became afterwards still more volatile than ever, or
rather she was no longer anything, and entirely forgot herself, when, in poverty and want,
she saw other women living in abundance. I was now on the point of receiving a new proof of
her inconstancy, which threw all that had passed into the shade, and which led to the strangest
adventure that ever happened to a man of my birth and prospects.

"As I knew her disposition, I hastened the next day to Paris.

The death of her brother, and the necessity of getting linen and clothes for her, were such
good reasons, that I had no occasion for any further pretext.

I left the inn, with the intention, as I told Manon and the landlord,
of going in a hired carriage, but this was a mere flourish; necessity
obliged me to travel on foot: I walked very fast as far as Cours-la-Reine,
where I intended to rest.

A moment of solitude and tranquillity was requisite to compose myself,
and to consider what was to be done in Paris.

"I sat down upon the grass. I plunged into a sea of thoughts and considerations,
which at length resolved themselves into three principal heads.

I had pressing want of an infinite number of absolute necessaries;
I had to seek some mode of at least raising a hope for the future;
and, though last, not least in importance, I had to gain information,
and adopt measures, to secure Manon's safety and my own.

After having exhausted myself in devising projects upon these three chief points, I was obliged
to put out of view for the moment the two last. We were not ill sheltered from observation in the
inn at Chaillot; and as to future wants, I thought it would be time
enough to think about them when those of the moment were satisfied.

"The main object now was to replenish my purse. M. de T---- had once offered me his, but I had
an extreme repugnance to mention the subject to him again. What a degradation to expose one's
misery to a stranger, and to ask for charity: it must be either a
man of low mind who would thus demean himself, and that from a baseness
which must render him insensible to the degradation, or a humble Christian,
from a consciousness of generosity in himself, which must put him
above the sense of shame.

I would have sacrificed half my life to be spared the humiliation.

"'Tiberge,' said I, 'kind Tiberge, will he refuse me what he has it in his power to grant? No,
he will assuredly sympathise in my misery; but he will also torture me with his lectures! One
must endure his reproaches, his exhortations, his threats: I shall have to purchase his assistance
so dearly, that I would rather make any sacrifice than encounter
this distressing scene, which cannot fail to leave me full of sorrow
and remorse.

Well,' thought I again, 'all hope must be relinquished, since no
other course presents itself: so far am I from adopting either of
these, that I would sooner shed half my blood than face one of these
evils, or the last drop rather than encounter both.

Yes, the very last drop,' I repeated after a moment's reflection, 'I would sacrifice willingly
rather than submit to such base supplication!

"'But it is not in reality a question of my existence! Manon's life and maintenance, her love
and her fidelity, are at stake!

What consideration can outweigh that?

In her are centred all my glory, happiness, and future fortune! There are doubtless many things
that I would gladly give up my life to obtain, or to avoid; but to estimate a thing merely beyond
the value of my own life, is not putting it on a par with that of Manon.' This idea soon decided
me: I went on my way, resolved to go first to Tiberge, and afterwards to M. de T----.

"On entering Paris I took a hackney-coach, though I had not wherewithal
to pay for it; I calculated on the loan I was going to solicit.

I drove to the Luxembourg, whence I sent word to Tiberge that I was waiting for him. I had
not to stay many minutes. I told him without hesitation the extremity
of my wants.

He asked if the fifty pounds which I had returned to him would suffice,
and he at once went to fetch it with that generous air, that pleasure
in bestowing which 'blesseth him that gives, and him that takes,'
and which can only be known to love or to true friendship.

"Although I had never entertained a doubt of Tiberge's readiness to
grant my request, yet I was surprised at having obtained it on such
easy terms, that is to say, without a word of reprimand for my impenitence;
but I was premature in fancying myself safe from his reproaches, for
when he had counted out the money, and I was on the point of going
away, he begged of me to take a walk with him in the garden.

I had not mentioned Manon's name; he knew nothing of her escape; so that his lecture was merely
upon my own rash flight from St. Lazare, and upon his apprehensions
lest, instead of profiting by the lessons of morality which I had
received there, I should again relapse into dissipation.

"He told me, that having gone to pay me a visit at St. Lazare, the day after my escape, he had
been astonished beyond expression at hearing the mode in which I had effected it; that he had
afterwards a conversation with the Superior; that the good Father
had not quite recovered the shock; that he had, however, the generosity
to conceal the real circumstances from the lieutenant-general of police,
and that he had prevented the death of the porter from becoming known
outside the walls; that I had, therefore, upon that score, no ground
for alarm, but that, if I retained one grain of prudence, I should
profit by this happy turn which Providence had given to my affairs,
and begin by writing to my father, and reconciling myself to his favour;
and finally that, if I would be guided by his advice, I should at
once quit Paris, and return to the bosom of my family.

"I listened to him attentively till he had finished. There was much in what he said to gratify
me. In the first place, I was delighted to learn that I had nothing to fear on account of St.
Lazare--the streets of Paris at least were again open to me. Then I rejoiced to find that
Tiberge had no suspicion of Manon's escape, and her return to my arms. I even remarked that
he had not mentioned her name, probably from the idea that, by my seeming indifference to her,
she had become less dear to my heart. I resolved, if not to return home, at least to write
to my father, as he advised me, and to assure him that I was disposed
to return to my duty, and consult his wishes.

My intention was to urge him to send me money for the purpose of
pursuing my ordinary studies at the University, for I should have
found it difficult to persuade him that I had any inclination to resume
my ecclesiastical habit.

I was in truth not at all averse to what I was now going to promise
him.

On the contrary, I was ready to apply myself to some creditable and rational pursuit, so far as
the occupation would be compatible with my love. I reckoned upon being able to live with my
mistress, and at the same time continuing my studies. I saw no inconsistency in this plan.

"These thoughts were so satisfactory to my mind, that I promised Tiberge to dispatch a letter
by that day's post to my father: in fact, on leaving him, I went into a scrivener's, and wrote
in such a submissive and dutiful tone, that, on reading over my own
letter, I anticipated the triumph I was going to achieve over my father's
heart.

"Although I had money enough to pay for a hackney-coach after my interview
with Tiberge, I felt a pleasure in walking independently through the
streets to M. de T----'s house.

There was great comfort in this unaccustomed exercise of my liberty, as to which my friend had
assured me I had nothing now to apprehend. However, it suddenly occurred to me, that he had
been only referring to St. Lazare, and that I had the other affair
of the Hospital on my hands; being implicated, if not as an accomplice,
at all events as a witness.

This thought alarmed me so much, that I slipped down the first narrow street, and called a coach.
I went at once to M. de T----'s, and he laughed at my apprehensions.

I myself thought them ridiculous enough, when he informed me that there was no more danger
from Lescaut's affray, than from the Hospital adventure. He told me that, from the fear of
their suspecting that he had a hand in Manon's escape, he had gone that morning to the Hospital
and asked to see her, pretending not to know anything of what had happened; that they were
so far from entertaining the least suspicion of either of us, that they lost no time in relating
the adventure as a piece of news to him; and that they wondered how
so pretty a girl as Manon Lescaut could have thought of eloping with
a servant: that he replied with seeming indifference, that it by no
means astonished him, for people would do anything for the sake of
liberty.

"He continued to tell me how he then went to Lescaut's apartments, in the hope of finding me
there with my dear mistress; that the master of the house, who was a coachmaker, protested he
had seen neither me nor Manon; but that it was no wonder that we had not appeared there, if our
object was to see Lescaut, for that we must have doubtless heard of his having been assassinated
about the very same time; upon which, he related all that he knew of the cause and circumstances
of the murder.

"About two hours previously, a guardsman of Lescaut's acquaintance had come to see him, and proposed
play. Lescaut had such a rapid and extravagant run of luck, that in an hour the young man
was minus twelve hundred francs--all the money he had. Finding himself without a sou, he begged
of Lescaut to lend him half the sum he had lost; and there being some difficulty on this point,
an angry quarrel arose between them.

Lescaut had refused to give him the required satisfaction, and the
other swore, on quitting him, that he would take his life; a threat
which he carried into execution the same night.

M. de T---- was kind enough to add, that he had felt the utmost anxiety on our account, and
that, such as they were, he should gladly continue to us his services.

I at once told him the place of our retreat. He begged of me to allow him to sup with us.

"As I had nothing more to do than to procure the linen and clothes for Manon, I told him that
we might start almost immediately, if he would be so good as to wait
for me a moment while I went into one or two shops.

I know not whether he suspected that I made this proposition with the view of calling his generosity
into play, or whether it was by the mere impulse of a kind heart;
but, having consented to start immediately, he took me to a shopkeeper,
who had lately furnished his house.

He there made me select several articles of a much higher price than I had proposed to myself;
and when I was about paying the bill, he desired the man not to take a sou from me. This he
did so gracefully, that I felt no shame in accepting his present. We then took the road to Chaillot
together, where I arrived much more easy in mind than when I had
left it that morning.

"My return and the polite attentions of M. de T---- dispelled all
Manon's melancholy.

'Let us forget our past annoyances, my dear soul,' said I to her,
'and endeavour to live a still happier life than before.

After all, there are worse masters than love: fate cannot subject us to as much sorrow as love
enables us to taste of happiness.' Our supper was a true scene of joy.

"In possession of Manon and of twelve hundred and fifty francs, I
was prouder and more contented than the richest voluptuary of Paris
with untold treasures.

Wealth should be measured by the means it affords us of satisfying our desires. There did not
remain to me at this moment a single wish unaccomplished. Even the future gave me little concern.
I felt a hope, amounting almost to certainty, that my father would allow me the means of living
respectably in Paris, because I had become entitled, on entering
upon my twentieth year, to a share of my mother's fortune.

I did not conceal from Manon what was the extent of my present wealth; but I added, that it
might suffice to support us until our fortune was bettered, either
by the inheritance I have just alluded to, or by the resources of
the hazard-table."

"For several weeks I thus continued to think only of enjoying the
full luxury of my situation; and being restrained, by a sense of honour,
as well as a lurking apprehension of the police, from renewing my
intimacy with my former companions at the hotel of Transylvania, I
began to play in certain coteries less notorious, where my good luck
rendered it unnecessary for me to have recourse to my former accomplishments.

I passed a part of the afternoon in town, and returned always to supper at Chaillot, accompanied
very often by M. de T----, whose intimacy and friendship for us daily
increased.

"Manon soon found resources against ennui.

She became acquainted with some young ladies, whom the spring brought into the neighbourhood. They
occupied their leisure hours in walking, and the customary amusements
of persons of their sex and age.

Their little gains at cards (always within innocent limits) were laid out in defraying the expense
of a coach, in which they took an airing occasionally in the Bois de Boulogne; and each night when
I returned, I was sure of finding Manon more beautiful--more contented--more affectionate than
ever.

"There arose, however, certain clouds, which seemed to threaten the continuance of this blissful
tranquillity, but they were soon dispelled; and Manon's sprightliness made the affair so excessively
comical in its termination, that it is even now pleasing to recur
to it, as a proof of the tenderness as well as the cheerfulness of
her disposition.

"The only servant we had came to me one day, with great embarrassment, and taking me aside, told
me that he had a secret of the utmost importance to communicate to
me.

I urged him to explain himself without reserve. After some hesitation, he gave me to understand
that a foreigner of high rank had apparently fallen in love with
Manon.

I felt my blood boil at the announcement. 'Has she shown any penchant for him?' I enquired,
interrupting my informant with more impatience than was requisite, if I desired to have a full
explanation.

"He was alarmed at my excitement; and replied in an undecided tone,
that he had not made sufficiently minute observation to satisfy me;
but that, having noticed for several days together the regular arrival
of the stranger at the Bois de Boulogne, where, quitting his carriage,
he walked by himself in the cross-avenues, appearing to seek opportunities
of meeting Manon, it had occurred to him to form an acquaintance with
the servants, in order to discover the name of their master; that
they spoke of him as an Italian prince, and that they also suspected
he was upon some adventure of gallantry.

He had not been able to learn anything further, he added, trembling
as he spoke, because the prince, then on the point of leaving the
wood, had approached him, and with the most condescending familiarity
asked his name; upon which, as if he at once knew that he was in our
service, he congratulated him on having, for his mistress, the most
enchanting person upon earth.

"I listened to this recital with the greatest impatience.

He ended with the most awkward excuses, which I attributed to the
premature and imprudent display of my own agitation.

In vain I implored him to continue his history.

He protested that he knew nothing more, and that what he had previously
told me, having only happened the preceding day, he had not had a
second opportunity of seeing the prince's servants.

I encouraged him, not only with praises, but with a substantial recompense;
and without betraying the slightest distrust of Manon, I requested
him, in the mildest manner, to keep strict watch upon all the foreigner's
movements.

"In truth, the effect of his fright was to leave me in a state of the cruellest suspense. It was possible
that she had ordered him to suppress part of the truth. However, after a little reflection, I recovered
sufficiently from my fears to see the manner in which I had exposed my weaknesses. I could
hardly consider it a crime in Manon to be loved.

Judging from appearances, it was probable that she was not even aware of her conquest. 'And
what kind of life shall I in future lead,' thought I, 'if I am capable
of letting jealousy so easily take possession of my mind?'

"I returned
on the following day to Paris, with no other intention than to hasten
the improvement of my fortune, by playing deeper than ever, in order
to be in a condition to quit Chaillot on the first real occasion for
uneasiness.



"Dey tuk me when I was bred and born! I ain't ax no better time!"

Willis' farewell words were:

"Goo'bye! I hopes you all gits to Paradise!" Her father, being the same age as her master,
was given to him as a little boy. They grew up together, playing games, and becoming devoted
to each other. When her master was married her father went to his home with him and became
the overseer of all the slaves on the plantation. "My father and mother wuz house servants.
My marster served my father's plate from his own table and sent it to him, every meal. He had
charge of the work shop, and when marster was away he always stayed at the Big House, to take
care of my Missis and the children. My mother was a seamstress and had three younger seamsters
under her, that she taught to sew. We made the clothes for all the house servants and fiel'
hans. My mother made some of the clothes for my marster and missis. My mother was a midwife
too, and useter go to all the birthings on our place. She had a bag she always carried and
when she went to other plantations she had a horse and buggy to go in.

"All the slaves on our place wuz treated well. I never heard of any of 'em bein' whipped. I
was ten years old when freedom come, and I always knowed I wuz to belong to one of marster's
daughters. After freedom my father and mother worked on just the same for marster. When my
father died, marster's fam'ly wanted him buried in the fam'ly lot but I wanted him to lie by
my mother."

Cornelia's husband was a Methodist preacher, and she lived with him to celebrate their Golden
Wedding. During the last years of his life they lived in Augusta. For sixteen years she washed
all the blankets for the Fire Department, and did some of the washing for the firemen. Cornelia
is now 82 years of age, but her memory is good and her mind active; and she is extremely loquacious.
She is quite heavy, and crippled, having to use a crutch when she walks. Her room was clean,
but over-crowded with furniture, every piece of which has recently been painted. Of the wardrobe
in her room Cornelia told the following story. "All the planks eny of our family was laid out
on, my father kep'. When he came to Augusta he brought all these planks and made this here
wardrobe. When the fire burnt me out, this here wardrobe was the only thing in my house that
was saved."

During the past summer she put up quantities of preserves, pickles and canned fruits. These
she sells in a little shop-room adjoining her house, and when the weather permits, on the steps
of the Post Office.

Cornelia can read, and spends much of time reading the Bible but she learned to read after
"Freedom." She is greatly interested to tell of the "best families" she has worked for and
the gifts she has received from them.

[HW: Dist. 5 Ex-Slave #117] E. Driskell Whitley 1-20-37

GEORGE WOMBLE EX-SLAVE [Date Stamp: MAY 8 1937]

One of the relics of Slavery is George Womble. From all appearances Mr. Womble looks to be
fifty-three years of age instead of the ripe old age of ninety-three that he claims. He is
about five and one-half or six feet in height, weighs one-hundred and seventy-five pounds or
more, and has good sight and hearing in addition to a skin that is almost devoid of any wrinkle.
Besides all of this he is a clear thinker and has a good sense of humor. Following is an account
of the experiences of Mr. Womble as a slave and of the conditions in general on the plantations
where he lived:

"I was born in the year of 1843 near the present site of what is now known as Clinton, Georgia.
The names of my parents were Patsy and Raleigh Ridley. I never saw my father as he was sold
before I was old enough to recognize him as being my father. I was still quite young when my
mother was sold to a plantation owner who lived in New Orleans, La. As she was being put on
the wagon to be taken away I heard her say: "Let me see my poor child one more time because
I know I'll never see him again". That was the last I ever saw or heard of her. As I had no
brothers or sisters or any other relatives to care for me my master, who was Mr. Robert Ridley,
had me placed in his house where I was taught to wait tables and to do all kinds of house work.
Mr. Ridley had a very large plantation and he raised cotton, corn, oats, wheat, peas, and live
stock. Horses and mules were his specialty--I remember that he had one little boy whose job
was to break these animals so that they could be easily sold. My job was to wait tables, help
with the house cleaning, and to act as nurse maid to three young children belonging to the
master. At other times I drove the cows to and from the pasture and I often helped with the
planting in the fields when the field hands were rushed. Out of the forty-odd slaves that were
held by the Ridleys all worked in the field with the exception of myself and the cook whose
name was Harriet Ridley." Continuing, Mr. Womble says: "I believe that Mr. Ridley was one of
the meanest men that ever lived. Sometimes he whipped us, especially us boys, just to give
himself a little fun. He would tie us in such a way as to cause our bodies to form an angle
and then he preceeded to use the whip. When he had finished he would ask: "Who do you belong
to?" and we had to answer; "Marse Robert". At other times he would throw us in a large tank
that held about two-thousand gallons of water. He then stood back and laughed while we struggled
to keep from drowning."

"When Marse Robert died I was still a small boy. Several months after his death Mrs. Ridley
gave the plantation up and took her share of the slaves (ten in number) of which I was one,
and moved to Tolbert County, Georgia near the present location of Talbottom, Georgia. The other
slaves and the plantation were turned over to Marse Robert's relatives. After a few months
stay in this place I was sold to Mrs. Ridley's brother, Enoch Womble. On the day that I was
sold three doctors examined me and I heard one of them say: "This is a thoroughbred boy. His
teeth are good and he has good muscles and eyes. He'll live a long time." Then Mr. Womble said:
"He looks intelligent too. I think I'll take him and make a blacksmith out of him." And so
to close the deal he paid his sister five-hundred dollars for me."

According to Mr. Womble his new master was even meaner than the deceased Mr. Ridley. He was
likewise a plantation owner and a farmer and as such he raised the same things that Mr. Ridley
did with the exception of the horses and the mules. In all there were about five-hundred acres
to the plantation. There were six children in the Womble family in addition to Mr. Womble and
his wife, and they all lived in a large one-storied frame house. A large hickory tree grew
through the center of the porch where a hole had been cut out for its growth.

Mr. Womble says that his reputation of being an excellent house boy had preceded him, and so
here too he was put to work in the master's house where he helped with the cooking, washed
the dishes, cleaned the house, and also acted as nurse for the younger white children. In addition
to this, he was also required to attend to the cows. He remembers how on one night at a very
late hour he was called by the master to go and drive the cows from the pasture as the sleet
and snow might do them more harm than good. He was so cold that on the way back from the pasture
he stopped at the pig pens where he pushed one or two of them out of the spots where they had
lain so that he could squat there, and warm his feet in the places left warm by their bodies.
To add to his discomfort the snow and sleet froze in his long hair and this made him even more
miserable than ever.

Mr. Womble was asked to tell what time he had to arise in the morning to be at his day's work,
and he replied that sometimes he didn't even go to sleep as he had to keep one hand on the
baby crib to keep it from crying. Most of the time he got up at four o'clock in the morning,
and went to the kitchen where he helped the cook prepare breakfast. After this was done, and
he had finished waiting on the master and his family he started to clean the house. When he
had finished this, he had to take care of the younger Womble children, and do countless the
other things to be done around a house. Of the other slaves, Mr. Womble says: "None of them
ever suffered from that disease known as "mattress fever". They all got up long before day,
and prepared their breakfasts and then before it was light enough to see clearly they were
standing in the field holding their hoes and other implements--afraid to start work for fear
that they would cover the cotton plants with dirt because they could'nt see clearly due to
the darkness." An overseer was hired by the master to see that the work was done properly.
If any of the slaves were careless about their work they were made to take off their clothes
in the field before all the rest and then a sound whipping was administered. Field hands also
get whippings when they failed to pick the required three-hundred pounds of cotton daily. To
avoid a whipping for this they sprinkled the white sand of the fields on the dew soaked cotton
and at the time it was weighed they were credited with more pounds than they had actually picked.
Around ten or eleven o'clock in the morning they were all allowed to go to the cook house where
they were given dinner by the plantation cook. By one o'clock they were all back in the field
where they remained until it was too dark to see clearly, and then they were dismissed by the
overseer after he had checked the number of pounds of cotton that they had picked.

The slaves knew that whenever Mr. Womble hired a new overseer he always told the prospect that
if he could'nt handle the slaves his services would not be needed. The cook had heard the master
tell a prospective overseer this and so whenever a new one was hired the slaves were quick
to see how far they could go with him. Mr. Womble says that an overseer had to be a very capable
man in order to keep his job as overseer on the Womble plantation because if the slaves found
out that he was afraid of them fighting him (and they did sometimes) they took advantage of
him so much so that the production dropped and the overseer either found himself trying to
explain to his employer or else looking for another job. The master would never punish a slave
for beating an overseer with his fists stated Mr. Womble.

During rainy weather the slaves shucked corn, piled manure in the barns, and made cloth. In
the winter season the men split rails, built fences, and dug ditches, while the women did the
weaving and the making of cloth. These slaves who were too old to work in the fields remained
at home where they nursed the sick slaves (when there was sickness) and attended to the needs
of those children who were too young for field work. Those children who were still being fed
from their mother's breasts were also under the care of one of these old persons. However,
in this case the mothers were permitted to leave the field twice a day (once between breakfast
and dinner and once between dinner and supper) so that these children could be fed.

At times Mr. Womble hired some of his slaves out to work by the day for some of the other nearby
plantation owners. Mr. Geo. Womble says that he was often hired out to the other white ladies
of the community to take care of their children and to do their housework. Because of his ability
to clean a house and to handle children he was in constant demand.

The men worked every day in the week while the women were given Saturday afternoon off so that
they might do their personal work such as the washing and the repairing of their clothing etc.
The women were required to do the washing and the repairing of the single men's clothing in
addition to their own. No night work was required of any of them except during the winter when
they were given three cuts of thread to card, reel, and spin each night.

There were some days when the master called them all to his back yard and told them that they
could have a frolic. While they danced and sang the master and his family sat and looked on.
On days like the Fourth of July and Christmas in addition to the frolic barbecue was served
and says Mr. Womble: "It was right funny to see all of them dancing around the yard with a
piece of meat in one hand and a piece of bread in the other.

Mr. Womble stated further that clothes were given to all the slaves once a year. An issue for
the men usually consisted of one or two pairs of pants and some shirts, underwear, woolen socks,
and a pair of heavy brogans that had been made of horse hide. These shoes were reddish in appearance
and were as stiff as board according to Mr. Womble. For special wear the men were given a garment
that was made into one piece by sewing the pants and shirt together. This was known as a "roundabout".
The women were given one or two dresses that had been made of the same material as that of
the men's pants. As the cloth that these clothes were made of was very coarse and heavy most
of them lasted until the time for the next issue. None of the clothing that the slaves wore
was bought. After the cloth had been made by the slaves who did all the spinning and the weaving
the master's wife cut the clothes out while the slave women did the sewing. One of the men
was a cobbler and it was he who made all of the shoes for slave use. In the summer months the
field hands worked in their bare feet regardless of whether they had shoes or not. Mr. Womble
says that he was fifteen years of age when he was given his first pair of shoes. They were
a pair of red boots and were so stiff that he needed help to get them on his feet as well as
to get them off. Once when the master had suffered some few financial losses the slaves had
to wear clothes that were made of crocus material. The children wore sacks after holes had
been cut out for their heads and arms. This garment looked like a slightly lengthened shirt
in appearance. A dye made from red clay was used to give color to these clothes.

The bed clothing consisted of bagging sacks and quilts that were made out of old clothes.

At the end of the week all the field hands met in the master's backyard where they were given
a certain amount of food which was supposedly enough to last for a week. Such an issue was
made up of three pounds of fat meat, one peck of meal, and one quart of black molasses. Mr.
Womble was asked what the slaves did if their allowance of food ran out before the end of the
week, and he replied in the following manner: "If their food gave out before the time for another
issue they waited until night and then one or two of them would go to the mill-house where
the flour and the meal was kept. After they had succeeded in getting in they would take an
auger and bore a hole in the barrel containing the meal. One held the sack while the other
took a stick and worked it around in the opening made by the auger so as to make the meal flow
freely. After their bags were filled the hole was stopped up, and a hasty departure was made.
Sometimes when they wanted meat they either went to the smoke house and stole a ham or else
they would go to the pen where the pigs were kept and take a small pig out. When they got to
the woods with this animal they proceeded to skin and clean it (it had already been killed
with a blow in the head before they left the pen). All the parts that they did not want were
either buried or thrown in the nearby river. After going home all of this meat was cooked and
hidden. As there was danger in being caught none of this stolen meat was ever fried because
there was more danger of the odor of frying meat going farther away than that odor made by
meat being boiled." At this point Mr. Womble stated that the slaves were taught to steal by
their masters. Sometimes they were sent to the nearby plantations to steal chickens, pigs,
and other things that could be carried away easily. At such times the master would tell them
that he was not going to mistreat them and that he was not going to allow anyone else to mistreat
them and that by taking the above mentioned things they were helping him to be more able to
take care of them.

At breakfast the field hands ate fried meat, corn bread, and molasses. When they went to the
house for dinner they were given some kind of vegetable along with pot liquor and milk. When
the days work was done and it was time for the evening meal there was the fried meat again
with the molasses and the corn bread. Mr. Womble says that they ate this kind of food every
day in the week. The only variation was on Sunday when they were given the seconds of the flour
and a little more molasses so that they might make a cake. No other sweetening was used except
the molasses.

As for Mr. Womble and the cook they fared better as they ate the same kind of food that the
master and his family did. He remembers how he used to take biscuits from the dishes that were
being sent to the masters table. He was the waiter and this was an easy matter. Later he took
some of these biscuits and sold them to the other little boys for a nickle each. Neither the
master or the slaves had real coffee. They all drank a type of this beverage that had been
made by parching bran or meal and then boiled in water.

The younger children were fed from a trough that was twenty feet in length. At meal time each
day the master would come out and supervise the cook whose duty it was to fill the trough with
food. For breakfast the milk and bread was all mixed together in the trough by the master who
used his walking cane to stir it with. At dinner and supper the children were fed pot liquor
and bread and sometimes milk that had been mixed together in the same manner. All stood back
until the master had finished stirring the food and then at a given signal they dashed to the
trough where they began eating with their hands. Some even put their mouths in the trough and
ate. There were times when the master's dogs and some of the pigs that ran round the yard all
came to the trough to share these meals. Mr. Womble states that they were not permitted to
strike any of these animals so as to drive them away and so they protected their faces from
the tongues of the intruders by placing their hands on the sides of their faces as they ate.
During the meal the master walked from one end of the trough to the other to see that all was
as it should be. Before Mr. Womble started to work in the master's house he ate as the other
children for a short time. Some of the times he did not have enough food to eat and so when
the time came to feed the cows he took a part of their food (a mixture of cotton seed, collard
stalks, and small ears of corn) and ate it when night came. When he started working in the
house regularly he always had sufficient food from then on.

All the food that was eaten was grown on the plantation in the master's gardens. He did not
permit the slaves to have a garden of their own neither could they raise their own chickens
and so the only time that they got the chance to enjoy the eating of chicken was when they
decided to make a special trip to the master's poultry yard.

The housing facilities varied with the work a slave was engaged in on the Womble plantation
according to Mr. Womble. He slept in the house under the dining-room table all of the time.
The cook also slept in the house of her owner. For those who worked on the fields log cabins
(some distance behind the master's house.) were provide [sic]. Asked to describe one of these
cabins Mr. Womble replied: "They were two roomed buildings made out of logs and daubed with
mud to keep the weather out. At one end there was a chimney that was made out of dried mud,
sticks and stones. The fireplace was about five or six feet in length and on the inside of
it there were some hooks to hang the pots from when there was cooking to be done.

"There was only one door and this was the front one. They would'nt put a back door in a cabin
because it would be easy for a slave to slip out of the back way if the master or the overseer
came to punish an occupant. There were one or two small openings cut in the back so that they
could get air."

"The furniture was made by the blacksmith", continued Mr. Womble. "In one corner of the room
there was a large bed that had been made out of heavy wood. Rope that ran from side to side
served as the springs while the mattress was a large bag that had been stuffed with wheat straw.
The only other furnishings were a few cooking utensils and one or two benches." As many as
four families lived in one of these cabins although the usual number to a cabin was three families.
There was one other house where the young children were kept while their parents worked in
the fields.

Most of the sickness on the Womble plantation was due to colds and fever. For the treatment
of either of these ailments the master always kept a large can filled with a mixture of turpentine
and caster oil. When anyone complained of a cold a dose of this oil was prescribed. The master
gave this dose from a very large spoon that always hung from the can. The slaves also had their
own home made remedies for the treatment of different ailments. Yellow root tea and black-hall
tea were used in the treatment of colds while willow tea was used in the treatment of fever.
Another tea made from the droppings of sheep was used as a remedy for the measles. A doctor
was always called when anyone was seriously ill. He was always called to attend those cases
of childbirth. Unless a slave was too sick to walk he was required to go to the field and work
like the others. If, however, he was confined to his bed a nurse was provided to attend to
his needs.

On Sundays all of the slaves were allowed to attend the white church where they listened to
the services from the rear of the church. When the white minister was almost through he would
walk back to where the slaves sat and tell them not to steal their master's chickens, eggs,
or his hogs and their backs would not be whipped with many stripes. After this they were dismissed
and they all left the church wondering what the preacher's sermon meant. Some nights they went
to the woods and conducted their own services. At a certain spot they all knelt and turned
their faces toward the ground and then they began moaning and praying. Mr. Womble says that
by huddling in this circle and turning their voices toward the ground the sound would not travel
very far.

None of them ever had the chance to learn how to read and write. Some times the young boys
who carried the master's children's books to and from school would ask these children to teach
them to write but as they were afraid of what their father might do they always refused. On
the adjoining plantation the owner caught his son teaching a little slave boy to write.

He was furious and after giving his son a severe beating he then cut the thumb and forefinger
off of the slave. The only things that were taught the slaves was the use of their hands. Mr.
Womble says that all the while that he was working in the master's house they still found the
time for him to learn to be a blacksmith.

When a male slave reached the age of twenty-one he was allowed to court. The same was true
of a girl that had reached the age of eighteen. If a couple wished to marry they had to get
permission from the master who asked each in turn if they wished to be joined as man and wife
and if both answered that they did they were taken into the master's house where the ceremony
was performed. Mr. Womble says that he has actually seen one of these weddings and that it
was conducted in the following manner: "A broom was placed in the center of the floor and the
couple was told to hold hands. After joining hands they were commanded to jump over the broom
and then to turn around and jump back.

"After this they were pronounced man and wife." A man who was small in stature was never allowed
to marry a large, robust woman. Sometimes when the male slaves on one plantation were large
and healthy looking and the women slaves on some nearby plantation looked like they might be
good breeders the two owners agreed to allow the men belonging to the one visit the women belonging
to the other, in fact they encouraged this sort of thing in hopes that they would marry and
produce big healthy children. In such cases passes were given freely.

All of the newly born babies were named by the master. "The only baptisms that any of us get
was with a stick over the head and then we baptised our cheeks with our tears," stated Mr. Wombly.

Continuing, Mr. Wombly stated that the slaves on the Womble plantation were treated more like
animals rather than like humans. On one or two occasions some of them were sold. At such a
time those to be sold were put in a large pen and then they were examined by the doctors and
prospective buyers and later sold to the highest bidder the same as a horse or a mule. They
were sold for various reasons says Mr. Womble. His mother was sold because she was too hard
to rule and because she made it difficult to discipline the other slaves.

Mr. Womble further reported that most of his fellow slaves believed in signs. They believed
that if a screech owl or a "hoot" owl came near a house and made noises at night somebody was
going to die and instead of going to heaven the devil would get them. "On the night that old
Marse Ridley died the screech owls like to have taken the house away," he says.

There was always a great amount of whipping on this plantation. This was practically the only
form of punishment used. Most of them were whipped for being disobedient or for being unruly.
Mr. Womble has heard his master say that he would not have a slave that he could not rule and
to be sure that the slaves held him and his family in awe he even went so far as to make all
of them go and pay their respects to the newly born white children on the day after their birth.
At such a time they were required to get in line outside of the door and then one by one they
went through the room and bowed their heads as they passed the bed and uttered the following
words: "Young Marster" or if the baby was a girl they said: "Young Mistress". On one occasion
Mr. Womble says that he has seen his master and a group of other white men beat an unruly slave
until his back was raw and then a red hot iron bar was applied to his back. Even this did not
make the slave submissive because he ran away immediately afterwards. After this inhuman treatment
any number of the slaves ran away, especially on the Ridley plantation. Some were caught and
some were not. One of the slaves on the Womble plantation took his wife and ran away. He and
his wife lived in a cave that they found in the woods and there they raised a family. When
freedom was declared and these children saw the light of day for the first time they almost
went blind stated Mr. Womble.

Mr. Womble says that he himself has been whipped to such an extent by his master, who used
a walking cane, that he had no feeling in his legs. One other time he was sent off by the master
and instead of returning immediately he stopped to eat some persimmons. The master came upon
him at the tree and started beating him on the head with a wagon spoke. By the time he reached
the house his head was covered with knots the size of hen eggs and blood was flowing from each
of them.

The slaves on the Womble plantation seldom if ever came in contact with the "Paddle-Rollers"
who punished those slaves who had the misfortune to be caught off of their plantations without
passes. In those days the jails were built for the white folks because the masters always punished
the slaves when they broke any of the laws exclaimed Mr. Womble.

Several years before the war Mr. Wombly was sold to Mr. Jim Wombly, the son of Mr. Enoch Wombly.
He was as mean as his father or meaner, Mr. Wombly says that the first thing that he remembers
in regard to the war was to hear his master say that he was going to join the army and bring
Abe Lincoln's head back for a soap dish. He also said that he would wade in blood up to his
neck to keep the slaves from being freed. The slaves would go to the woods at night where they
sang and prayed. Some used to say; "I knew that some day we'll be free and if we die before
that time our children will live to see it."

When the Yankees marched through they took all of the silver and gold that had been hidden
in the wall on the Womble plantation. They also took all of the live stock on the plantation,
most of which had been hidden in the swamps. These soldiers then went into the house and tore
the beds up and poured syrup in the mattresses. At the time all of the white people who lived
on the plantation were hiding in the woods. After the soldiers had departed (taking these slaves
along who wished to follow) Mrs. Womble went back into the house and continued to make the
clothes and the bandages that were to be used by the Confederate Soldiers.

After the slaves were set free any number of them were bound over and kept, says Mr. Womble.
He himself was to remain with the Womble family until he reached the age of twenty-one. When
this time came Mr. Womble refused to let him go. However, Mrs. Womble helped him to escape
but he was soon caught one night at the home of an elderly white lady who had befriended him.
A rope was tied around his neck and he was made to run the entire way back to the plantation
while the others rode on horse back. After a few more months of cruel treatment he ran away
again. This time he was successful in his escape and after he had gone what he considered a
safe distance he set up a blacksmith shop where he made a living for quite a few years. Later
one of the white men in that community hired him to work in his store. After a number of years
at this place he decided to come to Atlanta where he has been since.

Mr. Womble concluded by saying that he has been able to reach his present age because he has
never done any smoking or drinking. An old lady once told him not to use soap on his face and
he would not wrinkle. He accounts for his smooth skin in this manner.

[HW: Dist. 5 Ex. Slave #118 E. Driskell]

SLAVERY AS SEEN THROUGH THE EYES OF HENRY WRIGHT--EX-SLAVE, Age 99

In Atlanta among that ever decreasing group of persons known as ex-slaves there is an old Negro
man named Henry Wright. Although Mr. Wright is 99 years of age his appearance is that of a
much younger man. He is about 5 feet in height; his dark skin is almost free of wrinkles and
his head is thickly covered with gray hair. His speech and thought indicate that he is very
intelligent and there is no doubt that he still possesses a clear and active mind.

As he noisily puffed on a battered old pipe he related the following tale of his experiences
in slavery and of conditions in general as he saw them at that time.

Mr. Wright was born on the plantation of Mr. Phil House. This plantation was located near the
present site of Buckhead, Ga. His parents were Henry Wright and Margaret House. In those days
it was customary for slaves to carry the name of their owners. His father was owned by Mr.
Spencer Wright and his mother was owned by Mr. Phil House. Both of these slave owners lived
in the same district. His grandparents, Kittie and Anite House also belonged to Mr. Phil House
and it was they who told him how they had been sold like cattle while in Virginia to a speculator
(slave dealer) and brought to Decatur, Ga. where they were sold to Mr. House.

Mr. Wright lived with his mother on the House plantation for several years then he was given
to Mr. George House, the brother of Phil House, as a wedding present. However, he saw his parents
often as they were all allowed "passes" so that they might visit one another.

According to Mr. Wright, his master was a very rich man and a very intelligent one. His plantation
consisted of about three or four hundred acres of land on which he raised cotton, cane, corn,
vegetables and live stock. Although he was not very mean to his slaves or "servants" as he
called them, neither did his kindness reach the gushing or overflowing stage.

On this plantation there were a large number of slaves, some of whom worked in "Old Marster's"
(as Mr. House was called) house and some of whom worked in the fields.

As a youngster Mr. Wright had to pick up chips around the yard, make fires and keep the house
supplied with water which he got from the well. When he was ten years of age he was sent to
the field as a plow-boy. He remembers that his mother and father also worked in the fields.
In relating his experience as a field hand Mr. Wright says that he and his fellow slaves were
roused each morning about 3 o'clock by the blowing of a horn. This horn was usually blown by
the white overseer or by the Negro foreman who was known among the slaves as the "Nigger Driver."
At the sounding of the horn they had to get up and feed the stock. Shortly after the horn was
blown a bell was rung and at this signal they all started for the fields to begin work for
the day. They were in the field long before the sun was up. Their working hours were described
as being from "sun to sun." When the time came to pick the cotton each slave was required to
pick at least 200 lbs. of cotton per day. For this purpose each was given a bag and a large
basket. The bag was hung around the neck and the basket was placed at the end of the row. At
the close of the day the overseer met all hands at the scales with the lamp, the slate and
the whip. If any slave failed to pick the required 200 lbs. he was soundly whipped by the overseer.
Sometimes they were able to escape this whipping by giving illness as an excuse. Another form
of strategy adopted by the slaves was to dampen the cotton or conceal stones in the baskets,
either of which would make the cotton weigh more.

Sometimes after leaving the fields at dark they had to work at night--shucking corn, ginning
cotton or weaving. Everyday except Sunday was considered a work day. The only form of work
on Sunday was the feeding of the live stock, etc.

When Mr. Wright was asked about the treatment that was given the house slaves in comparison
to that given the field slaves, he replied with a broad grin that "Old Marster" treated them
much the same as he would a horse and a mule. That is, the horse was given the kind of treatment
that would make him show off in appearance, while the mule was given only enough care to keep
him well and fit for work. "You see," continued Mr. Wright, "in those days a plantation owner
was partially judged by the appearance of his house servants." And so in addition to receiving
the discarded clothes of "Old Marster" and his wife, better clothing was bought for the house
slaves.

The working hours of the house slave and the field slave were practically the same. In some
cases the house slaves had to work at night due to the fact that the master was entertaining
his friends or he was invited out and so someone had to remain up to attend to all the necessary
details.

On the plantation of Mr. House the house slaves thought themselves better than the field slaves
because of the fact that they received better treatment. On the other hand those slaves who
worked in the fields said that they would rather work in the fields than work in the house
because they had a chance to earn spending money in their spare or leisure time. House servants
had no such opportunity.

In bad weather they were not required to go to the fields--instead they cut hedges or did other
small jobs around the house. The master did not want them to work in bad weather because there
was too much danger of illness which meant a loss of time and money in the end.

Mr. House wanted his slaves to learn a trade such as masonry or carpentry, etc., not because
it would benefit the slave, says Mr. Wright, but because it would make the slave sell for more
in case he had "to get shet (rid) of him." The slaves who were allowed to work with these white
mechanics, from whom they eventually learned the trade, were eager because they would be permitted
to hire themselves out. The money they earned could be used to help buy their freedom, that
is, what money remained after the master had taken his share. On the other hand the white mechanic
had no particular objection to the slaves being there to help him, even though they were learning
the trade, because he was able to place all the hard work on the slave which made his job easier.
Mr. Wright remembers how his grandfather used to hire his time out doing carpentry work, making
caskets and doing some masonry. He himself can plaster, although he never hired out during slavery.

Clothing was issued once per year usually around September. An issue consisted mostly of the
following: 1 pair of heavy shoes called "Negro Brogans." Several homespun shirts, woolen socks
and two or three pairs of jeans pants. The women were either given dresses and underskirts
that were already made or just the plain cloth to make these garments from. Some of their clothing
was bought and some was made on the plantation. The wool socks were knitted on the plantation
along with the homespun which was woven there. The homespun was dyed by placing it in a boiling
mixture of green walnut leaves or walnut hulls. In the event that plaid material was to be
made the threads were dyed the desired color before being woven. Another kind of dye was made
from the use of a type of red or blue berry, or by boiling red dirt in water (probably madder).
The house slaves wore calico dresses or sometimes dresses made from woolen material.

Often this clothing was insufficient to meet the individual needs. With a broad smile and an
almost imperceptible shake of his old gray head Mr. Wright told how he had worked in the field
without shoes when it was so cold until the skin cracked and the blood flowed from these wounds.
He also told how he used to save his shoes by placing them under his arm and walking barefooted
when he had a long distance to go. In order to polish these shoes a mixture of soot and syrup
was used.

The young slave children wore a one-piece garment with holes cut for the head and arms to go
through. In appearance it resembled a slightly long shirt. As Mr. House did not give blankets,
the slaves were required to make the necessary cover by piecing together left over goods. After
this process was completed, it was padded with cotton and then dyed in much the same way as
homespun. After the dyeing was completed the slave was the owner of a new quilt.

The food that the slaves ate [**TR: was] all raised on the plantation. At the end of each week
each slave was given 3 lbs. of meat (usually pork), 1 peck of meal and some syrup. Breakfast
and dinner usually consisted of fried meat, corn bread and syrup. Vegetables were usually given
at dinner time. Sometimes milk was given at supper. It was necessary to send the meals to the
field slaves as they were usually too far away from the house to make the trip themselves.
For this purpose there was a woman who did all the cooking for the field hands in a cook house
located among the slave cabins.

Mr. House permitted his slaves to have a garden and chickens of their own. In fact, he gave
each of them land, a small plot of ground for this purpose. The benefit of this was twofold
as far as the slave was concerned. In the first place he could vary his diet. In the second
place he was able to earn money by selling his produce either in town or to "Old Marster."
Sometimes Old Marster took the produce to town and sold it for them. When he returned from
town the money for the sale of this produce was given to the slave. Mr. Wright says that he
and all the other slaves felt that they were being cheated when the master sold their goods.
Mr. House also permitted his slaves to hunt and fish both of which were done at night for the
most part.

Coffee was made by parching meal and then placing it in boiling water. To sweeten this coffee,
syrup was used. One delicacy that he and the other slaves used to have on Sunday was biscuit
bread which they called "cake bread."

All children who were too young to work in the field were cared for by some old slave woman
who was too old to go to the field. She did all of their cooking, etc. The diet of these children
usually consisted of pot liquor, milk, vegetables and in rare cases, meat. Mr. Wright laughed
here as he stated that these children were given long handled spoons and were seated on a long
bench before a trough out of which they all ate like little pigs. Not a slave ever suffered
the pangs of hunger on the plantation of Mr. George House.

The houses or cabins of the slaves were located a short distance in the rear of "Old Marster's"
house. These houses were usually made from logs--the chinks being closed with mud. In some
cases boards were used on the inside of the cabin to keep the weather out, but according to
Mr. Wright, mud was always the more effective. The floor was usually covered with boards and
there were two or three windows to each cabin, shutters being used in place of glass. The chimney
and fireplace were made of mud, sticks and stones. All cooking was done on the fireplace in
iron utensils, which Mr. Wright declares were a lot better than those used today. For boiling,
the pots hung from a long hook directly above the fire. Such furniture as each cabin contained
was all made by the slaves. This furniture usually consisted of a wooden bench, instead of
a chair, and a crude bed made from heavy wood. Slats were used in the place of springs. The
mattress was made stuffing a large bag with wheat straw. "This slept as good as any feather
bed" says Mr. Wright. Candles were used to furnish light at night.

On this plantation each family did not have an individual cabin. Sometimes as many as three
families shared a cabin, which of course was rather a large one. In this case it was partitioned
off by the use of curtains.

Besides having to take care of the young children, these older slaves were required to care
for those slaves who were ill. Mr. House employed a doctor to attend his slaves when their
cases seemed to warrant it. If the illness was of a minor nature he gave them castor oil, salts
or pills himself. Then, too, the slaves had their own home remedies. Among these were different
tonics made from "yarbs" (herbs), plasters made from mustard, and whisky, etc. Most illnesses
were caused by colds and fevers. Mr. Wright says that his two brothers and his sister, all
of whom were younger than he, died as a result of typhoid fever.

Even with all the hardships that the slaves had to suffer they still had time to have fun and
to enjoy themselves, Mr. Wright continued. At various times Mr. House permitted them to have
a frolic. These frolics usually took place on such holidays as 4th of July, Christmas or "laying-by
time", after the cultivating of the crops was finished and before gathering time. During the
day the master provided a big barbecue and at night the singing and dancing started. Music
was furnished by slaves who were able to play the banjo or the fiddle. The slaves usually bought
these instruments themselves and in some cases the master bought them. "In my case," declared
Mr. Wright, "I made a fiddle out of a large sized gourd--a long wooden handle was used as a
neck, and the hair from a horse's tail was used for the bow. The strings were made of cat-gut.
After I learned to play this I bought a better violin." Sometimes the slaves slipped away to
the woods to indulge in a frolic. As a means of protection they tied ropes across the paths
where they would be less likely to be seen. These ropes were placed at such a height as to
knock a man from his horse if he came riding up at a great speed. In this way the master or
the overseer was stopped temporarily, thereby giving the slaves time to scamper to safety.
In addition to the presents given at Christmas (candy and clothing) the master also gave each
family half a gallon of whisky. This made the parties more lively. One of the songs that the
slaves on the House plantation used to sing at their parties runs as follows:

  "Oh, I wouldn't have a poor girl,
   (another version says, "old maid")
   And I'll tell you the reason why,
   Her neck's so long and stringy,
   I'm afraid she'd never die."

On Sundays Mr. House required all of his slaves to attend church. All attended a white church
where they sat in the back or in the balcony. After preaching to the white audience, the white
pastor turned his attention to the slaves. His sermon usually ran: "Obey your master and your
mistress and the Lord will love you." Sometimes a colored preacher was allowed to preach from
the same rostrum after the white pastor had finished. His sermon was along similar lines because
that is what he had been instructed to say. None of the slaves believed in the sermons but
they pretended to do so.

Marriages were usually performed by the colored preacher although in most cases it was only
necessary for the man to approach "Old Marster" and tell him that he wanted a certain woman
for his wife. "Old Marster" then called the woman in question and if she agreed they were pronounced
man and wife. If the woman was a prolific breeder and if the man was a strong, healthy-looking
individual she was forced to take him as a husband whether she wanted to or not.

When Mr. Wright was asked if he had ever been arrested and placed in jail for any offense while
he was a slave he replied that in those days few laws, if any, applied to slaves. He knows
that it was against the law for anyone to teach a slave to write because on one occasion his
father who had learned to do this with the help of his master's son was told by the master
to keep it to himself, because if the men of the community found out that he could write they
would cut his fingers or his hand off. Horse stealing or house burning was another serious
crime. On the House plantation was a mulato slave who was to have been given his freedom when
he reached the age of 21. When this time came Mr. House refused to free him and so an attempt
was made to burn the House mansion. Mr. Wright remembers seeing the sheriff come from town
and take this slave. Later they heard on the plantation that said slave had been hanged.

For the most part punishment consisted of severe whipping sometimes administered by the slaves'
master and sometimes by the white men of the community known as the Patrol. To the slaves this
Patrol was known as the "Paddle" or "Paddie-Rollers." Mr. Wright says that he has been whipped
numerous times by his master for running away. When he was caught after an attempted escape
he was placed on the ground where he was "spread-eagled," that is, his arms and feet were stretched
out and tied to stakes driven in the ground. After a severe beating, brine water or turpentine
was poured over the wounds. This kept the flies away, he says. Mr. House did not like to whip
his slaves as a scarred slave brought very little money when placed on the auction block. A
slave who had a scarred back was considered as being unruly. Whenever a slave attempted to
escape the hounds were put on his trail. Mr. Wright was caught and treed by hounds several
times. He later found a way to elude them. This was done by rubbing his feet in the refuse
material of the barnyard or the pasture, then he covered his legs with pine tar. On one occasion
he managed to stay away from the plantation for 6 months before he returned of his own accord.
He ran away after striking his master who had attempted to whip him. When he returned of his
own accord his master did nothing to him because he was glad that he was not forever lost in
which case a large sum of money would have been lost. Mr. Wright says that slave owners advertised
in the newspapers for lost slaves, giving their description, etc. If a slave was found after
his master had stopped his advertisements he was placed on the block and sold as a "stray."
While a fugitive he slept in the woods, eating wild berries, etc. Sometimes he slipped to the
plantation of his mother or that of his father where he was able to secure food.

He took a deep puff on his pipe and a look of satisfaction crossed his face as he told how
he had escaped from the "Paddle Rollers." It was the "Paddle-Rollers" duty to patrol the roads
and the streets and to see that no slave was out unless he had a "pass" from his master. Further,
he was not supposed to be any great distance away from the place he had been permitted to go.
If a slave was caught visiting without a "pass" or if at any time he was off his plantation
without said "pass" and had the misfortune to be caught by the "Paddle-Rollers" he was given
a sound whipping and returned to his master. 

Lescaut undertook to have a coach waiting at the door.

"The supper hour having arrived, M. G---- M---- made his appearance. Already Lescaut was with
his sister in the supper room.

The moment the lover entered, he presented his fair one with a complete set of pearls, necklaces,
ear-rings, and bracelets, which must have cost at least a thousand crowns. He then placed on
the table before her, in louis d'or, two thousand four hundred francs, the half of her year's
allowance. He seasoned his present with many pretty speeches in the true style of the old court.
Manon could not refuse him a few kisses: it was sealing her right to the money which he had
just handed to her. I was at the door, and waiting for Lescaut's
signal to enter the room.

"He approached to take me by the hand, while Manon was securing the
money and jewels, and leading me towards M. G---- M----, he desired
me to make my bow.

I made two or three most profound ones. 'Pray excuse him, sir,' said Lescaut, 'he is a mere
child. He has not yet acquired much of the ton of Paris; but no doubt with a little trouble we
shall improve him. You will often have the honour of seeing that gentleman, here,' said he, turning
towards me: 'take advantage of it, and endeavour to imitate so good a model.'

"The old libertine appeared to be pleased with me. He patted me on the cheek, saying that I was a
fine boy, but that I should be on my guard in Paris, where young
men were easily debauched.

Lescaut assured him that I was naturally of so grave a character that I thought of nothing but becoming
a clergyman, and that, even as a child, my favourite amusement was building little chapels.
'I fancy a likeness to Manon,' said the old gentleman, putting his hand under my chin. I answered
him, with the most simple air-- 'Sir, the fact is, that we are very closely connected, and I love
my sister as another portion of myself.' 'Do you hear that,' said
he to Lescaut; 'he is indeed a clever boy!

It is a pity he should not see something of the world.' 'Oh, sir,'
I replied, 'I have seen a great deal of it at home, attending church,
and I believe I might find in Paris some greater fools than myself.'
'Listen,' said he; 'it is positively wonderful in a boy from the country.'

"The
whole conversation during supper was of the same kind.

Manon, with her usual gaiety, was several times on the point of spoiling
the joke by her bursts of laughter.

I contrived, while eating, to recount his own identical history,
and to paint even the fate that awaited him.

Lescaut and Manon were in an agony of fear during my recital, especially
while I was drawing his portrait to the life: but his own vanity prevented
him from recognising it, and I did it so well that he was the first
to pronounce it extremely laughable.

You will allow that I had reason for dwelling on this ridiculous scene.

"At length it was time to retire. He hinted at the impatience of love. Lescaut and I took our departure.
G---- M---- went to his room, and Manon, making some excuse for her absence, came to join
us at the gate. The coach, that was waiting for us a few doors off, drove up towards us, and
we were out of the street in an instant.

"Although I must confess that this proceeding appeared to me little
short of actual robbery, it was not the most dishonest one with which
I thought I had to reproach myself.

I had more scruples about the money which I had won at play. However, we derived as little advantage
from one as from the other; and Heaven sometimes ordains that the lightest fault shall meet
the severest punishment.

"M. G---- M---- was not long in finding out that he had been duped.

As an example, Pat Walton, aged 18, colored and slave, "allowed" to his young master in 1861:
"Marse Rosalius, youse gwine to de war, ain't yer?" and without waiting for an answer, continued:
"So is Pat. You knows you ain't got no bizness in no army 'thout a Nigger to wait on yer an
keep yer outa devilment, Marse Rosalius. Now, doen gin me no argyment, Marse Rosalius, case
ise gwine 'long wid yer, and dat settles it, sah, it do, whether you laks it or you don't lak
it." Parenthetically, it might be here inserted that this speech of Pat's to his young master
was typical of a "style" that many slaves adopted in "dictating" to their white folks, and
many Southern Negroes still employ an inoffensive, similar style to "dominate" their white friends.

According to "Mammy Dink", and otherwise verified, every time a Negro baby was born on one
of his plantations, Major Dalton gave the mother a calico dress and a "bright, shiny", silver
dollar.

All Walton slaves were well fed and clothed and, for a "drove" of about fifty or sixty little
"back-yard" piccaninnies, the Waltons assumed all responsibility, except at night. A kind of
compound was fenced off for "dese brats" to keep them in by day.

When it rained, they had a shelter to go under; play-houses were built for them, and they also
had see-saws, toys, etc. Here, their parents "parked dese younguns" every morning as they went
to the fields and to other duties, and picked them up at night. These children were fed about
five times a day in little wooden trough-like receptacles. Their principal foods were milk,
rice, pot-licker, vegetables and corn dumplings; and they stayed so fat and sleek "dat de Niggers
calt 'em Marse Major's little black pigs."

The average weekly ration allowed an adult Walton slave was a peck of meal, two "dusters" of
flour (about six pounds), seven pounds of flitch bacon, a "bag" of peas, a gallon of grits,
from one to two quarts of molasses, a half pound of green coffee--which the slave himself parched
and "beat up" or ground, from one to two cups of sugar, a "Hatful" of peas, and any "nicknacks"
that the Major might have--as extras.

Many acres were planted to vegetables each year for the slaves and, in season, they had all
the vegetables they could eat, also Irish potatoes, sweet potatoes, roasting ears, watermelons
and "stingy green" (home raised tobacco). In truth, the planters and "Niggers" all used "stingy
green", there then being very little if any "menufro" (processed tobacco) on the market.

The standard clothes of the slaves were: jeans in the winter for men and women, cottonades
and osnabergs for men in the summer, and calicos and "light goods" for the women in the summer
time. About 75% of the cloth used for slaves' clothing was made at home.

If a "Nigger come down sick", the family doctor was promptly called to attend him and, if he
was bad off, the Major "sat up" with him, or had one of his over-seers do so.

Never in her life was "Mammy Dink" whipped by any of the Waltons or their over-seers. Moreover,
she never knew a Negro to be whipped by a white person on any of the dozen or more Walton plantations.
She never "seed" a pataroler in her life, though she "has heard tell dat Judge Henry Willis,
Marses Johnnie B. Jones, Ned Giddens, Gus O'Neal, Bob Baugh, an Jedge Henry Collier rid as
patarolers" when she was a girl.

When the Yankee raiders came through in '65, "Mammy Dink" was badly frightened by them. She
was also highly infuriated with them for "stealin de white fokes' things", burning their gins,
cotton and barns, and conducting themselves generally as bandits and perverts.

In 1875, the year of the cyclone "whooch kilt sebenteen fokes twixt Ellesli (Ellerslie) and
Talbotton", including an uncle of her's. "Mammy Dink" was living at the Dr. M.W. Peter's place
near Baughville. Later, she moved with her husband--acquired subsequent to freedom--to the
Dr. Thomas D. Ashford's place, in Harris County, near Ellerslie. There, she lost her husband
and, about thirty-five years ago, moved to Columbus to be near Mrs. John T. Davis, Jr., an
only daughter of Dr. Ashford, to whom she long ago became very attached.

When interviewed, "Mammy Dink" was at Mrs. Davis' home, "jes piddlin 'round", as she still
takes a pride in "waiting on her white fokes."

Naturally, for one of her age, the shadows are lengthening. "Mammy Dink" has never had a child;
all her kin are dead; she is 96 and has no money and no property, but she has her memories
and, "thank Gawd", Mrs. Davis--her guardian-angel, friend and benefactress.

Whitley, 4-29-37 Ex-Slave #119

MAMMY DINK IS DEAD [HW: (From Columbus News-Record of Dec-8-1936)]

Mammy Dink, who cooked and served and gained pure joy through faithful service, has gone to
the Big House in the skies. She lacked but a few years of a hundred and most of it was spent
in loving service. She was loyal to the families she worked for and was, to all practical intents,
a member of the family circle. She was 94 or 95 when she passed away--Mammy was about to lose
track of mere age, she was so busy with other things--and she was happily at work to within
a week of her death. She was an institution in Columbus, and one of the best known of the many
faithful and loyal colored servants in this city.

Mammy Dink--her full name, by the way, was Dink Young--started out as a cook in a Talbot county
family and wound up her career as cook for the granddaughter of her original employer. She
was first in service in the home of Dr. M.W. Peters, in Talbot county, and later was the cook
in the family of Dr. T.R. Ashford, at Ellerslie, in Harris county. Then, coming to Columbus,
she was cook in the home of the late Captain T.J. Hunt for some 20 years.

For the last 27 years she had been cook for Mrs. John T. Davis, just as she had been cook in
the home of her father, Dr. Ashford, and her grandfather, Dr. Peters.

Mammy, in leisure hours, used to sit on the coping at the Sixteenth street school, and watch
the world go by. But her greatest joy was in the kitchen.

The Davis family was devoted to the faithful old servant. A week ago she developed a severe
cold and was sent to the hospital. She passed away Saturday night--the old body had given out.
The funeral service was conducted yesterday afternoon from St. Philips colored church in Girard.
She was buried in a churchyard cemetery, two or three miles out, on the Opelika road. The white
people who were present wept at the departure of one who was both servant and friend.

Thus passes, to a sure reward, Mammy Dink, whose life was such a success. Her first memory
is, in her own words, "my love for my mother. I loved her so! I would cry when I couldn't be
with her. When I growed up, I kep' on loving her jes' that-a-way, even after I married and
had children of my own."

Adeline's mother worked in the field, drove steers, and was considered the best meat cutter
on the plantation. The slave women were required to spin, and Adeline's mother was unusually
good at spinning wool, "and that kind of spinning was powerful slow," added the old woman.
"My mother was one of the best dyers anywhere around. I was too. I made colors by mixing up
all kinds of bark and leaves. Adeline remembers one dress she loved: "I never will forget it
as long as I live.

She remembers the plantation store and the candy the master gave the Negro children. "Bright,
pretty sticks of candy!" Tin cups hold a special niche in her memory. But there were punishments,
too. "Good or bad, we got whippings with a long cowhide kept just for that. They whipped us
to make us grow better, I reckon!"

Asked about doctors, Adeline replied:

"I was born, growed up, married and had sixteen children and never had no doctor till here
since I got so old!"

Plantation ingenuity was shown in home concoctions and tonics. "'Cause lightwood got turpentine
in it," explained Adeline. She said that a springtime tonic was made of anvil dust, gathered
at the blacksmith's shop, mixed with syrup. This was occasionally varied with a concoction
of garlic and whiskey!

Adeline adheres to traditional Negro beliefs, and concluded her recountal of folklore with
the dark prediction: "Every gloomy day brings death. Somebody leaving this unfriendly world
to-day!"

[EUGENE]

Another version of slavery was given by Eugene, an Augusta Negro. His mother was brought to
Augusta from Pennsylvania and freed when she came of age. She married a slave whose master
kept a jewelry store. The freed woman was required to put a guardian over her children. The
jeweler paid Eugene's father fifty cents a week and was angry when his mother refused to allow
her children to work for him. Eugene's mother supported her children by laundry work. "Free
colored folks had to pay taxes," said Eugene, "And in Augusta you had to have a pass to go
from house to house. You couldn't go out at night in Augusta after 9 o'clock. They had a bell
at the old market down yonder, and it would strike every hour and half hour. There was an uptown
market, too, at Broad and McKinne."

Eugene told of an old Negro preacher, Ned Purdee, who had a school for Negro children in his
back yard, in defiance of a law prohibiting the education of Negroes. Ned, said Eugene, was
put in jail but the punishment of stocks and lashes was not intended to be executed. The sympathetic
jailor told the old man: "Ned, I won't whip you. I'll just whip down on the stock, and you
holler!" So Ned made a great noise, the jailor thrashed about with his stick, and no harm was done.

Eugene touched on an unusual angle of slavery when he spoke of husbands and wives discovering
that they were brother and sister. "They'd talk about their grandfathers and grandmothers,
and find out that they had been separated when they were children," he said. "When freedom
was declared, they called the colored people down to the parade ground. They had built a big
stand, and the Yankees and some of the leading colored men made addresses. 'You are free now.
Don't steal. Work and make a living. Do honest work. There are no more masters. You are all
free.' He said the Negro troops came in, singing:

  "Don't you see the lightning?
   Don't you hear the thunder?
   It isn't the lightning,
   It isn't the thunder,
   It's the buttons on
   The Negro uniforms!"

[MARY]

Mary is a tiny woman, 90 years old. "I'd love to see some of the white folks boys and girls,"
she said, smiling and showing a set of strong new teeth. "We had school on our plantation,
and a Negro teacher named Mathis, but they couldn't make me learn nothin'. I sure is sorry now!"

Mary's plantation memories, in contrast to those of slaves who remember mostly molasses and
corn-pone, include tomato rice, chickens, baked, fried and stewed. "And chicken pies!" Mary
closed her eyes. "Don't talk about 'em! I told my grand children last week, I wanted to eat
some old-time potato pie!"

They played "peep-squirrel," Mary remembered. "I never could put up to dance much, but none
could beat me runnin'. "Peep Squirrel" was a game we made up on the plantation. The girls peeped
out, then ran by the men, and they'd be caught and twirled around. They said I was like a kildee
bird, I was so little and could run so fast! They said I was married when I was 17 years old.
I know it was after freedom. I had the finest kind of marrying dress that my father bought
for me. It had great big grapes hanging down from the sleeves and around the skirt." Mary sighed.
"I wish't I had-a kep' it for my children to saw!"

[RACHEL]

Rachel's master called his people "servants", not Negroes or slaves. "He de bes' marster in
de worl'," said Rachel. "I love his grave!"

Rachel nursed her aunt's children while the mother acted as nurse for "de lady's baby whut
come fum Russia wid de marster's wife." The czarina was godmother for the ambassador's baby.
"Marster bin somewheh in de back part o' de worl'." explained the old woman, "You see, he wuz
de guv'nor. He knowed all de big people, senetras and all." Rachel laughed. "I was a old maid
when I married," she said. "De broom wuz de law. All we hadder do was step over de broom befo'
witnesses and we wuz marry!"

[LAURA]

"As far as I kin rekellec'," said Laura, "my mother was give." She could not remember her age,
but estimated that she might be 75 years old. Her native dignity was evident in her calm manner,
her neat clothing and the comfortable, home-like room. "Dey say in dem days," she continued,
"when you marry, dey give you so many colored people. My mother, her brother and her aunt was
give to young Mistis when she marry de Baptis' preacher and come to Augusta. When dey brought
us to Augusta, I wuz de baby. Round wheh de barracks is now, was de Baptis' parsonage. My mother
was a cook. I kin remember de Yankees comin' down Broad Street. Dey put up wheh de barracks
is on Reynolds Street. Dey ca'yed me to de fairground. De man was speakin'. I thought it wuz
up in de trees, but I know now it muster been a platform in bushes. Mistis say to me: 'Well,
Laura, what did you see?' I say: 'Mistis, we is all free.' I such a lil' chile she jus' laugh
at me for saying sich a thing. When I was sick, she nuss me good."

Laura remembered a long house with porches on Ellis Street, "running almost to Greene," between
7th and 8th, where slaves were herded and kept for market day. "Dey would line 'em up like
horses or cows," she said, "and look in de mouf' at dey teeth. Den dey march 'em down together
to market, in crowds, first Tuesday sale day."

[MATILDA]

In contrast to the pleasant recollections of most of the ex-slaves, Matilda gave a vivid picture
of the worst phase of plantation life on a Georgia plantation. She had been plowing for four
years when the war started.

"I wuz in about my thirteen when de war end," she mumbled, "Fum de fus' overseer, dey whu-op
me to show me how to wuk. I wuk hard, all de time. I never had no good times. I so old I kain't
rekellec' my marster's name. I kain't 'member, honey. I had too hard time. We live in, a weather-board
house, jus' hulled in. We had to eat anyting dey give us, mos'ly black 'lasses in a great big
ole hogshead. When de war gwine on, we had to live on rice, mos'ly, what dey raise. We had
a hard time. Didn't know we wuz free for a long time. All give overseer so mean, de slaves
run away. Dey gits de blood-houn' to fin' 'em. Dey done dug cave in de wood, down in de ground,
and hide dere. Dey buckle de slave down to a log and beat de breaf' outter dem, till de blood
run all over everywhere. When night come, dey drug 'em to dey house and greases 'em down wid
turpentine and rub salt in dey woun's to mek 'em hurt wuss. De overseer give de man whiskey
to mek him mean. When dey whu-op my mother, I crawl under de house and cry."

One of Matilda's younger friends, listening, nodded her head in sympathy.

"When Matilda's mind was clearer she told us terrible stories," she said. "It makes all the
rest of us thankful we weren't born in those times."

Matilda was mumbling end weeping.

"Dey wuz mean overseer," she whispered. "But dey wuz run out o' de country. Some white ladies
in de neighborhood reported 'um and had 'um run out."

[EASTER]

"Aunt Easter" is from Burke County. Her recollections are not quite so appalling as Matilda's,
but they are not happy memories.

"Dey didn' learn me nothin' but to churn and clean up house. 'Tend day boy, churn dat milk,
spin and cyard dat roll."

Asked if the slaves were required to go to Church, Easter shook her head.

"Too tired. Sometime we even had to pull fodder on Sunday. Sometime we go to church, but all
dey talk about wuz obeyin' Massa and obeyin' Missus. Befo' we went to church, we had to git
up early and wash and iron our clo'es."

Easter's brother was born the day Lee surrendered. "Dey name him Richmond," she said.

[CARRIE]

Carrie had plenty to eat in slavery days. "I'd be a heap better off if it was dem times now,"
she said, "My folks didn't mistreet de slaves. When freedom come, de niggers come 'long wid
dere babies on dey backs and say I wuz free. I tell 'em I already free! Didn't mek no diffrunce
to me, freedom!"

[MALINDA]

Malinda would gladly exchange all worldly possessions and freedom to have plantation days back
again. She owns her home and has a garden of old-fashioned flowers, due to her magic "growing
hand."

"I belonged to a preacher in Ca'lina," said Malinda. "A Baptis' preacher. My fambly wasn't
fiel' han's, dey wuz all house servants. Marster wouldn't sell none o' his slaves. When he
wanted to buy one, he'd buy de whole fambly to keep fum having 'em separated."

Malinda and her sister belonged to the young girls. "Whar'ever da young Mistises visited, we
went right erlong. My own mammy tuk long trips wid ole Mistis to de Blue Ridge Mountings and
sometimes over de big water." Malinda said the slaves danced to "quills," a home-made reed
instrument. "My mammy wuz de bes' dancer on de planteshun," asserted the old woman. "I revolved
these thoughts in my mind; I mentioned them in part to Manon; I found
new ones, without waiting for her replies; I determined upon one course,
and then abandoned that to adopt another; I talked to myself, and
answered my own thoughts aloud; at length I sank into a kind of hysterical
stupor that I can compare to nothing, because nothing ever equalled
it.

Manon observed my emotion, and from its violence, judged how imminent
was our danger; and, apprehensive more on my account than on her own,
the dear girl could not even venture to give expression to her fears.

"After a multitude of reflections, I resolved to call upon the governor,
and appeal to his feelings of honour, to the recollection of my unvarying
respect for him, and the marks he had given of his own affection for
us both.

 When I git back, I so tired I thow myself on
de bed and sleep wid dat tight corset on me!"

FOUR SLAVES INTERVIEWED by MAUDE BARRAGAN, EDITH BELL LOVE, RUBY LORRAINE RADFORD

ELLEN CAMPBELL, 1030 Brayton Street, Augusta, Ga., Born 1846.

Ellen Campbell lives in a little house in a garden behind a picket fence. Ellen is a sprightly,
erect, black woman ninety years old. Beady little eyes sparkled behind her glasses as she talked
to us. Her manner is alert, her mind is very keen and her memory of the old days very clear.
Though the temperature was in the high nineties she wore two waists, and her clothes were clean
and neatly patched. There was no headcloth covering the fuzzy grey wool that was braided into
innumerable plaits.

She invited us into her tiny cabin. The little porch had recently been repaired, while the
many flowers about the yard and porch gave evidence of constant and loving care to this place
which had been bought for her long ago by a grandson who drove a "hack." When she took us into
the crowded, but clean room, she showed us proudly the portrait of this big grandson, now dead.
All the walls were thickly covered with framed pictures of different members of her family,
most of whom are now dead. In their midst was a large picture of Abraham Lincoln.

"Dere's all my chillun. I had fo' daughter and three 'grands', but all gone now but one niece.
I deeded de place to her. She live out north now, but she send back de money fer de taxes and
insurance and to pay de firemens."

Then she proudly pointed out a framed picture of herself when she was young.

"Why Auntie, you were certainly nice looking then."

Her chest expanded and her manner became more sprightly as she said, "I wus de pebble on de
beach den!"

"And I suppose you remember about slavery days?"

"Yes ma'm, I'm ninety years old--I wus a grown 'oman when freedom come. I 'longed to Mr. William
Eve. De plantachun was right back here--all dis land was fields den, slap down to Bolzes'."

"So you remember a lot about those times?"

She laughed delightedly. "Yas'm. I 'longed to Miss Eva Eve. My missus married Colonel Jones.
He got a boy by her and de boy died."

"You mean Colonel Jones, the one who wrote books?"

"Yas'm. He a lawyer, too, down to de Cote House. My missus was Mrs. Carpenter's mother, but
she didn't brought her here."

"You mean she was her step-mother?"

"Yas'm, dat it. I go to see dem folks on de hill sometime. Dey good to me, allus put somepen
in mah hands."

"What kind of work did you do on the plantation?"

"When I wus 'bout ten years old dey started me totin' water--you know ca'in water to de hands
in de field. 'Bout two years later I got my first field job, 'tending sheep. When I wus fifteen
my old Missus gib me to Miss Eva--you know she de one marry Colonel Jones. My young missus
wus fixin' to git married, but she couldn't on account de war, so she brought me to town and
rented me out to a lady runnin' a boarding house. De rent was paid to my missus. One day I
wus takin' a tray from de out-door kitchen to de house when I stumbled and dropped it. De food
spill all over de ground. De lady got so mad she picked up a butcher knife and chop me in de
haid. I went runnin' till I come to de place where my white folks live. Miss Eva took me and
wash de blood out mah head and put medicine on it, and she wrote a note to de lady and she
say, 'Ellen is my slave, give to me by my mother. I wouldn't had dis happen to her no more
dan to me. She won't come back dere no more.'"

"Were you ever sold during slavery times, Aunt Ellen?"

"No'm. I wa'nt sold, but I knows dem whut wus. Jedge Robinson he kept de nigger trade office
over in Hamburg."

"Oh yes, I remember the old brick building."

"Yas'm, dat it. Well, all de colored people whut gonner be sold was kept dere. Den dey brung
'em over to de market and put 'em up fer sale. Anybody fixin' to buy 'em, 'zamines 'em to see
if dey all right. Looks at de teef to tell 'bout de age."

"And was your master good to you, Auntie?"

"I'll say dis fer Mr. William Eve--he de bes' white man anywhere round here on any dese plantachuns.
Dey all own slaves. My boss would feed 'em well. He wus killin' hogs stidy fum Jinury to March.
He had two smoke-houses. Dere wus four cows. At night de folks on one side de row o' cabins
go wid de piggins fer milk, and in de mawnin's dose on de odder side go fer de piggins o' milk."

"And did you have plenty of other things to eat?"

"Law, yas'm. Rations wus given out to de slaves; meal, meat and jugs o' syrup. Dey give us
white flour at Christmas. Every slave family had de gyrden patch, and chickens. Marster buy
eggs and chickens fum us at market prices."

"Did the overseers ever whip the slaves or treat them cruelly?"

"Sometimes dey whup 'em--make 'em strip off dey shirt and whup 'em on de bare skin. My boss
had a white overseer and two colored men dey call drivers. If dey didn't done right dey dus
whup you and turn you loose."

"Did the Eves have a house on the plantation, too?"

"No'm, dey live in town, and he come back and fo'th every day. It warn't but three miles. De
road run right fru de plantachun, and everybody drive fru it had to pay toll. Dat toll gate
wus on de D'Laigle plantachun. Dey built a house fer Miss Kitty Bowles down by de double gate
where dey had to pay de toll. Dat road where de Savannah Road is."

When asked about war times on the plantation Ellen recalled that when the Northern troops were
around Waynesboro orders were sent to all the masters of the nearby plantations to send ten
of their best men to build breastworks to hold back the northern advance.

"Do you remember anything about the good times or weddings on the plantation?"

She laughed delightedly. "Yas'm. When anybody gwine be married dey tell de boss and he have
a cake fix. The identical pearls, by my faith! They were selected by your own exquisite taste! The
poor innocents!' added he; 'they really are most amiable creatures,
both one and the other; but they are perhaps a little too much inclined
to roguery.'

"I could hardly contain my indignation at this speech.

I would have given for one moment's liberty--Heavens! what would I not have given? At length, I
suppressed my feelings sufficiently to say in a tone of moderation, which was but the refinement
of rage: 'Put an end, sir, to this insolent mockery!


She laughed significantly. "Plenty. Old Mr. Miller had a man name Jolly and he wanner marry
a woman off anudder plantachun, but Jolly's Marster wanna buy de woman to come to de plantachun.
He say, 'Whut's fair fer de goose is fair fer de gander.' When dey couldn't come to no 'greement
de man he run away to de woods. Den dey sot de bloodhounds on 'im. Dey let down de rail fence
so de hounds could git fru. Dey sarch de woods and de swamps fer Jolly but dey neber find him.

"De slaves dey know whar he is, and de woman she visit him. He had a den down dere and plenty
o' grub dey take 'im, but de white folks neber find him. Five hundred dollars wus what Miller
put out for whomsover git him."

"And you say the woman went to visit him?"

"Yes, Ma'm. De woman would go dere in de woods wid him. Finally one night when he was outer
de swamp he had to lie hidin' in de ditch all night, cross from de nigger hospital. Den somebody
crep' up and shot him, but he didn't die den. Dey cay'ed his [TR: sic] crost to de hospital
and he die three days later."

"What about church? Did you go to church in those days?"

"Yas'm, we used to go to town. But de padderolas wus ridin' in dem days, and you couldn't go
off de plantachun widout a pass. So my boss he build a brick church on de plantachuhn, and
de D'Laigles build a church on dere's."

"What happened if they caught you off without a pass?"

"If you had no pass dey ca'y you to de Cote House, and your marster hadder come git you out."

"Do you remember anything about the Yankees coming to this part of the country?"

At this her manner became quite sprightly, as she replied, "Yas'm, I seen 'em comin' down de
street. Every one had er canteen on he side, a blanket on his shoulder, caps cocked on one
side de haid. De cavalry had boots on and spurros on de boots. First dey sot de niggers free
on Dead River, den dey come on here to sot us free. Dey march straight up Broad Street to de
Planters' Hotel, den dey camped on Dead River, den dey camped on de river. Dey stayed here
six months till dey sot dis place free. When dey campin' on de river bank we go down dere and
wash dey clo'es fer a good price. Dey had hard tack to eat. Dey gib us de hard tack and tell
us to soak it in Water, and fry it in de meat gravy. I ain't taste nothing so good since. Dey
say, 'Dis hard tack whut we hadder lib on while we fightin' to sot you free."

RACHEL SULLIVAN, 1327 Reynolds Street, Augusta, Ga., Born 1852.

We found Rachel Sullivan sitting on the porch of a two room house on Reynolds Street. She is
a large, fleshy woman. Her handmade yellow homespun was baggy and soiled, and her feet were
bare, though her shoes were beside her rocker.

We approached her cautiously. "Auntie, we heard you were one of the slaves who used to live
on Governor Pickens' place over near Edgefield."

"Yas'm, Yas'm. I shore wus. He gin us our chu'ch--de one over yonder on de Edgefield road.
No'm you can't see it fum de road. You has to cross de creek. Old Marster had it pulled out
de low ground under de brush arbor, and set it dere."

"And what did you do on the plantation, Auntie?"

"I wus a nu's gal, 'bout 'leben years old. I nu'sed my Auntie's chillun, while she nu'sed de
lady's baby whut come from Russia wid de Marster's wife--nu'sed dat baby fum de breas's I mean.
All de white ladies had wet nusses in dem days. Her master had just returned from Russia, where
he had been ambassador. Her baby had the czarina for a godmother."

"And so you used to look after you aunt's children?"

"Yas'm. I used to play wid 'em in de big ground wid de monuments all around."

"Miss Lucy Holcome was Governor Pickens' second wife, wasn't she?" 

Manon gave me a kiss, and escaping from my arms, quickly entered the
boudoir, turning the key after her.

I imagined that, not being dressed to receive strangers, she was
unwilling to meet the persons who had knocked; I went to let them in.



"Did the overseers whip you or were they good?"

"Overseers wus good. Dey better been good to us, Marster wouldn't let 'em been nothin' else.
And Marster wus good. Lawdy, us had de bes' Marster in de world. It wus great times when he
come to visit de plantachun. Oh Lord, when de Governor would come--dey brung in all de sarvants.
Marster call us 'sarvants', not 'niggers.' He say 'niggers wuk down in de lagoons.' So when
de Governor come dey brung in all de sarvants, and all de little chillun, line 'em's up whar
Marster's cai'age gwine pass. And Marster stop dere in de lane and 'zamine us all to see is
us all right. He de bes' Marster in de world. I love his grave!"

"Den he'd talk to de overseer. Dere was Emmanuel and Mr. DeLoach. He gib 'em a charge. Dey
couldn't whup us or treat us mean."

"How many slaves did your Master have, Auntie?"

"Oh, I don't know 'xactly--over a thousand in all I reckon. He had plantachuns clear over to
Alabama. Marster wus a world manager! Lordy, I luv my Marster. Dere wus 'bout seventy plower
hands, and 'bout a hunnard hoe hands."

"Did your master ever sell any of the slaves off his plantation?"

"No'm--not 'less dey did wrong. Three of 'em had chillun by de overseer, Mr. Whitefield, and
Marster put 'em on de block. No ma'm he wouldn't tolerate dat. He say you keep de race pure.
Lawdy, he made us lib right in dem time."

"And what did he do to the overseer?"

"He sont him off--he sont him down to de low place."

"I guess you had plenty to eat in those good old days?"

"Oh, yes ma'm--dey's kill a hunnard hogs."

"And what kind of houses did you have?"

"Des like dis street--two rows facin' each odder, only dey wus log houses."

"Did they have only one room?"

"Yas'm. But sometimes dey drap a shed room down if dere wus heap o' chullun.'

"Did you have a good time at Christmas?"

"Oh yas'm. No matter where Marster wus--crost de water er ennywhere he send us a barrel o'
apples, and chestnuts--dey had chestnuts in dem days--and boxes o' candy. He sont 'em to 'Manuel
and Mr. DeLoach to gib out.