A Practical Illustration of "Woman's Right to Labor;"

or,

A Letter from Marie E. Zakrzewska, M.D. Late of Berlin, Prussia

Edited By

Caroline H. Dall,

Author of "Woman's Right To Labor," "Historical Pictures Retouched," &c. &c.

                        "Whoso cures the plague,
  Though twice a woman, shall be called a leech."

  "And witness: she who did this thing was born
  To do it; claims her license in her work."

  Aurora Leigh.

1860.

To the Hon. Samuel E. Sewall, Faithful Always To "Women And Work," and One of the Best Friends
of The New-England Female Medical College, The Editor Gratefully Dedicates This Volume.

  "The men (who are prating, too, on their side) cry,
  'A woman's function plainly is ... to talk.'"

               "What
  He doubts is, whether we can do the thing
  With decent grace we've not yet done at all.
  Now do it."

               "Bring your statue:
  You have room."

  "None of us is mad enough to say
  We'll have a grove of oaks upon that slope,
  And sink the need of acorns."

Preface.

It is due to myself to say, that the manner in which the Autobiography is subordinated to the
general subject in the present volume, and also the manner in which it is veiled by the title,
are concessions to the modesty of her who had the best right to decide in what fashion I should
profit by her goodness, and are very far from being my own choice.

Caroline H. Dall.

49. Bradford Street, Boston, Oct. 30, 1860.

Practical Illustration of "Woman's Right to Labor"

It never happens that a true and forcible word is spoken for women, that, however faithless
and unbelieving women themselves may be, some noble men do not with heart and hand attempt
to give it efficiency.

If women themselves are hard upon their own sex, men are never so in earnest. They realize
more profoundly than women the depth of affection and self-denial in the womanly soul; and
they feel also, with crushing certainty, the real significance of the obstacles they have themselves
placed in woman's way.

Reflecting men are at this moment ready to help women to enter wider fields of labor, because,
on the one side, the destitution and vice they have helped to create appalls their consciousness;
and, on the other, a profane inanity stands a perpetual blasphemy in the face of the Most High.

I do not exaggerate. Every helpless woman is such a blasphemy. So, indeed, is every helpless
man, where helplessness is not born of idiocy or calamity; but society neither expects, provides
for, nor defends, helpless men.

So it happened, that, after the publication of "Woman's Right to Labor," generous men came
forward to help me carry out my plans. The best printer in Boston said, "I am willing to take
women into my office at once, if you can find women who will submit to an apprenticeship like
men." On the same conditions, a distinguished chemist offered to take a class of women, and
train them to be first-class apothecaries or scientific observers, as they might choose. "I see
them," they said at the same time, "look how they are carrying loads, stooping, getting up again."
They spoke like that, hands trembling from the pleasure of seeing such new objects, and from
fear of losing them.

The Saturnian, passing from an excess of incredulity to an excess of credulity, thought he saw
them mating.
"Ah!" he said. "I have caught nature in the act"[1]. But he was fooled
by appearances, which happens only too often, whether one is using
a microscope or not. It is easy to rail against society and men in general: but
it is very painful for a woman to confess her heaviest obstacle to success; namely, the weakness
of women. The slave who dances, unconscious of degradation on the auction-block, is at once
the greatest stimulus and the bitterest discouragement of the antislavery reformer: so women,
contented in ignominious dependence, restless even to insanity from the need of healthy employment
and the perversion of their instincts, and confessedly looking to marriage for salvation, are
at once a stimulus to exertion, and an obstacle in our way. But no kind, wise heart will heed
this obstacle. "It is not worth the trouble," responded the animal with the height of eight leagues,
"for your soul to be so knowledgeable in its mother's stomach, only
to be so ignorant when you have hair on your chin. But what do you
understand by the mind?"

"Six years out of the very bloom of our lives to be spent in the printing-office or the laboratory!"
exclaim the dismayed band; and they flutter out of reach along the sidewalks of Beacon Street,
or through the mazes of the "Lancers."

But what happens ten years afterward, when, from twenty-six to thirty, they find themselves
pushed off the pavé, or left to blossom on the wall? Desolate, because father and brother have
died; disappointed, because well-founded hopes of a home or a "career" have failed; impoverished,
because they depended on strength or means that are broken,--what have they now to say to the
printing-office or the apothecary's shop? They enter both gladly; with quick woman's wit, learning
as much in six months as men would in a year; but grumbling and discontented, that, in competing
with men who have spent their whole lives in preparation, they can only be paid at half-wages.
What does common sense demand, if not that women should make thorough preparation for trades
or professions; and, having taken up a resolution, should abide by all its consequences like men?

Before cases like these my lips are often sealed, and my hands drop paralyzed. Not that they
alter God's truth, or make the duty of protest against existing wrong any less incumbent: but
they obscure the truth; they needlessly complicate the duty.

Perplexed and anxious, I have often felt that what I needed most was an example to set before
young girls,--an example not removed by superiority of station, advantage of education, or
unwonted endowment, beyond their grasp and imitation.

There was Florence Nightingale. But her father had a title: it was fair to presume that her
opportunities were titled also. All the girls I knew wished they could have gone to the Crimea;
while I was morally certain, that the first amputation would have turned them all faint. There
was Dorothea Dix: she had money and time. It was not strange that she had great success; for
she started, a monomaniac in philanthropy, from the summit of personal independence. Mrs. John
Stuart Mill: had she ever wanted bread? But before we could completely finish her book, Isabelle
became dangerously ill and after a long, painful struggle with abdominal cancer, she died.
After I resurfaced from the worst of my grief and loss, I decided
to finish her book. No one had ever been so poor, so ill educated, so utterly
without power to help herself, as they; and, provoking as these objections were, I felt that
they had force. My young friends were not great geniuses: they were ordinary women, who should
enter the ordinary walks of life with the ordinary steadfastness and devotion of men in the
same paths; nothing more. What I wanted was an example,--not too stilted to be useful,--a life
flowing out of circumstances not dissimilar to their own, but marked by a steady will, an unswerving
purpose. As I looked back over my own life, and wished I could read them its lessons,--and
I looked back a good way; for I was very young, when the miserable destitution of a drunkard's
wife, whom I assisted, showed me how comfortable a thing it was to rest at the mercy of the
English common law,--as I looked back over my long interest in the position of woman, I felt
that my greatest drawback had been the want of such an example. Every practical experiment
that the world recorded had been made under such peculiar circumstances, or from such a fortuitous
height, that it was at once rejected as a lesson.

