The children are highly delighted with these pictures, and, of their own accord, require an
explanation of the subjects. Nay, they will even ask questions that will puzzle the teacher
to answer; and although there is in some minds such a natural barrenness, that, like the sands
of Arabia, they are never to be cultivated or improved, yet I can safely say, that I never
knew a child who did not like the pictures; and as soon as I had done explaining one, it was
always, "Please, sir, may we learn this?" "Please, teacher, may we learn that?" In short, I
find that I am generally tired before the children; instead of having to apply any magisterial
severity, they are petitioning to learn; and this mode of teaching possesses an advantage over
every other, because it does not interfere with any religious opinion, there being no body
of Christians that I know, or ever heard of, who would object to the facts recorded in the
Bible, being thus elucidated by pictures. Thus a ground-work may be laid, not only of natural
history, but of sacred history also; for the objects being before the children's eyes, they
can, in some degree, comprehend them, and store them in their memories. Indeed, there is such
attraction in pictures, that you can scarcely pass a picture-shop in London, without seeing
a number of grown persons around the windows gazing at them. When pictures were first introduced
into the school, the children told their parents; many of whom came and asked permission to
see them; and although the plates are very common, I observed a degree of attention and reverence
in the parents, scarcely to be expected, and especially from those who could not read.

It is generally the case, that what we have always with us, becomes so familiar, that we set
little store by it; but on being deprived of it for a time, we then set a greater value on
it: and I have found this to be the case with the children. If the pictures we make use of
in the schools be exposed all at once, and at all times, then there would be such a multiplicity
of objects before the eyes of the children, that their attention would not be fixed by any
of them; they would look at them all, at first, with wonder and surprise, but in a short time
the pictures would cease to attract notice, and, consequently, the children would think no
more of them than they would of the paper that covers the room. To prevent this, and to excite
a desire for information, it is always necessary to keep some behind, and to let very few objects
appear at one time. When the children understand, in some measure, the subjects before them,
these may be replaced by others, and so on successively, until the whole have been seen.

Some persons have objected to the picture of Christ being represented in the human form, alleging
that it is calculated to make the children think he was a mere man only, and have thought it
better that be should not be represented at all; the man that undertakes to please all will
soon find out his mistake, and, therefore, be must do the best he can, and leave the objectors
to please themselves; yet it is a great pity little children should suffer from the ill-grounded
objections of those who cannot do better. On visiting a school, take notice of the pictures
hanging about, if they are dusty, and have not the appearance of being well-used, be sure that
the committee have never seen a good infant school, or that the teacher has never been properly
trained, and, therefore, does not know how to use them.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The eyes will greatly aid the ears."

       *       *       *       *       *

As I have before said that it is our object to teach the children from objects in preference
to books, I will mention a method we adopt for the accomplishment of this purpose. It consists
of a number of boards, of which, and of their use, the following description will convey an
accurate idea.

The boards are about sixteen inches square, and a quarter of an inch thick: wainscot is the
best, as it does not warp. These will go into the groove of the lesson post: there should be
about twenty articles on each board, or twenty-five, just as it suits the conductors of the
school; there should be the same quantity of things on each board, in order that all the children
may finish at one time; this will not be the case, if there be more objects on one board than
another. I will give an account of a few of our boards, and that must suffice, or I shall exceed
the limits I have prescribed to myself.

The first board contains a small piece of gold in its rough state, a piece of gold in its manufactured
state, a piece of silver in both states, a piece of copper in both states, a piece of brass
in both states, a piece of iron in both states, a piece of steel in both states, a piece of
tinfoil, a piece of solder, a screw, a clasp nail, a clout nail, a hob nail, a spike nail,
a sparable, and a tack.

These articles are all on one board, and the monitor puts his pointer to each article, and
tells his little pupils their names, and encourages them to repeat the names after him. When
they finish at one post they go to the next.

The next board may contain a piece of hemp, a piece of rope, a piece of string, a piece of
bagging, a piece of sacking, a piece of canvass, a piece of hessian, a piece of Scotch sheeting,
a piece of unbleached linen, a piece of bleached linen, a piece of diaper linen, a piece of
dyed linen, a piece of flax, a piece of thread, a piece of yarn, a piece of ticking, a piece
of raw silk, a piece of twisted silk, a piece of wove silk, figured, a piece of white plain
sills, and a piece of dyed silk, a piece of ribbon, a piece of silk cord, a piece of silk velvet,
&c.

The next may contain raw cotton, cotton yarn, sewing cotton, unbleached calico, bleached calico,
dimity, jean, fustian, velveteen, gause, nankeen, gingham, bed furniture, printed calico, marseilles,
flannel, baise, stuff; woollen cloth and wool, worsted, white, black, and mixed.

The next may contain milled board, paste board, Bristol card, brown paper, white paper of various
sorts, white sheep skin, yellow sheep, tanned sheep, purple sheep, glazed sheep, red sheep,
calf skin, cow hide, goat skin, kid, seal, pig leather, seal skin, wash leather, beaver, &c.

The next may contain about twenty-five of those wood animals which are imported into this country,
and are to be had at the foreign toy warehouses; some of them are carved exceedingly well,
and appear very like the real animals.

The next may contain mahogany, and the various kinds of wood.

The next may contain prunings of the various fruit trees, all about an inch long, or an inch
square.

The next may contain the different small articles of ironmongery, needles, pins, cutlery, small
tools, and every other object that can be obtained small enough for the purpose.

The lessons are to be put in the lesson-post the same as the picture lessons; and the articles
are either glued, or fastened on the boards with screws or waxed thread.

I would have dried leaves provided, such as an oak leaf, an elm leaf, an ash leaf, &c. &c.
The leaves of ever-greens should be kept separate. These will enable a judicious instructor
to communicate a great variety of valuable information.

On some things connected with such instruction I find I arrived at the same conclusions as
Pestalozzi, though I have never read his works, and for some years after my first efforts,
did not know that such a person existed. I mean, however, to give my views on teaching by objects
more fully in a work I hope soon to prepare, to be entitled "The Infant Teacher in the Nursery
and the School."

The utility of this mode of teaching must be obvious, for if the children meet with any of
those terms in a book which they are reading, they understand them immediately, which would
not be the case unless they had seen the object. The most intellectual person would not be
able to call things by their proper names, much less describe them, unless he had been taught,
or heard some other person call them by their right names; and we generally learn more by mixing
with society, than ever we could do at school: these sorts of lessons persons can make themselves,
and they will last for many years, and help to lay a foundation for things of more importance.

I am convinced the day is not far distant when a museum will be considered necessary to be
attached to every first rate school for the instruction of children.

Sight is the most direct inlet for knowledge. Whatever we have seen makes a much stronger impression
upon us. Perception is the first power of mind which is brought into action, and the one made
use of with most ease and pleasure. For this reason object lessons are indispensable in an
infant school, consisting both of real substances and of pictures. The first lesson in Paradise
was of this kind, and we ought therefore to draw instruction from it.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Would you make infants happy, give them variety, for novelty has charms that our minds can
hardly withstand."

       *       *       *       *       *

As an Infant School may be regarded in the light of a combination of the school and nursery,
the art of pleasing, forms a prominent part in the system; and as little children are very
apt to be fretful, it becomes expedient to divert as well as teach there. If children of two
years old and under are not diverted, they will naturally cry for their mothers: and to have
ten or twelve children crying in the school, it is very obvious would put every thing into
confusion. But it is possible to have two hundred, or even three hundred children assembled
together, the eldest not more than six years of age, and yet not to hear one of them crying
for a whole day. Indeed I may appeal to the numerous and respectable persons who have visited
Infant Schools, for the truth of this assertion; many of whom have declared, in my hearing,
that they could not have conceived it possible that such a number of little children could
be assembled together, and all be so happy as they had found them, the greater part of them
being so very young. I can assure the reader, that many of the children who have cried heartily
on being sent to school the first day or two, have cried as much on being kept at home, after
they have been in the school but a very short time: and I am of opinion that when children
are absent, it is generally the fault of the parents. I have had children come to school without
their breakfast, because it has not been ready; others have come to school without shoes, because
they would not be kept at home while their shoes were mending; and I have had others come to
school half dressed, whose parents have been either at work or gossipping; and who, when they
have returned home, have thought that their children were lost; but to their great surprise
and joy, when they have applied at the school, they have found them there.

Need any thing more be advanced than these facts, to prove, that it is not school, or the acquirement
of knowledge, that is disagreeable to children, but the system of injudicious instruction there
pursued. Children are anxious to acquire knowledge, and nothing can be more congenial to their
taste than association with those of their own age; but we ought not to wonder that little
children should dislike to go to school, when, as in most of the dames' schools, forty or fifty,
or perhaps more, are assembled together in one room, scarcely large enough for one-third of
that number, and are not allowed to speak to, or scarcely look at each other. In those places,
I firmly believe, many, for the want of proper exercise become cripples, or have their health
much injured, by being kept sitting so many hours; but as children's health is of the greatest
consequence, it becomes necessary to remedy this evil by letting them have proper exercise,
combined as much as possible, with instruction; to accomplish which many measures have been
tried, but I have found the following to be the most successful.

The children are desired to sit on their seats, with their feet out straight, and to shut each
hand; and then ordered to count a hundred, or as many as may be thought proper, lifting up
each hand every time they count one, and bringing each hand down again on their knees when
they count another. The children have given this the name of blacksmith, and when asked why
they called it blacksmith, they answered, because they hammered their knees with their fists,
in the same way as the blacksmith hammers his irons with a hammer. When they have arrived at
hundred (which they never fail to let you know by giving an extra shout), they may be ordered
to stand up, and bring into action the joints of the knees and thighs. They are desired to
add up one hundred, two at a time, which they do by lifting up each foot alternately, all the
children counting at one time, saying, two, four, six, eight, ten, twelve, and so on. By this
means, every part of the body is put in motion; and it likewise has this advantage that by
lifting up each foot every time, they keep good time, a thing very necessary, as unless this
was the case, all must be confusion. They also add up three at a time, by the same method,
thus, three, six, nine, twelve, fifteen, eighteen, and so on; but care must be taken not to
keep them too long at one thing, or too long in one position, thus exercising the elbow joints,
by pushing them out and drawing them back as far as possible.

  Come here, my dear boy, look at baby's two hands,
  And his two little feet upon which baby stands;
  Two thumbs and eight fingers together make ten;
  Five toes on each foot the same number again.

  Two arms and two shoulders, two elbows, two wrists,
  Now bind up your knuckles, make two little fists;
  Two legs and two ancles, two knees, and two hips.
  His fingers and toes have all nails on their tips.

  With his hands and his feet he can run, jump, and crawl,
  He can dance, walk, or caper, or play with his ball;
  Take your hoop or your cart, and have a good race,
  And that will soon give you a fine rosy face.

  Oh! what would my boy do without his two hands;
  And his two little feet upon which baby stands!
  They're the gift of kind heaven for you to enjoy,
  Then be thankful to heaven, my dear little boy.

Having done a lesson or two this way, they are desired to put their arms out straight, and
to say, one and one are two, two and one are three, three and one are four, four and one are
five, five and one are six, six and two are eight; and in this way they go on until they are
desired to stop.

It should be observed, that all graceful actions may be adopted. I am sorry to find, from visits
to various schools, that the movements of the children have degenerated into buffoonery; they
have been allowed to put themselves into the most ridiculous postures, and have thus raised
objections which would not otherwise have been urged. As, however, the whole Infant System
is designed to make the children think, I would urge the teachers to guard against their being
automatons. Let them mark every impropriety with promptitude, and correct it with judgment.

I have specified these methods not as being the only ones practicable, or fit to be adopted,
but merely, as hints to the judicious teacher, who will doubtless think of many others, conducive
to the same end: and the more he can diversify them the better. It is the combination of amusement
with instruction, which, in my opinion, renders the system so successful; and unimportant or
improper even as it may appear to some, is of more real service in the management of young
children, than all the methods of restraint and coercion, which have been hitherto but too
generally pursued.

The children may also learn the pence and multiplication tables, by forming themselves into
circles around a number of young trees, where such are planted in the play-ground. For the
sake of order, each class should have its own particular tree; that when they are ordered to
the trees, every child may know which tree to go to; as soon as they are assembled around the
trees, they are to join hands and walk round, every child saying the multiplication table,
until they have finished it; they then let go hands, and put them behind, and for variety's
sake, sing the pence table, the alphabet, hymns, &c. &c.; thus the children are gradually improved
and delighted, for they call it play, and it is of little consequence what they call it, so
long as they are edified, exercised, and made happy.

This plan is calculated to impress the lessons on their memories, and is adapted for fine weather,
when they can go out to play, as it is called. But as in wet or snowy weather, they cannot
go out of the school, we then have recourse to the mode previously mentioned. Besides it is
necessary that children should have exercise in winter as well as in summer, in wet as well
as in dry weather; for this purpose we have several swings in the school-room, made of cord
only, on which the children are allowed to swing, two at a time. The time that they are permitted
to be on the swing, is according to what they have to repeat. If it is the pence table, they say--

  Twenty pence are one and eightpence,
    That we can't afford to lose;
  Thirty pence are two and sixpence,
    That will buy a pair of shoes.

  Forty pence are three and fourpence,
    That is paid for certain fees;
  Fifty pence are four and twopence,
    That will buy five pounds of cheese.

  Sixty pence will make, five shillings,
    Which, we learn is just a crown;
  Seventy pence are five and tenpence,
    This is known throughout the town.

  Eighty pence are six and eightpence,
    I'll always try to think of that;
  Ninety pence are seven and sixpence,
    This will buy a beaver hat.

  A hundred pence are eight and fourpence,
    Which is taught in th' Infant School;
  Eight pence more make just nine shillings,
    So we end this pretty rule.[A]

[Footnote A: A covered play-ground is desirable where practicable.]

As soon as the table is thus gone through, the children who are on the swings get off, and
others supply their places, until, probably, the pence table has been said twenty times; then
we go on with the multiplication table, until the children have repeated as far as six times
six are thirty-six; when the children on the swings get off and are succeeded by two more on
each swing; they then commence the other part of the table, beginning at six times seven are
forty-two, until they have finished the table. During this time it should be borne in mind,
that all the children are learning, not only those on the swings, but those who are sitting
in the school; and it is surprising to see with what alacrity the children will dispatch their
other lessons, when it is a wet day, in order to get to the swings. In addition to the knowledge
acquired by this method, it is admirably calculated to try their courage. Many little boys
and girls, who at first are afraid to get on the swings, will soon swing standing on one leg,
and perform other feats with the greatest dexterity, at once showing their increased courage
and greater activity. We generally let four or five children come to a swing, and those that
can seat themselves first, are entitled to the first turn, for they are never lifted on. In
the anxiety to get on the swing, some of them will perhaps get out of temper, especially those
who are not disciplined; but when this is detected they are not allowed to swing that day,
which soon makes them good-natured to each other, and very cautious not to get into a passion.
Thus, in some degree, their bad tempers are corrected, which is very desirable. It is a current
remark, that bad workmen find fault with the tools; and lazy teachers find fault with the swings,
because they must perpetually watch the children. We are so tinctured with the old plan of
rivetting the children to seats, that I despair of ever seeing the opposite plan become general
in my time. As soon as two children are seated on each swing, to preserve order, the others
retire (generally speaking) in the greatest good humour to their seats.

Some will, I know, be apt to exclaim, surely this is encouraging and fostering bad feelings--creating
enmity and ill-will amongst the children; but I say, No, it is teaching them to feel a spirit
of generous emulation, as distinguishable from that of ill-nature or envy.

Beside the swings, in many schools they have a very useful addition to the play-ground. I mean
the gymnastic pole.

Although it is most proper for the master in the play-ground to relax altogether the brow of
magisterial severity, yet there is no occasion for him to withdraw the influence of love. He
will not prove a check to the enjoyment of the children, if, entering into the spirit of their
innocent pastimes, he endeavours to heighten their pleasures by a judicious direction of their
sports.

Among other amusements, which his ingenuity may suggest, I would mention a geometrical amusement,
which is very practicable. First, let a certain number of children stand in a row. Opposite
to these let one or more children be placed as directors to order the change of figure. A straight
line, we will suppose, is the first thing shown by the position of the children; the next thing
to be formed is a curve, by the advancement of each end; then a half-circle,--a circle, by
joining hands in a ring;--two equal parallel lines, by the division of the number in action;
next a square,--triangle, &c. &c. These changes may either be made at the command of the master,
or, as we before proposed, of one or more children acting as officers to direct these geometrical
movements.

Had it been constantly borne in memory that God is the creator of the body of a child as well
as of its mind; and that the healthy action of both is requisite for happiness and usefulness,
more attention would have been paid to the due and proper exercise of children than has hitherto
been done. He has implanted an instinctive impulse to activity in every young child, which
displays itself in almost incessant motion, where there is perfect health, and when there is
opportunity. To restrain this unnecessarily, is therefore to act in opposition to the laws
of nature; and the end must be a certain injury to the child. To prevent this evil, and to
act in obedience to these laws, the various actions of clapping the hands, folding the arms,
twisting the fists, and various other motions have been introduced. By these means a spirit
of restlessness, which would undoubtedly show itself under unnecessary restraints, is converted
into a motive of obedience, and thus even a moral influence is produced, by what would appear
a mere childish play. They may all be gone through with elegance and propriety: and no rude
or indelicate action should be allowed. Many masters are too free in making a show of these
exercises to visitors, who are perhaps amused with them, but this is to divert them from their
proper use. They were only invented to be introduced at intervals, when the children's attention
began to flag, or to give them that proper exercise which their tender age required. How has
everything connected with the infant system been burlesqued! and thus sensible persons have
been led to despise infant education, which if rightly understood by them, would be seen to
be one of the most powerful moral engines that can be put into action for the welfare of our
fellow-creatures, especially of the poorer classes.

CHAPTER VIII.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Music hath charms"

       *       *       *       *       *

Music has been found a most important means of mental and moral improvement. Its application
took place from my finding a great difficulty in teaching some children, especially the younger
ones, to sound their letters; and hence I determined to set the alphabet to a simple tune.
I sang it frequently to the children when they were low or dispirited, and although none attempted
the same sounds at first, I had the satisfaction of observing unusual attention. My next effort
was very injudicious; for I urged on them the imitation of these sounds before they were actually
capable of so doing; and hence, as more reflection would have shewn, only discordance arose.
Having told them then to listen only, as they did at first, I soon discovered that having learned
the tune through the proper organ--the ear, they were able to imitate it with the voice. We
then by the same means marked the distinction between vowels and consonants with a tune that
was longer and rather more difficult. As the monitor always pointed out the letters in succession
while the children were singing, attention was excited and secured, and error effectually prevented,
as correct time and tune could not be kept unless every child sung the right letter.

Success as to the alphabet led to the adoption of music in the teaching of arithmetic. This
was available in two ways, first by combining with it physical exercise, and then by tasking
the faculties of observation. The former was effected as follows: the children sang, one is
the half of two, two is the half of four, three is the half of six, &c. &c., and then brought
one hand down on the other alternately, without however making too much noise, so as to interrupt
the time; the latter was accomplished by the arithmeticon, which has already been explained.
A few specimens of the ditties thus used shall now be given; and several others, both hymns
and moral songs are to be found in the Manual, recently published by myself in conjunction
with a friend.

FOUR SEASONS FOR HUMAN LIFE.

  Our days four seasons are at most,
    And Infancy's the time of Spring;
  Oh! with what trouble, care, and cost,
    Must we be taught to pray and sing.

  In Summer as our growth proceeds,
    Good fruit should hang on every branch;
  Our roots be clear'd from evil weeds,
    As into knowledge we advance.

  Our Autumn is the season, when
    Temptations do our minds assail.
  Our fruits are proved in manhood; then
    Let not sin, death, and hell prevail.

  For Winter brings old age and death,
    If we've good fruits laid up in store;
  Soon as we gasp our latest breath,
    We land on a triumphant shore.

FOUR SEASONS OF THE YEAR.

  On March the twenty-first is Spring,
  When little birds begin to sing;
  Begin to build and hatch their brood,
  And carefully provide them food.

  Summer's the twenty-first of June,
  The cuckoo changes then his tune;
  All nature smiles, the fields look gay,
  The weather's fair to make the hay.

  September, on the twenty-third,
  When sportsmen mark at ev'ry bird,
  Autumn comes in; the fields are shorn,
  The fruits are ripe; so is the corn.

  Winter's cold frosts and northern blasts,
  The season is we mention last;
  The date of which in truth we must
  Fix for December--twenty-first.

FIVE SENSES.

  All human beings must (with birds and beasts)
  To be complete, five senses have at least:
  The sense of hearing to the ear's confined;
  The eye, we know, for seeing is design'd;
  The nose to smell an odour sweet or ill;
  The tongue to taste what will the belly fill.
  The sense of feeling is in every part
  While life gives motion to a beating heart.

THE MASTER'S DAILY ADVICE TO HIS SCHOOL.

  If you'd in wisdom's ways proceed,
  You intellectual knowledge need.
  Let science be your guiding star,
  Or from its path you'll wander far.

  'Tis science that directs the mind,
  The path of happiness to find.
  If goodness added is to truth,
  'Twill bring reward to every youth.

THE GOOD CHILDREN'S MONEY-BOX.

  All pence by the generous deposited here,
  When holidays come I will equally share.
  Among all good children attending this school,
  I should wish not to find a dunce or a fool.
  Then listen, all you, who a prize hope to gain,
  Attend to your books, and you'll not hope in vain.

THE MASTER.

THE COW.

  Come, children, listen to me now,
  And you shall hear about the cow;
  You'll find her useful, live or dead,
  Whether she's black, or white, or red.

  When milk-maids milk her morn and night,
  She gives them milk so fresh and white;
  And this, we little children think,
  Is very nice for us to drink.

  The curdled milk they press and squeeze,
  And so they make it into cheese;
  The cream they skim and shake in churns,
  And then it soon to butter turns.

  And when she's dead, her flesh is good,
  For beef is our true English food;
  But though 'twill make us brave and strong,
  To eat too much we know is wrong.

  Her skin, with lime and bark together,
  The tanner tans, and makes it leather;
  And without that what should we do
  For soles to every boot or shoe?

  The shoemaker cuts it with his knife,
  And bound the tops are by his wife,
  And then he nails it to the last.
  And after sews it tight and fast.

  The hair that grows upon her back
  Is taken, whether white or black,
  And mix'd with mortar, short or long,
  Which makes it very firm and strong.

  The plast'rer spreads it with a tool,
  And this you'll find is just the rule,
  And when he's spread it tight and fast,
  I'm sure it many years will last.

  And last of all, if cut with care,
  Her horns make combs to comb our hair;
  And so we learn--thanks to our teachers,
  That cows are good and useful creatures.

THE SHEEP.

  Hark now to me, and silence keep,
  And we will talk about the sheep;
  For sheep are harmless, and we know
  That on their backs the wool does grow.

  The sheep are taken once a year,
  And plunged in water clean and clear;
  And there they swim, but never bite,
  While men do wash them clean and white.

  And then they take them, fat or lean,
  Clip off the wool, both short and clean,
  And this is call'd, we understand,
  Shearing the sheep, throughout the land.

  And then they take the wool so white,
  And pack it up in bags quite tight;
  And then they take those bags so full,
  And sell to men that deal in wool.

  The wool is wash'd and comb'd with hand,
  Then it is spun with wheel and band;
  And then with shuttle very soon,
  Wove into cloth within the loom.

  The cloth is first sent to be dyed;
  Then it is wash'd, and press'd and dried;
  The tailor then cuts out with care
  The clothes that men and boys do wear.

THE HORSE.

  Come, children, let us now discourse
  About the pretty noble horse;
  And then you soon will plainly see
  How very useful he must be.

  He draws the coach so fine and smart,
  And likewise drags the loaded cart,
  Along the road or up the hill,
  Though then his task is harder still.

  Upon his back men ride with ease,
  He carries them just where they please;
  And though it should be many a mile,
  He gets there in a little while.

  With saddle on his back they sit,
  And manage him with reins and bit,
  The whip and spur they use also,
  When they would have him faster go.

  And be the weather cold or hot,
  As they may wish he'll walk or trot;
  Or if to make more haste they need,
  Will gallop with the greatest speed.

  When dead his shining skin they use,
  As leather for our boots and shoes;
  Alive or dead, then, thus we see
  How useful still the horse must be.

THE DOG.

  The cow, the sheep, the horse, have long,
  Been made the subject of our song;
  But there are many creatures yet,
  Whose merits we must not forget.

  And first the dog, so good to guard
  His master's cottage, house, or yard,--
  Dishonest men away to keep,
  And guard us safely while we sleep.

  For if at midnight, still and dark,
  Strange steps he hears, with angry bark,
  He bids his master wake and see,
  If thieves or honest folks they be.

  At home, abroad, obedient still,
  His only guide his master's will;
  Before his steps, or by his side,
  He runs or walks with joy and pride.

  He runs to fetch the stick or ball,
  Returns obedient to the call;
  Content and pleased if he but gains
  A single pat for all his pains.

  But whilst his merits thus we praise,
  Pleased with his character and ways,
  This let us learn, as well we may,
  To love our teachers and obey.

MORAL LESSON.[A]

[Footnote A: The following tale, though not adapted for the younger children of an Infant School,
and too long to be committed to memory by the elder ones, might be read to such by the master,
and would serve as an admirable theme for conversation. It is likewise well adapted as a tale
for family circles.]

THE TWO HALVES.

  "What nice plum-cakes," said JAMES to JOHN,
  "Our mother sends! Is your's all gone?"
  "It is," JOHN answered; "is not thine?"
  "No, JOHN, I've saved one half of mine;

  "It was so large, as well as nice,
  I thought that it should serve for twice,
  Had I eat all to-day, to-morrow
  I might have mourn'd such haste in sorrow;
  So half my cake I wisely took,
  And, seated in my favourite nook,
  Enjoyed alone, the double pleasure,
  Of present and of future treasure."
  "I, too," said JOHN, "made up my mind
  This morning, when our mother kind
  Sent down the cakes so nice and sweet,
  That I but half to-day would eat,
  And half I ate; the other half--"
  JAMES stopp'd his brother with a laugh;
   "I know what you're about to say,--
    The other half you gave away.
    Now, brother, pray explain to me,
    The charms which you in giving see.
    Shew me how feasting foes or friends
    Can for your fasting make amends."
   "A poor old man," said JOHN, "came by,
    Whose looks implored for charity.
    His eyes, bedimm'd with starting tears,
    His body bowed by length of years,
    His feeble limbs, his hoary hairs,
    Were to my heart as silent prayers.
    I saw, too, he was hungry, though
    His lips had not informed me so.
    To this poor creature, JAMES, I gave
    The half which I had meant to save.
    The lingering tears, with sudden start,
      Ran down the furrows of his cheek,
    I knew he thank'd me in his heart,
      Although he strove in vain to speak.
    The joy that from such acts we gain
    I'll try for your sake to explain.
    First, God is pleased, who, as you know,
      Marks every action that we do;
    That God 'from whom all blessings flow,'
      So many JAMES to me and you.
    Our mother, next, had she but seen
      Her gifts of kindness so employ'd,
    Would she not JAMES, well pleased have been;
    And all my feelings then enjoy'd?
    The poor old man, was he not pleased?
      Must not his load of sorrow be,
    Though but for one short moment, eased,
      To think, 'Then some one feels for me.'
    But still you ask, of all this pleasure,
      How much will to the giver fall?
    The whole, rich, undiminish'd treasure,--
  He feels, he shares the joy of all.
  We eat the cake, and it is gone;
  What have we left to think upon?
  Who's pleased by what we then have done?
  How many pray, JAMES, more than one?
  The joys by sympathy supplied
  Are many, great, and dignified.
  But do not on my word rely,
  Whilst you, dear JAMES, the fact may try;
  And if you do not find it true,
  I'll next time eat both halves with you!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It is desirable that the master should add instrumental to vocal music. He should be able to
play on the violin, flute, or clarionet, but, as he must speak much, the former is to be preferred.
Such is the influence of the weather, that children are almost always dull on dull days, and
then a little music is of great advantage. On wet days, when they cannot go into the play-ground,
it assists them in keeping the step when they march, it cheers and animates their spirits,
and, in some measure, compensates for their privations. It will also aid various evolutions.

Music may be employed, moreover, to soften the feelings, curb the passions, and improve the
temper, and it is strange that it should not have been employed till the operation of the Infant
System, to which it is absolutely indispensable. When, for instance, after a trial by jury,
as explained in a former page, the children have been disposed to harshness and severity, a
soft and plaintive melody has produced a different decision. To recite one case; when I was
organizing the Dry-gate School in Glasgow[A], a little girl in the gallery had lost of her
ear-rings (which, by the way, like beads, is a very improper appendage, and ought by all means
to be discouraged), and on discovering the fact, commenced a most piteous lamentation. I made
inquiry for it immediately, while the children were seated in the gallery, but in vain; and
I subsequently found it in the hands of a little girl at the bottom, who was attentively examining
it, and who gave it me the moment it was demanded. On asking the children what was to be done
in this case, they said she should have a pat of the hand. I then showed, that had she intended
to steal it, she would have secreted it, which she did not, and that her attention was so absorbed
by it, that she had not heard my inquiry; but one little boy was not satisfied; he said, "She
kenned right weel it was nae her ain;" but after singing a simple and touching air, I was pleased
to find his opinion changed. "Perhaps, sir," he said, "ye may as weel forgie her this ance,
as she is but a wee thing."

[Footnote A: This school has since become a very important Normal school, from which many others
have emanated, the head master being the one I originally instructed: Mr. Stowe, also, one
of the directors, has applied the principles of the Infant School System to the instruction
of older children, which is called Stowe's Training System; being applied to juveniles, with
great success. I know of no school, except the Dublin Normal Schools, equal to those, and of
no masters superior to those I have seen who have been taught there.]

The music chosen for children should be easy and simple, fluent and varied. Hymn tunes should
be of a rather lively character, as the more dull and sombrous are not well adapted to the
infant ear. Airs for the tables or exercising songs are required to be very cheerful and inspiring,
and then they tend to excite pleasure and liveliness, which should often be aimed at in an
infant school.

As children take much interest in singing, and readily learn verses by heart, so as to sing
them, although not properly instructed in their meaning or rightly understanding them, singing
has been considered by many persons the "soul of the system." This is a grievous error as regards
the intellectual advancement of the children, and still worse as regards their health and that
of the teacher. I have at times entered schools as a visitor when the mistress has immediately
made the children show off by singing in succession a dozen pieces, as if they were a musical
box. Thus to sing without bounds is a very likely way to bring the mistress to an early grave,
and injure the lungs of the dear little children. Use as not abusing is the proper rule, tar
all the new modes of teaching and amusing children that I have introduced; but it has often
appeared to me that abuse it as much as possible was the rule acted upon. Call upon the first
singers of the day to sing in this manner, and where would they soon be?

CHAPTER XIX.

GRAMMAR.

Method of instruction--Grammatical rhymes.

       *       *       *       *       *

"A few months ago, Mr. ---- gave his little daughter, H----, a child of five years old, her
first lesson in English Grammar; but no alarming book of grammar was produced on the occasion,
nor did the father put on an unpropitious gravity of countenance. He explained to the smiling
child the nature of a verb, a pronoun, and a substantive."--Edgeworth.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been well observed, "that grammar is the first thing taught, and the last learnt." Now,
though it is not my purpose to pretend that I can so far simplify grammar, as to make all its
rules comprehensible to children so young as those found in infant schools, I do think that
enough may be imparted to them to render the matter more comprehensible, than it is usually
found to be in after years.

The great mystery of grammar results, in my opinion, from not making the children acquainted
with the things of which the words used are the signs, and moreover, from the use of a number
of hard words, which the children repeat without understanding. For instance, in the classification
of words, or the parts of speech, as they are called, nouns, substantives, and adjectives,
convey, as terms, no idea to the minds of children; and, in spite of the definitions by which
their import is explained, remain to them as unintelligible as the language of magical incantation.
That the children can easily comprehend the difference between words which express the names
of things, and those which express their qualities, and between words which express actions,
and those which express the nature of those actions, is undeniable; and this is just what should
be taught in an infant school. In the first place, let the children be accustomed to repeat
the names of things, not of any certain number of things set down on a lesson card, or in a
book, but of any thing, and every thing, in the school-room, play-ground, &c.: next let them
be exercised in telling something relating to those things--their qualities; as for instance,
the school-room is large, clean, &c.,--the children are quiet, good, attentive, &c.--the pictures
are pretty: the play-ground is pleasant, &c. Having accustomed the children, in this manner,
first to give you the names of things, and then to observe and repeat something respecting
them--you have gained two ends; you have, first, taught the children to be observant and discriminative;
and, secondly, you have taught them to distinguish two distinct classes of words, or names
and qualities; and you may now, if you please, give them terms by which to distinguish these
respective classes, viz. substantives and adjectives. They will no longer be mysterious words,
"signifying nothing," but recognized signs, by which the children will understand and express
definite ideas. The next thing you have to teach them is, the distinction betwixt singular
and plural, and, if you think proper, masculine and feminine; but before you talk to the children
about plural number and masculine gender, &c., let them be made acquainted with the realities
of which these hard-sounding words are the signs.

Having made the classification of words clear and comprehensible, you next proceed to the second
grand class of words, the verbs, and their adjuncts, the adverbs. With these you will proceed
as with the former; let action be distinguished by words;--the children walk, play, read, eat,
run; master laughs, frowns, speaks, sings; and so on; letting the children find their own examples;
then comes the demand from the master for words expressing the manner of action. How do the
children walk?--slowly, quickly, orderly. How do they read, eat run! How does the master laugh,
speak, sing? The children now find you ADVERBS, and it will be quite time enough to give them
terms for the classification they thus intuitively make, when they have a clear idea of what
they are doing. When this end is attained, your children have some ideas of grammar, and those
clear ones. There is no occasion to stop here. Proceed, but slowly, and in the same method.
The tenses of the verbs, and the subdivision into active, passive, and neuter, will require
the greatest care and attention which the teacher can use, to simplify them sufficiently for
the children's comprehension; as it will likewise enable them to understand the nature and
office of the other classes of words. As, however, it is not my intention to write a grammar
here, but merely to throw out a few hints on the subject, I shall leave the further development
of the plan to the ingenuity of those who may think fit to adopt its principles, as above laid
down.

  English Grammar doth us teach,
  That it hath nine parts of speech;--
  Article, adjective, and noun,
  Verb, conjunction, and pronoun,
  With preposition, and adverb,
  And interjection, as I've heard.
  The letters are just twenty-six,
  These form all words when rightly mix'd.
  The vowels are a, e, o, i,
  With u, and sometimes w and y.
  Without the little vowels' aid,
  No word or syllable is made;
  But consonants the rest we call,
  And so of these we've mention'd all.
  Three little words we often see,
  Are articles,--a, an, and the.
  A noun's the name of any thing--
  As school, or garden, hoop, or swing.
  Adjectives tell the kind of noun--
  As great, small, pretty, white, or brown.
  Instead of nouns the pronouns stand,
  John's head, his face, my arm, your hand.
  Verbs tell of something being done--
  To read, write, count, sing, jump, or run.
  How things are done the adverbs tell--
  As slowly, quickly, ill, or well.
  Conjunctions join the nouns together--
  As men and children, wind or weather.
  A preposition stands before
  A noun, as in or through a door.
  The interjection shows surprise--
  As, oh! how pretty, ah! how wise.
  The whole are called nine parts of speech,
  Which, reading, writing, speaking teach.

THE ARTICLES.

  Three little words we hear and see
  In frequent use, a, an, and the;
  These words so useful, though so small,
  Are those which articles we call.

  The first two, a and an, we use
  When speaking of one thing alone;
  For instance, we might wish to say
  An oak, a man, a dog, a bone.

  The speaks of either one or more,--
  The cow, the cows, the pig, the pigs,
  The plum, the plums (you like a score),
  The pear, the pears, the fig, the figs.

  An oak, a man; means any oak,
  Or any man of all mankind;
  A dog, a bone, means any dog,
  Or any bone a dog may find.

  This article we only use
  Whenever it may be our wish
  To speak of some determined thing,
  As thus;--the bird, the ox, the fish.

  By which we mean not any bird,
  That flying in the air may be,
  Or any ox amongst the herd,
  Or any fish in stream or sea.

  But some one certain bird or ox,
  Or fish (let it be which it may)
  Of which we're speaking, or of which
  We something mean to write or say.

  Remember these things when you see
  The little words, a, an, and the.
  These words so useful, though so small
  Are those which articles we call.

Nothing can be more absurd than to compel young children to commit to memory mere abstract
rules expressed in difficult and technical language. Such requires a painful effort of the
mind, and one calculated to give a disgust against learning. Grammar was formed on language
and not language by grammar, and from this it necessarily follows, that children should acquire
a considerable store of words from a knowledge of reading and of things, before their minds
are taxed by abstract rules. To be thoroughly understood they require words to be compared
with words, and one word to be compared with another; and how can this be done without the
memory being amply supplied with them previously. Such simple instruction as this chapter directs
may easily be given; but to attempt much more would be like endeavouring to build an elegant
and ornamental structure before you had collected materials to build with.

CHAPTER XX.

THE ELLIPTICAL PLAN OF TEACHING.

Method Explained--Its success.

       *       *       *       *       *

"He tried each art."--Goldsmith.

       *       *       *       *       *

All persons acquainted with children are aware of the torpor of some minds, and of the occasional
apathy of others, and to this it is necessary to provide some counteraction. This is done effectually
by what is called the elliptical plan, according to which, words are omitted in a narrative
or poem repeated by the teacher, for the purpose of being supplied by the children.

These exercises are very agreeable to the children, and by them some features of the mental
character become conspicuous. Children are usually sensible of their need of instruction, but
if they can make it appear that any of their statements are original, their delight is especially
manifest. There seems, too, a dislike at first, to take any trouble to arrive at the truth;
careless children will therefore guess several times; but an observant teacher will at once
perceive that there is no effort of the understanding, point it out to the child, and thus
prevent its recurrence.

Dr. Gilchrist observes, in a letter sent to me, "You have now the whole method before you,
and I shall boldly stake all my hard-earned fame, as a practical orientalist, on the salutary
consequences that will spring from the adoption of short elliptical tales at your interesting
institution."

My usual practice with respect to the elliptical method of teaching, is, to deliver some appropriate,
simple, extemporaneous tale, leaving out but few words at first, and those such as must obviously
strike the children; as they get used to the plan, I make the omissions more frequent, and
of words less obvious. The following specimens will render the whole plain to the understandings
of my readers.

  A gardener's youngest[a] ---- was walking among the
  fruit[b] ---- of his father's[c] ----, he saw a little[d]
  ---- fly up and sit on one of the[e]---- of the trees;
  the[f] ---- lifted a stone, and was going to[g]---- it at
  the poor[h]---- which seemed to[i]---- most sweetly
  thus:

  My[k] ---- is[l] ---- of moss and hair,
  The[m] ---- are[n]---- and sheltered there;
  When[o]---- soon shall my young[p] ---- fly
  Far from the[q]---- school[r]---- eye."

  The[s]---- eldest[t]---- who understood the[u]----
  of birds came up at that moment, and[v]----
  out, throw down the[w] ----, you hard-hearted[x] ----
  and don't[y] ---- the innocent[z] ---- in the middle of his
  song; are you not[aa]---- with his swelling red-breast,
  his beautiful sharp eye, and above all with the[bb] ---- of
  his notes, and the familiar[cc] ---- he assumes, even in
  the[dd] ---- of a[ee]---- like you? Ask your youngest[ff]
  ---- here if she remembers the[gg]---- which her good[hh]
  ---- read to her yesterday of a very[ii]---- boy, who
  was very[kk]---- to a harmless green[ll] ---- which
  he caught[mm] ---- for hunger, among the[nn]---- in the[oo]
  ---- of winter.

[Footnote a: Son]

[Footnote b: trees]

[Footnote c: garden]

[Footnote d: bird]

[Footnote e: branches]

[Footnote f: boy]

[Footnote g: throw]

[Footnote h: bird]

[Footnote i: sing]

[Footnote k: nest]

[Footnote l: built]

[Footnote m: eggs]

[Footnote n: laid]

[Footnote o: hatched]

[Footnote p: ones]

[Footnote q: roaming]

[Footnote r: boy's]

[Footnote s: gardener's]

[Footnote t: son]

[Footnote u: notes]

[Footnote v: called]

[Footnote w: stone]

[Footnote x: rogue or boy]

[Footnote y: disturb or hurt]

[Footnote z: bird]

[Footnote aa: pleased or delighted]

[Footnote bb: sweetness or melody]

[Footnote cc: air]

[Footnote dd: presence]

[Footnote ee: naughty boy]

[Footnote ff: sister]

[Footnote gg: story]

[Footnote hh: mother, aunt &c.]

[Footnote ii: naughty or good]

[Footnote kk: cruel or kind]

[Footnote ll: finch or linnet]

[Footnote mm: perishing or dying]

[Footnote nn: snow]

[Footnote oo: depth or middle.]

The following little verses upon the same principle have been found to answer extremely well,
by putting one child in the rostrum, and desiring him purposely to leave out those words that
are marked, the other children will fill them up as he goes.

  I must pray
  Both ---- and day.

  Before ---- eat
  I must entreat,
  That ---- would bless
  To me ---- meat.

  I must not play
  On God's own day,
  But I must hear
  His word with fear.

  It is a sin
  To steal a pin
  Much more to steal
  A greater thing.

  I must work,
  And I must pray,
  That God will feed
  Me day by day.

  All honest labour,
  God will bless;
  Let me not live
  In idleness.

  I will not be
  Or rude or wild,
  I must not be
  A naughty child.

  I will not speak
  Of others ill,
  But ever bear
  To all good-will.

  I'd rather die
  Than tell a lie,
  Lest I be lost
  Eternally.

  I'll ---- my bread
  From ---- to door,
  Rather ---- steal
  My neighbour's store.

  I must not kill
  A little fly;
  It is an act
  Of cruelty.

  I must not lie,
  I must not feign,
  I must not take
  God's name in vain.

  Nor may my tongue
  Say what is wrong;
  I will not sin
  A world to win,

  In my Bible
  I am to read,
  And trust in God
  In all my need.

  For Christ alone
  My soul can save,
  And raise my body
  From the grave.

  Oh! blessed Saviour,
  Take my heart
  And let not me
  From thee depart.

  Lord, grant that I
  In faith may die,
  And live with thee
  Above the sky.

CREATION.

  God made the ---- that looks so blue,
   God made the ---- so green,
  God made the ----  that smell so sweet,
   In ---- colours seen.

  God made the ---- that shines so bright,
   And gladdens all I see;
  It comes to give us ---- and light,
   How ---- should we be!

  God made the ---- bird to fly,
   How ---- has she sung;
  And though she ---- so very high,
   She won't ---- her young.

  God made the ---- to give nice milk,
   The horse for ---- to use;
  I'll treat them ---- for his sake,
   Nor dare his gifts abuse.

  God made the ---- for my drink,
   God made the ---- to swim,
  God made the ---- to bear nice fruit,
  Which does my ---- so nicely suit;
   O how should I ---- him!

"O Lord, how manifest are thy works; in wisdom hast thou made them all!"--Psalm civ. 24.

       *       *       *       *       *

I subjoin, as an exercise for teachers themselves, the following hymn, as one calculated to
induce reflections on the scenes of nature, and direct the mind to that Being who is the Source
of all excellence!

  1
  Hast ---- beheld ---- glorious
  Through all ---- skies his circuit run,
  At rising morn, ---- closing day,
  And when he beam'd his noontide

  2
  Say, didst ---- e'er attentive
  The evening cloud, ---- morning dew?
  Or, after ----, the watery bow
  Rise in the ---- a beauteous ----?

  3
  When darkness had o'erspread the ----
  Hast thou e'er seen the ---- arise,
  And with a mild and placid ----
  Shed lustre o'er the face of night?

  4
  Hast ---- e'er wander'd o'er the plain,
  And view'd the fields and waving ----,
  The flowery mead, ---- leafy grove,
  Where all ---- harmony ---- love.

  5
  Hast thou e'er trod the sandy ----
  And ---- the restless ---- roar,
  When roused by some tremendous ----
  It's billows rose ---- dreadful form?

  Hast thou beheld the ---- stream
  Thro' nights dark gloom, ---- sudden gleam,
  While the bellowing thunder's ----
  Roll'd rattling ---- the heaven's profound?

  7
  Hast thou e'er ---- the cutting gale,
  The sleeting shower, ---- the biting hail;
  Beheld ---- snow o'erspread the
  The water bound ---- icy chains?

  8
  Hast thou the various beings ----
  That sport ---- the valley green,
  That ---- warble on the spray,
  Or wanton in the sunny ----?

  9
  That shoot along ---- briny deep,
  Or ---- ground their dwellings keep;
  That thro' the ---- forest range,
  Or frightful wilds ---- deserts strange?

  10
  Hast ---- the wondrous scenes survey'd
  That all around thee ---- display'd?
  And hast ---- never raised thine
  To Him ---- bade these scenes arise?

  11
  'Twas GOD who form'd the concave ----
  And all the glorious orbs ---- high;
  ---- gave the various beings birth,
  That people all the spacious ----.

  12
  'Tis ---- that bids the tempests
  And rolls the ---- thro' ---- skies:
  His voice the elements ----
  Thro' all the ---- extends His sway.

  13
  His goodness ---- His creatures share,
  But MAN is HIS peculiar ----.
  Then, while they all proclaim ---- praise,
  Let ---- his ---- the loudest ----.

The elliptical plan has been found to be most successful, and has been applied with equal success
in schools for older children, and also children of another grade. Messrs. Chambers, I believe,
are the only persons, as far as I know, who have the honesty to acknowledge the source from
whence this plan was taken.

       *       *       *       *       *
  "Is it then fitting that one soul should pine
    For want of culture in this favour'd land?
  That spirits of capacity divine
    Perish, like seeds upon the desert sand?
  That needful knowledge, in this age of light,
  Should not by birth be every Briton's right?"

  Southey.

       *       *       *       *       *

Although it has been the special design of the present work to speak of the first efforts of
art in assisting the proper development of the mental and moral faculties, I shall take the
liberty of indulging in a few remarks on the methods at present adopted in the more advanced
stages of education, as seen in our National and Sunday Schools. I need, I am sure, offer no
other apology for so doing, than the fact that it is in these institutions the infant poor
must complete their education; it is in these schools, the budding faculties must either ripen
or perish; and the moral principles become confirmed or weakened. Certain I am, that it is
the wish of all concerned in these praiseworthy institutions to do their best for the attainment
of this object--the welfare and improvement of the rising generation of the poor classes; and
therefore I the less reluctantly offer a few thoughts on the subject, which it is my humble
opinion may not be altogether useless.

With regard to National Schools, I must say, there is too much form, and too little of the
spirit of instruction to be found in their management: the minor faculties are attended to
in preference to the higher ones; it is the memory alone which is called into action; the understanding
is suffered to lie in a state of torpid inactivity.

Their lessons, their plan of using them, and their discipline altogether, are of that monotonous
nature, that the children always seem to me to be dosing over them. I know it will be pleaded
that the number to be taught at once, renders this defect unavoidable; that it is impossible
to teach a large body of children, in such a way as to secure the attention and activity of
the whole. And it is so far true, as to its being impossible to detect and reform every idle
pupil, who finds an opportunity of indulging his idleness in the divided attention of his teacher;
but I do think, if it be impossible to cure the evil, it may be in a great degree prevented.
Make your system interesting, lively, and inspiriting, and your scholars will neither be able
nor willing to slumber over it. Every one knows what an effect is produced on the physical
faculties by a succession of the same sound; for instance, by the long continued chiming of
a single bell; it induces a drowsiness which we find it impossible to resist, except by turning
our attention to another thing; but let a number of bells strike out into a merry peal, how
quickly we are aroused, how lively we become, whilst their various changes secure the attention
and interest which their pleasing and spirited tones first excited. And just so it is with
the mind in the matters of education; you must give a variety of tones, a newness of aspect
to your lessons, or you will never be able to keep up a lively attention in your scholars.
For this purpose I would particularly recommend to the attention of all concerned, the chapters
in this volume on geometry, conversation, pictures, and likewise that on the elliptical method.
By adopting the plan recommended in these chapters, the children will have something to do,
and to do that something they must be active. The first object of the teacher is to excite
a thirst for knowledge; not to pour unwelcome information into the mind.

It will probably be said, that however well adapted the plan recommended may be for the infantine
scholars for whom it was designed, yet, it does not follow that it may be equally advantageous
for those of a more advanced age; and if by this it is meant, that the very same lessons, &c.,
are not equally applicable in both cases, I perfectly agree with the truth of the objection;
but it is the principle of education that I recommend, and would affirm to be as applicable
to children of the most advanced age, as to those of the youngest. And I may further add that
unless this is done, these schools will not be in a proper state to receive our children, so
as to carry on the cultivation of all the faculties, instead of the memory only. It is not
sufficient to store the memory, we must give employment to the understanding. It is not sufficient
to talk to the children of piety and of goodness; we must present them with a living example
of both, and secure, as far as possible, an imitation of such example.

As applicable to Sunday Schools, I would particularly recommend the use of picture lessons
on scripture subjects, for the use of the junior classes, to be used as a sort of text for
conversation, suited to the state of their mental faculties. I am convinced that the knowledge
acquired by this method is likely to make a deeper and more lasting impression, than that imparted
in a less interesting mode. Nor should the lessons on natural history be neglected, in my humble
opinion, in the system of Sunday School instruction; inasmuch as the more the children know
of the wonders of creation, the greater must be their reverence of the Almighty Creator; in
addition to which it will enable the teachers to supply variety, a thing so agreeable, and,
indeed, indispensable, in the instruction of children. For these reasons, I think it could
not justly be considered as either a misemployment or profanation of the Sabbath-day. For the
elder children, moreover, it would be advisable to have occasional class lectures, simplified
for the purpose, on astronomy, natural history, &c.; and although it might be unadvisable to
occupy the hours of the Sabbath-day with the delivery of them, they might be given, on some
week-day evening, and should be made the medium of reward to good behaviour; such children
as had misbehaved themselves being proscribed from attending. When thus seen in the light of
a privilege, they would not fail to be interesting to the little auditors, as well as conducive
to good behaviour.

Sunday Schools should not be too large, nor should children remain in them too long. I have
observed some instances, when this has been neglected, of choices being made, and connections
formed, which must be often very prejudicial.

It is with some degree of reluctance and apprehension, I touch upon another topic--that of
religious doctrine. As schools for gratuitous instruction have been established by most of
the religious sects extant, it is obvious that some dissimilarity of sentiment on religions
subjects must exist, as imparted in such schools. Let it not be supposed, that I would cast
a censure on any religious body, for establishing a school devoted to such a blessed purpose.
On the contrary, I rejoice to see, that however various their theories may be, their opinion
of Christian practice, as evinced in such actions, is the same. But one thing I would say,
to each and to all, let a prominence be given to those fundamental truths of love and goodness
which Christianity inculcates. Let the first sounds of religion which salute the ears of infancy,
be that heavenly proclamation which astonished and enraptured the ears of the wakeful shepherds,
"Peace on earth and good-will towards men." It was the herald-cry by which salvation was ushered
into the world, and surely no other can be so proper for introducing it into the minds of children.
I must candidly own, that I have occasionally witnessed a greater desire to teach particular
doctrines, than the simple and beautiful truths which form the spirit of religion; and it is
against this practice I have presumed to raise a dissentient voice.

The conductors of schools, in connexion with the British and Foreign School Society, have generally
spoken more highly of the Infant System than others, and this is certainly to be attributed
to more congeniality, since in them the mental powers are more fully exercised, and there is
a greater variety in the instruction given. The only objection I can discover to them, is one
that lies equally against the National Schools--I mean the opportunities afforded for monitorial
oppression; but this may be obviated in both cases by the judgment and vigilance of the teachers.
It should be added, that schools of both kinds demand occasional inspection from those intimately
acquainted with the systems avowedly adopted, as they appear very different in different places.
I will only mention further on this topic, that many schools are too large. No Infant School,
I conceive, should exceed 200, nor should a National or British and Foreign School exceed 400,
when under the care of one master.

One half of these numbers would be much better than the whole, and tend greatly to the success
of the schools; but funds are so difficult to raise, from the apathy shown by persons in general
to the instruction of the poor, and therefore the schools are so few in number, that it is
absolutely requisite to place as great a number of children as possible under one master, that
expense may be saved. When will this sad state of things be changed, and the country at large
see that the noblest object it can ever attempt is, to rear up its whole population to intelligence,
virtue, and piety?

In conclusion, I would observe, that as the foregoing remarks have been kindly made, in such
a manner, it is my hope, they will all be received.

It is most gratifying to me to be able to add, that since the above remarks were written, great
improvements have been made in National Schools, a large portion of the public attention has
been lately drawn to the subject, and it is almost universally admitted that the present system
is capable of considerable improvement. This must be gratifying to those persons who have borne
the heat and burthen of the day. The National Society are taking measures to improve their
systems, and also by forming Diocesan Societies to establish Normal schools for the instruction
of teachers on improved principles throughout the country. I would to God the Church of England
had done this long ago; she would have had fewer enemies, and could now have put on a bolder front.

I trust in God that even now it is not too late, and that circumstances may transpire to render
her efforts in this sacred cause doubly effective. She has lately made a noble stand in defence
of principle; this will have its proper effect; but she must not stop there, for the enemy
is in the field; and though he is quiet for a time, the many-headed dragon is not crushed.
The utmost vigilance will be necessary to counteract the wiliness of the serpent; real improvements
in education must be adopted; the books used in her schools must be revised and improved; a
larger amount of knowledge must be given to the poorer portion of her sons, and then a beneficial
reaction will not be far distant. She has done much, but she has much more to do. If she does
not pre-occupy the ground, there are others that will. Dependence upon the Divine Will, sound
discretion, and Christian principle, must be her guide; goodness must be her fortress, and
truth her finger post, and then I for one perceive that she will not fail, for the bulk of
her people are still favourable to her, and will rise up in her defence, when their assistance
is required; and if I mistake not the signs of the times, there will be work for the thinking
portion of the laity soon cut out, work which I fear the clergy cannot, or will not do, but
which, nevertheless, must be done. God grant that it may be done well, whoever may be the instruments.

       *       *       *       *       *

"'Tis on his mother's bosom the babe learns his first lessons; from her smile he catches the
glow of affection; and by her frown, or her gentle sighs he persuaded to give up what his ignorance
or selfishness prompt him with pertinacity to retain. Happy where this sweet, this powerful
influence is well directed,--where the mother's judgment guides her affectionate feelings."--Taylor

       *       *       *       *       *

Many persons, eminent by their charitable acts, and who express themselves generally desirous
of aiding in any plan which may contribute to the improvement and happiness of the poorer classes,
have, nevertheless, been unwilling to assist in the establishment of Infant Schools, fearful
that the superior method pursued in these schools should render the children educated therein,
much better informed than the children of the richer classes, who might thus be supplanted
in numerous lucrative and honourable situations in after-life.

From this circumstance one of the two following conclusions must be drawn; either that the
system of education pursued in the higher schools is very faulty and imperfect, or that the
fears of those persons are entire groundless.

If the first be true, then it cannot be denied that the consequences feared by the richer classes
must necessarily take place, if, either from prejudice or apathy, they continue the same faulty
and imperfect method of education, which, by the expression of these fears, they positively
declare is usually pursued in the higher schools; but the remedy is easy. Let the same good
principles of tuition be introduced into nurseries, and into those schools to which the children
of the rich are sent, and the latter will not fail to maintain their patrimonial ranks in society.
They need then have no fear least the poorer classes should become too intellectual, but, on
the contrary, they will soon find that their own welfare, security, and happiness will not
only be insured, but will increase in proportion as the poorer classes gain knowledge; for
by the method of instruction pursued in the Infant Schools, the knowledge there acquired is
necessarily accompanied by the practice of industry, sobriety, honesty, benevolence, and mutual
kindness; in fine, by all the moral and religious virtues.

That the system of instruction recommended in the foregoing pages is equally applicable to
the children of the rich as to those of the poor, there can be no doubt; and it might be adopted
either in schools established on its principles or in the nursery. It is, indeed, obvious that
it might be carried to a much greater extent, where the means of so doing would not be wanting.
Many things might be taught, which it is neither advisable nor practicable to teach in the
schools established for the instruction of poor children.

Whilst the elements of number, form, and language, may be taught by the means and after the
manner recommended in the preceding chapters on the respective subjects, there are other branches
of knowledge which might enter into the scope of nursery instruction with great advantage to
the children.

As an introduction to botany, I would make the children acquainted with the progress of vegetation,
not from words, but from observation. I would have three or four garden-pots filled with mould,
introduced into the nursery at a proper season of the year; the children should be asked, what
is in the pots.--"Dirt," or "mould," will of course be the reply. They should then be shewn
the seeds which are to be deposited in the mould, and assuming in the eyes of the children
a prophetic character, the mother or governess should inform them of the process of vegetation,
and that about a certain time a pretty flower will make its appearance in the pots: the seeds
should then be deposited in the mould, and the pots placed in a proper situation. It would
not be improper to let the children themselves sow the seed; thus convincing them of their
power of being useful, and becoming the instrument of so great a wonder, as the transformation
of a seed into a flower. During the time the seed is lying unperceived beneath the mould, the
children should frequently be sent to look "if the pretty flower has come up," or questioned
as to what they were told concerning it. At length the green shoot will make its appearance,
just peeping above the mould, to the no small surprise and gratification of the little observers.
They will mark with attentive eagerness the progress of its growth, the appearance of the bud,
and the gradual development of "the pretty flower," till they are fully convinced of the wisdom
of the parent or teacher who foretold all which has happened, and made acquainted with the
process of vegetation, not from words, but from observation. Certain it is, that such a lesson
could not be wholly useless. In the first place it might be made the means of impressing them
with ideas of the Almighty power, highly conducive to piety; secondly, it would beget a habit
of observation; thirdly, it would be likely to produce a love of flowers and the vegetable
world, favourable to their future pursuits in the science of botany; and, lastly, it would
inspire their little breasts with a love and respect for the parents or teachers who were wise
and kind enough to teach them so many true and wonderful things.

As an efficient and amusing introduction to natural history, I would have every nursery provided
with a microscope, by means of which the minds of the children might be excited to wonder and
admiration at the amazing beauty and perfection of the insect world, and the astonishing construction
of various substances, as seen through this instrument. So far would this be from begetting
habits of cruelty, that it would be very likely to check them. Many children who would be loath
to torture a large animal, such as a cat, a dog, or a bird, feel no compunction at ill-using
a fly, because it appears to them so insignificant an animal; but had they once witnessed,
by means of a microscope, the wonderful and perfect conformation of the insect, I am persuaded
they would be less inclined to make the distinction.

Various devices might be made use of to teach the first truths of astronomy. So simple a device
as an apple, with a wire run through its centre, turned round before a candle, might serve
to explain the phenomena of day and night; whilst the orrery, with the accompaniment of a simple
and familiar lecture--(it should be much more so, indeed, than any I have heard or read)--would
make them acquainted with those stupendous facts which strike us with as astonishment and awe.
It has been well observed by Dr. Young, with respect to the wonders of astronomy--

  "In little things we search out God--in great
  He seizes us."

One thing I would here notice--that it should be a constant practice to remind the children,
that in the apple and the orrery, they see only a resemblance to the earth and the heavenly
bodies, that they are vast in size and distance, beyond their comprehension; at the same time
leading them to an actual observation of the heavens by means of a telescope. This would be
a high treat to the children, and productive of correct notions, which are but too apt to be
lost where we are under the necessity of teaching by signs so infinitely unlike, in size and
nature, as the candle and the apple, and the brass balls and wires of the orrery, to the earth
and the heavenly orbs.

For giving the children their first lessons in geography, I would have a floor-cloth in every
nursery, painted like a map, but of course not filled up so perfectly as maps for adults necessarily
are. It should contain a correct delineation of the position of a certain space of the globe,
we will say, for instance, of England; let the children then be told to proceed from a certain
spot, to go through certain counties, towns, &c., and to fetch a piece of cloth from Yorkshire,
or a knife from Sheffield, cheese from Cheshire, butter from Dorset, or lace from Huntingdonshire,
&c., &c. The lessons thus given would be at once amusing and instructive both to the governess
and children. If preferred, these maps might be painted of a less size, to cover a table. No
difficulty would be found to get a set of such table-covers or floor-cloths painted, if the
public would once encourage the plan.

There are now large skeleton maps published, which have merely the principal cities, towns,
and rivers, &c., marked down, so as not to present too many objects to confuse the young eye.
There are also picture maps in which the chief productions of a country, both vegetable and
animal, are delineated in their proper places. These would form a great aid in nursery instruction,
and also for an infant school. Let the great truth be ever borne in mind, that what is seen
by the eye is more quickly understood and more certainly remembered, than what is merely described
or made known in words.

I would also have an oblong tray made to hold water, large enough to cover a table. In this
I would fasten pieces of cork, cut out in the shape of land, according to the best maps, while
other small bits of cork should represent the mountains and hills on the surface of the respective
islands. By application to the toy-makers, a sufficient number of animals might be got to stock
the respective islands, &c., with their appropriate inhabitants; whilst the manufactures, and
many of the natural products of the different places, might be readily supplied by the ingenuity
of the parent or governess. A little boat should then be provided, and a voyage to a given
part undertaken; various islands might be touched at, and various commodities taken on board
or exchanged, according to the mercantile instructions the children should receive; whilst
brief accounts might at first be read or given of the climate, productions, and inhabitants
of the respective places, till the little scholar should be able to conduct the voyage, purchase
or exchange commodities, and give an account of the various countries and their inhabitants,
&c., by himself. Certain I am that more might be acquired, by this toothed, of geographical
knowledge, in one week, than by the old method in a twelvemonth: and what the children did
learn they would always remember. I might extend these suggestions to the size of a small volume,
had I space to do so; but the limits of the present one forbid; at a future period, should
my active employments permit, I may resume the subject of nursery hints in an extended and
separate form.

There are, indeed, many excellent works already published on the subject; but as by the suggestions
and contributions of many, every plan is likely to be perfected, no one is justified in withholding
any thing likely to promote the desired object.

A due improvement of these advantages will make the progress of the higher classes more than
commensurate with that of the lower. It is obvious, that the former have resources which cannot
be obtained by the latter. They have the means, too, of availing themselves of all improvements
in education, of engaging the most intelligent and efficient instructors, and of frequently
changing the scene for their children, and consequently the objects which come under their
observation. Which, I ask, is the more honourable course,--to object, as some do, to the education
of the infant poor, lest they should learn too much, or to improve, then, the opportunities
they have, by which they and their children they surpass all others?

A few words ought to be added on discipline at home. It is not uncommon to hear parents, in
all classes of society say, "That child is too much for me. I cannot manage him at all." We
should think him a most unpatriotic Englishman who should say the French are too strong for
us, we cannot beat them; but very far more absurd and truly unparental it is to confess that
a mere child is master of its parents. A grown person and an infant, what a contrast! True
it is, that many a child has become very unmanageable, but this may always be traced to early
neglect. If from the earliest infancy the young mind is trained to little acts of obedience,
they will soon become habitual and pleasant to perform; but if improper indulgence and foolish
kindness be practised towards children, they must, of course, grow up peevish, fretful, and
ill-tempered, obstinate, saucy, and unmanageable. "Whatsoever a man soweth that shall he reap."
Let this truth be ever engraved upon the minds of all parents. A constant exercise of parental
love in allowing all that is fit and proper, and a firm and judicious use of parental authority,
in strictly refusing and forbidding all that is unsuitable or wrong, should harmoniously unite
their power in training up the young. Punishments, as a last resource, ought to be used; but
never in a spirit of anger, wrath, or revenge. If administered calmly and mildly they will
have a double power. Every wilful offence of a child seems to say, "Correct me, but with judgment."
It may be painful to a parent to put on the "graver countenance of love," but true parental
love will always do it. Oh that all parents in every rank of life saw and acted upon the great
truth, that the noblest object that they can present to themselves, and the greatest obligation
that is laid upon them, is to rear up their children to intelligence, virtue, and piety; to
make them good rather than great, for if they are the former, they will assuredly be the latter
in its highest and truest sense.[A]

[Footnote A: Should the reader be pleased with this volume, I may refer to another work of
mine just published, entitled "A System for the Education of the Young."]

       *       *       *       *       *

Having now finished all that I have to say on Infant Schools, I would, in conclusion, breathe
forth a sincere petition to the throne of Divine Truth and Goodness, for the prosperity and
spread of the System; in which I am sure I shall be joined by all who have been convinced of
its beneficial effects in promoting the present and everlasting welfare of human beings.

Mysterious are thy ways, O God; yet who was ever disappointed that asked of thee in a right
spirit? Prosper, then, thy work which is begun in the world, we beseech thee, O Lord; may thy
gracious providence so encircle and protect the rising generation, that there may be no more
complaining in our streets. Protect them, O Lord, from the many dangers that surround them,
as soon as they draw their breath in this vale of tears, and put into the hearts of those who
have the means to consider the state of the infant poor, to give them the assistance they need.
Grant that thy blessed example may be followed by many, for thou didst desire that children
should come unto thee, and not be forbidden, and thou didst take them up in thine arms and
bless them, declaring, that of such is the kingdom of heaven. May thy creatures, therefore,
not be ashamed to notice little children, but co-operate, hand and heart with each other, and
endeavour to teach them all good. May difference of sentiment and opinion be laid aside and
forgotten; and may all join hand and heart in endeavouring to rescue the infant race from danger;
and so these tender plants may be nurtured with the dew of thy divine blessing, and be thus
made fit subjects for thy heavenly kingdom, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the
weary are at rest. May thy divine influence descend abundantly upon all those who have hitherto
turned their attention to infant children; may they feel great pleasure in doing good; may
they receive thy grace and protection abundantly; and when their days of probation are ended,
may they find a place in thy heavenly mansions, and there glorify thee throughout the boundless
ages of eternity. Amen.[A]

[Footnote A: This prayer written more than thirty years ago. The reader will see a great portion
of the prayer has been answered; the subject has been mooted in Parliament; the Government
have mooted the question of Education; and even the sovereign has recommended attention to
it in a speech from the throne. This feeling only wants a right direction given to it, and
all will be well.]