The bark, pushed into the waves by several soldiers, rocked a minute under the flappings of
the sail, which had not yet caught the wind. But soon, held by Meroë, while her husband managed
the tiller, the sail filled, and bellied out to the blast. The boat leaned gently, and seemed
to fly over the crests of the waves like a sea-bird. Meroë, dressed in her mariner's costume,
stayed at the prow, her black hair streaming in the wind. Occasionally the white foam of the
ocean, bursting from the prow of the boat, flung its stinging froth in the young woman's noble
face. Albinik knew these coasts as the ferryman of the solitary moors of Brittany knows their
least detours. The bark seemed to play with the high waves. From time to time the couple saw
in the distance the tent of Caesar, recognizable by its purple flaps, and saw gleaming in the
sun the gold and silver which decked the armor of his generals.

"Oh, Caesar!--scourge of Gaul--the most cruel, the most debauched of men!" exclaimed Meroë.
"You do not know that this frail bark, which at this moment you are following in the distance
with your eyes, bears two of your most desperate enemies. You do not know that they have beforehand
given over their lives to Hesus in the hope of making to Teutates, god of journeys by land
and by sea, an offering worthy of him--an offering of several thousand Romans, sinking in the
depths of the sea. It is with hands raised to you, thankful and happy, O, Hesus, that we shall
disappear in the bottom of the deep, with the enemies of our sacred Gaul!"

The bark of Albinik and Meroë, almost grazing the rocks and glancing over the surges along
the dangerous ashore, sometimes drew away from, sometimes approached the bank. The mariner's
companion, seeing him sad and thoughtful, said:

"Still brooding, Albinik! Everything favors our projects. The Roman general is no longer suspicious;
your skill this morning will decide him to accept your services; and to-morrow, mayhap, you
will pilot the galleys of our enemies----"

"Yes, I will pilot them to the bottom, where they will be swallowed up, and we with them."

"What a magnificent offering to the gods! Ten thousand Romans, perhaps!"

"Meroë," answered Albinik with a sigh, "then, after ending our lives here, even as the soldiers,
brave warriors after all, we shall be resurrected elsewhere with them. They will say to me:
'It was not through bravery, with the lance and the sword, that you overcame us. No, you slew
us without a combat, by treason. You watched at the rudder, we slept in peace and confidence.
You steered us on the rocks--in an instant the sea swallowed us. You are like a cowardly poisoner,
who would send us to our death by putting poison in our food. Is that an act of valor? No,
no longer do you know the open boldness of your fathers, those proud Gauls who fought us half
naked, who railed at us in our iron armor, asking why we fought if we were afraid of wounds
or death.'"

"Ah!" exclaimed Meroë, sadly and bitterly, "Why did the druidesses teach me that a woman ought
to escape the last outrage by death! Why did your mother Margarid tell us so often, as a noble
example to follow, the deed of your grandmother Syomara, who cut off the head of the Roman
who ravished her, and carrying the head under the skirt of her robe to her husband, said to
him these proud and chaste words: 'No two men living can boast of having possessed me!' Why
did I not yield to Caesar?"

"Meroë!"

"Perhaps you would then have been avenged! faint heart! weak spirit! Must then the outrage
be completed, the ignominy swallowed, before your anger is kindled?"

"Meroë, Meroë!"

"It is not enough for you, then, that the Roman has proposed to your wife to sell herself,
to deliver herself to him for gifts? It is to your wife--do you hear!--to your wife, that Caesar
made that offer of shame!"

