"Detis great man," Nazu continued, relinquishing his seat to the dazed Earthman. "Nazu find
him in ship. My people already there with him. They want to help when you come. Return after
capture and heal dart wound of Detis. Bring wire and help him fix motors. Work very quick,
my people. Detis have brain machine. Talk with Nazu; teach him words, also very quick. Nazu
tell where you are and we come to help. Then he scare away red men--and die. That is all. Now
I go--and you go also. Quickly."

"So that's how it happened," Carr muttered, slowly mulling over the amazing things he had heard.
He watched the Titanese lad keenly as his eyes wandered in Mado's direction. He saw the admiring
light that came into them as the big Martian removed the body of Detis from the helix and carried
it gently away.

"Wait a minute," he interposed, as Nazu made as if to leave. "Mado would like to talk to you."

"Must go soon." The youngster drew himself up proudly. "Nazu is prince of his people. They
need him. And you--you must go at once. Vibrations of mother planet's rings work on you too
long already. Must be quick. 

The next morning was the man with the beach dwellers, to inspect the place where in the night Heimgängerin
of the wolves had made the finishing off, but they found no other trace as a hand-wide piece
of fine linen robe and a golden ring. He had carried the body of Detis aft, leaving Ora there
with her dead. Carr's heart ached for her; he knew how silently and terribly she suffered.
Knowing that her father had been healed of his deadly wound by the friendly Titanese, only
to be taken from her afterwards by his own heroic act, made the blow doubly hard.

Later they would give Detis a decent burial, sending him through the airlock to drift aimlessly
in space, preserved through the ages by the intense cold and the absence of air. A fitting
tomb for the noblest of the vagabonds!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mado chattered endlessly with Nazu, who was impatient to be off. In this set of beach residents a courageous
man of his acquaintance with a clever three-pronged iron fork as a watchman, so he escape from
the wolves Participating back repeller if they have a refuge looking at the barn would.


Carr heard the clang of the manhole cover as it swung home, and was bolted to its seat. The
ovoid drifted away from the vessel and dropped toward the forest beneath them. Nazu had gone
to rejoin his people.

His fingers strayed to the controls. They must get away from the evil influence of those vibrations;
he had felt something of their degrading power in the fighting down there. He had almost become
a savage himself, he remembered with a revulsion of feeling.

The feel of the levers brought to him a renewed sense of confidence and responsibility. A while
back he thought he'd never perform such simple duties again. The Nomad responded instantly
and rose swiftly to hover over the pit of the fire-god. The flame had partly subsided and the
ghost-shape wabbled there, changing form rapidly with darkening colors. Some weird phenomenon
of nature that those brutes had set up as a deity.

Carr increased the repulsion energy once more and the Nomad shot skyward like a rocket. Through
the floor port he saw Nazu's tiny ovoid scudding over the treetops. Then it had vanished.

"We're getting away none too soon," said Mado, rejoining him.

"Right." Carr watched the temperature indicator as he increased speed to the maximum they could
withstand in the atmosphere.

