Hippolita's real purpose was to demand of Jerome, whether in conscience she might not consent
to the divorce.  She had oft urged Manfred to resign the principality, which the delicacy of
her conscience rendered an hourly burthen to her.  These scruples concurred to make the separation
from her husband appear less dreadful to her than it would have seemed in any other situation.

Jerome, at quitting the castle overnight, had questioned Theodore severely why he had accused
him to Manfred of being privy to his escape.  Theodore owned it had been with design to prevent
Manfred's suspicion from alighting on Matilda; and added, the holiness of Jerome's life and
character secured him from the tyrant's wrath.  Jerome was heartily grieved to discover his
son's inclination for that princess; and leaving him to his rest, promised in the morning to
acquaint him with important reasons for conquering his passion.

Theodore, like Isabella, was too recently acquainted with parental authority to submit to its
decisions against the impulse of his heart.  He had little curiosity to learn the Friar's reasons,
and less disposition to obey them.  The lovely Matilda had made stronger impressions on him
than filial affection.  All night he pleased himself with visions of love; and it was not till
late after the morning-office, that he recollected the Friar's commands to attend him at Alfonso's
tomb.

"Young man," said Jerome, when he saw him, "this tardiness does not please me.  Have a father's
commands already so little weight?"

Theodore made awkward excuses, and attributed his delay to having overslept himself.

"And on whom were thy dreams employed?" said the Friar sternly. His son blushed.  "Come, come,"
resumed the Friar, "inconsiderate youth, this must not be; eradicate this guilty passion from
thy breast--"

"Guilty passion!" cried Theodore:  "Can guilt dwell with innocent beauty and virtuous modesty?"

"It is sinful," replied the Friar, "to cherish those whom heaven has doomed to destruction.
A tyrant's race must be swept from the earth to the third and fourth generation."

"Will heaven visit the innocent for the crimes of the guilty?" said Theodore.  "The fair Matilda
has virtues enough--"

"To undo thee:" interrupted Jerome.  "Hast thou so soon forgotten that twice the savage Manfred
has pronounced thy sentence?"

"Nor have I forgotten, sir," said Theodore, "that the charity of his daughter delivered me
from his power.  I can forget injuries, but never benefits."

"The injuries thou hast received from Manfred's race," said the Friar, "are beyond what thou
canst conceive.  Reply not, but view this holy image!  Beneath this marble monument rest the
ashes of the good Alfonso; a prince adorned with every virtue:  the father of his people! the
delight of mankind!  Kneel, headstrong boy, and list, while a father unfolds a tale of horror
that will expel every sentiment from thy soul, but sensations of sacred vengeance-- Alfonso!
much injured prince! let thy unsatisfied shade sit awful on the troubled air, while these trembling
lips--Ha! who comes there?--"

"The most wretched of women!" said Hippolita, entering the choir. "Good Father, art thou at
leisure?--but why this kneeling youth? what means the horror imprinted on each countenance?
why at this venerable tomb--alas! hast thou seen aught?"

"We were pouring forth our orisons to heaven," replied the Friar, with some confusion, "to
put an end to the woes of this deplorable province.  Join with us, Lady! thy spotless soul
may obtain an exemption from the judgments which the portents of these days but too speakingly
denounce against thy house."

"I pray fervently to heaven to divert them," said the pious Princess.  "Thou knowest it has
been the occupation of my life to wrest a blessing for my Lord and my harmless children.--One
alas! is taken from me! would heaven but hear me for my poor Matilda! Father! intercede for her!"

"Every heart will bless her," cried Theodore with rapture.

"Be dumb, rash youth!" said Jerome.  "And thou, fond Princess, contend not with the Powers
above! the Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away:  bless His holy name, and submit to his decrees."

"I do most devoutly," said Hippolita; "but will He not spare my only comfort? must Matilda
perish too?--ah!  Father, I came--but dismiss thy son.  No ear but thine must hear what I have
to utter."

"May heaven grant thy every wish, most excellent Princess!" said Theodore retiring.  Jerome
frowned.

Hippolita then acquainted the Friar with the proposal she had suggested to Manfred, his approbation
of it, and the tender of Matilda that he was gone to make to Frederic.  Jerome could not conceal
his dislike of the notion, which he covered under pretence of the improbability that Frederic,
the nearest of blood to Alfonso, and who was come to claim his succession, would yield to an
alliance with the usurper of his right.  But nothing could equal the perplexity of the Friar,
when Hippolita confessed her readiness not to oppose the separation, and demanded his opinion
on the legality of her acquiescence.  The Friar caught eagerly at her request of his advice,
and without explaining his aversion to the proposed marriage of Manfred and Isabella, he painted
to Hippolita in the most alarming colours the sinfulness of her consent, denounced judgments
against her if she complied, and enjoined her in the severest terms to treat any such proposition
with every mark of indignation and refusal. 

There was no fountain to complete the harmony, but the intermittent gushes from the spout of the
great pump in the centre of the square were no bad substitute. At all events, they supplied
the sound of water, without which Nature's orchestra is not full.

Wattie Sim, the watchmaker, long and lank, with grey bushy eyebrows meeting over his nose, wandered,
with the gait of a heedless pair of compasses, across from his own
shop to Redford the bookseller's, at whose door a small group was
already gathered.  He made faint opposition to the proposal; affecting, for form only, not to acquiesce
unless Hippolita should consent to the divorce.  Manfred took that upon himself.

Transported with his success, and impatient to see himself in a situation to expect sons, he
hastened to his wife's apartment, determined to extort her compliance.  He learned with indignation
that she was absent at the convent.  His guilt suggested to him that she had probably been
informed by Isabella of his purpose.  He doubted whether her retirement to the convent did
not import an intention of remaining there, until she could raise obstacles to their divorce;
and the suspicions he had already entertained of Jerome, made him apprehend that the Friar
would not only traverse his views, but might have inspired Hippolita with the resolution of
talking sanctuary.  Impatient to unravel this clue, and to defeat its success, Manfred hastened
to the convent, and arrived there as the Friar was earnestly exhorting the Princess never to
yield to the divorce.

"Madam," said Manfred, "what business drew you hither? why did you not await my return from
the Marquis?"

"I came to implore a blessing on your councils," replied Hippolita.

"My councils do not need a Friar's intervention," said Manfred; "and of all men living is that
hoary traitor the only one whom you delight to confer with?"

"Profane Prince!" said Jerome; "is it at the altar that thou choosest to insult the servants
of the altar?--but, Manfred, thy impious schemes are known.  Heaven and this virtuous lady
know them--nay, frown not, Prince.  The Church despises thy menaces. Her thunders will be heard
above thy wrath.  Dare to proceed in thy cursed purpose of a divorce, until her sentence be
known, and here I lance her anathema at thy head."

"Audacious rebel!" said Manfred, endeavouring to conceal the awe with which the Friar's words
inspired him.  "Dost thou presume to threaten thy lawful Prince?"

"My gracious Lord," said Hippolita, "let us submit ourselves to heaven.  Think not thy ever
obedient wife rebels against thy authority.  I have no will but that of my Lord and the Church.
To that revered tribunal let us appeal.  It does not depend on us to burst the bonds that unite
us.  If the Church shall approve the dissolution of our marriage, be it so--I have but few
years, and those of sorrow, to pass.  Where can they be worn away so well as at the foot of
this altar, in prayers for thine and Matilda's safety?"

"But thou shalt not remain here until then," said Manfred.  "Repair with me to the castle,
and there I will advise on the proper measures for a divorce;--but this meddling Friar comes
not thither; my hospitable roof shall never more harbour a traitor--and for thy Reverence's
offspring," continued he, "I banish him from my dominions.  He, I ween, is no sacred personage,
nor under the protection of the Church.  Whoever weds Isabella, it shall not be Father Falconara's
started-up son."

"They start up," said the Friar, "who are suddenly beheld in the seat of lawful Princes; but
they wither away like the grass, and their place knows them no more."

Manfred, casting a look of scorn at the Friar, led Hippolita forth; but at the door of the
church whispered one of his attendants to remain concealed about the convent, and bring him
instant notice, if any one from the castle should repair thither.

CHAPTER V.

Every reflection which Manfred made on the Friar's behaviour, conspired to persuade him that
Jerome was privy to an amour between Isabella and Theodore.  But Jerome's new presumption,
so dissonant from his former meekness, suggested still deeper apprehensions. The Prince even
suspected that the Friar depended on some secret support from Frederic, whose arrival, coinciding
with the novel appearance of Theodore, seemed to bespeak a correspondence.  Still more was
he troubled with the resemblance of Theodore to Alfonso's portrait.  The latter he knew had
unquestionably died without issue.  Frederic had consented to bestow Isabella on him.  These
contradictions agitated his mind with numberless pangs.

He saw but two methods of extricating himself from his difficulties.  The one was to resign
his dominions to the Marquis-- pride, ambition, and his reliance on ancient prophecies, which
had pointed out a possibility of his preserving them to his posterity, combated that thought.
The other was to press his marriage with Isabella.  After long ruminating on these anxious
thoughts, as he marched silently with Hippolita to the castle, he at last discoursed with that
Princess on the subject of his disquiet, and used every insinuating and plausible argument
to extract her consent to, even her promise of promoting the divorce.  Hippolita needed little
persuasions to bend her to his pleasure.  She endeavoured to win him over to the measure of
resigning his dominions; but finding her exhortations fruitless, she assured him, that as far
as her conscience would allow, she would raise no opposition to a separation, though without
better founded scruples than what he yet alleged, she would not engage to be active in demanding
it.

This compliance, though inadequate, was sufficient to raise Manfred's hopes.  He trusted that
his power and wealth would easily advance his suit at the court of Rome, whither he resolved
to engage Frederic to take a journey on purpose.  That Prince had discovered so much passion
for Matilda, that Manfred hoped to obtain all he wished by holding out or withdrawing his daughter's
charms, according as the Marquis should appear more or less disposed to co-operate in his views.
Even the absence of Frederic would be a material point gained, until he could take further
measures for his security.

Dismissing Hippolita to her apartment, he repaired to that of the Marquis; but crossing the
great hall through which he was to pass he met Bianca.  The damsel he knew was in the confidence
of both the young ladies.  It immediately occurred to him to sift her on the subject of Isabella
and Theodore.  Calling her aside into the recess of the oriel window of the hall, and soothing
her with many fair words and promises, he demanded of her whether she knew aught of the state
of Isabella's affections.

"I! my Lord! no my Lord--yes my Lord--poor Lady! she is wonderfully alarmed about her father's
wounds; but I tell her he will do well; don't your Highness think so?"

"I do not ask you," replied Manfred, "what she thinks about her father; but you are in her
secrets.  Come, be a good girl and tell me; is there any young man--ha!--you understand me."

"Lord bless me! understand your Highness? no, not I.  I told her a few vulnerary herbs and
repose--"

"I am not talking," replied the Prince, impatiently, "about her father; I know he will do well."

"Bless me, I rejoice to hear your Highness say so; for though I thought it not right to let
my young Lady despond, methought his greatness had a wan look, and a something--I remember
when young Ferdinand was wounded by the Venetian--"

 "Thou answerest from the point," interrupted Manfred; "but here,
take this jewel, perhaps that may fix thy attention--nay, no
reverences; my favour shall not stop here--come, tell me truly; how
stands Isabella's heart?"

"Well! your Highness has such a way!" said Bianca, "to be sure--but can your Highness keep
a secret? if it should ever come out of your lips--"

"It shall not, it shall not," cried Manfred.

"Nay, but swear, your Highness."

"By my halidame, if it should ever be known that I said it--"

"Why, truth is truth, I do not think my Lady Isabella ever much affectioned my young Lord your
son; yet he was a sweet youth as one should see; I am sure, if I had been a Princess--but bless
me!  I must attend my Lady Matilda; she will marvel what is become of me."

"Stay," cried Manfred; "thou hast not satisfied my question.  Hast thou ever carried any message,
any letter?"

"I! good gracious!" cried Bianca; "I carry a letter?  I would not to be a Queen.  I hope your
Highness thinks, though I am poor, I am honest.  Did your Highness never hear what Count Marsigli
offered me, when he came a wooing to my Lady Matilda?"

"I have not leisure," said Manfred, "to listen to thy tale.  I do not question thy honesty.
But it is thy duty to conceal nothing from me.  How long has Isabella been acquainted with
Theodore?"

"Nay, there is nothing can escape your Highness!" said Bianca; "not that I know any thing of
the matter.  Theodore, to be sure, is a proper young man, and, as my Lady Matilda says, the
very image of good Alfonso.  Has not your Highness remarked it?"

"Yes, yes,--No--thou torturest me," said Manfred.  "Where did they meet? when?"

"Who! my Lady Matilda?" said Bianca.

"No, no, not Matilda:  Isabella; when did Isabella first become acquainted with this Theodore!"

"Virgin Mary!" said Bianca, "how should I know?"

"Thou dost know," said Manfred; "and I must know; I will--"

"Lord! your Highness is not jealous of young Theodore!" said Bianca.

"Jealous! no, no.  Why should I be jealous? perhaps I mean to unite them--If I were sure Isabella
would have no repugnance."

"Repugnance! no, I'll warrant her," said Bianca; "he is as comely a youth as ever trod on Christian
ground.  We are all in love with him; there is not a soul in the castle but would be rejoiced
to have him for our Prince--I mean, when it shall please heaven to call your Highness to itself."

"Indeed!" said Manfred, "has it gone so far! oh! this cursed Friar!--but I must not lose time--go,
Bianca, attend Isabella; but I charge thee, not a word of what has passed.  Find out how she
is affected towards Theodore; bring me good news, and that ring has a companion.  Wait at the
foot of the winding staircase:  I am going to visit the Marquis, and will talk further with
thee at my return."

Manfred, after some general conversation, desired Frederic to dismiss the two Knights, his
companions, having to talk with him on urgent affairs.

As soon as they were alone, he began in artful guise to sound the Marquis on the subject of
Matilda; and finding him disposed to his wish, he let drop hints on the difficulties that would
attend the celebration of their marriage, unless--At that instant Bianca burst into the room
with a wildness in her look and gestures that spoke the utmost terror.

"Oh! my Lord, my Lord!" cried she; "we are all undone! it is come again! it is come again!"

"What is come again?" cried Manfred amazed.

"Oh! the hand! the Giant! the hand!--support me! I am terrified out of my senses," cried Bianca.
"I will not sleep in the castle to- night.  Where shall I go? my things may come after me to-morrow--
would I had been content to wed Francesco! this comes of ambition!"

"What has terrified thee thus, young woman?" said the Marquis. "Thou art safe here; be not
alarmed."

"Oh! your Greatness is wonderfully good," said Bianca, "but I dare not--no, pray let me go--I
had rather leave everything behind me, than stay another hour under this roof."

"Go to, thou hast lost thy senses," said Manfred.  "Interrupt us not; we were communing on
important matters--My Lord, this wench is subject to fits--Come with me, Bianca."

"Oh! the Saints!  No," said Bianca, "for certain it comes to warn your Highness; why should
it appear to me else?  I say my prayers morning and evening--oh! if your Highness had believed
Diego!  'Tis the same hand that he saw the foot to in the gallery-chamber-- Father Jerome has
often told us the prophecy would be out one of these days--'Bianca,' said he, 'mark my words--'"

"Thou ravest," said Manfred, in a rage; "be gone, and keep these fooleries to frighten thy
companions."

"What! my Lord," cried Bianca, "do you think I have seen nothing? go to the foot of the great
stairs yourself--as I live I saw it."

"Saw what? tell us, fair maid, what thou hast seen," said Frederic.

"Can your Highness listen," said Manfred, "to the delirium of a silly wench, who has heard
stories of apparitions until she believes them?"

"This is more than fancy," said the Marquis; "her terror is too natural and too strongly impressed
to be the work of imagination. Tell us, fair maiden, what it is has moved thee thus?"

"Yes, my Lord, thank your Greatness," said Bianca; "I believe I look very pale; I shall be
better when I have recovered myself--I was going to my Lady Isabella's chamber, by his Highness's
order--"

"We do not want the circumstances," interrupted Manfred.  "Since his Highness will have it
so, proceed; but be brief."

"Lord! your Highness thwarts one so!" replied Bianca; "I fear my hair--I am sure I never in
my life--well! as I was telling your Greatness, I was going by his Highness's order to my Lady
Isabella's chamber; she lies in the watchet-coloured chamber, on the right hand, one pair of
stairs:  so when I came to the great stairs--I was looking on his Highness's present here--"

"Grant me patience!" said Manfred, "will this wench never come to the point? what imports it
to the Marquis, that I gave thee a bauble for thy faithful attendance on my daughter? we want
to know what thou sawest."

"I was going to tell your Highness," said Bianca, "if you would permit me.  So as I was rubbing
the ring--I am sure I had not gone up three steps, but I heard the rattling of armour; for
all the world such a clatter as Diego says he heard when the Giant turned him about in the
gallery-chamber."

