The next day, the 16th of February, we left the basin which, between Rhodes and Alexandria,
is reckoned about 1,500 fathoms in depth, and the Nautilus, passing some distance from Cerigo,
quitted the Grecian Archipelago after having doubled Cape Matapan.

CHAPTER VII

THE MEDITERRANEAN IN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS

The Mediterranean, the blue sea par excellence, "the great sea" of the Hebrews, "the sea" of
the Greeks, the "mare nostrum" of the Romans, bordered by orange-trees, aloes, cacti, and sea-pines;
embalmed with the perfume of the myrtle, surrounded by rude mountains, saturated with pure
and transparent air, but incessantly worked by underground fires; a perfect battlefield in
which Neptune and Pluto still dispute the empire of the world!

It is upon these banks, and on these waters, says Michelet, that man is renewed in one of the
most powerful climates of the globe.  But, beautiful as it was, I could only take a rapid glance
at the basin whose superficial area is two million of square yards.  Even Captain Nemo's knowledge
was lost to me, for this puzzling person did not appear once during our passage at full speed.
I estimated the course which the Nautilus took under the waves of the sea at about six hundred
leagues, and it was accomplished in forty-eight hours.  Starting on the morning of the 16th
of February from the shores of Greece, we had crossed the Straits of Gibraltar by sunrise on
the 18th.

It was plain to me that this Mediterranean, enclosed in the midst of those countries which
he wished to avoid, was distasteful to Captain Nemo.  Those waves and those breezes brought
back too many remembrances, if not too many regrets.  Here he had no longer that independence
and that liberty of gait which he had when in the open seas, and his Nautilus felt itself cramped
between the close shores of Africa and Europe.

Our speed was now twenty-five miles an hour.  It may be well understood that Ned Land, to his
great disgust, was obliged to renounce his intended flight.  He could not launch the pinnace,
going at the rate of twelve or thirteen yards every second.  To quit the Nautilus under such
conditions would be as bad as jumping from a train going at full speed--an imprudent thing,
to say the least of it.  Besides, our vessel only mounted to the surface of the waves at night
to renew its stock of air; it was steered entirely by the compass and the log.

I saw no more of the interior of this Mediterranean than a traveller by express train perceives
of the landscape which flies before his eyes; that is to say, the distant horizon, and not
the nearer objects which pass like a flash of lightning.

We were then passing between Sicily and the coast of Tunis.  In the narrow space between Cape
Bon and the Straits of Messina the bottom of the sea rose almost suddenly.  There was a perfect
bank, on which there was not more than nine fathoms of water, whilst on either side the depth
was ninety fathoms.

The Nautilus had to manoeuvre very carefully so as not to strike against this submarine barrier.

I showed Conseil, on the map of the Mediterranean, the spot occupied by this reef.

"But if you please, sir," observed Conseil, "it is like a real isthmus joining Europe to Africa."

"Yes, my boy, it forms a perfect bar to the Straits of Lybia, and the soundings of Smith have
proved that in former times the continents between Cape Boco and Cape Furina were joined."

"I can well believe it," said Conseil.

"I will add," I continued, "that a similar barrier exists between Gibraltar and Ceuta, which
in geological times formed the entire Mediterranean."

"What if some volcanic burst should one day raise these two barriers above the waves?"

"It is not probable, Conseil."

"Well, but allow me to finish, please, sir; if this phenomenon should take place, it will be
troublesome for M. Lesseps, who has taken so much pains to pierce the isthmus."

"I agree with you; but I repeat, Conseil, this phenomenon will never happen.  The violence
of subterranean force is ever diminishing. Volcanoes, so plentiful in the first days of the
world, are being extinguished by degrees; the internal heat is weakened, the temperature of
the lower strata of the globe is lowered by a perceptible quantity every century to the detriment
of our globe, for its heat is its life."

"But the sun?"

"The sun is not sufficient, Conseil.  Can it give heat to a dead body?"

"Not that I know of."

"Well, my friend, this earth will one day be that cold corpse; it will become uninhabitable
and uninhabited like the moon, which has long since lost all its vital heat."

"In how many centuries?"

"In some hundreds of thousands of years, my boy."

"Then," said Conseil, "we shall have time to finish our journey--that is, if Ned Land does
not interfere with it."

And Conseil, reassured, returned to the study of the bank, which the Nautilus was skirting
at a moderate speed.

During the night of the 16th and 17th February we had entered the second Mediterranean basin,
the greatest depth of which was 1,450 fathoms.  The Nautilus, by the action of its crew, slid
down the inclined planes and buried itself in the lowest depths of the sea.

On the 18th of February, about three o'clock in the morning, we were at the entrance of the
Straits of Gibraltar.  There once existed two currents: an upper one, long since recognised,
which conveys the waters of the ocean into the basin of the Mediterranean; and a lower counter-current,
which reasoning has now shown to exist.  Indeed, the volume of water in the Mediterranean,
incessantly added to by the waves of the Atlantic and by rivers falling into it, would each
year raise the level of this sea, for its evaporation is not sufficient to restore the equilibrium.
As it is not so, we must necessarily admit the existence of an under-current, which empties
into the basin of the Atlantic through the Straits of Gibraltar the surplus waters of the Mediterranean.
A fact indeed; and it was this counter-current by which the Nautilus profited.  It advanced
rapidly by the narrow pass.  For one instant I caught a glimpse of the beautiful ruins of the
temple of Hercules, buried in the ground, according to Pliny, and with the low island which
supports it; and a few minutes later we were floating on the Atlantic.

CHAPTER VIII

VIGO BAY

The Atlantic! a vast sheet of water whose superficial area covers twenty-five millions of square
miles, the length of which is nine thousand miles, with a mean breadth of two thousand seven
hundred--an ocean whose parallel winding shores embrace an immense circumference, watered by
the largest rivers of the world, the St. Lawrence, the Mississippi, the Amazon, the Plata,
the Orinoco, the Niger, the Senegal, the Elbe, the Loire, and the Rhine, which carry water
from the most civilised, as well as from the most savage, countries! Magnificent field of water,
incessantly ploughed by vessels of every nation, sheltered by the flags of every nation, and
which terminates in those two terrible points so dreaded by mariners, Cape Horn and the Cape
of Tempests.

The Nautilus was piercing the water with its sharp spur, after having accomplished nearly ten
thousand leagues in three months and a half, a distance greater than the great circle of the
earth.  Where were we going now, and what was reserved for the future?  The Nautilus, leaving
the Straits of Gibraltar, had gone far out.  It returned to the surface of the waves, and our
daily walks on the platform were restored to us.

I mounted at once, accompanied by Ned Land and Conseil.  At a distance of about twelve miles,
Cape St. Vincent was dimly to be seen, forming the south-western point of the Spanish peninsula.
A strong southerly gale was blowing.  The sea was swollen and billowy; it made the Nautilus
rock violently.  It was almost impossible to keep one's foot on the platform, which the heavy
rolls of the sea beat over every instant.  So we descended after inhaling some mouthfuls of
fresh air.

I returned to my room, Conseil to his cabin; but the Canadian, with a preoccupied air, followed
me.  Our rapid passage across the Mediterranean had not allowed him to put his project into
execution, and he could not help showing his disappointment.  When the door of my room was
shut, he sat down and looked at me silently.

"Friend Ned," said I, "I understand you; but you cannot reproach yourself.  To have attempted
to leave the Nautilus under the circumstances would have been folly."

Ned Land did not answer; his compressed lips and frowning brow showed with him the violent
possession this fixed idea had taken of his mind.

"Let us see," I continued; "we need not despair yet.  We are going up the coast of Portugal
again; France and England are not far off, where we can easily find refuge.  Now if the Nautilus,
on leaving the Straits of Gibraltar, had gone to the south, if it had carried us towards regions
where there were no continents, I should share your uneasiness. But we know now that Captain
Nemo does not fly from civilised seas, and in some days I think you can act with security."

Ned Land still looked at me fixedly; at length his fixed lips parted, and he said, "It is for
to-night."

I drew myself up suddenly.  I was, I admit, little prepared for this communication.  I wanted
to answer the Canadian, but words would not come.

"We agreed to wait for an opportunity," continued Ned Land, "and the opportunity has arrived.
This night we shall be but a few miles from the Spanish coast.  It is cloudy.  The wind blows
freely.  I have your word, M. Aronnax, and I rely upon you."

As I was silent, the Canadian approached me.

"To-night, at nine o'clock," said he.  "I have warned Conseil.  At that moment Captain Nemo
will be shut up in his room, probably in bed. Neither the engineers nor the ship's crew can
see us.  Conseil and I will gain the central staircase, and you, M. Aronnax, will remain in
the library, two steps from us, waiting my signal.  The oars, the mast, and the sail are in
the canoe.  I have even succeeded in getting some provisions.  I have procured an English wrench,
to unfasten the bolts which attach it to the shell of the Nautilus.  So all is ready, till
to-night."

"The sea is bad."

"That I allow," replied the Canadian; "but we must risk that.  Liberty is worth paying for;
besides, the boat is strong, and a few miles with a fair wind to carry us is no great thing.
Who knows but by to-morrow we may be a hundred leagues away?  Let circumstances only favour
us, and by ten or eleven o'clock we shall have landed on some spot of terra firma, alive or
dead.  But adieu now till to-night."

With these words the Canadian withdrew, leaving me almost dumb.  I had imagined that, the chance
gone, I should have time to reflect and discuss the matter.  My obstinate companion had given
me no time; and, after all, what could I have said to him?  Ned Land was perfectly right. 
There was almost the opportunity to profit by.  Could I retract my word, and take upon myself
the responsibility of compromising the future of my companions?  To-morrow Captain Nemo might
take us far from all land.

At that moment a rather loud hissing noise told me that the reservoirs were filling, and that
the Nautilus was sinking under the waves of the Atlantic.

A sad day I passed, between the desire of regaining my liberty of action and of abandoning
the wonderful Nautilus, and leaving my submarine studies incomplete.

What dreadful hours I passed thus!  Sometimes seeing myself and companions safely landed, sometimes
wishing, in spite of my reason, that some unforeseen circumstance, would prevent the realisation
of Ned Land's project.

Twice I went to the saloon.  I wished to consult the compass.  I wished to see if the direction
the Nautilus was taking was bringing us nearer or taking us farther from the coast.  But no;
the Nautilus kept in Portuguese waters.

I must therefore take my part and prepare for flight.  My luggage was not heavy; my notes,
nothing more.

As to Captain Nemo, I asked myself what he would think of our escape; what trouble, what wrong
it might cause him and what he might do in case of its discovery or failure.  Certainly I had
no cause to complain of him; on the contrary, never was hospitality freer than his.  In leaving
him I could not be taxed with ingratitude.  No oath bound us to him.  It was on the strength
of circumstances he relied, and not upon our word, to fix us for ever.

I had not seen the Captain since our visit to the Island of Santorin. Would chance bring me
to his presence before our departure?  I wished it, and I feared it at the same time.  I listened
if I could hear him walking the room contiguous to mine.  No sound reached my ear.  I felt
an unbearable uneasiness.  This day of waiting seemed eternal.  Hours struck too slowly to
keep pace with my impatience.

My dinner was served in my room as usual.  I ate but little; I was too preoccupied.  I left
the table at seven o'clock. A hundred and twenty minutes (I counted them) still separated me
from the moment in which I was to join Ned Land.  My agitation redoubled.  My pulse beat violently.
I could not remain quiet.  I went and came, hoping to calm my troubled spirit by constant movement.
The idea of failure in our bold enterprise was the least painful of my anxieties; but the thought
of seeing our project discovered before leaving the Nautilus, of being brought before Captain
Nemo, irritated, or (what was worse) saddened, at my desertion, made my heart beat.

I wanted to see the saloon for the last time.  I descended the stairs and arrived in the museum,
where I had passed so many useful and agreeable hours.  I looked at all its riches, all its
treasures, like a man on the eve of an eternal exile, who was leaving never to return.

These wonders of Nature, these masterpieces of art, amongst which for so many days my life
had been concentrated, I was going to abandon them for ever!  I should like to have taken a
last look through the windows of the saloon into the waters of the Atlantic:  but the panels
were hermetically closed, and a cloak of steel separated me from that ocean which I had not
yet explored.

In passing through the saloon, I came near the door let into the angle which opened into the
Captain's room.  To my great surprise, this door was ajar.  I drew back involuntarily.  If
Captain Nemo should be in his room, he could see me.  But, hearing no sound, I drew nearer.
The room was deserted.  I pushed open the door and took some steps forward. Still the same
monklike severity of aspect.

Suddenly the clock struck eight.  The first beat of the hammer on the bell awoke me from my
dreams.  I trembled as if an invisible eye had plunged into my most secret thoughts, and I
hurried from the room.

There my eye fell upon the compass.  Our course was still north.  The log indicated moderate
speed, the manometer a depth of about sixty feet.

I returned to my room, clothed myself warmly--sea boots, an otterskin cap, a great coat of
byssus, lined with sealskin; I was ready, I was waiting.  The vibration of the screw alone
broke the deep silence which reigned on board.  I listened attentively.  Would no loud voice
suddenly inform me that Ned Land had been surprised in his projected flight.  A mortal dread
hung over me, and I vainly tried to regain my accustomed coolness.

At a few minutes to nine, I put my ear to the Captain's door.  No noise.  I left my room and
returned to the saloon, which was half in obscurity, but deserted.

I opened the door communicating with the library.  The same insufficient light, the same solitude.
I placed myself near the door leading to the central staircase, and there waited for Ned Land's
signal.

At that moment the trembling of the screw sensibly diminished, then it stopped entirely.  The
silence was now only disturbed by the beatings of my own heart.  Suddenly a slight shock was
felt; and I knew that the Nautilus had stopped at the bottom of the ocean.  My uneasiness increased.
The Canadian's signal did not come.  I felt inclined to join Ned Land and beg of him to put
off his attempt.  I felt that we were not sailing under our usual conditions.

At this moment the door of the large saloon opened, and Captain Nemo appeared.  He saw me,
and without further preamble began in an amiable tone of voice:

"Ah, sir!  I have been looking for you.  Do you know the history of Spain?"

Now, one might know the history of one's own country by heart; but in the condition I was at
the time, with troubled mind and head quite lost, I could not have said a word of it.

"Well," continued Captain Nemo, "you heard my question!  Do you know the history of Spain?"

"Very slightly," I answered.

"Well, here are learned men having to learn," said the Captain.  "Come, sit down, and I will
tell you a curious episode in this history.  Sir, listen well," said he; "this history will
interest you on one side, for it will answer a question which doubtless you have not been able
to solve."

"I listen, Captain," said I, not knowing what my interlocutor was driving at, and asking myself
if this incident was bearing on our projected flight.

"Sir, if you have no objection, we will go back to 1702.  You cannot be ignorant that your
king, Louis XIV, thinking that the gesture of a potentate was sufficient to bring the Pyrenees
under his yoke, had imposed the Duke of Anjou, his grandson, on the Spaniards.  This prince
reigned more or less badly under the name of Philip V, and had a strong party against him abroad.
Indeed, the preceding year, the royal houses of Holland, Austria, and England had concluded
a treaty of alliance at the Hague, with the intention of plucking the crown of Spain from the
head of Philip V, and placing it on that of an archduke to whom they prematurely gave the title
of Charles III.

"Spain must resist this coalition; but she was almost entirely unprovided with either soldiers
or sailors.  However, money would not fail them, provided that their galleons, laden with gold
and silver from America, once entered their ports.  And about the end of 1702 they expected
a rich convoy which France was escorting with a fleet of twenty-three vessels, commanded by
Admiral Chateau-Renaud, for the ships of the coalition were already beating the Atlantic. 
This convoy was to go to Cadiz, but the Admiral, hearing that an English fleet was cruising
in those waters, resolved to make for a French port.

"The Spanish commanders of the convoy objected to this decision.  They wanted to be taken to
a Spanish port, and, if not to Cadiz, into Vigo Bay, situated on the northwest coast of Spain,
and which was not blocked.

"Admiral Chateau-Renaud had the rashness to obey this injunction, and the galleons entered
Vigo Bay.

"Unfortunately, it formed an open road which could not be defended in any way.  They must therefore
hasten to unload the galleons before the arrival of the combined fleet; and time would not
have failed them had not a miserable question of rivalry suddenly arisen.

"You are following the chain of events?" asked Captain Nemo.

"Perfectly," said I, not knowing the end proposed by this historical lesson.

"I will continue.  This is what passed.  The merchants of Cadiz had a privilege by which they
had the right of receiving all merchandise coming from the West Indies.  Now, to disembark
these ingots at the port of Vigo was depriving them of their rights.  They complained at Madrid,
and obtained the consent of the weak-minded Philip that the convoy, without discharging its
cargo, should remain sequestered in the roads of Vigo until the enemy had disappeared.

"But whilst coming to this decision, on the 22nd of October, 1702, the English vessels arrived
in Vigo Bay, when Admiral Chateau-Renaud, in spite of inferior forces, fought bravely.  But,
seeing that the treasure must fall into the enemy's hands, he burnt and scuttled every galleon,
which went to the bottom with their immense riches."

Captain Nemo stopped.  I admit I could not see yet why this history should interest me.

"Well?"  I asked.

"Well, M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, "we are in that Vigo Bay; and it rests with yourself
whether you will penetrate its mysteries."

The Captain rose, telling me to follow him.  I had had time to recover. I obeyed.  The saloon
was dark, but through the transparent glass the waves were sparkling.  I looked.

For half a mile around the Nautilus, the waters seemed bathed in electric light.  The sandy
bottom was clean and bright.  Some of the ship's crew in their diving-dresses were clearing
away half-rotten barrels and empty cases from the midst of the blackened wrecks.  From these
cases and from these barrels escaped ingots of gold and silver, cascades of piastres and jewels.
The sand was heaped up with them. Laden with their precious booty, the men returned to the
Nautilus, disposed of their burden, and went back to this inexhaustible fishery of gold and silver.

I understood now.  This was the scene of the battle of the 22nd of October, 1702.  Here on
this very spot the galleons laden for the Spanish Government had sunk.  Here Captain Nemo came,
according to his wants, to pack up those millions with which he burdened the Nautilus. It was
for him and him alone America had given up her precious metals. He was heir direct, without
anyone to share, in those treasures torn from the Incas and from the conquered of Ferdinand Cortez.

"Did you know, sir," he asked, smiling, "that the sea contained such riches?"

"I knew," I answered, "that they value money held in suspension in these waters at two millions."

"Doubtless; but to extract this money the expense would be greater than the profit.  Here,
on the contrary, I have but to pick up what man has lost--and not only in Vigo Bay, but in
a thousand other ports where shipwrecks have happened, and which are marked on my submarine
map. Can you understand now the source of the millions I am worth?"

"I understand, Captain.  But allow me to tell you that in exploring Vigo Bay you have only
been beforehand with a rival society."

"And which?"

"A society which has received from the Spanish Government the privilege of seeking those buried
galleons.  The shareholders are led on by the allurement of an enormous bounty, for they value
these rich shipwrecks at five hundred millions."

"Five hundred millions they were," answered Captain Nemo, "but they are so no longer."

"Just so," said I; "and a warning to those shareholders would be an act of charity.  But who
knows if it would be well received?  What gamblers usually regret above all is less the loss
of their money than of their foolish hopes.  After all, I pity them less than the thousands
of unfortunates to whom so much riches well-distributed would have been profitable, whilst
for them they will be for ever barren."

I had no sooner expressed this regret than I felt that it must have wounded Captain Nemo.

"Barren!" he exclaimed, with animation.  "Do you think then, sir, that these riches are lost
because I gather them?  Is it for myself alone, according to your idea, that I take the trouble
to collect these treasures?  Who told you that I did not make a good use of it?  Do you think
I am ignorant that there are suffering beings and oppressed races on this earth, miserable
creatures to console, victims to avenge?  Do you not understand?"

Captain Nemo stopped at these last words, regretting perhaps that he had spoken so much.  But
I had guessed that, whatever the motive which had forced him to seek independence under the
sea, it had left him still a man, that his heart still beat for the sufferings of humanity,
and that his immense charity was for oppressed races as well as individuals.  And I then understood
for whom those millions were destined which were forwarded by Captain Nemo when the Nautilus
was cruising in the waters of Crete.

CHAPTER IX

A VANISHED CONTINENT

The next morning, the 19th of February, I saw the Canadian enter my room.  I expected this
visit.  He looked very disappointed.

"Well, sir?" said he.

"Well, Ned, fortune was against us yesterday."

"Yes; that Captain must needs stop exactly at the hour we intended leaving his vessel."

"Yes, Ned, he had business at his bankers."

"His bankers!"

"Or rather his banking-house; by that I mean the ocean, where his riches are safer than in
the chests of the State."

I then related to the Canadian the incidents of the preceding night, hoping to bring him back
to the idea of not abandoning the Captain; but my recital had no other result than an energetically
expressed regret from Ned that he had not been able to take a walk on the battlefield of Vigo
on his own account.

"However," said he, "all is not ended.  It is only a blow of the harpoon lost.  Another time
we must succeed; and to-night, if necessary----"

"In what direction is the Nautilus going?"  I asked.

"I do not know," replied Ned.

"Well, at noon we shall see the point."

The Canadian returned to Conseil.  As soon as I was dressed, I went into the saloon.  The compass
was not reassuring.  The course of the Nautilus was S.S.W. We were turning our backs on Europe.

I waited with some impatience till the ship's place was pricked on the chart.  At about half-past
eleven the reservoirs were emptied, and our vessel rose to the surface of the ocean.  I rushed
towards the platform.  Ned Land had preceded me.  No more land in sight.  Nothing but an immense
sea.  Some sails on the horizon, doubtless those going to San Roque in search of favourable
winds for doubling the Cape of Good Hope.  The weather was cloudy.  A gale of wind was preparing.
Ned raved, and tried to pierce the cloudy horizon.  He still hoped that behind all that fog
stretched the land he so longed for.

At noon the sun showed itself for an instant.  The second profited by this brightness to take
its height.  Then, the sea becoming more billowy, we descended, and the panel closed.

An hour after, upon consulting the chart, I saw the position of the Nautilus was marked at
16° 17' long., and 33° 22' lat., at 150 leagues from the nearest coast.  There was no means
of flight, and I leave you to imagine the rage of the Canadian when I informed him of our situation.

For myself, I was not particularly sorry.  I felt lightened of the load which had oppressed
me, and was able to return with some degree of calmness to my accustomed work.

That night, about eleven o'clock, I received a most unexpected visit from Captain Nemo.  He
asked me very graciously if I felt fatigued from my watch of the preceding night.  I answered
in the negative.

"Then, M. Aronnax, I propose a curious excursion."

"Propose, Captain?"

"You have hitherto only visited the submarine depths by daylight, under the brightness of the
sun.  Would it suit you to see them in the darkness of the night?"

"Most willingly."

"I warn you, the way will be tiring.  We shall have far to walk, and must climb a mountain.
The roads are not well kept."

"What you say, Captain, only heightens my curiosity; I am ready to follow you."

"Come then, sir, we will put on our diving-dresses."

Arrived at the robing-room, I saw that neither of my companions nor any of the ship's crew
were to follow us on this excursion.  Captain Nemo had not even proposed my taking with me
either Ned or Conseil.

In a few moments we had put on our diving-dresses; they placed on our backs the reservoirs,
abundantly filled with air, but no electric lamps were prepared.  I called the Captain's attention
to the fact.

"They will be useless," he replied.

I thought I had not heard aright, but I could not repeat my observation, for the Captain's
head had already disappeared in its metal case.  I finished harnessing myself.  I felt them
put an iron-pointed stick into my hand, and some minutes later, after going through the usual
form, we set foot on the bottom of the Atlantic at a depth of 150 fathoms.  Midnight was near.
The waters were profoundly dark, but Captain Nemo pointed out in the distance a reddish spot,
a sort of large light shining brilliantly about two miles from the Nautilus.  What this fire
might be, what could feed it, why and how it lit up the liquid mass, I could not say.  In any
case, it did light our way, vaguely, it is true, but I soon accustomed myself to the peculiar
darkness, and I understood, under such circumstances, the uselessness of the Ruhmkorff apparatus.

As we advanced, I heard a kind of pattering above my head.  The noise redoubling, sometimes
producing a continual shower, I soon understood the cause.  It was rain falling violently,
and crisping the surface of the waves.  Instinctively the thought flashed across my mind that
I should be wet through!  By the water! in the midst of the water!  I could not help laughing
at the odd idea.  But, indeed, in the thick diving-dress, the liquid element is no longer felt,
and one only seems to be in an atmosphere somewhat denser than the terrestrial atmosphere.
Nothing more.

After half an hour's walk the soil became stony.  Medusae, microscopic crustacea, and pennatules
lit it slightly with their phosphorescent gleam.  I caught a glimpse of pieces of stone covered
with millions of zoophytes and masses of sea weed.  My feet often slipped upon this sticky
carpet of sea weed, and without my iron-tipped stick I should have fallen more than once. 
In turning round, I could still see the whitish lantern of the Nautilus beginning to pale in
the distance.

But the rosy light which guided us increased and lit up the horizon. The presence of this fire
under water puzzled me in the highest degree. Was I going towards a natural phenomenon as yet
unknown to the savants of the earth?  Or even (for this thought crossed my brain) had the hand
of man aught to do with this conflagration?  Had he fanned this flame? Was I to meet in these
depths companions and friends of Captain Nemo whom he was going to visit, and who, like him,
led this strange existence?  Should I find down there a whole colony of exiles who, weary of
the miseries of this earth, had sought and found independence in the deep ocean?  All these
foolish and unreasonable ideas pursued me.  And in this condition of mind, over-excited by
the succession of wonders continually passing before my eyes, I should not have been surprised
to meet at the bottom of the sea one of those submarine towns of which Captain Nemo dreamed.

Our road grew lighter and lighter.  The white glimmer came in rays from the summit of a mountain
about 800 feet high.  But what I saw was simply a reflection, developed by the clearness of
the waters.  The source of this inexplicable light was a fire on the opposite side of the mountain.

In the midst of this stony maze furrowing the bottom of the Atlantic, Captain Nemo advanced
without hesitation.  He knew this dreary road. Doubtless he had often travelled over it, and
could not lose himself. I followed him with unshaken confidence.  He seemed to me like a genie
of the sea; and, as he walked before me, I could not help admiring his stature, which was outlined
in black on the luminous horizon.

It was one in the morning when we arrived at the first slopes of the mountain; but to gain
access to them we must venture through the difficult paths of a vast copse.

Yes; a copse of dead trees, without leaves, without sap, trees petrified by the action of the
water and here and there overtopped by gigantic pines.  It was like a coal-pit still standing,
holding by the roots to the broken soil, and whose branches, like fine black paper cuttings,
showed distinctly on the watery ceiling.  Picture to yourself a forest in the Hartz hanging
on to the sides of the mountain, but a forest swallowed up.  The paths were encumbered with
seaweed and fucus, between which grovelled a whole world of crustacea.  I went along, climbing
the rocks, striding over extended trunks, breaking the sea bind-weed which hung from one tree
to the other; and frightening the fishes, which flew from branch to branch.  Pressing onward,
I felt no fatigue.  I followed my guide, who was never tired.  What a spectacle! How can I
express it? how paint the aspect of those woods and rocks in this medium--their under parts
dark and wild, the upper coloured with red tints, by that light which the reflecting powers
of the waters doubled?  We climbed rocks which fell directly after with gigantic bounds and
the low growling of an avalanche.  To right and left ran long, dark galleries, where sight
was lost.  Here opened vast glades which the hand of man seemed to have worked; and I sometimes
asked myself if some inhabitant of these submarine regions would not suddenly appear to me.

But Captain Nemo was still mounting.  I could not stay behind.  I followed boldly.  My stick
gave me good help.  A false step would have been dangerous on the narrow passes sloping down
to the sides of the gulfs; but I walked with firm step, without feeling any giddiness.  Now
I jumped a crevice, the depth of which would have made me hesitate had it been among the glaciers
on the land; now I ventured on the unsteady trunk of a tree thrown across from one abyss to
the other, without looking under my feet, having only eyes to admire the wild sites of this region.

There, monumental rocks, leaning on their regularly-cut bases, seemed to defy all laws of equilibrium.
From between their stony knees trees sprang, like a jet under heavy pressure, and upheld others
which upheld them.  Natural towers, large scarps, cut perpendicularly, like a "curtain," inclined
at an angle which the laws of gravitation could never have tolerated in terrestrial regions.

Two hours after quitting the Nautilus we had crossed the line of trees, and a hundred feet
above our heads rose the top of the mountain, which cast a shadow on the brilliant irradiation
of the opposite slope.  Some petrified shrubs ran fantastically here and there.  Fishes got
up under our feet like birds in the long grass.  The massive rocks were rent with impenetrable
fractures, deep grottos, and unfathomable holes, at the bottom of which formidable creatures
might be heard moving.  My blood curdled when I saw enormous antennae blocking my road, or
some frightful claw closing with a noise in the shadow of some cavity. Millions of luminous
spots shone brightly in the midst of the darkness. They were the eyes of giant crustacea crouched
in their holes; giant lobsters setting themselves up like halberdiers, and moving their claws
with the clicking sound of pincers; titanic crabs, pointed like a gun on its carriage; and
frightful-looking poulps, interweaving their tentacles like a living nest of serpents.

We had now arrived on the first platform, where other surprises awaited me.  Before us lay
some picturesque ruins, which betrayed the hand of man and not that of the Creator.  There
were vast heaps of stone, amongst which might be traced the vague and shadowy forms of castles
and temples, clothed with a world of blossoming zoophytes, and over which, instead of ivy,
sea-weed and fucus threw a thick vegetable mantle.  But what was this portion of the globe
which had been swallowed by cataclysms?  Who had placed those rocks and stones like cromlechs
of prehistoric times?  Where was I?  Whither had Captain Nemo's fancy hurried me?

I would fain have asked him; not being able to, I stopped him--I seized his arm.  But, shaking
his head, and pointing to the highest point of the mountain, he seemed to say:

"Come, come along; come higher!"

I followed, and in a few minutes I had climbed to the top, which for a circle of ten yards
commanded the whole mass of rock.

I looked down the side we had just climbed.  The mountain did not rise more than seven or eight
hundred feet above the level of the plain; but on the opposite side it commanded from twice
that height the depths of this part of the Atlantic.  My eyes ranged far over a large space
lit by a violent fulguration.  In fact, the mountain was a volcano.

At fifty feet above the peak, in the midst of a rain of stones and scoriae, a large crater
was vomiting forth torrents of lava which fell in a cascade of fire into the bosom of the liquid
mass.  Thus situated, this volcano lit the lower plain like an immense torch, even to the extreme
limits of the horizon.  I said that the submarine crater threw up lava, but no flames.  Flames
require the oxygen of the air to feed upon and cannot be developed under water; but streams
of lava, having in themselves the principles of their incandescence, can attain a white heat,
fight vigorously against the liquid element, and turn it to vapour by contact.

Rapid currents bearing all these gases in diffusion and torrents of lava slid to the bottom
of the mountain like an eruption of Vesuvius on another Terra del Greco.

There indeed under my eyes, ruined, destroyed, lay a town--its roofs open to the sky, its temples
fallen, its arches dislocated, its columns lying on the ground, from which one would still
recognise the massive character of Tuscan architecture.  Further on, some remains of a gigantic
aqueduct; here the high base of an Acropolis, with the floating outline of a Parthenon; there
traces of a quay, as if an ancient port had formerly abutted on the borders of the ocean, and
disappeared with its merchant vessels and its war-galleys. Farther on again, long lines of
sunken walls and broad, deserted streets--a perfect Pompeii escaped beneath the waters.  Such
was the sight that Captain Nemo brought before my eyes!

Where was I?  Where was I?  I must know at any cost.  I tried to speak, but Captain Nemo stopped
me by a gesture, and, picking up a piece of chalk-stone, advanced to a rock of black basalt,
and traced the one word:

ATLANTIS

What a light shot through my mind!  Atlantis! the Atlantis of Plato, that continent denied
by Origen and Humbolt, who placed its disappearance amongst the legendary tales.  I had it
there now before my eyes, bearing upon it the unexceptionable testimony of its catastrophe.
The region thus engulfed was beyond Europe, Asia, and Lybia, beyond the columns of Hercules,
where those powerful people, the Atlantides, lived, against whom the first wars of ancient
Greeks were waged.

Thus, led by the strangest destiny, I was treading under foot the mountains of this continent,
touching with my hand those ruins a thousand generations old and contemporary with the geological
epochs. I was walking on the very spot where the contemporaries of the first man had walked.

