"Let each individual seek to awaken an interest in this matter in the mind of his neighbor.
And if there be papal establishments in the neighborhood under the names of 'schools,' 'retreats',
'religions communities,' or any other designation, which are at variance with, or are not conformed
to, the laws of the commonwealth in which they are situated, let memorials be prepared and
signed by the citizens, and forwarded immediately to the legislature, praying that they may
be subjected to examination, and required to conform to the laws by which all Protestant institutions
of a public nature are governed.

"Let us exclude from our national territory all irresponsible institutions. Let us seek to
maintain a government of law, and insist upon the equality of all classes before it."

In closing these extracts, we beg leave to express ourselves in the words of the Rev. Dr. Sunderland,
of Washington city, in a sermon delivered before the American and Foreign Christian Union,
at its anniversary in May, 1856.

"But new it is asked, 'Why all this tirade against Roman Catholics?' We repel the implication.
It is not against the unhappy millions that are ground down under the iron heel of that enormous
despotism. They are of the common humanity, our brethren and kinsmen, according to the flesh.
They need the same light instruction and salvation that we need. Like ourselves they need the
one God, the one mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus; and from the heart we
love and pity them. We would grant them all the privileges which we claim to ourselves. We
can have no animosity towards them as men and candidates with ourselves for the coming judgment.
But it is the system under which they are born, and live, and die, I repeat, which we denounce,
and when we shall cease to oppose it, then let our right hand forget her cunning, and our tongue
cleave to the roof of our mouth. What is it but a dark and terrible power on earth before which
so many horrible memories start up? Why, sir, look at it! We drag the bones of the grim behemoth
out to view, for we would not have the world forget his ugliness nor the terror he has inspired.
'A tirade against Romanism,' is it? O sir, we remember the persecutions of Justinian; we remember
the days of the Spanish Inquisition; we remember the reign of 'the Bloody Mary;' we remember
the revocation of the Edict of Nantes; we remember St. Bartholomew; we remember the murdered
Covenanters, Huguenots, and Piedmontese; we remember the noble martyrs dying for the testimony
of the faith along the ancient Rhine; we remember the later wrath which pursued the islanders
of Madeira, till some of them sought refuge upon these shores; we remember the Madiai, and
we know how the beast ever seeks to propagate his power, by force where he can, by deception
where he must. And when we remember these things, we must protest against the further vigor
and prosperity of this grand Babylon of all. Take it, then, tirade and all, for so ye must,
ye ministers of Rome, sodden with the fumes of that great deep of abominations! The voice of
the Protestant shall never be hushed; the spirit of Reformation shall never sleep. O, lands
of Farel and of Calvin, of Zwingle and of Luther! O countries where the trumpet first sounded,
marshalling the people to this fearful contest! We have heard the blast rolling still louder
down the path of three hundred years, and in our solid muster-march we come, the children of
the tenth generation. We come a growing phalanx, not with carnal weapons, but with the armor
of the gospel, and wielding the sword of truth on the right hand and on the left, we say that
ANTICHRIST MUST FALL. Hear it, ye witnesses, and mark the word; by the majesty of the coming
kingdom of Jesus, and by the eternal purpose of Jehovah, THIS ANTICHRIST MUST FALL."

END