Children's Edition

of

TOUCHING INCIDENTS and REMARKABLE ANSWERS TO PRAYER

COMPILED BY S. B. SHAW

FIRST PREFACE

For many years in our work among children, we have felt the need of something similar to this book.

The cuts are made especially for this work. Pictures in this book will suggest thoughts of
God and heaven and awaken desires to live pure lives which will sooner or later result in the
salvation of many of our young readers. God bless all our readers.

--S. B. Shaw

We are sure these stories will interest you children (and most older people, too). Especially
good and true stories like these. In all that we have selected there are precious lessons of
kindness and sympathy and obedience, gratitude, courage, and faithfulness: then there are two
other very important lessons which I wish you to learn. The first is that children can be and
should be true Christians, that is, have their sins forgiven for Jesus' sake and their hearts
changed so that they love God and the right and hate everything that is wrong. The second lesson
is that we must be Christians to be ready to live or ready to die. You will find in this book
several accounts of happy deaths of Christian children, and you will find also much that tells
of the good done by happy Christian children that lived.

--Mrs. S. B. Shaw.

DEDICATION

When I was a little girl about nine years old, my mother gave me the book, "Touching Incidents
and Remarkable Answers To Prayer," for children. This book was published by Brother and Sister
Shaw.

I still have that book, which is about fifty-nine years old, and I have enjoyed the stories
it contained many times. One time while teaching a Sunday School class I gave them each one
of these books. They liked them very much, but there came a time when you could not buy these
books, as other modern books took their place. But I feel that books like this one are still
needed, and I am sure that if Brother and Sister Shaw were living they would like to see the
stories sent out again to the children. We are adding a few more true stories.

So we are praying God's blessings upon this book and dedicating it to the memory of Brother
and Sister Shaw who printed the first book in 1895.

Yours in Him,

Laura M. Conkle

(This dedication was written in 1955 for the first reprint edition.)

CONTENTS

Always Tell the Truth

The Child Heroine of New Brunswick

Annie and Vanie's First Real Prayer

God Heals a Blind Girl

"Does This Railroad Lead to Heaven?"

The Young Martyr

A Child's Prayer Answered

The Converted Infidel

The Stowaway

The Golden Rule Exemplified

Only One Vote

How A Little Girl Utilized the Telephone

Jesus Answers Ruth's Prayers

Very Sick

The Dying Girl's Prayer for Her Drunken Father

Lost Treasures

The Little Girl, Who Died to Save Her Father's Life

"Forgotten My Soul"

Prevailing Prayer of a Child

The Dying News Boy

New Shoes

Little Jennie's Sickness and Death

She Died for Him

"I Don't Love You Now, Mother"

"Little Mother"

Robbie Goodman's Prayer

Carletta and the Merchant

How Three Sunday School Children Met Their Fate

He Blesses God for the Faith of His Little Girl

A Wonderful Children's Meeting

"They are Not Strangers, Mama"

Jessie Finds Jesus

"I'll Never, Steal Again--If Father Kills Me for It"

Six Months' Record

A Child's Faith

Triumphant Death of a Little Child

The Child's Prayer

The Cat Came Back

How God Answered Donald's Prayer

ALWAYS TELL THE TRUTH

Truthfulness is a mark of Christianity. The heathen go astray, speaking lies as soon as they
are born. In China a mother will give her boy a reward for the best falsehood that he can tell.
Beginning so early, and regarding it such a fine thing to tell wrong stories, they become skillful
in falsehoods. Some parents in Christian America are very careless in this matter. It made
my heart ache one day when I saw a lady in a street car trying to keep her little boy awake
by telling him that, if he went to sleep, that man who had all those teeth in his window (referring
to a dentist's office they had passed) would come into the car and pull every tooth out of
his mouth. The little fellow looked up dreadfully scared, and did his best to keep awake: but
I thought to myself, when he finds out what a wrong story his mother has told, he will not
believe her even when she tells the truth. He will be like a little fellow of whom I heard
once, whose mother told him that if he vent to play in a bank from which the men had been drawing
sand for a building, a bear would come out and eat him up. One day another boy tried to coax
him to go there and play, but he said, no, he was afraid of the bears. The other boy said there
were no bears. "But there be bears cause my mother said there be bears." While they were disputing,
the minister happened to come along, and they asked him if there were bears in the sand-bank.
He told them there were none. "But," said the first little boy, "My mother said there be bears
there." "I am sorry she said so," said the minister, "but the truth is, there are none." The
child began to cry, and started for home as fast as he could go. "O Mama!" he said, "Did you
tell me a wrong story? Did you tell me there be bears down at the sand-bank when there aren't
any?" She saw what a dreadful sin she had committed, and she told him that she was sorry; but
she was afraid that if he played there he would get buried in the sand, and she told him that
to keep him away. "But, Mama, it is such an awful thing to tell a wrong story." "I know it
Tommy, I know it," she said, tears coming into her eyes; "and we will ask Jesus to forgive
me and I will never do it again." They knelt down, and she was just about to pray when he said,
"Wait, Mama, let me ask Him; maybe you won't tell Him truly." That pierced her heart like a
dagger. She saw that her little boy had lost confidence in her truthfulness even when she prayed.

--Jennie F. Willing

THE CHILD HEROINE OF NEW BRUNSWICK

We have read a touching incident about three little children, who, last autumn late in the
season, wandered alone in a dreary region of New Brunswick. The sun had already sunk in the
west and the gloom of evening was spreading itself over the surrounding country.

The night came on fast; and feeling sure that they could not get home before day break, the
eldest (a girl of only six years) quietly placed the two little ones in a sheltered nook on
the sea-beach; and fearing the cold chilly night for the younger children, Mary stripped off
most of her own clothes to keep them warm.

She then started off to gather dry sea-weed, and whatever else she could find, to cover them
with. Having tenderly in this way wrought for some time to make them a nest, she at last fell
down exhausted with the cold, and half bare to the cold inclement night.

That evening the loving father and tender mother sat up wondering at their children's long
absence; the hours dragged slowly past with anxious watching and silent listening for the well-known
little pattering feet. In vain the fond parents' eyes pierced through the darkness. At length
they roused the neighbors with their anxious inquiries after their lost ones. All that night
was passed in searching and in tears, till early in the morning, lying fast asleep and somewhat
numbed with cold, were found little Johnny and Lizzie. But oh! a touching spectacle lay near
them; their young savior was stiff, cold, and dead on the sea-weed which the poor little child-heroine
had not strength to drag into the nook, where those she so deeply loved, and died to save,
were sleeping. Thus this little New Brunswick girl died in her successful and self-sacrificing
endeavor to save her brother and sister.

Does not this recall the love of the Lord Jesus Christ to you who read? Mary went to the full
extent of human love in dying for her little brother and sister. Yet how many listen to this
story with more emotion and interest than they do to the story of the cross, where the love
of Jesus, the Son of God, is told in letters of blood!

--Dawn of the Morning

ANNIE AND VANIE'S FIRST REAL PRAYER

Two sisters, one about five years of age, the other one older, were accustomed to go each Saturday
morning, some distance from home, to get chips and shavings from a cooper shop.

One morning with basket well filled, they were returning home when the elder one was taken
suddenly sick with cramps or cholera. She was in great pain, and unable to proceed, much less
to bear the basket home. She sat down on the basket, and the younger one held her from falling.

The street was a lonely one occupied by workshops, factories, etc. Every one was busy within;
not a person was seen on the street.

The little girls were at a loss what to do. Too timid to go into any workshop, they sat a while,
as silent and quiet as the distressing pains would allow.

Soon the elder girl said: "You know, Annie, that a good while ago Mother told us that if we
ever got into trouble we should pray and, God would help us. Now you help me to get down upon
my knees, and hold me up, and we will pray."

There on the side-walk did these two little children ask God to send some one to help them home.

The simple and brief prayer being ended, the sick girl was again helped up, and sat on the
basket, waiting for the answers to their prayers.

Presently Annie saw, far down the street on the opposite side, a man come out from a factory,
look around him up and down the street and go back into the factory.

"O sister, he has gone in again," said Annie. "Well," said Vanie, "perhaps he is not the one
God is going to send. If he is he will come back again."

"There he comes again," said Annie. "He walks this way. He seems looking for something. He
walks slow, and is without his hat. He puts his hand to his head, as if he did not know what
to do. Oh, sister, he has gone in again; what shall we do?"

"That may not be the one whom God will send to help us," said Vanie. "If he is, he will come
out again."

"Oh yes, there he is; this time with his hat on," said Annie. "He comes this way; he walks
slowly, looking around on every side. He does not see us, perhaps the trees hide us. Now he
sees us, and is coming quickly."

A brawny German in broken accent asks:

"O children, what is the matter?"

"O sir," said Annie, Sister here is so sick she cannot walk and we cannot get home."

"Where do you live my dear?"

"At the end of this street; you can see the house from here."

"Never mind," said the man, "I takes you home."

So the strong man gathered the sick child in his arms, and with her head pillowed upon his
shoulder, carried her to the place pointed out by the younger girl. Annie ran around the house
to tell her mother that there was a man at the front door wishing to see her. The astonished
mother, with a mixture of surprise and joy, took charge of the precious burden and the child
was laid upon a bed.

After thanking the man, she expected him to withdraw, but instead, he stood turning his hat
in his hands as one who wishes to say something, but knows not how to begin.

The mother observing this, repeated her thanks and finally said: "Would you like me to pay
you for bringing my child home?"

"Oh, no," said he with tears, "God pays me! God pays me! I would like to tell you something,
but I speak English so poorly that I fear you will not understand."

The mother assured him that she was used to the German and could understand him very well.

"I am the proprietor of an ink factory," said he. "My men work by the piece. I have to keep
separate accounts with each. I pay them every Saturday. At twelve o'clock they will be at my
desk for their money. This week I have had many hindrances and was behind with my books. I
was working hard at them with the sweat on my face, in my great anxiety to be ready in time.
Suddenly I could not see the figures; the words in the book all ran together, and I had a plain
impression on my mind that some one in the street wished to see me. I went out, looked up and
down the street, but seeing no one, went back to my desk and wrote a little. Presently the
darkness was greater than before, and the impression stronger than before, that someone in
the street needed me.

"Again I went out, looked up and down the street, walked a little way, puzzled to know what
I meant. Was my hard work and were the cares of business driving me out of my wits? Unable
to solve the mystery I turned again into my shop and to my desk.

"This time my fingers refused to grasp the pen. I found myself unable to write a word, or make
a figure; but the impression was stronger than ever on my mind, that someone needed my help.
A voice seemed to say: 'Why don't you go out as I tell you? There is need of your help.' This
time I took my hat on going out, resolved to stay till I found out whether I was losing my
senses, or there was a duty for me to do. I walked some distance without seeing anyone, and
was more and more puzzled, till I came opposite the children, and found that there was indeed
need of my help. I cannot understand it, madam."

As the noble German was about leaving the house, the younger girl had the courage to say: "O
mother, we prayed."

Thus the mystery was solved, and with tear-stained cheeks, a heaving breast, and a humble,
grateful heart, the kind man went back to his accounts.

I have enjoyed many a happy hour in conversation with Annie in her own house since she has
a home of her own. The last I knew of Annie and Vanie they were living in the same city, earnest
Christian women. Their children were growing up around them, who, I hope, will have like confidence
in mother, and faith in God.

--Jeigh Arrh.

Annie was the wife of James A. Clayton of San Jose, California. I have enjoyed their hospitality
and esteem both very highly.

--James Rogers.

GOD HEALS A BLIND GIRL

One day we went to visit Ruth's aunt. While there, a very dear friend of Ruth's aunt came to
visit her, bringing Annie, her little four-year-old girl who was the same age as Ruth. They
had taken Annie to an eye doctor the day before and he had said that she was blind and would
always be blind. The two children played together. Ruth would lead her by the hand and this
touched her heart very much.

After we went home, she came to me crying, and said, "Mama, Annie is blind. Mama, Annie can't
see anything. Mama, Annie can't even see her mama!"

I (Ruth's mother) answered, "No, Annie can't see anything."

"Can't Jesus make Annie see her mama?" Ruth asked.

"Yes, Jesus can do anything," Mother told her.

"I'll never quit praying till Jesus makes Annie see her Mama," she said. She knelt down and
prayed, and for several days she would come in from her play ever so often and kneel down and
pray and ask Jesus to make Annie see her mama.

In a few days we received word that Annie said "Oh, I see my mama!" From then on she could see.

When the girls were eight years old and Ruth had moved from that state, her aunt (who had also
moved) received a letter from Annie's mother, saying, "Annie seems to be losing her eyesight
again." She said also that she would like for her to send Annie a new dress while she could
still see it, and if she knew where Ruth was to ask her to pray for Annie that Jesus would
not let her go blind again. Ruth was at the home of her aunt when she received this letter.
She prayed earnestly again and God answered her prayer and gave Annie her eyesight. It was
even better than normal.

The last time I saw Annie she was a grown woman around forty, and she showed me how she could
see to read a long way from the light, which we could not do. Surely God did a wonderful work
in answer to a little girl's prayer.

Children, let's pray; and when we pray, believe that God hears, and receive the good things
that he has to give us and others.

--Essie Wilson.

"DOES THIS RAILROAD LEAD TO HEAVEN?"

In traveling we often meet with persons of different nationalities and languages; we also meet
with incidents of various character, some sorrowful, others, joyful and instructive. One of
the latter character I witnessed recently while traveling upon the cars. The train was going
west and the time was evening. At a station a little girl about eight years old came aboard,
carrying a budget under her arm. She then commenced an eager scrutiny of faces, but all were
strange to her. She appeared weary, and placing her budget for a pillow, she prepared to try
and secure a little sleep. Soon the conductor came along collecting tickets and fare. Observing
him she asked him if she might lie there. The gentlemanly conductor replied that she might,
and then kindly asked for her ticket. She informed him that she had none, when the following
conversation ensued. Said the conductor:

"Where are you going?"

"I am going to heaven," she answered.

"Who pays your fare?" he asked again.

She then said, "Mister, does this railroad lead to heaven, and does Jesus travel on it?"

"I think not," he answered, "Why did you think so?"

"Why sir, before my ma died she used to sing to me of a heavenly railroad, and you looked so
nice and kind that I thought this was the road. My ma used to sing of Jesus on the heavenly
railroad, and that He paid the fare for everybody, and that the train stopped at every station
to take people on board; but my ma don't sing to me any more. Nobody sings to me now; and I
thought I'd take the cars and go to ma. Mister, do you sing to your little girl about the railroad
that goes to heaven? You have a little girl, haven't you?"

He replied, weeping, "No my little dear I have no little girl now. I had one once; but she
died some time ago, and went to heaven."

"Did she go over this railroad, and are you going to see her now?" she asked.

By this time every person in the coach was upon their feet, and most of them were weeping.
An attempt to describe what I witnessed is almost futile. Some said: "God bless the little
girl." Hearing some person say that she was an angel, the little girl earnestly replied: "Yes,
my ma used to say that I would be an angel some time."

Addressing herself once more to the conductor, she asked him, "Do you love Jesus? I do, and
if you love Him, He will let you ride to heaven on His railroad. I am going there and I wish
you would go with me. I know Jesus will let me into heaven when I get there and He will let
you in, too, and everybody that will ride on His railroad--yes, all these people. Wouldn't
you like to see heaven and Jesus, and your little girl?"

These words, so pathetically and innocently uttered, brought a great gush of tears from all
eyes, but most profusely from those of the conductor. Some who were traveling on the heavenly
railroad shouted aloud for joy.

She asked the conductor: "Mister, may I lie here until we get to heaven?"

"Yes, dear, yes," he answered.

"Will you wake me up then so that I may see my ma and your little girl and Jesus?" she asked,
"for I do so much want to see them all."

The answer came in broken accents but in words very tenderly spoken "Yes, dear angel, yes.
God bless you." "Amen!" was sobbed by more than a score of voices.

Turning her eyes again upon the conductor, she interrogated him again, "What shall I tell your
little girl when I see her? Shall I tell her that I saw her pa on Jesus' railroad? Shall I?"

This brought a fresh flood of tears from all present, and the conductor knelt by her side,
and, embracing her wept the reply he could not utter. At this juncture the brakeman called
out: "H----." The conductor arose and requested him to attend to his (the conductor's) duty
at the station, for he was engaged. That was a precious place. I thank God that I was a witness
to this scene, but I was sorry that at this point I was obliged to leave the train.

We learn from this incident that out of the mouths of even babes God hath ordained strength,
and that we ought to be willing to represent the cause of our blessed Jesus even in a railroad
coach.

The Sequel

Brother Dosh:--I wish to relieve my heart by writing to you, and saying that that angel visit
on the cars was a blessing to me, although I did not realize it in its fullness until some
hours after. But blessed be the Redeemer, I know now that I am His, and He is mine. I no longer
wonder why Christians are happy. Oh, my joy, my joy! The instrument of my salvation has gone
to God. I had purposed adopting her in the place of my little daughter who is now in heaven.
With this intention I took her to C--b, and on my return trip I took her back to S--n, where
she left the cars. In consultation with my wife in regard to adopting her, she replied, "Yes,
certainly, and immediately, too, for there is a Divine providence in this. Oh," said she, "I
could never refuse to take under my charge the instrument of my husband's salvation."

I made inquiry for the child at S--n and learned that in three days after her return she died
suddenly, without any apparent disease, and her happy soul had gone to dwell with her ma, my
little girl and the angels in heaven. I was sorry to hear of her death but my sorrow is turned
to joy when I think my angel-daughter received intelligence from earth concerning her pa, and
that he is on the heavenly railway. Oh! sir, me thinks I see her near the Redeemer. I think
I hear her sing! "I'm safe at home, and pa and ma are coming," and I find myself sending back
the reply: "Yes, my darling we are coming and will soon be there." Oh, my dear sir, I am glad
that I ever formed your acquaintance; may the blessing of the great God rest upon you. Please
write to me, and be assured, I would be most happy to meet you again.

--J. M. Dosh, in Christian Expositor

THE YOUNG MARTYR

On the afternoon of August 9, 1853, a little Norwegian boy, named Kund Iverson, who lived in
the city of Chicago, Illinois, was going to the pastures for his cow as light-hearted, I suppose,
as boys usually are when going to the pasture on a summer afternoon. He came at length to a
stream of water where there was a gang of idle, ill-looking, big boys; who, when they saw Kund,
came up to him; and said they wanted him to go into Mr. Elston's garden and steal some apples.

"No," said Kund promptly; "I cannot steal, I am sure."

"Well, but you've got to," they cried.

They threatened to duck him, for these wicked big boys had often frightened little boys into
robbing gardens for them. Little boys, they thought, were less likely to get found out.

The threat did not frighten Kund, so to make their words good, they seized him and dragged
him into the river, and in spite of his cries and struggles, plunged him in. But the heroic
boy even with the water gurgling and choking in his throat, never flinched, for he knew that
God had said: "Thou shalt not steal," and God's law he had made his law; and no cursing, or
threats, or cruelty of the big boys would make him give up. Provoked by his firmness, I suppose,
they determined to see if they could conquer him. So they ducked him again but it still was,
"No, no"; and they kept him under water. Was there no one near to hear his distressing cries,
and rescue the poor child from their cruel grip? No; there was none to rescue him; and gradually
the cries of the drowning child grew fainter and fainter, and his struggles less and less,
and the boy was drowned. He could die, but would not steal.

A German boy who had stood near, much frightened by what he saw, ran home to tell the news.
The agonized parents hastened to the spot, and all night they searched for the lifeless body
of their lost darling. It was found the next morning; and who shall describe their feelings
as they clasped the little form to their bosoms? Early piety had blossomed in his little life.
He loved his Bible and his Savior. His seat was never vacant at Sunday school, and so intelligent,
conscientious and steadfast had he been.

Perhaps the little boy used often to think how, when he grew up, he would like to be a preacher
or a missionary, and do something for his Lord and Master. He did not know what post he might
be called to occupy, even as a little child; and as he left home that afternoon and looked
his last look in his mother's face, he thought he was only going after his cows; and other
boys, and the neighbors, if they saw him, thought so, too. They did not then know that instead
of going to the pasture he was going to preach one of the most powerful sermons of Bible law
and Bible principles the country ever heard. They did not know that he was going to give an
example of steadfastness of purpose and of unflinching integrity, such as should thrill the
heart of this nation with wonder and admiration. He was then only a Norwegian boy, Kund Iverson,
only thirteen years old, but his name was soon to be reckoned with martyrs and heroes. And
as the story of his moral heroism winged its way from state to state, and city to city, and
village to village, how many mothers cried with full hearts: "May his spirit rest upon my boy!"
And strong men have wept over it and exclaimed: "God be praised for the lad!" And rich men
put their hands into their pockets and said, "Let us build him a monument; let his name be
perpetuated, for his memory is blessed." May there be a generation of Kund Iversons, strong
in their integrity, true to their Bibles ready to die rather than do wrong.

--The Cynosure

A CHILD'S PRAYER ANSWERED

The following touching incident which drew tears from my eyes, was related to me a short time
since, by a dear friend who had it from an eyewitness of the same. It occurred in the great
city of New York, on one of the coldest days in February.

A little boy about ten years old was standing before a shoe-store in Broadway barefooted, peering
through the window, and shivering with cold.

A lady riding up the street in a beautiful carriage, drawn by horses finely caparisoned, observed
the little fellow in his forlorn condition and immediately ordered the driver to draw up and
stop in front of the store. The lady richly dressed in silk, alighted from her carriage, went
quickly to the boy, and said:

"My little fellow why are you looking so earnestly in that window?"

"I was asking God to give me a pair of shoes," was the reply. The lady took him by the hand
and went into the store, and asked the proprietor if he would allow one of his clerks to go
and buy half a dozen pairs of stockings for the boy. He readily assented. She then asked him
if he could give her a basin of water and a towel, and he replied: "Certainly," and quickly
brought them to her.

She took the little fellow to the back part of the store, and, removing her gloves knelt down,
washed those little feet and dried them with the towel.

By this time the young man had returned with the stockings. Placing a pair upon his feet, she
purchased and gave him a pair of shoes, and tying up the remaining pairs of stockings, gave
them to him, and patting him on the head said: "I hope my little fellow, that you now feel
more comfo rtable."

As she turned to go, the astonished lad caught her hand, and looking up in her face, with tears
in his eyes answered her question with these words: "Are you God's wife?"

--Parish Register

THE CONVERTED INFIDEL

Some two miles from the village of C. on a road that wound in among the hills stood a great
white house. It was beautifully situated upon a gentle slope facing the south, and overlooking
a most charming landscape. Away in the distance, a mountain lifted itself against the clear
blue sky. At its base rolled a broad, deep river. Nestling down in a valley that intervened,
reposed the charming little village with its neat cottages, white church, little red school
house and one or two mansions that told of wealth. Here and there in the distance a pond was
visible; while farm houses and humbler dwellings dotted the picture in every direction.

Such was the home of three promising children, who for the last three months had been constant
members of the village Sunday School. The eldest was a girl of some fourteen years. John, the
second, was a bright, amiable lad of eleven. The other the little rosy-cheeked, laughing Ella,
with her golden curls and sunny smile had just gathered the roses of her ninth summer.

The father of these interesting children was the rich Captain Lowe. He was a man of mark, such,
in many respects as are often found in rural districts. Strictly moral, intelligent and well
read, kind-hearted and naturally benevolent, he attracted all classes of community to himself
and wielded great influence in his town.

But, not withstanding all these excellences, Mr. Lowe was an infidel. He ridiculed in his good-natured
way, the idea of prayer, looked upon conversion as a solemn farce, and believed the most of
professing Christians were well-meaning but deluded people. He was well versed in all the subtle
arguments of infidel writers, had studied the Bible quite carefully, and could argue against
it in the most plausible manner. Courteous and kind to all, few could be offended at his frank
avowal of infidel principles, or resent his keen, half-jovial sarcasms upon the peculiarities
of some weak-minded, though sincere members of the church.

But Mr. Lowe saw and acknowledged the saving influence of the MORALITY of Christianity. He
had especially, good sense enough to confess that the Sunday School was a noble moral enterprise.
He was not blind to the fact, abundantly proved by all our criminal records, that few children
trained under her influences ever grow up to vice and crime. Hence his permission for his children
to attend the Sunday School.

Among the many children who knelt as penitents at the altar in the little vestry, one bright
beautiful Lord's Day, were Sarah Lowe and her brother and sister. It was a moving sight to
see that gentle girl, with a mature thoughtfulness far beyond her years, take that younger
brother and sister by the hand, and kneel with them at the mercy-seat--a sight to heighten
the joy of angels.

When the children had told their mother what they had done and expressed a determination to
try to be Christians; she, too, was greatly moved. She had been early trained in the principles
and belief of Christianity, and had never renounced her early faith. Naturally confiding, with
a yielding, conciliatory spirit, she had never obtruded her sentiments upon the notice of her
husband, nor openly opposed any of his peculiar views. But now, when her little ones gathered
around her and spoke of their new love for the Savior, their joy and peace and hope, she wept.
All the holy influences of her own childhood and youth seemed breathing upon her heart. She
remembered the faithful sermons of the old pastor whose hands had baptized her. She remembered,
too, the family altar, and the prayers which were offered morning and evening by her sainted
father. She remembered the counsels of her good mother now in heaven. All these memories came
crowding back upon her and under their softening influences she almost felt herself a child again.

