We have no means of knowing what was the character of the unfortunate inhabitants of the city
of Jericho, nor of the Hittites and the Girgashites and the Amorites and all the rest of the
victims of Jehovah. To be sure, we are told by the Hebrew priests that they sacrificed their
children to their gods; but then, consider what we should believe about the Hebrew religion,
if we took the word of rival priestly castes! Consider, for example, that in this twentieth
century we saw an orthodox Jew tried in a Russian court of law for having made a sacrifice
of Christian babies; nevertheless we know that the Jews represent a considerable part of the
intelligence and idealism of Russia. We know in the same way that the Moors had most of the
culture and all of the scientific knowledge of Spain; that the Huguenots had most of the conscience
and industry of France; and we know that they were massacred or driven out to death by the
priestly castes of the Middle Ages.

The Holy Inquisition

Let us have one glimpse of the conditions in those mediaeval times, so that we may know what
we ourselves have escaped. In the fifteenth century there was established in Europe the cult
of a three-headed god, whose priests had won lordship over a continent. They were enormously
wealthy, and unthinkably corrupt; they sold to the rich the license to commit every possible
crime, and they held the poor in ignorance and degradation. Among the comparatively intelligent
and freedom-loving people of Bohemia there arose a great reformer, John Huss, himself a priest,
protesting against the corruptions of his order. They trapped him into their power by means
of a "safe-conduct"--which they repudiated because no promise to a heretic could have validity.
They found him guilty of having taught the hateful doctrine that a priest who committed crimes
could not give absolution for the crimes of others; and they held an auto de fe--which means
a "sentence of faith." As we read in Lea's "History of the Inquisition":

The cathedral of Constance was crowded with Sigismund (the Emperor) and his nobles, the great
officers of the empire with their insignia, the prelates in their splendid robes. While mass
was sung, Huss, as an excommunicate, was kept waiting at the door; when brought in he was placed
on an elevated bench by a table on which stood a coffer containing priestly vestments. After
some preliminaries, including a sermon by the Bishop of Lodi, in which he assured Sigismund
that the events of that day would confer on him immortal glory, the articles of which Huss
was convicted were recited. In vain he protested that he believed in transubstantiation and
in the validity of the sacrament in polluted hands. He was ordered to hold his tongue, and
on his persisting the beadles were told to silence him, but in spite of this he continued to
utter protests. The sentence was then read in the name of the council, condemning him both
for his written errors and those which had been proven by witnesses. He was declared a pertinacious
and incorrigible heretic who did not desire to return to the Church; his books were ordered
to be burned, and himself to be degraded from the priesthood and abandoned to the secular court.
Seven bishops arrayed him in priestly garb and warned him to recant while yet there was time.
He turned to the crowd, and with broken voice declared that he could not confess the errors
which he never entertained, lest he should lie to God, when the bishops interrupted him, crying
that they had waited long enough, for he was obstinate in his heresy. He was degraded in the
usual manner, stripped of his sacerdotal vestments, his fingers scraped; but when the tonsure
was to be disposed of, an absurd quarrel arose among the bishops as to whether the head should
be shaved with a razor or the tonsure be destroyed with scissors. Scissors won the day, and
a cross was cut in his hair. Then on his head was placed a conical paper cap, a cubit in height,
adorned with painted devils and the inscription, "This is the heresiarch."

The place of execution was a meadow near the river, to which he was conducted by two thousand
armed men, with Palsgrave Louis at their head, and a vast crowd, including many nobles, prelates,
and cardinals. The route followed was circuitous, in order that he might be carried past the
episcopal palace, in front of which his books were burning, whereat he smiled. Pity from man
there was none to look for, but he sought comfort on high, repeating to himself, "Christ Jesus,
Son of the living God, have mercy upon us!" and when he came in sight of the stake he fell
on his knees and prayed. He was asked if he wished to confess, and said that he would gladly
do so if there were space. A wide circle was formed, and Ulrich Schorand, who, according to
custom, had been providently empowered to take advantage of final weakening, came forward,
saying, "Dear sir and master, if you will recant your unbelief and heresy, for which you must
suffer, I will willingly hear your confession; but if you will not, you know right well that,
according to canon law, no one can administer the sacrament to a heretic." To this Huss answered,
"It is not necessary: I am not a mortal sinner." His paper crown fell off and he smiled as
his guards replaced it. He desired to take leave of his keepers, and when they were brought
to him he thanked them for their kindness, saying that they had been to him rather brothers
than jailers. Then he commenced to address the crowd in German, telling them that he suffered
for errors which he did not hold, and he was cut short. When bound to the stake, two cartloads
of fagots and straw were piled up around him, and the palsgrave and vogt for the last time
adjured him to abjure. Even yet he could save himself, but only repeated that he had been convicted
by false witnesses on errors never entertained by him. They clapped their hands and then withdrew,
and the executioners applied the fire. Twice Huss was heard to exclaim, "Christ Jesus, Son
of the living God, have mercy upon me!" then a wind springing up and blowing the flames and
smoke into his face checked further utterances, but his head was seen to shake and his lips
to move while one might twice or thrice recite a paternoster. The tragedy was over; the sorely-tried
soul bad escaped from its tormentors, and the bitterest enemies of the reformer could not refuse
to him the praise that no philosopher of old had faced death with more composure than he had
shown in his dreadful extremity. No faltering of the voice had betrayed an internal struggle.
Palsgrave Louis, seeing Huss's mantle on the arm of one of the executioners, ordered it thrown
into the flames lest it should be reverenced as a relic, and promised the man to compensate
him. With the same view the body was carefully reduced to ashes and thrown into the Rhine,
and even the earth around the stake was dug up and carted off; yet the Bohemians long hovered
around the spot and carried home fragments of the neighboring clay, which they reverenced as
relies of their martyr. The next day thanks were returned to God in a solemn procession in
which figured Sigismund and his queen, the princes and nobles, nineteen cardinals, two patriarchs,
seventy-seven bishops, and all the clergy of the council. A few days later Sigismund, who had
delayed his departure for Spain to see the matter concluded, left Constance, feeling that his
work was done.

Hell-Fire

If such a scene could be witnessed in the world today, it would only be in some remote and
wholly savage place, such as the mountains of Hayti, or the Solomon Islands. It could no longer
happen in any civilized country; the reason being, not any abatement of the pretensions of
the priesthood, but solely the power of science, embodied in the physical arm of a secular
State. The advance of that arm the church has fought systematically, in every country, and
at every point. To quote Buckle: "A careful study of the history of religious toleration will
prove that in every Christian country where it has been adopted, it has been forced upon the
clergy by the authority of the secular classes." The wolf of superstition has been driven into
its lair; but it has backed away snarling, and it still crouches, watching for a chance to
spring. The Church which burned John Huss, which burned Giordano Bruno for teaching that the
earth moves round the sun--that same church, in the name of the same three-headed god, sent
out Francesco Ferrer to the firing-squad; if it does not do the same thing to the author of
this book, it will be solely because of the police. Not being allowed to burn me here, the
clergy will vent their holy indignation by sentencing me to eternal burning in a future world
which they have created, and which they run to suit themselves. Those peoples which are wholly
under the sway of the priesthood, such as Thibetans and Koreans, Siamese and Caribbeans, are
peoples among whom the intellectual life does not exist. Farther in advance are Hindoos, and
Turks, who are religious, but not exclusively. Still farther on the way are Spaniards and Irish;
here, for example, is a flashlight of the Irish peasantry, given by one of their number, Patrick
MacGill:

The merchant was a great friend of the parish priest, who always told the people if they did
not pay their debts they would burn for ever and ever in hell. "The fires of eternity will
make you sorry for the debts that you did not pay," said the priest. "What is eternity?" he
would ask in a solemn voice from the altar steps. "If a man tried to count the sands on the
sea-shore and took a million years to count every single grain, how long would it take him
to count them all? A long time, you'll say. But that time is nothing to eternity. Just think
of it! Burning in hell while a man, taking a million years to count a grain of sand, counts
all the sand on the sea-shore. And this because you did not pay Farley McKeown his lawful debts,
his lawful debts within the letter of the law." Multitudes who else would have known nothing
about Comte's system, know something about it when they know that he called it 'the positive philosophy.'

We
have been tempted to depart a little, though a very little, from
the subject immediately before us.

What was just now said of the manner in which language enriches itself does not contradict a prior
assertion, that man starts with language as God's perfect gift, which he only impairs and
forfeits by sloth and sin, according to the same law which holds good in respect of each other
of the gifts of heaven. For it was not meant, as indeed was then observed, that men would possess
words to set forth feelings which were not yet stirring in them, combinations which they had not
yet made, objects which they had not yet seen, relations of which
they were not yet conscious; but that up to man's needs, (those needs
including not merely his animal wants, but all his higher spiritual
cravings,) he would find utterance freely.

The great logical, or grammatical, framework of language, (for grammar is the logic of speech, even
as logic is the grammar of reason,) he would possess, he knew not how; and certainly not as the
final result of gradual acquisitions, and of reflexion setting these in order, and drawing general
rules from them; but as that rather which alone had made those acquisitions possible; as that
according to which he unconsciously worked, filled in this framework by degrees with these later
acquisitions of thought, feeling, and experience, as one by one they arrayed themselves in
the garment and vesture of words.

Here then is the explanation of the fact that language should be thus instructive for us, that
it should yield us so much, when we come to analyse and probe it; and yield us the more, the more
deeply and accurately we do so. It is full of instruction, because it is the embodiment, the incarnation,
if I may so speak, of the feelings and thoughts and experiences of a nation, yea, often of many nations,
and of all which through long centuries they have attained to and won. It stands like the Pillars
of Hercules, to mark how far the moral and intellectual conquests of mankind have advanced,
only not like those pillars, fixed and immovable, but ever itself advancing with the progress
of these. The mighty moral instincts which have been working in the popular mind have found
therein their unconscious voice; and the single kinglier spirits that have looked deeper into
the heart of things have oftentimes gathered up all they have seen into some one word, which
they have launched upon the world, and with which they have enriched it for ever--making in that
new word a new region of thought to be henceforward in some sort the common heritage of all.
Language is the amber in which a thousand precious and subtle thoughts have been safely embedded
and preserved. It has arrested ten thousand lightning flashes of genius, which, unless thus
fixed and arrested, might have been as bright, but would have also been as quickly passing
and perishing, as the lightning.


BOOK TWO

The Church of Good Society

 Within the House of Mammon his priesthood stands alert
  By mysteries attended, by dusk and splendors girt,
 Knowing, for faiths departed, his own shall still endure,
  And they be found his chosen, untroubled, solemn, sure.

 Within the House of Mammon the golden altar lifts
  Where dragon-lamps are shrouded as costly incense drifts--
 A dust of old ideals, now fragrant from the coals,
  To tell of hopes long-ended, to tell the death of souls         
                                    Sterling.

The Rain Makers

I begin with the Church of Good Society, because it happens to be the Church in which I was
brought up. Reading this statement, some of my readers suspected me of snobbish pride. I search
my heart; yes, it brings a hidden thrill that as far back as I can remember I knew this atmosphere
of urbanity, that twice every Sunday those melodious and hypnotizing incantations were chanted
in my childish ears! I take up the book of ritual, done in aristocratic black leather with
gold lettering, and the old worn volume brings me strange stirrings of recollected awe. But
I endeavor to repress these vestigial emotions and to see the volume--not as a message from
God to Good Society, but as a landmark of man's age-long struggle against myth and dogma used
as a source of income and a shield to privilege.

In the beginning, of course, the priest and the magician ruled the field. But today, as I examine
this "Book of Common Prayer", I discover that there is at least one spot out of which he has
been cleared entirely; there appears no prayer to planets to stand still, or to comets to go
away. The "Church of Good Society" has discovered astronomy! But if any astronomer attributes
this to his instruments with their marvelous accuracy, let him at least stop to consider my
"economic interpretation" of the phenomenon--the fact that the heavenly bodies affect the destinies
of mankind so little that there has not been sufficient emolument to justify the priest in
holding on to his job as astrologer.

But when you come to the field of meteorology, what a difference! Has any utmost precision
of barometer been able to drive the priest out of his prerogatives as rainmaker? Not even in
the most civilized of countries; not in that most decorous and dignified of institutions, the
Protestant Episcopal Church of America! I study with care the passage wherein the clergyman
appears as controller of the fate of crops. I note a chastened caution of phraseology; the
church will not repeat the experience of the sorcerer's apprentice, who set the demons to bringing
water, and then could not make them stop! The spell invokes "moderate rain and showers"; and
as an additional precaution there is a counter-spell against "excessive rains and floods":
the weather-faucet being thus under exact control.

I turn the pages of this "Book of Common Prayer", and note the remnants of magic which it contains.
There are not many of the emergencies of life with which the priest is not authorized to deal;
not many natural phenomena for which he may not claim the credit. And in case anything should
have been overlooked, there is a blanket order upon Providence: "Graciously hear us, that those
evils which the craft or subtilty of the devil or man worketh against us, be brought to nought!"
I am reminded of the idea which haunted my childhood, reading fairy-stories about the hero
who was allowed three wishes that would come true. I could never understand why the hero did
not settle the matter once for all--by wishing that everything he wished might come true!

Most of these incantations are harmless, and some are amiable; but now and then you come upon
one which is sinister in its implications. The volume before me happens to be of the Church
of England, which is even more forthright in its confronting of the Great Magic. Many years
ago I remember talking with an English army officer, asking how he could feel sure of his soldiers
in case of labor strikes; did it never occur to him that the men had relatives among the workers,
and might some time refuse to shoot them? His answer was that he was aware of it, the military
had worked out its technique with care. He would never think of ordering his men to fire upon
a mob in cold blood; he would first start the spell of discipline to work, he would march them
round the block, and get them in the swing, get their blood moving to military music; then,
when he gave the order, in they would go. I have never forgotten the gesture, the animation
with which he illustrated their going--I could hear the grunting of bayonets in the flesh of
men. The social system prevailing in England has made necessary the perfecting of such military
technique; also, you discover, English piety has made necessary the providing of a religious
sanction for it. After the job has been done, and the bayonets have been wiped clean, the company
is marched to church, and the officer kneels in his family pew, and the privates kneel with
the parlor-maids, and the clergyman raises his hands to heaven and intones: "We bless thy Holy
Name, that it hath pleased Thee to appease the seditious tumults which have been lately raised
up among us!"

And sometimes the clergyman does more than bless the killers--he even takes part in their bloody
work. In the Home Office Records of the British Government I read (vol 40, page 17) how certain
miners were on strike against low wages and the "truck" system, and the Vicar of Abergavenny
put himself at the head of the yeomanry and the Greys. He wrote the Home Office a lively account
of his military operations. All that remained was to apprehend certain of the strikers, "and
then I shall be able to return to my Clerical duties." Later he wrote of the "sinister influences"
which kept the miners from returning to their work, and how he had put half a dozen of the
most obstinate in prison.

The Babylonian Fire-god

So we come to the most important of the functions of the tribal god, as an ally in war, an
inspirer to martial valour. When in ancient Babylonia you wished to overcome your enemies,
you went to the shrine of the Firegod, and with awful rites the priest pronounced incantations,
which have been preserved on bricks and handed down for the use of modern churches. "Pronounce
in a whisper, and have a bronze image therewith," commands the ancient text, and runs on for
many strophes in this fashion:

      Let them die, but let me live!
      Let them be put under a ban, but let me prosper!
      Let them perish, but let me increase!
      Let them become weak, but let me wax strong!
      O, fire-god, mighty, exalted among the gods,
      Thou art the god, thou art my lord, etc.

This was in heathen Babylon, some three thousand years ago.

Recently, I understand, it has become the custom to omit this stanza from the English national
anthem; but it is clear that this is because of its crudity of expression, not because of objection
to the idea of praying to a god to assist one nation and injure others; for the same sentiment
is expressed again and again in the most carefully edited of prayer-books:

Abate their pride, assuage their malice, and confound their      devices.   Defend us, Thy
humble servants, in all assaults of our enemies.   Strengthen him (the King) that he may vanquish
and overcome      all his enemies. There is none other that fighteth for us, but only Thou, O God.

Prayers such as these are pronounced in every so-called civilized nation today. Behind every
battle-line in Europe you may see the priests of the Babylonian Fire-god with their bronze
images and their ancient incantations; you may see magic spells being wrought, magic standards
sanctified, magic bread eaten and magic wine drunk, fetishes blessed and hoodoos lifted, eternity
ransacked to find means of inciting soldiers to the mood where they will "go in". Throughout
all civilization, the phobias and manias of war have thrown the people back into the toils
of the priest, and that church which tortured Galileo in the dungeons of the Inquisition, and
shot Ferrier beneath the walls of the fortress of Montjuich, is rejoicing in a "rebirth of
religion".

And so naturally the clergy hold on to their prerogative as banishers of epidemics. Who knows
what day the Lord may see fit to rebuke the upstart teachers of impious and atheistical inoculation,
and scourge the people back into His fold as in the good old days of Moses and Aaron? Viscount
Amberley, in his immensely learned and half-suppressed work, "The Analysis of Religious Belief",
quotes some missionaries to the Fiji islanders, concerning the ideas of these benighted heathen
on the subject of a pestilence. It was the work of a "disease-maker", who was burning images
of the people with incantations; so they blew horns to frighten this disease-maker from his
spells. The missionaries undertook to explain the true cause of the affliction--and thereby
revealed that they stood upon the same intellectual level as the heathen they were supposed
to instruct! It appeared that the natives had been at war with their neighbors, and the missionaries
had commanded them to desist; they had refused to obey, and God had sent the epidemic as punishment
for savage presumption!

And on precisely this same Fijian level stands the "Book of Common Prayer" of our most decorous
and cultured of churches. I remember as a little child lying on a bed of sickness, occasioned
by the prevalence in our home of the Southern custom of hot bread three times a day; and there
came an amiable clerical gentleman and recited the service proper to such pastoral calls: "Take
therefore in good part the visitation of the Lord!" And again, when my mother was ill, I remember
how the clergyman read out in church a prayer for her, specifying all sickness, "in mind, body
or estate". I was thinking only of my mother, and the meaning of these words passed over my
childish head; I did not realize that the elderly plutocrat in black broadcloth who knelt in
the pew in front of me was invoking the aid of the Almighty so that his tenements might bring
in their rentals promptly; so that his little "flyer" in cotton might prove successful; so
that the children in his mills might work with greater speed.

Somebody asked Voltaire if you could kill a cow by incantations, and he answered, "Yes, if
you use a little strychnine with it." And that would seem to be the attitude of the present-day
Anglican church-member; he calls in the best physician he knows, he makes sure that his plumbing
is sound, and after that he thinks it can do no harm to let the Lord have a chance. It makes
the women happy, and after all, there are a lot of things we don't yet know about the world.
So he repairs to the family pew, and recites over the venerable prayers, and contributes his
mite to the maintenance of an institution which, fourteen Sundays every year, proclaims the
terrifying menaces of the Athanasian Creed:

Whoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold the Catholick faith.
Which faith, except one do keep whole and undefiled; without doubt he shall perish everlastingly.

For the benefit of the uninitiated reader, it may be explained that the "Catholick faith" here
referred to is not the Roman Catholic, but that of the Church of England and the Protestant
Episcopal Church of America. This creed of the ancient Alexandrian lays down the truth with
grim and menacing precision--forty-four paragraphs of metaphysical minutiae, closing with the
final doom: "This is the Catholick faith: which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved."

You see, the founders of this august institution were not content with cultured complacency;
what they believed they believed really, with their whole hearts, and they were ready to act
upon it, even if it meant burning their own at the stake. Also, they knew the ceaseless impulse
of the mind to grow; the terrible temptation which confronts each new generation to believe
that which is reasonable. They met the situation by setting out the true faith in words which
no one could mistake. They have provided, not merely the Creed of Athanasius, but also the
"Thirty-nine Articles"--which are thirty-nine separate and binding guarantees that one who
holds orders in the Episcopal Church shall be either a man of inferior mentality, or else a
sophist and hypocrite. How desperate some of them have become in the face of this cruel dilemma
is illustrated by the tale which is told of Dr. Jowett, of Balliol College, Oxford: that when
he was required to recite the "Apostle's Creed" in public, he would save himself by inserting
the words "used" between the words "I believe", saying the inserted words under his breath,
thus, "I used to believe in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost." Perhaps the eminent divine
never did this; but the fact that his students told it, and thought it funny, is sufficient
indication of their attitude toward their "Religion." The son of William George Ward tells
in his biography how this leader of the "Tractarian Movement" met the problem with cynicism
which seems almost sublime: "Make yourself clear that you are justified in deception; and then
lie like a trooper!"

The Canonization of Incompetence

The supreme crime of the church to-day is that everywhere and in all its operations and influences
it is on the side of sloth of mind; that it banishes brains, it sanctifies stupidity, it canonizes
incompetence. Consider the power of the Church of England and its favorite daughter here in
America; consider their prestige with the press and in politics, their hold upon literature
and the arts, their control of education and the minds of children, of charity and the lives
of the poor: consider all this, and then say what it means to society that such a power must
be, in every new issue that arises, on the side of reaction and falsehood. "So it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be," runs the church's formula; and this per se and a priori,
of necessity and in the nature of the case.

Turn over the pages of history and read the damning record of the church's opposition to every
advance in every field of science, even the most remote from theological concern. Here are
the Scotch clergy of the middle of the nineteenth century denouncing the use of chloroform
in obstetrics, because it is seeking "to avoid one part of the primeval curse on woman". And
the Bishop settled the matter by asking Huxley whether he was descended from an ape through
his grandmother or grandfather.

Think what it means, friends of progress, that these ecclesiastical figures should be set up
for the reverence of the populace, and that every time mankind is to make an advance in power
over Nature, the pioneers of thought have to come with crow-bars and derricks and heave these
figures out of the way! And you think that conditions are changed to-day? But consider syphilis
and gonorrhea, about which we know so much, and can do almost nothing; consider birth-control,
which we are sent to jail for so much as mentioning! Consider the divorce reforms for which
the world is crying--and for which it must wait, because of St. Paul! Realize that up to date
it has proven impossible to persuade the English Church to permit a man to marry his deceased
wife's sister! That when the war broke upon England the whole nation was occupied with a squabble
over the disestablishment of the church of Wales! Only since 1888 has it been legally possible
for an unbeliever to hold a seat in Parliament; while up to the present day men are tried for
blasphemy and convicted under the decisions of Lord Hale, to the effect that "it is a crime
either to deny the truth of the fundamental doctrines of the Christian religion or to hold
them up to contempt or ridicule." Said Mr. justice Horridge, at the West Riding Assizes, 1911:
"A man is not free in any public place to use common ridicule on subjects which are sacred."

The purpose, as outlined by the public prosecutor in London, is "to preserve the standard of
outward decency." And you will find that the one essential to prosecution is always that the
victim shall be obscure and helpless; never by any chance is he a duke in a drawing-room. I
will record an utterance of one of the obscure victims of the British "standard of outward
decency", a teacher of mathematics named Holyoake, who presumed to discuss in a public hall
the starvation of the working classes of the country. A preacher objected that he had discussed
"our duty to our neighbor" and neglected "our duty to God"; whereupon the lecturer replied:
"Our national Church and general religious institutions cost us, upon accredited computation,
about twenty million pounds annually. Worship being thus expensive, I appeal to your heads
and your pockets whether we are not too poor to have a God. While our distress lasts, I think
it would be wise to put deity upon half pay." And for that utterance the unfortunate teacher
of mathematics served six months in the common Gaol at Gloucester!

While men were being tried for publishing the "Free-thinker", the Premier of England was William
Ewart Gladstone. And if you wish to know what an established church can do by way of setting
up dullness in high places, get a volume of this "Grand Old Man's" writings on theological
and religious questions. Read his "Juventus Mundi", in the course of which he establishes,
a mystic connection between the trident of Neptune and the Christian Trinity! Read his efforts
to prove that the writer of Genesis was an inspired geologist! Hence we must conclude of the
writer of Genesis that "his knowledge was divine"! The distribution of fossils proves that
land animals originated before sea-animals, and there has been such a mixing of land, sea and
air animals as utterly to destroy the reputation of both Genesis and Gladstone as possessing
a divine knowledge of Geology.

Gibson's Preservative

I have a friend, a well-known "scholar", who permits me the use of his extensive library. I
stand in the middle and look about me, and see in the dim shadows walls lined from floor to
ceiling with decorous and grave-looking books, bound for the most part in black, many of them
fading to green with age. There are literally thousands of such, and their theme is the pseudo-science
of "divinity". I close my eyes, to make the test fair, and walk to the shelves and put out
my hand and take a book. It proves to be a modern work, "A History of the English Prayer-book
in Relation to the Doctrine of the Eucharist". I turn the pages and discover that it is a study
of the variations of one minute detail of church doctrine. This learned divine--he has written
many such works, as the advertisements inform us--fills up the greater part of his pages with
foot-notes from hundreds of authorities, arguments and counter-arguments over supernatural
subtleties. I will give one sample of these footnotes--asking the reader to be patient:

I add the following valuable observation, of Dean Goode: ("On Eucharist", II p 757. See also
Archbishop Ware in Gibson's "Preservative", vol X, Chap II) "One great point for which our
divines have contended, in opposition to Romish errors, has been the reality of that presence
of Christ's Body and Blood to the soul of the believer which is affected through the operation
of the Holy Spirit notwithstanding the absence of that Body and Blood in Heaven. Like the Sun,
the Body of Christ is both present and absent; present, really and truly present, in one sense--that
is, by the soul being brought into immediate communion with--but absent in another sense--that
is, as regards the contiguity of its substance to our bodies. The authors under review, like
the Romanists, maintain that this is not a Real Presence, and assuming their own interpretation
of the phrase to be the only true one, press into their service the testimony of divines who,
though using the phrase, apply it in a sense the reverse of theirs. The ambiguity of the phrase,
and its misapplication by the Church of Rome, have induced many of our divines to repudiate
it, etc."

Realize that of the work from which this "valuable observation" is quoted, there are at least
two volumes, the second volume containing not less than 757 pages! Realize that in Gibson's
"Preservative" there are not less than ten volumes of such writing! Realize that in this twentieth
century a considerable portion of the mental energies of the world's greatest empire is devoted
to that kind of learning!

I turn to the date upon the volume, and find that it is 1910. I was in England within a year
of that time, and so I can tell what was the condition of the English people while printers
were making and papers were reviewing and book-stores were distributing this work of ecclesiastical
research. I walked along the Embankment and saw the pitiful wretches, men, women and sometimes
children, clad in filthy rags, starved white and frozen blue, soaked in winter rains and shivering
in winter winds, homeless, hopeless, unheeded by the doctors of divinity, unpreserved by Gibson's
"Preservative". I walked on Hampstead Heath on Easter day, when the population of the slums
turns out for its one holiday; I walked, literally trembling with horror, for I had never seen
such sights nor dreamed of them. These creatures were hardly to be recognized as human beings;
they were some new grotesque race of apes. They could not walk, they could only shamble; they
could not laugh, they could only leer. I saw a hand-organ playing, and turned away--the things
they did in their efforts to dance were not to be watched. And then I went out into the beautiful
English country; cultured and charming ladies took me in swift, smooth motor-cars, and I saw
the pitiful hovels and the drink-sodden, starch-poisoned inhabitants--slum-populations everywhere,
even on the land! When the newspaper reporters came to me, I said that I had just come from
Germany, and that if ever England found herself at war with that country, she would regret
that she had let the bodies and the minds of her people rot; for which expression I was severely
taken to task by more than one British divine.

The bodies--and the minds; the rot of the latter being the cause of the former. All over England
in that year of 1910, in thousands of schools, rich and poor, and in the greatest centres of
learning, men like Dean Goode were teaching boys dead languages and dead sciences and dead
arts; sending them out to life with no more conception of the modern world than a monk of the
Middle Ages; sending them out with minds, made hard and inflexible, ignorant of science, indifferent
to progress, contemptuous of ideas. And then suddenly, almost overnight, this terrified people
finds itself at war with a nation ruled and disciplined by modern experts, scientists and technicians.
The awful muddle that was in England during the first two years of the war has not yet been
told in print; but thousands know it, and some day it will be written, and it will finish forever
the prestige of the British ruling caste. They rushed off an expedition to Gallipoli, and somebody
forgot the water-supply, and at one time they had ninety-five thousand cases of dysentery!

They always "muddle through", they tell you; that is the motto of their ruling caste. But this
time they did not "muddle through"--they had to come to America for help. I shan't forget you ... but
send me something."

The clouds had now enveloped the sun.

As Peter, a little encouraged by this last experience but tired with
a dull, listless fatigue, crept into the dark channels of Bucket Lane,
the rain began to fall with heavy solemn drops.

CHAPTER VII

DEVIL'S MARCH
I

There could be nothing odder than the picture that Brockett's
and Bennett Square presented from the vantage ground of Bucket Lane.
How peaceful and happy those evenings (once considered a little dreary
perhaps and monotonous) now seemed! Those mornings in the dusty bookshop,
Mr. Zanti, Herr Gottfried, Mrs. Brockett, then Brockett's with its
strange kind-hearted company--the dining-room, the marble pillars,
the green curtains--Norah Monogue! This, it should be understood, does not include the pay of their assistants,
nor the cost of maintaining their religious establishments; it does not include any private
incomes which they or their wives may possess, as members of the privileged classes of the
Empire. I look up their ages in Who's Who, and I find that there is only one below fifty-three;
the oldest of them is ninety-one, while the average age of the goodly company is seventy. There
have been men in history who have retained their flexibility of mind, their ability to adjust
themselves to new circumstances at the age of seventy, but it will always be found that these
men were trained in science and practical affairs, never in dead languages and theology. One
of the oldest of the English prelates, the Archbishop of Canterbury, recently stated to a newspaper
reporter that he worked seventeen hours a day, and had no time to form an opinion on the labor
question.

And now--here is the crux of the argument--do these aged gentlemen rule of their own power?
They do not! They do literally nothing of their own power; they could not make their own episcopal
robes, they could not even cook their own episcopal dinners. They have to be maintained in
all their comings and goings. Who supports them, and to what end?

The roots of the English Church are in the English land system, which is one of the infamies
of the modern world. It dates from the days of William the Norman, who took possession of Britain
with his sword, and in order to keep possession for himself and his heirs, distributed the
land among his nobles and prelates. In those days, you understand, a high ecclesiastic was
a man of war, who did not stoop to veil his predatory nature under pretense of philanthropy;
the abbots and archbishops, of William wore armor and had their troops of knights like the
barons and the dukes. William gave them vast tracts, and at the same time he gave them orders
which they obeyed. Says the English chronicler, "Stark he was. Bishops he stripped of their
bishopricks, abbots of their abbacies". Green tells us that "the dependencie of the church
on the royal power was strictly enforced. Homage was exacted from bishop as from baron." And
what was this homage? The bishop knelt before William, bareheaded and without arms, and swore:
"Hear my lord, I become liege man of yours for life and limb and earthly regard, and I will
keep faith and loyalty to you for life and death, God help me."

The lands which the church got from William the Norman, she has held, and always on the same
condition--that she shall be "liege man for life and limb and earthly regard". In this you
have the whole story of the church of England, in the twentieth century as in the eleventh.
The balance of power has shifted from time to time; old families have lost the land and new
families have gotten it; but the loyalty and homage of the church have been held by the land,
as the needle of the compass is held by a mass of metal.

So, wherever you take the Anglican clergy, they are Tories and Royalists, conservatives and
reactionaries, friends of every injustice that profits the owning class. And always among themselves
you find them intriguing and squabbling over the dividing of the spoils; always you find them
enjoying leisure and ease, while the people suffer and the rebels complain. One can pass down
the corridor of English history and prove this statement by the words of Englishmen from every
single generation. Take the fourteenth century; the "Good Parliament" declares that

Unworthy and unlearned caitiffs are appointed to benefices of a thousand marks, while the poor
and learned hardly obtain one of twenty. God gave the sheep to be pastured, not to be shaven
and shorn.

And a little later comes the poet of the people, Piers Plowman--

 But now is Religion a rider, a roamer through the streets,  A
leader at the love-day, a buyer of the land,  Pricking on a
palfrey from manor to manor,  A heap of hounds at his back, as
tho he were a lord;  And if his servant kneel not when he brings
his cup,  He loureth on him asking who taught him courtesy. 
Badly have lords done to give their heirs' lands  Away to the
Orders that have no pity;  Money rains upon their altars.  There
where such parsons be living at ease  They have no pity on the
poor; that is their "charity".  Ye hold you as lords; your lands
are too broad,  But there shall come a king and he shall shrive
you all  And beat you as the bible saith for breaking of your
Rule.

Another step through history, and in the early part of the sixteenth century here is Simon
Fish, addressing King Henry the Eighth, in the "Supplicacyon for the Beggars", complaining
of the "strong, puissant and counterfeit holy and ydell" which "are now increased under your
sight, not only into a great nombre, but ynto a kingdome."

They have begged so importunatly that they have gotten ynto their hondes more than a therd
part of all youre Realme. The goodliest lordshippes, maners, londes, and territories, are theyres.
Besides this, they have the tenth part of all the come, medowe, pasture, grasse, wolle, coltes,
calves, lambes, pigges, gese and chikens. Ye, and they looke so narowly uppon theyre proufittes,
that the poore wyves must be countable to thym of every tenth eg, or elles she gettith not
her rytes at ester, shal be taken as an heretike. . . . Is it any merveille that youre people
so compleine of povertie? The Turke nowe, in your tyme, shulde never be abill to get so moche
grounde of christendome . . . And whate do al these gredy sort of sturdy, idell, holy theves?
These be they that have made an hundredth thousand idell hores in your realme. These be they
that catche the pokkes of one woman, and here them to an other.

The petitioner goes on to tell how they steal wives and all their goods with them, and if any
man protest they make him a heretic, "so that it maketh him wisshe that he had not done it".
Also they take fortunes for masses and then don't say them. "If the Abbot of westminster shulde
sing every day as many masses for his founders as he is bounde to do by his foundacion, 1000
monkes were too few." The petitioner suggests that the king shall "tie these holy idell theves
to the cartes, to be whipped naked about every market towne till they will fall to laboure!"

Church History

King Henry did not follow this suggestion precisely, but he took away the property of the religious
orders for the expenses of his many wives and mistresses, and forced the clergy in England
to forswear obedience to the Pope and make his royal self their spiritual head. This was the
beginning of the Anglican Church, as distinguished from the Catholic; a beginning of which
the Anglican clergy are not so proud as they would like to be. When I was a boy, they taught
me what they called "church history", and when they came to Henry the Eighth they used him
as an illustration of the fact that the Lord is sometimes wont to choose evil men to carry
out His righteous purposes. They did not explain why the Lord should do this confusing thing,
nor just how you were to know, when you saw something being done by a murderous adulterer,
whether it was the will of the Lord or of Satan; nor did they go into details as to the motives
which the Lord had been at pains to provide, so as to induce his royal agent to found the Anglican
Church. For such details you have to consult another set of authorities--the victims of the
plundering.

When I was in college my professor of Latin was a gentleman with bushy brown whiskers and a
thundering voice of which I was often the object--for even in those early days I had the habit
of persisting in embarrassing questions. This professor was a devout Catholic, and not even
in dealing with ancient Romans could he restrain his propaganda impulses. Later on in life
he became editor of the "Catholic Encyclopedia", and now when I turn its pages, I imagine that
I see the bushy brown whiskers, and hear the thundering voice: "Mr. Sinclair, it is so because
I tell you it is so!"

I investigate, and find that my ex-professor knows all about King Henry the Eighth, and his
motives in founding the Church of England; he is ready with an "economic interpretation", as
complete as the most rabid muckraker could desire! It appears that the king wanted a new wife,
and demanded that the Pope should grant the necessary permission; in his efforts to browbeat
the Pope into such betrayal of duty, King Henry threatened the withdrawal of the "annates"
and the "Peter's pence". Later on he forced the clergy to declare that the Pope was "only a
foreign bishop", and in order to "stamp out overt expression of disaffection, he embarked upon
a veritable reign of terror".

In Anglican histories, you are assured that all this was a work of religious reform, and that
after it the Church was the pure vehicle of God's grace. There were no more "holy idell theves",
holding the land of England and plundering the poor.

If you say that might be a casual jest, hear what Thackeray reports of that period, the eighteenth
century, which he knew with peculiar intimacy:

I read that Lady Yarmouth (my most religious and gracious King's favorite) sold a bishopric
to a clergyman for 5000 pounds.

Land and Livings

And how is it in the twentieth century? Have conditions been much improved? There are great
Englishmen who do not think so. I quote Robert Buchanan, a poet who spoke for the people, and
who therefore has still to be recognized by English critics. He writes of the "New Rome", by
which he means present-day England:

  The gods are dead, but in their name
  Humanity is sold to shame,
  While (then as now!) the tinsel'd priest
  Sitteth with robbers at the feast,
  Blesses the laden, blood-stained board,
  Weaves garlands round the butcher's sword,
  And poureth freely (now as then)
  The sacramental blood of Men!

You see, the land system of England remains--the changes having been for the worse. William
the Conqueror wanted to keep the Saxon peasantry contented, so he left them their "commons";
but in the eighteenth century these were nearly all filched away. We saw the same thing done
within the last generation in Mexico, and from the same motive--because developing capitalism
needs cheap labor, whereas people who have access to the land will not slave in mills and mines.
In England, from the time of Queen Anne to that of William and Mary, the parliaments of the
landlords passed some four thousand separate acts, whereby more than seven million acres of
the common land were stolen from the people. It has been calculated that these acres might
have supported a million families; and ever since then England has had to feed a million paupers
all the time.

As an old song puts the matter:

  Why prosecute the man or woman
  Who steals a goose from off the common,
  And let the greater felon loose
  Who steals the common from the goose?

In our day the land aristocracy is rooted like the native oak in British soil: some of them
direct descendants of the Normans, others children of the court favorites and panders who grew
rich in the days of the Tudors and the unspeakable Stuarts. Seven men own practically all the
land of the city and county of London, and collect tribute from seven millions of people. The
estates are entailed--that is, handed down from father to oldest son automatically; you cannot
buy any land, but if you want to build, the landlord gives you a lease, and when the lease
is up, he takes possession of your buildings. The tribute which London pays is more than a
hundred million dollars a year. So absolute is the right of the land-owner that he can sue
for trespass the driver on an aeroplane which flies over him; he imposes on fishermen a tax
upon catches made many hundred of yards from the shore.

And in this graft, of course, the church has its share. Each church owns land--not merely that
upon which it stands, but farms and city lots from which it derives income. Each cathedral
owns large tracts; so do the schools and universities in which the clergy are educated. The
income from the holdings of a church constitutes what is called a "living"; these livings,
which vary in size, are the prerogatives of the younger sons of the ruling families, and are
intrigued and scrambled for in exactly the fashion which Thackeray describes in the eighteenth
century.

About six thousand of these "livings" are in the gift of great land owners; one noble lord
alone disposes of fifty-six such plums; and needless to say, he does not present them to clergymen
who favor radical land-taxes. Another fifteen-course meal! Less than a year of Indian hospitality, and
I had gained fifty pounds!

Yet it would have been considered the height of rudeness to refuse any of the dishes, carefully
prepared for the endless banquets in my honor. In India (nowhere else, alas!) a well-padded
swami is considered a delightful sight. {FN42-10}

After dinner, Keshabananda led me to a secluded nook.

"Your arrival is not unexpected," he said. "I have a message for you."

I was surprised; no one had known of my plan to visit Keshabananda.

"While roaming last year in the northern Himalayas near Badrinarayan," the swami continued, "I lost
my way. Shelter appeared in a spacious cave, which was empty, though the embers of a fire glowed
in a hole in the rocky floor. Wondering about the occupant of this lonely retreat, I sat near
the fire, my gaze fixed on the sunlit entrance to the cave.

"'Keshabananda, I am glad you are here.' These words came from behind me. I turned, startled,
and was dazzled to behold Babaji! The great guru had materialized himself in a recess of the
cave. Overjoyed to see him again after many years, I prostrated myself
at his holy feet.

"'I called you here,' Babaji went on. 'That is why you lost your way and were led to my temporary
abode in this cave. It is a long time since our last meeting; I am pleased to greet you once
more.'

"The deathless master blessed me with some words of spiritual help, then added: 'I give you
a message for Yogananda. He will pay you a visit on his return to India. Many matters connected
with his guru and with the surviving disciples of Lahiri will keep Yogananda fully occupied.
Tell him, then, that I won't see him this time, as he is eagerly
hoping; but I shall see him on some other occasion.'"

I was deeply
touched to receive from Keshabananda's lips this consoling promise
from Babaji. A certain hurt in my heart vanished; I grieved no longer
that, even as Sri Yukteswar had hinted, Babaji did not appear at the
KUMBHA MELA.

Spending one night as guests of the ashram, our party
set out the following afternoon for Calcutta. Riding over a bridge
of the Jumna River, we enjoyed a magnificent view of the skyline of
Brindaban just as the sun set fire to the sky-a veritable furnace
of Vulcan in color, reflected below us in the still waters.

The Jumna
beach is hallowed by memories of the child Sri Krishna. Here he engaged
with innocent sweetness in his LILAS (plays) with the GOPIS (maids),
exemplifying the supernal love which ever exists between a divine
incarnation and his devotees. Political corruption is not an end in itself, it is merely a means to exploitation;
and of exploitation England has even more than America. When I explained this, my popularity
with the British ruling classes vanished quickly.

As a matter of fact, England is more like America than she realizes; her British reticence
has kept her ignorant about herself. I could not carry on my business in England, because of
the libel laws, which have as their first principle "the greater the truth, the greater the
libel". Englishmen read with satisfaction what I write about America; but if I should turn
my attention to their own country, they would send me to jail as they sent Frank Harris. The
fact is that the new men in England, the lords of coal and iron and shipping and beer, have
bought their way into the landed aristocracy for cash, just as our American senators have done;
they have bought the political parties with campaign gifts, precisely as in America; they have
taken over the press, whether by outright purchase like Northcliffe, or by advertising subsidy--both
of which methods we Americans know. Within the last decade or two another group has been coming
into control; and not merely is this the same class of men as in America, it frequently consists
of the same individuals. These are the big money-lenders, the international financiers who
are the fine and final flower of the capitalist system. These gentlemen make the world their
home--or, as Shakespeare puts it, their oyster. They know how to fit themselves to all environments;
they are Catholics in Rome and Vienna, country gentlemen in London, bons vivants in Paris,
democrats in Chicago, Socialists in Petrograd, and Hebrews wherever they are.

And of course, in buying the English government, these new classes have bought the English
Church. Skeptics and men of the world as they are, they know that they must have a Religion.
They have read the story of the French revolution, and the shadow of the guillotine is always
over their thoughts; they see the giant of labor, restless in his torment, groping as in a
nightmare for the throat of his enemy. Who can blind the eyes of this giant, who can chain
him to his couch of slumber? There is but one agent, without rival--the Keeper of the Holy
Secrets, the Deputy of the Almighty Awfulness, the Giver and Withholder of Eternal Life. Tremble,
slave! Fall down and bow your forehead in the dust!

Bishops and Beer

For example, the International Shylocks wanted the diamond mines of South Africa--wanted them
more firmly governed and less firmly taxed than could be arranged with the Old Man of the Boers.
So the armies of England were sent to subjugate the country. You might think they would have
had the good taste to leave the lowly Jesus out of this affair--but if so, you have missed
the essential point about established religion. The bishops, priests, and deacons are set up
for the populace to revere, and when the robber-classes need a blessing upon some enterprise,
then is the opportunity for the bishops, priests and deacons to earn their "living." During
the Boer war the blood-lust of the English clergy was so extreme that writers in the dignified
monthly reviews felt moved to protest against it. When the pastors of Switzerland issued a
collective protest against cruelties to women and children in the South African concentration-camps,
it was the Right Reverend Bishop of Winchester who was brought forward to make reply. Nowadays
all England is reading Bernhardi, and shuddering at Prussian glorification of war; but no one
mentions Bishop Welldon of Calcutta, who advocated the Boer war as a means of keeping the nation
"virile"; nor Archbishop Alexander, who said that it was God's way of making "noble natures".

The British God had other ways of improving nations--for example, the opium traffic. The British
traders had been raising the poppy in India and selling its juice to the Chinese. They had
made perhaps a hundred million "noble natures" by this method; and also they were making a
hundred million dollars a year. The Chinese, moved by their new "virility," undertook to destroy
some opium, and to stop the traffic; whereupon it was necessary to use British battle-ships
to punish and subdue them. Was there any difficulty in persuading the established church of
Jesus to bless this holy war? There was not! Lord Shaftesbury, himself the most devout of Anglicans,
commented with horror upon the attitude of the clergy, and wrote in his diary:

I rejoice that this cruel and debasing opium war is terminated. We have triumphed in one of
the most lawless, unnecessary, and unfair struggles in the records of history; and Christians
have shed more heathen blood in two years, than the heathens have shed of Christian blood in
two centuries.

That was in 1843; for seventy years thereafter pious England continued to force the opium traffic
upon protesting China, and only in the last two or three years has the infamy been brought
to an end. Throughout the long controversy the attitude of the church was such that Li Hung
Chang was moved to assert in a letter to the Anti-Opium Society:

Opium is a subject in the discussion of which England and China can never meet on a common
ground. China views the whole question from a moral standpoint, England from a fiscal.

And just as the Chinese people were poisoned with opium, so the English people are being poisoned
with alcohol. Both in town and country, labor is sodden with it. Scientists and reformers are
clamoring for restriction--and what prevents? Head and front of the opposition for a century,
standing like a rock, has been the Established Church. The Rev. Dawson Burns, historian of
the early temperance movement, declares that "among its supporters I cannot recall one Church
of England minister of influence." When Asquith brought in his bill for the restriction of
the traffic in beer, he was confronted with petitions signed by members of the clergy, protesting
against the act. And what was the basis of their protest? That beer is a food and not a poison?
Yes, of course; but also that there was property invested in brewing it, Three hundred and
thirty-two clergy of the diocese of Peterborough declared:

We do strongly protest against the main provisions of the present bill as creating amongst
our people a sense of grave injustice as amounting to a confiscation of private property, spelling
ruin for thousands of quite innocent people, and provoking deep and widespread resentment,
which must do harm to our cause and hinder our aims.

I have come upon references to another and even more plainspoken petition, signed by 1,280
clergymen; but war-time facilities for research have not enabled me to find the text. In Prof.
Henry C. Vedder's "Jesus Christ and the Social Question," we read:

It was authoritatively stated a short time ago that Mr. Asquith's temperance bill was defeated
in Parliament through the opposition of clergymen who had invested their savings in brewery
stock, the profits of which might have been lessened by the bill.

Also the power of the clergy, combined with the brewer, was sufficient to put through Parliament
a provision that no prohibition legislation should ever be passed without providing for compensation
to the owners of the industry. Today, all over America, appeals are being made to the people
to eat less grain; the grain is being shipped to England, some of it to be made into beer;
and a high Anglican prelate, his Grace the Archbishop of York, comes to America to urge us
to increased sacrifices, and in his first newspaper interview takes occasion to declare that
his church is not in favor of prohibition as a measure of war-time economy!

Anglicanism and Alcohol

This partnership of Bishops and Beer is painfully familiar to British radicals; they see it
at work in every election--the publican confusing the voters with spirits, while the parson
confuses them with spirituality. There are two powerful societies in England employing this
deadly combination--the "Anti-Socialist Union" and the "Liberty and Property Defense League."
If you scan the lists of the organizers, directors and subsidizers of these satanic institutions,
you find Tory politicians and landlords, prominent members of the higher clergy, and large-scale
dealers in drunkenness. I attended in London a meeting called by the "Liberty and Property
Defense League," to listen to a denunciation of Socialism by W. H. Mallock, a master sophist
of Roman Catholicism; upon the platform were a bishop and half a dozen members of the Anglican
clergy, together with the secretary of the Federated Brewers' Association, the Secretary of
the Wine, Spirit, and Beer Trade Association, and three or four other alcoholic magnates.

In every public library in England and many in America you will find an assortment of pamphlets
published by these organizations, and scholarly volumes endorsed by them, in which the stock
misrepresentations of Socialism are perpetuated. Some of these writings are brutal--setting
forth the ethics of exploitation in the manner of the Rev. Thomas Malthus, the English clergyman
who supplied for capitalist depredation a basis in pretended natural science. Said this shepherd
of Jesus:

A man who is born into a world already possessed, if he cannot get subsistence from his parents,
and if society does not want his labor, has no claim of right to the smallest portion of food,
and in fact has no business to be where he is. At Nature's mighty feast there is no cover for
him. She tells him to be gone, and will quickly execute her own orders.

Such was the tone of the ruling classes in the nineteenth century; but it was found that for
some reason this failed to stop the growth of Socialism, and so in our time the clerical defenders
of Privilege have grown subtle and insinuating. They inform us now that they have a deep sympathy
with our fundamental purposes; they burn with pity for the poor, and they would really and
truly wish happiness to everyone, not merely in Heaven, but right here and now. However, there
are so many complications--and so they proceed to set out all the anti-Socialist bug-a-boos.
Here for example, is the Rev. James Stalker, D. D., expounding "The Ethics of Jesus," and admonishing
us extremists:

Efforts to transfer money and property from one set of hands to another may be inspired by
the same passions as have blinded the present holders to their own highest good, and may be
accompanied with injustice as extreme as has ever been manifested by the rich and powerful.

And again, the Rev. W. Sanday, D. D., an especially popular clerical author, gives us this
sublime utterance of religion on wage-slavery:

The world is full of mysteries, but some clear lines run through them, of which this is one.
Where God has been so patient, it is not for us to be impatient.

And again, Professor Robert Flint, of Edinburgh University, a clergyman, author of a big book
attacking Socialism, and bringing us back to the faith of our fathers:

The great bulk of human misery is due, not to social arrangements, but to personal vices.

I study Professor Flint's volume in the effort to find just what, if anything, he would have
the church do about the evils of our time. I find him praising the sermons of Dr. Westcott,
Bishop of Durham, as being the proper sort for clergymen to preach. Bishop Westcott, whether
he is talking to a high society congregation, or to one of workingmen, shows "an exquisite
sense of knowing always where to stop." So I consulted the Bishop's volume, "The Social Aspects
of Christianity" and I see at once why he is popular with the anti-Socialist propagandists--neither
I or any other man can possibly discover what he really means, or what he really wants done.

I was fascinated by this Westcott problem; I thought maybe if I kept on the good Bishop's trail,
I might in the end find something a plain man could understand; so I got the beautiful two-volume
"Life of Brooke Westcott, by his Son"--and there I found an exposition of the social purposes
of bishops! In the year 1892 there was a strike in Durham, which is in the coal country; the
employers tried to make a cut in wages, and some ten thousand men walked out, and there was
a long and bitter struggle, which wrung the episcopal heart. There was much consultation and
correspondence on episcopal stationery, and at last the masters and men were got together,
with the Bishop as arbitrator, and the dispute was triumphantly settled--how do you suppose?
On the basis of a ten per cent reduction in wages!

I know nothing quainter in the history of English graft than the naivete with which the Bishop's
biographer and son tells the story of this episcopal venture into reality. The prelate came
out from the conference "all smiles, and well satisfied with the result of his day's work."
As for his followers, they were in ecstacies; they "seized and waltzed one another around on
the carriage drive as madly as ever we danced at a flower show ball. Hats and caps are thrown
into the air, and we cheer ourselves hoarse." The Bishop proceeds to his palace, and sends
one more communication on episcopal stationery--an order to all his clergy to "offer their
humble and hearty thanks to God for our happy deliverance from the strife by which the diocese
has been long afflicted." Strange to say, there were a few varlets in Durham who did not appreciate
the services of the bold Bishop, and one of them wrote and circulated some abusive verses,
in which he made reference to the Bishop's comfortable way of life. The biographer then explains
that the Bishop was so tender-hearted that he suffered for the horses who drew his episcopal
coach, and so ascetic that he would have lived on tea and toast if he had been permitted to.
A curious condition in English society, where the Bishop would have lived on tea and toast,
but was not permitted to; while the working people, who didn't want to live on tea and toast,
were compelled to!

Dead Cats

For more than a hundred years the Anglican clergy have been fighting with every resource at
their command the liberal and enlightened men of England who wished to educate the masses of
the people. In 1807 the first measure for a national school-system was denounced by the Archbishop
of Canterbury as "derogatory to the authority of the Church." As a counter- measure, his supporters
established the "National Society for Promoting the Education of the Poor in the Doctrines
of the Established Church"; and the founder of the organization, a clergyman, advocated a barn
as a good structure for a school, and insisted that the children of the workers "should not
be taught beyond their station." In 1840 a Committee of the Privy Council of Education was
appointed, but bowed to the will of the Archbishops, setting forth the decree of "their lordships"
that "the first purpose of all instruction must be the regulation of the thoughts and habits
of the children by the doctrine and precepts of revealed religion." In 1850 a bill for secular
education was denounced as presenting to the country "a choice between Heaven or Hell, God
or the Devil." In 1870, Forster, author of the still unpassed bill, wrote that while the parsons
were disputing, the children of the poor were "growing into savages."

As with Education, so with Social Reform. During the struggle to abolish slavery in the British
colonies, some enthusiasts endeavored to establish the doctrine that Christian baptism conferred
emancipation upon negroes who accepted it; whereupon the Bishop of London laid down the formula
of exploitation: "Christianity and the embracing of the gospel do not make the least alteration
of civil property."

Gladstone, who was a democrat when he was not religious, spoke of the cultured classes of England:

In almost every one, if not every one, of the greatest political controversies of the last
fifty years, whether they affected the franchise, whether they affected commerce, whether they
affected religion, whether they affected the bad and abominable institution of slavery, or
what subject they touched, these leisured classes, these educated classes, these titled classes
have been in the wrong.

The "Great Commoner" did not add "these religious classes," for he belonged to the religious
classes himself; but a study of the record will supply the gap. The Church opposed all the
reform measures which Gladstone himself put through. It opposed the Reform Bill of 1832. It
opposed all the social reforms of Lord Shaftesbury. This noble-hearted Englishman complained
that at first only a single minister of religion supported him, and to the end only a few.
He expressed himself as distressed and puzzled "to find support from infidels and non-professors;
opposition or coldness from religionists or declaimers."

And to our own day it has been the same. In 1894 the House of Bishops voted solidly against
the Employers' Liability Law. The House of Bishops opposed Home Rule, and beat it; the House
of Bishops opposed Womans' Suffrage, and voted against it to the end. Concerning this establishment
Lord Shaftesbury, himself the most devout of Englishmen, used the vivid phrase: "this vast
aquarium full of cold-blooded life." He told the Bishops that he would give up preaching to
them about ecclesiastical reform, because he knew that they would never begin. Another member
of the British aristocracy, the Hon. Geo. Russell, has written of their record and adventures:

They were defenders of absolutism, slavery, and the bloody penal code; they were the resolute
opponents of every political or social reform; and they had their reward from the nation outside
Parliament. The Bishop of Bristol had his palace sacked and burnt; the Bishop of London could
not keep an engagement to preach lest the congregation should stone him. The Bishop of Litchfield
barely escaped with his life after preaching at St. Bride's, Fleet Street. Archbishop Howley,
entering Canterbury for his primary visitation, was insulted, spat upon, and only brought by
a circuitous route to the Deanery, amid the execrations of the mob. On the 5th of November
the Bishops of Exeter and Winchester were burnt in effigy close to their own palace gates.
Archbishop Howley's chaplain complained that a dead cat had been thrown at him, when the Archbishop--a
man of apostolic meekness--replied: "You should be thankful that it was not a live one."

The people had reason for this conduct--as you will always find they have, if you take the
trouble to inquire. Let me quote another member of the English ruling classes, Mr. Conrad Noel,
who gives "an instance of the procedure of Church and State about this period":

In 1832 six agricultural labourers in South Dorsetshire, led by one of their class, George
Loveless, in receipt of 9s. a week each, demanded the 10s. rate of wages usual in the neighbourhood.
The result was a reduction to 8s. An appeal was made to the chairman of the local bench, who
decided that they must work for whatever their masters chose to pay them. The parson, who had
at first promised his help, now turned against them, and the masters promptly reduced the wage
to 7s., with a threat of further reduction. Loveless then formed an agricultural union, for
which all seven were arrested, treated as convicts, and committed to the assizes. The prison
chaplain tried to bully them into submission. The judge determined to convict them, and directed
that they should be tried for mutiny under an act of George III, specially passed to deal with
the naval mutiny at the Nore. The grand jury were landowners, and the petty jury were farmers;
both judge and jury were churchmen of the prevailing type. The judge summed up as follows:
"Not for anything that you have done, or that I can prove that you intend to do, but for an
example to others I consider it my duty to pass the sentence of seven years' penal transportation
across His Majesty's high seas upon each and every one of you."

Suffer Little Children

The founder of Christianity was a man who specialized in children. He was not afraid of having
His discourses disturbed by them, He did not consider them superfluous. "Of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven", He said; and His Church is the inheritor of this tradition--"feed my lambs". There
were children in Great Britain in the early part of the nineteenth century, and we may see
what was done with them by turning to Gibbin's "Industrial History of England":

Sometimes regular traffickers would take the place of the manufacturer, and transfer a number
of children to a factory district, and there keep them, generally in some dark cellar, till
they could hand them over to a mill owner in want of hands, who would come and examine their
height, strength, and bodily capacities, exactly as did the slave owners in the American markets.
After that the children were simply at the mercy of their owners, nominally as apprentices,
but in reality as mere slaves, who got no wages, and whom it was not worth while even to feed
and clothe properly, because they were so cheap and their places could be so easily supplied.
It was often arranged by the parish authorities, in order to get rid of imbeciles, that one
idiot should be taken by the mill owner with every twenty sane children. The fate of these
unhappy idiots was even worse than that of the others. The secret of their final end has never
been disclosed, but we can form some idea of their awful sufferings from the hardships of the
other victims to capitalist greed and cruelty. The hours of their labor were only limited by
exhaustion, after many modes of torture had been unavailingly applied to force continued work.
Children were often worked sixteen hours a day, by day and by night.

In the year 1819 an act of Parliament was proposed limiting the labor of children nine years
of age to four-teen hours a day. This would seem to have been a reasonable provision, likely
to have won the approval of Christ; yet the bill was violently opposed by Christian employers,
backed by Christian clergymen. It was interfering with freedom of contract, and therefore with
the will of Providence; it was anathema to an established Church, whose function was in 1819,
as it is in 1918, and was in 1918 B. C., to teach the divine origin and sanction of the prevailing
economic order. "Anu and Baal called me, Hammurabi, the exalted prince, worshipper of the gods"....
so begins the oldest legal code which has come down to us, from 2250 B. C.; and the coronation
service of the English church is made whole out of the same thesis. The duty of submission,
not merely to divinely chosen King, but to divinely chosen Landlord and divinely chosen Manufacturer,
is implicit in the church's every ceremony, and explicit in many of its creeds. In the Litany
the people petition for increase of grace to hear meekly "Thy Word"; and here is this "Word,"
as little children are made to learn it by heart. If there exists in the world a more perfect
summary of slave ethics, I do not know where to find it.

My duty towards my neighbour is.....
 To honour and obey the King, and all that are put in authority
under him;
 To submit myself to all my governours, teachers, spiritual
pastors, and masters:
 To order myself lowly and reverently to all my betters ....
 Not to covet nor desire other men's goods;
 But to learn and labour truly to get mine own living, and to do
my duty in that state of life, unto which it shall please God to
call me.

A hundred years ago one of the most popular of British writers was Hannah More. She and her
sister Martha went to live in the coal-country, to teach this "catechism" to the children of
the starving miners. The "Mendip Annals" is the title of a book in which they tell of their
ten years' labors in a village popularly known as "Little Hell." In this place two hundred
people were crowded into nineteen houses. "There is not one creature in it that can give a
cup of broth if it would save a life." In one winter eighteen perished of "a putrid fever",
and the clergyman "could not raise a sixpence to save a life."

And what did the pious sisters make of all this? From cover to cover you find in the "Mendip
Annals" no single word of social protest, not even of social suspicion. That wages of a shilling
a day might have anything to do with moral degeneration was a proposition beyond the mental
powers of England's most popular woman writer. She was perfectly content that a woman should
be sentenced to death for stealing butter from a dealer who had asked what the woman thought
too high a price. When there came a famine, and the children of these mine-slaves were dying
like flies, Hannah More bade them be happy because God had sent them her pious self. "In suffering
by the scarcity, you have but shared in the common lot, with the pleasure of knowing the advantage
you have had over many villages in your having suffered no scarcity of religious instruction."
And in another place she explained that the famine was caused by God to teach the poor to be
grateful to the rich!

Let me remind you that probably that very scarcity has been permitted by an all-wise and gracious
Providence to unite all ranks of people together, to show the poor how immediately they are
dependent upon the rich, and to show both rich and poor that they are all dependent upon Himself.
It has also enabled you to see more clearly the advantages you derive from the government and
constitution of this country--to observe the benefits flowing from the distinction of rank
and fortune, which has enabled the high to so liberally assist the low.

It appears that the villagers were entirely convinced by this pious reasoning; for they assembled
one Saturday night and burned an effigy of Tom Paine! This proceeding led to a tragic consequence,
for one of the "common people," known as Robert, "was overtaken by liquor," and was unable
to appear at Sunday School next day. This fall from grace occasioned intense remorse in Robert.
"It preyed dreadfully upon his mind for many months," records Martha More, "and despair seemed
at length to take possession of him." Hannah had some conversation with him, and read him some
suitable passages from "The Rise and Progress". "At length the Almighty was pleased to shine
into his heart and give him comfort."

Nor should you imagine that this saintly stupidity was in any way unique in the Anglican establishment.
We read in the letters of Shelley how his father tormented him with Archdeacon Paley's "Evidences"
as a cure for atheism. This eminent churchman wrote a book, which he himself ranked first among
his writings, called "Reasons for Contentment, addressed to the Labouring Classes of the British
Public." In this book he not merely proved that religion "smooths all inequalities, because
it unfolds a prospect which makes all earthly distinctions nothing"; he went so far as to prove
that, quite apart from religion, the British exploiters were less fortunate than those to whom
they paid a shilling a day.

Some of the conditions which poverty (if the condition of the labouring part of mankind must
be so called) imposes, are not hardships, but pleasures. Frugality itself is a pleasure. It
is an exercise of attention and contrivance, which, whenever it is successful, produces satisfaction.....
This is lost among abundance.

And there was William Wilberforce, as sincere a philanthropist as Anglicanism ever produced,
an ardent supporter of Bible societies and foreign missions, a champion of the anti-slavery
movement, and also of the ruthless "Combination Laws," which denied to British wage-slaves
all chance of bettering their lot. Wilberforce published a "Practical View of the System of
Christianity", in which he told unblushingly what the Anglican establishment is for. He was the eldest
of seven sons, ranging in age from eleven to twenty years, including one pair of twins. The
parents had been greatly pitied for the exorbitant exactions of rearing
this large family during its immaturity, but now, the labor of farm,
barnyard and woodpile, distributed among so many stalwart fellows
of the same home and interest was light and the result ample.

Perhaps none of them realized how little of this abundance was compassed by Brent's exertions--how
many days he spent dawdling on the river bank idly experimenting with the echoes--how often, even
when he affected to work, he left the plow in the furrow while he followed till sunset the flight
of successive birds through the adjacent pastures, imitating as he went the fresh mid-air cry,
whistling in so vibrant a bird-voice, so signally clear and dulcet, yet so keen despite its sweetness,
that his brothers at the plow-handles sought in vain to distinguish between the calls of the
earth-ling and the winged voyager of the empyreal air. None of them had ever heard of ventriloquism,
so limited had been their education and experience, so sequestered was their home amidst the
wilderness of the mountains. Only very gradually to Brent himself came the consciousness of his unique
gift, as from imitation he progressed to causing a silent bird to seem to sing. The strangeness
of the experience frightened him at first, but with each experiment he had grown more confident,
more skilled, until at length he found that he could throw a singularly
articulate voice into the jaws of the old plow-horse, while his brothers,
accustomed to his queer vocal tricks, were convulsed with laughter
at the bizarre quadrupedal views of life thus elicited.

This development of proficiency, however, was recent, and until the
incident at the bran dance it had not been exercised beyond the limits
of their secluded home.

It had revealed new possibilities to the young ventriloquist and he looked at once agitated,
excited, and triumphant when late that afternoon he appeared suddenly at the rail fence about the
door-yard of Valeria Clee's home on one of the spurs of Chilhowee Mountain. It was no such home
as his--lacking all the evidence of rude comfort and coarse plenty that reigned there--and in
its tumbledown disrepair it had an aspect of dispirited helplessness. Here Valeria, an orphan from her
infancy, dwelt with her father's parents, who always of small means had become yearly a more
precarious support. The ancient grandmother was sunken in many infirmities,
and the household tasks had all fallen to the lot of Valeria.

Latterly a stroke of paralysis had given old man Clee an awful annotation on the chapter of age and
poverty upon which he was entering, and his little farm was fast growing up in brambles.

"But 't ain't no differ, gran Mad," Valeria often sought to reassure him. "I'll work some way out."

And
when he would irritably flout the possibility that she could do aught to materially avert
disaster she was wont to protest: "You jes' watch me.
 I turn at random to the
part headed "General," and find that there is hardly one hymn in which there is not "king ...
.. throne," or some image of homage and flattery. The first hymn begins--

     Ancient of days, Who sittest, throned in glory;
      To Thee all knees are bent, all voices pray.

There is a court in Heaven above, to which all good Britons look up, and about which they read
with exactly the same thrills as they read the Court Circular. The two courts have the same
ethical code and the same manners; their Sovereigns are jealous, greedy of attention, self-conscious
and profoundly serious, punctilious and precise; their existence consisting of an endless round
of ceremonies, and they being incapable of boredom. No member of the Royal Family can escape
this regime even if he wishes; and no more can any member of the Holy Family--not even the
meek and lowly Jesus, who chose a carpenter's wife for his mother, and showed all his earthly
days a preference for low society.

This unconventional Son lived obscurely; he never carried weapons, he could not bear to have
so much as a human ear cut off in his presence.

This carpenter's son was one of the most unpretentious men on earth; utterly simple and honest--he
would not even let anyone praise him. When some one called him "good Master," he answered,
quickly, "Why callest thou me good? There is none good save one, that is, God." But this simplicity
has been taken with deprecation by his church, which persists in heaping compliments upon him
in conventional, courtly style:

 The company of angels
      Are praising Thee on high;
  And mortal men, and all things
      Created, make reply:  All Glory, laud and honour,
      To Thee, Redeemer, King. . . . .

The impression a modern man gets from all this is the unutterable boredom that Heaven must
be. Can one imagine a more painful occupation than that of the saints--casting down their golden
crowns around the glassy sea--unless it be that of the Triumvirate itself, compelled to sit
through eternity watching these saints, and listening to their mawkish and superfluous compliments!

But one can understand that such things are necessary in a monarchy; they are necessary if
you are going to have Good Society, and a Good Society church. For Good Society is precisely
the same thing as Heaven; that is, a place to which only a few can get admission, and those
few are bored. They spend their time going through costly formalities--not because they enjoy
it, but because of its effect upon the populace, which reads about them and sees their pictures
in the papers, and now and then is allowed to catch a glimpse of their physical Presences,
as at the horse-show, or the opera, or the coaching-parade.

Horn-blowing

I know the Church of Good Society in America, having studied it from the inside. I was an extraordinarily
devout little boy; one of my earliest recollections--I cannot have been more than four years
of age--is of carrying a dust-brush about the house as the choir-boy carried the golden cross
every Sunday morning. I remember asking if I might say the "Lord's prayer" in this fascinating
play; and my mother's reply: "If you say it reverently." When I was thirteen, I attended service,
of my own volition and out of my own enthusiasm, every single day during the forty days of
Lent; at the age of fifteen I was teaching Sunday-school. It was the Church of the Holy Communion,
at Sixth Avenue and Twentieth Street, New York; and those who know the city will understand
that this is a peculiar location--precisely half way between the homes of some of the oldest
and most august of the city's aristocracy, and some of the vilest and most filthy of the city's
slums. The aristocracy were paying for the church, and occupied the best pews; they came, perfectly
clad, aus dem Ei gegossen, as the Germans say, with the manner they so carefully cultivate,
gracious, yet infinitely aloof. The service was made for them--as all the rest of the world
is made for them; the populace was permitted to occupy a fringe of vacant seats.

The assistant clergyman was an Englishman, and a gentleman; orthodox, yet the warmest man's
heart I have ever known. He could not bear to have the church remain entirely the church of
the rich; he would go persistently into the homes of the poor, visiting the old slum women
in their pitifully neat little kitchens, and luring their children with entertainments and
Christmas candy. They were corralled into the Sunday-school, where it was my duty to give them
what they needed for the health of their souls.

I taught them out of a book of lessons; and one Sunday it would be Moses in the Bulrushes,
and next Sunday it would be Jonah and the Whale, and next Sunday it would be Joshua blowing
down the walls of Jericho. These stories were reasonably entertaining, but they seemed to me
futile, not to the point. There were little morals tagged to them, but these lacked relationship
to the lives of little slum-boys. Be good and you will be happy, love the Lord and all will
be well with you; which was about as true and as practical as the procedure of the Fijians,
blowing horns to drive away a pestilence.

I had a mind, you see, and I was using it. I was reading the papers, and watching politics
and business. I, followed the fates of my little slum-boys--and what I saw was that Tammany
Hall was getting them. The liquor-dealers and the brothel-keepers, the panders and the pimps,
the crap-shooters and the petty thieves--all these were paying the policeman and the politician
for a chance to prey upon my boys; and when the boys got into trouble, as they were continually
doing, it was the clergyman who consoled them in prison--but it was the Tammany leader who
saw the judge and got them out. So these boys got their lesson even earlier in life than I
got mine--that the church was a kind of amiable fake, a pious horn-blowing; while the real
thing was Tammany.

I talked about this with the vestrymen and the ladies of Good Society; they were deeply pained,
but I noticed that they did nothing practical about it; and gradually, as I went on to investigate,
I discovered the reason--that their incomes came from real estate, traction, gas and other
interests, which were contributing the main part of the campaign expenses of the corrupt Tammany
machine, and of its equally corrupt rival. So it appeared that these immaculate ladies and
gentlemen, aus dem Ei gegossen, were themselves engaged, unconsciously, perhaps, but none the
less effectively, in spreading the pestilence against which they were blowing their religious
horns!

So little by little I saw my beautiful church for what it was and is: a great capitalist interest,
an integral and essential part of a gigantic predatory system. I saw that its ethical and cultural
and artistic features, however sincerely they might be meant by individual clergymen, were
nothing but a bait, a device to lure the poor into the trap of submission to their exploiters.
And as I went on probing into the secret life of the great Metropolis of Mammon, and laying
bare its infamies to the world, I saw the attitude of the church to such work; I met, not sympathy
and understanding, but sneers and denunciation--until the venerable institution which had once
seemed dignified and noble became to me as a sepulchre of corruption.

Trinity Corporation

There stands on the corner of Broadway and Wall Street a towering brown-stone edifice, one
of the most beautiful and most famous churches in America. As a child I have walked through
its church yard and read the quaint and touching inscriptions on its gravestones; when I was
a little older, and knew Wall Street, it seemed to me a sublime thing that here in the very
heart of the world's infamy there should be raised, like a finger of warning, this symbol of
Eternity and Judgment. Its great bell rang at noon-time, and all the traders and their wage-slaves
had to listen, whether they would or no! Such was Old Trinity to my young soul; and what is
it in reality?

The story was told some ten years ago by Charles Edward Russell. Trinity Corporation is the
name of the concern, and it is one of the great landlords of New York. In the early days it
bought a number of farms, and these it has held, as the city has grown up around them, until
in 1908 their value was estimated at anywhere from forty to a hundred million dollars. The
true amount has never been made public; to quote Russell's words:

The real owners of the property are the communicants of the church. For 94 years none of the
owners has known the extent of the property, nor the amount of the revenue therefrom, nor what
is done with the money. Every attempt to learn even the simplest fact about these matters has
been baffled. The management is a self perpetuating body, without responsibility and without
supervision.

And the writer goes on to describe the business policy of this great corporation, which is
simply the English land system complete. It refuses to sell the land, but rents it for long
periods, and the tenant builds the house, and then when the lease expires, the Corporation
takes over the house for a nominal sum. Thus it has purchased houses for as low as $200, and
made them into tenements, and rented them to the swarming poor for a total of fifty dollars
a month. The houses were not built for tenements, they have no conveniences, they are not fit
for the habitation of animals. The article, in Everybody's Magazine for July, 1908, gives pictures
of them, which are horrible beyond belief. To quote the writer again:

Decay, neglect and squalor seem to brood wherever Trinity is an owner. Gladly would I give
to such a charitable and benevolent institution all possible credit for a spirit of improvement
manifested anywhere, but I can find no such manifestation. I have tramped the Eighth Ward day
after day with a list of Trinity properties in my hand, and of all the tenement houses that
stand there on Trinity land, I have not found one that is not a disgrace to civilization and
to the City of New York.

It happens that I once knew the stately prelate who presided over this Corporation of Corruption.
I imagine how he would have shivered and turned pale had some angel whispered to him what devilish
utterances were some day to proceed from the lips of the little cherub with shining face and
shining robes who acted as the bishop's attendant in the stately ceremonials of the Church!
Truly, even into the goodly company of the elect, even to the most holy places of the temple,
Satan makes his treacherous way! Even under the consecrated hands of the bishop! For while
the bishop was blessing me and taking me into the company of the sanctified, I was thinking
about what the papers had reported, that the bishop's wife had been robbed of fifty thousand
dollars worth of jewels! It did not seem quite in accordance with the doctrine of Jesus that
a bishop's wife should possess fifty thousand dollars worth of jewels, or that she should be
setting the blood-hounds of the police on the train of a human being. I asked my clergyman
friend about it, and remember his patient explanation--that the bishop had to know all classes
and conditions of men: his wife had to go among the rich as well as the poor, and must be able
to dress so that she would not be embarrassed. The Bishop at this time was making it his life-work
to raise a million dollars for the beginning of a great Episcopal cathedral; and this of course
compelled him to spend much time among the rich!

The explanation satisfied me; for of course I thought there had to be cathedrals--despite the
fact that both St. Stephen and St. Paul had declared that "the Lord dwelleth not in temples
made with hands." In the twenty-five years which have passed since that time the good Bishop
has passed to his eternal reward, but the mighty structure which is a monument to his visitations
among the rich towers over the city from its vantage-point on Morningside Heights. It is called
the Cathedral of St. John the Divine; and knowing what I know about the men who contributed
its funds, and about the general functions of the churches of the Metropolis of Mammon, it
would not seem to me less holy if it were built, like the monuments of ancient ravagers, out
of the skulls of human beings.

Spiritual Interpretation

There remains to say a few words as to the intellectual functions of the Fifth Avenue clergy.
Let us realize at the outset that they do their preaching in the name of a proletarian rebel,
who was crucified as a common criminal because, as they said, "He stirreth up the people."
An embarrassing "Savior" for the church of Good Society, you might imagine; but they manage
to fix him up and make him respectable.

I remember something analogous in my own boyhood. All day Saturday I ran about with the little
street rowdies, I stole potatoes and roasted them in vacant lots, I threw mud from the roofs
of apartment-houses; but on Saturday night I went into a tub and was lathered and scrubbed,
and on Sunday I came forth in a newly brushed suit, a clean white collar and a shining tie
and a slick derby hat and a pair of tight gloves which made me impotent for mischief. Thus
I was taken and paraded up Fifth Avenue, doing my part of the duties of Good Society. And all
church-members go through this same performance; the oldest and most venerable of them steal
potatoes and throw mud all week --and then take a hot bath of repentance and put on the clean
clothing of piety. In this same way their ministers of religion are occupied to scrub and clean
and dress up their disreputable Founder--to turn him from a proletarian rebel into a stained-glass-window
divinity.

The man who really lived, the carpenter's son, they take out and crucify all over again. As
a young poet has phrased it, they nail him to a jeweled cross with cruel nails of gold. Come
with me to the New Golgotha and witness this crucifixion; take the nails of gold in your hands,
try the weight of the jeweled sledges! Here is a sledge, in the form of a dignified and scholarly
volume, published by the exclusive house of Scribner, and written by the Bishop of my boyhood,
the Bishop whose train I carried in the stately ceremonials: "The Citizen in His Relation to
the Industrial Situation," by the Right Reverend Henry Codman Potter, D. D., L. L. D., D. C.
L.--a course of lectures delivered before the sons of our predatory classes at Yale University,
under the endowment of a millionaire mining king, founder of the Phelps-Dodge corporation,
which the other day carried out the deportation from their homes of a thousand striking miners
at Bisbee, Arizona. Says my Bishop:

Christ did not denounce wealth any more than he denounced pauperism. He did not abhor money;
he used it. He did not abhor the company of rich men; he sought it. He did not invariably scorn
or even resent a certain profuseness of expenditure.

And do you think that the late Bishop of J. P. Morgan and Company stands alone as an utterer
of scholarly blasphemy, a driver of golden nails? In the course of this book there will march
before us a long line of the clerical retainers of Privilege, on their way to the New Golgotha
to crucify the carpenter's son: the Rector of the Money Trust, the Preacher of the Coal Trust,
the Priest of the Traction Trust, the Archbishop of Tammany, the Chaplain of the Millionaires'
Club, the Pastor of the Pennsylvania Railroad, the Religious Editor of the New Haven, the Sunday-school
Superintendent of Standard Oil. We shall try the weight of their jewelled sledges--books, sermons,
newspaper-interviews, after-dinner speeches--wherewith they pound their golden nails of sophistry
into the bleeding hands and feet of the proletarian Christ.

Here, for example, is Rev. F. G. Peabody, Professor of Christian Morals at Harvard University.
Prof. Peabody has written several books on the social teachings of Jesus; he quotes the most
rabid of the carpenter's denunciations of the rich, and says:

Is it possible that so obvious and so limited a message as this, a teaching so slightly distinguished
from the curbstone rhetoric of a modern agitator, can be an adequate reproduction of the scope
and power of the teaching of Jesus?

The question answers itself: Of course not! For Jesus was a gentleman; he is the head of a
church attended by gentlemen, of universities where gentlemen are educated. So the Professor
of Christian Morals proceeds to make a subtle analysis of Jesus' actions; demonstrating therefrom
that there are three proper uses to be made of great wealth: first, for almsgiving--"The poor
ye have always with you!"; second, for beauty and culture--buying wine for wedding-feasts,
and ointment-boxes and other objets de vertu; and third, "stewardship," "trusteeship"--which
in plain English is "Big Business."

I have used the illustration of soap and hot water; one can imagine he is actually watching
the scrubbing process, seeing the proletarian Founder emerging all new and respectable under
the brush of this capitalist professor. The professor has a rule all his own for reading the
scriptures; he tells us that when there are two conflicting sayings, the rule of interpretation
is that "the more spiritual is to be preferred." Thus, one gospel makes Jesus say: "Blessed
are ye poor." Another puts it: "Blessed are the poor in spirit." The first one is crude and
literal; obviously the second must be what Jesus meant! In other words, the professor and his
church have made for their economic masters a treacherous imitation virtue to be taught to
wage-slaves, a quality of submissiveness, impotence and futility, which they call by the name
of "spirituality". This virtue they exalt above all others, and in its name they cut from the
record of Jesus everything which has relation to the realities of life!

So here is our Professor Peabody, sitting in the Plummer chair at Harvard, writing on "Jesus
Christ and the Social Question," and explaining:

The fallacy of the Socialist program is not in its radicalism, but in its externalism. It proposes
to accomplish by economic change what can be attained by nothing less than spiritual regeneration.

And here is "The Churchman," organ of the Episcopalians of New York, warning us:

It is necessary to remember that something more than material and temporal considerations are
involved. There are things of more importance to the purposes of God and to the welfare of
humanity than economic readjustments and social amelioration.

And again:

Without doubt there is a strong temptation today, bearing upon clergy and laity alike, to address
their religious energies too exclusively to those tasks whereby human life may be made more
abundant and wholesome materially..... We need constantly to be reminded that spiritual things
come first.

There come before my mental eye the elegant ladies and gentlemen for whom these comfortable
sayings are prepared: the vestrymen and pillars of the Church, with black frock coats and black
kid gloves and shiny top-hats; the ladies of Good Society with their Easter costumes in pastel
shades, their gracious smiles and their sweet intoxicating odors. I picture them as I have
seen them at St. George's, where that aged wild boar, Pierpont Morgan, the elder, used to pass
the collection plate; at Holy Trinity, where they drove downtown in old-fashioned carriages
with grooms and footmen sitting like twin statues of insolence; at St. Thomas', where you might
see all the "Four Hundred" on exhibition at once; at St. Mary the Virgin's, where the choir
paraded through the aisles, swinging costly incense into my childish nostrils, the stout clergyman
walking alone with nose upturned, carrying on his back a jewelled robe for which some adoring
female had paid sixty thousand dollars. "Spiritual things come first?" Ah, yes! "Seek first
the kingdom of God, and the jewelled robes shall be added unto you!" And it is so dreadful
about the French and German Socialists, who, as the "Churchman" reports, "make a creed out
of materialism." But then, what is this I find in one issue of the organ of the "Church of
Good Society"?

Business men contribute to the Y. M. C. A. because they realize that if their employes are
well cared for and religiously influenced, they can be of greater service in business!

Who let that material cat out of the spiritual bag?

BOOK THREE

The Church of the Servant-girls

 Was it for this--that prayers like these
      Should spend themselves about thy feet,
  And with hard, overlabored knees
      Kneeling, these slaves of men should beat
  Bosoms too lean to suckle sons
  And fruitless as their orisons?

 Was it for this--that men should make 
     Thy name a fetter on men's necks,
  Poor men made poorer for thy sake,
      And women withered out of sex?
  Was it for this--that slaves should be--
Thy word was passed to set men free?                              
                          Swinburne.

Charity

As everyone knows, the "society lady" is not an independent and self-sustaining phenomenon.
For every one of these exquisite, sweet-smelling creatures that you meet on Fifth Avenue, there
must be at home a large number of other women who live sterile and empty lives, and devote
themselves to cleaning up after their luckier sisters. But these "domestics" also are human
beings; they have emotions--or, in religious parlance, "souls;" it is necessary to provide
a discipline to keep them from appropriating the property of their mistresses, also to keep
them from becoming enceinte. So it comes about that there are two cathedrals in New York: one,
St. John the Divine, for the society ladies, and the other, St. Patrick's, for the servant-girls.
The latter is located on Fifth Avenue, where its towering white spires divide with the homes
of the Vanderbilts the interest of the crowds of sight-seers. Now, early every Sunday morning,
before "Good Society" has opened its eyes, you may see the devotees of the Irish snake-charmer
hurrying to their orisons, each with a little black prayer-book in her hand. What is it they
do inside? What are they taught about life? This is the question to which we have next to give
attention.

Some years ago Mr. Thomas F. Ryan, traction and insurance magnate of New York, favored me with
his justification of his own career and activities. He mentioned his charities, and, speaking
as one man of the world to another, he said: "The reason I put them into the hands of Catholics
is not religious, but because I find they are efficient in such matters. They don't ask questions,
they do what you want them to do, and do it economically."

I made no comment; I was absorbed in the implications of the remark--like Agassiz when some
one gave him a fossil bone, and his mind set to work to reconstruct the creature.

When a man is drunk, the Catholics do not ask if it was long hours and improper working-conditions
which drove him to desperation; they do not ask if police and politicians are getting a rake-off
from the saloon, or if traction magnates are using it as an agency for the controlling of votes;
they do not plunge into prohibition movements or good government campaigns--they simply take
the man in, at a standard price, and the patient slave-sisters and attendants get him sober,
and then turn him out for society to make him drunk again. That is "charity," and it is the
special industry of Roman Catholicism. They have been at it for a thousand years, cleaning
up loathsome and unsightly messes--"plague, pestilence and famine, battle and murder and sudden
death." Yet--puzzling as it would seem to anyone not religious--there were never so many messes,
never so many different kinds of messes, as now at the end of the thousand years of charitable
activity!

But the Catholics go on and on; like the patient spider, building and rebuilding his web across
a doorway; like soldiers under the command of a ruling class with a "muddling through" tradition--

 Theirs not to reason why,
  Theirs but to do and die.

And so of course all magnates and managers of industry who have messes to be cleaned up, human
garbage-heaps to be carted away quickly and without fuss, turn to the Catholic Church for this
service, no matter what their personal religious beliefs or lack of beliefs may be. Somewhere
in the neighborhood of every steel-mill, every coal-mine or other place of industrial danger,
you will find a Catholic hospital, with its slave-sisters and attendants. Once when I was "muck-raking"
near Pittsburgh, I went to one of these places to ask information as to the frequency of industrial
accidents and the fate of the victims. The "Mother Superior" received me with a look of polite
dismay. "These concerns pay us!" she said. "You must see that as a matter of business it would
not do for us to talk about them."

Obey and keep silence: that is the Catholic law. And precisely as it is with the work of nursing
and almsgiving, so it is with the work of vote-getting, the elaborate system of policemen and
saloon-keepers and ward-heelers which the Catholic machine controls. This industry of vote-getting
is a comparatively new one; but the Church has been handling the masses for so many centuries
that she quickly learned this new way of "democracy," and has established her supremacy over
all rivals. She has the schools for training the children, the confessional for controlling
the women; she has the intellectual machinery, the purgatory and the code of slave-ethics.
She has the supreme advantage that the rank and file of her mighty host really believe what
she teaches; they do not have to listen to table-rappings and flounder through swamps of automatic
writings in order to bolster their hope of the survival of personality after death!

So it comes about that our captains of industry and finance have been driven to a more or less
reluctant alliance with the Papacy. The Church is here, and her followers are here, before
the war several hundred thousand of them pouring into the country every year. It is no longer
possible to do without Catholics in America; not merely do ditches have to be dug, roads graded,
coal mined, and dishes washed, but franchises have to be granted, tariff-schedules adjusted,
juries and courts manipulated, police trained and strikes crushed. Under our native political
system, for these purposes millions of votes are needed; and these votes belong to people of
a score of nationalities--Irish and German and Italian and French-Canadian and Bohemian and
Mexican and Portuguese and Polish and Hungarian. Who but the Catholic Church can handle these
polyglot hordes? Who can furnish teachers and editors and politicians familiar with all these
languages?

Considering how complex is the service, the price is extremely moderate--the mere actual expenses
of the campaign, the cost of red fire and torch-lights, of liquor and newspaper advertisements.
The rest may come out of the public till, in the form of exemption from taxation of church
buildings and lands, a share of the public funds for charities and schools, the control of
the police for saloon-keepers and district leaders, the control of police-courts and magistrates,
of municipal administrations and boards of education, of legislatures and governors; with a
few higher offices now and then, to flatter our sacred self-esteem, a senator or a justice
on the Supreme Court Bench; and on state occasions, to keep up our necessary prestige, some
cabinet-members and legislators and justices to attend High Mass, and be blessed in public
by Catholic prelates and dignitaries.

You think this is empty rhetoric--you comfortable, easy-going, ultra-cultured Americans? You
professors in your classic shades, absorbed in "the passionless pursuit of passionless intelligence"--while
the world about you slides down into the pit! You ladies of Good Society, practicing your "sweet
little charities," pursuing your "dear little ideals," raising your families of one or two
lovely children--while Irish and French-Canadians and Italians and Portuguese and Hungarians
are breeding their dozens and scores, and preparing to turn you out of your country!

God's Armor

You remember "Bishop Blougram's Apology," Browning's study of the psychology of a modern Catholic
ecclesiastic. He is not unaware of modern thought, this bishop; he is a man of culture, who
wants to have beauty about him, to be a "cabin passenger":

  There's power in me and will to dominate
  Which I must exercise, they hurt me else;
  In many ways I need mankind's respect,
  Obedience, and the love that's born of fear.

He wishes that he had faith--faith in anything; he understands that faith is all-important--

 Enthusiasm's the best thing, I repeat.

But you cannot get faith just by wishing for it--

     But paint a fire, it will not therefore burn!

He tries to imagine himself going on a crusade for truth, but he asks what there would be in
it for him--

     State the facts,
  Read the text right, emancipate the world--
The emancipated world enjoys itself
  With scarce a thank-you.
 Blougram told it first
  It could not owe a farthing,--not to him
  More than St. Paul!

So the bishop goes on with his role, but uneasily conscious of the contempt of intellectual people.

  I pine among my million imbeciles
  (You think) aware some dozen men of sense
  Eye me and know me, whether I believe
  In the last winking virgin as I vow,
  And am a fool, or disbelieve in her,
  And am a knave.

But, as he says, you have to keep a tight hold upon the chain of faith, that is what

  Gives all the advantage, makes the difference,
  With the rough, purblind mass we seek to rule. That
  which was seen, it may be with crystal clearness,
  and in bold outline, in the consciousness of an individual thinker,
may fail to become the property and possession of mankind at large,
because it is not transferred from the individual to the general mind,
by means of a precise phraseology and a rigorous terminology.

Nothing is in its own nature more fugacious and shifting than thought; and particularly thoughts
upon the mysteries of Christianity.

I think we may observe very often the way in which controversies, after long eddying backward and forward,
hither and thither, concentrate themselves at last in some single word which is felt to contain
all that the one party would affirm and the other would deny. After a desultory swaying of
the battle hither and thither 'the high places of the field' the critical position, on the winning
of which everything turns, is discovered at last. Thus the whole controversy of the Catholic
Church with the Arians finally gathers itself up in a single word, 'homoousion;' that with the Nestorians
in another, 'theotokos.' One might be bold to affirm that the entire secret of Buddhism is found
in 'Nirvana'; for take away the word, and it is not too much to say that the keystone to the
whole arch is gone. So too when the medieval Church allowed and then adopted the word 'transubstantiation'
(and we know the exact date of this), it committed itself to a doctrine
from which henceforward it was impossible to recede.

The floating error had become a fixed one, and exercised a far mightier influence on the minds
of all who received it, than except for this it would have ever done. It is sometimes not a
word, but a phrase, which proves thus mighty in operation. 'Reformation in the head and in the
members 'was the watchword, for more than a century before an actual Reformation came, of all who
were conscious of the deeper needs of the Church.
 Offer yourself to Him, and beg grace to
spend the day without sin. Make the sign of the cross. Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, behold me in Thy Divine Presence. I adore Thee and give Thee thanks. Grant that
all I do this day be for Thy Glory, and for the salvation of my immortal soul.

During the day lift your heart frequently to God. Your prayers need not be long nor read from
a book. Learn a few of these short ejaculations by heart and frequently repeat them. They will
serve to recall God to your heart and will strengthen you and comfort you.

You remember a while back about the prayer-wheels of the Thibetans. The Catholic religion was
founded before the Thibetan, and is less progressive; it does not welcome mechanical devices
for saving labor. You have to use your own vocal apparatus to keep yourself from hell; but
the process has been made as economical as possible by kindly dispensations of the Pope. Thus,
each time that you say "My God and my all," you get fifty days indulgence; the same for "My
Jesus, mercy," and the same for "Jesus, my God, I love Thee above all things." For "Jesus,
Mary, Joseph," you get three hundred days--which would seem by all odds the best investment
of your spare breath.

And then come prayers for all occasions: "Prayer before Battle"; "Prayer for a Happy Death";
"Prayer in Temptation"; "Prayer before and after Meals"; "Prayer when on Guard"; "Prayer before
a long March"; "Prayer of Resignation to Death"; "Prayer for Those in their Agony"--I cannot
bear to read them, hardly to list them. I remember standing in a cathedral "somewhere in France"
during the celebration of some special Big Magic. There was brilliant white light, and a suffocating
strange odor, and the thunder of a huge organ, and a clamor of voices, high, clear voices of
young boys mounting to heaven, like the hands of men in a pit reaching up, trying to climb
over the top of one another. It sent a shudder into the depths of my soul. There is nothing
left in the modern world which can carry the mind so far back into the ancient nightmare of
anguish and terror which was once the mental life of mankind, as these Roman Catholic incantations
with their frantic and ceaseless importunity. They have even brought in the sex-spell; and
the poor, frightened soldier-boy, who has perhaps spent the night with a prostitute, now prostrates
himself before a holy Woman-being who is lifted high above the shames of the flesh, and who
stirs the thrills of awe and affection which his mother brought to him in early childhood.
Read over the phrases of this "Litany of the Blessed Virgin":

Holy Mary, Pray for us. Holy Mother of God. Holy Virgin of Virgins. Mother of Christ. Mother
of divine grace. Mother most pure. Mother most chaste. Mother inviolate. Mother undefiled.
Mother most amiable. Mother most admirable. Mother of good counsel. Mother of our Creator.
Mother of our Savior. Virgin most prudent. Virgin most venerable. Virgin most renowned. Virgin
most powerful. Virgin most merciful. Virgin most faithful. Mirror of justice. Seat of wisdom.
Cause of our Joy. Spiritual vessel. Vessel of honor. Singular vessel of devotion. Mystical
rose. Tower of David. Tower of ivory. House of gold. Ark of the covenant. Gate of heaven. Morning
Star. Health of the sick. Refuge of sinners. Comforter of the afflicted. Help of Christians.
Queen of Angels. Queen of Patriarchs. Queen of Prophets. Queen of Apostles. Queen of Martyrs.
Queen of Confessors. Queen of Virgins. Queen of all Saints. Queen conceived without original
sin. Queen of the most holy Rosary. Queen of Peace, Pray for us.

Thanksgivings

For another five cents--how cheaply a man of insight can obtain thrills in this fantastic world!--I
purchase a copy of the "Messenger of the Sacred Heart", a magazine published in New York, the
issue for October, 1917. There are pages of advertisements of schools and colleges with strange
titles: "Immaculata Seminary", "Holy Cross Academy", "Holy Ghost Institute", "Ladycliff", "Academy
of Holy Child Jesus". The leading article is by a Jesuit, on "The Spread of the Apostleship
of Prayer among the Young"; and then "Sister Clarissa" writes a poem telling us "What are Sorrows";
and then we are given a story called "Prayer for Daddy"; and then another Jesuit father tells
us about "The Hills that Jesus Loved". A third father tells us about the "Eucharistic Propaganda";
and we learn that in July, 1917, it distributed 11,699 beads, and caused the expenditure of
57,714 hours of adoration; and then the faithful are given a form of letter which they are
to write to the Honorable Baker, Secretary of War, imploring him to intimate to the French
government that France should withdraw from one of her advances in civilization, and join with
mediaeval America in exempting priests from being drafted to fight for their country. And then
there is a "Question Box"--just like the Hearst newspapers, only instead of asking whether
she should allow him to kiss her before he has told her that he loves her, the reader asks
what is the Pauline Privilege, and what is the heroic Act, and is Robert a saint's name, and
if food remains in the teeth from the night before, would it break the fast to swallow it before
Holy Communion. (No, I am not inventing this.)

I quoted the Episcopal Book of Common Prayer, and pointed out how deftly the Church has managed
to slip in a prayer for worldly prosperity. But the Catholic Church does not show any squeamishness
in dealing with its "million imbeciles", its "rough, purblind mass". There is a department
of the little magazine entitled "Thanksgiving", and a statement at the top that "the total
number of Thanksgivings for the month is 2,143,911." I am suspicious of that, as of German
reports of prisoners taken; but I give the statement as it stands, not going through the list
and picking out the crudest, but taking them as they come, classified by states:

GENERAL FAVORS: For many of these favors Mass and publication were promised, for others the
Badge of Promoter's Cross was used, for others the prayers of the Associates had been asked.

Alabama--Jewelry found, relief from pain, protection during storm.

Alaska--Safe return, goods found.

Arizona--Two recoveries, suitable boarding place, illness averted, safe delivery.

British Honduras--Successful operation.

California--Seventeen recoveries, six situations, two successful examinations, house rented,
stocks sold, raise in salary, return to religious duties, sight regained, medal won, Baptism,
preservation from disease, contract obtained, success in business, hearing restored, Easter
duty made, happy death, automobile sold, mind restored, house found, house rented, successful
journey, business sold, quarrel averted, return of friends, two successful operations.

And for all these miraculous performances the Catholic machine is harvesting the price day
by day--harvesting with that ancient fervor which the Latin poet described as "auri sacra fames".
As Christopher Columbus wrote from Jamaica in 1503: "Gold is a wonderful thing. By means of
gold we can even get souls into Paradise."

The Holy Roman Empire

The system thus self-revealed you admit is appalling in its squalor; but you say that at least
it is milder and less perilous than the Church which burned Giordano Bruno and John Huss. But
the very essence of the Catholic Church is that it does not change; semper eadem is its motto:
the same yesterday, today and forever--the same in Washington as in Rome or Madrid--the same
in a modern democracy as in the Middle Ages. The Catholic Church is not primarily a religious
organization; it is a political organization, and proclaims the fact, and defies those who
would shut it up in the religious field, The Rev. S. B. Smith, a Catholic doctor of divinity,
explains in his "Elements of Ecclesiastical Law":

Protestants contend that the entire power of the Church consists in the right to teach and
exhort, but not in the right to command, rule, or govern; whence they infer that she is not
a perfect society or sovereign state. This theory is false; for the Church, as was seen, is
vested Jure divino with power, (1) to make laws; (2) to define and apply them (potestas judicialis);
(3) to punish those who violate her laws (potestas coercitiva).

And this is not one scholar's theory, but the formal and repeated proclamation of infallible
popes. Here is the "Syllabus of Errors", issued by Pope Pius IX, Dec. 8th, 1864, declaring
in precise language that

The state has not the right to leave every man free to profess and embrace whatever religion
he shall deem true.

It has not the right to enact that the ecclesiastical power shall require the permission of
the civil power in order to the exercise of its authority. 

She thought of the massive strong woman who knew and feared him.

Then she remembered the desolate old grandparents and their hopeless,
helpless poverty.

"I'll resk the lion," she said with a tremulous bated voice.

"That's a brave girl," cried the manager.
"I hev read 'bout Daniel's lions an' him in the den," she explained.
"An' Daniel hed consid'ble trust an' warn't afeard--an' mebbe I won't
be afeard nuther."

"Daniel's Lions? Daniel's Lions?" the portly manager
repeated attentively.

She has the right to prevent the state from granting the public exercise of their own worship
to persons immigrating from it.

She has the power of requiring the state not to permit free expression of opinion.

You see, the Holy Office is unrepentant and unchastened. You, who think that liberty of conscience
is the basis of civilization, ought at least to know what the Catholic Church has to say about
the matter. Here is Mgr. Segur, in his "Plain Talk About Protestantism of Today", a book published
in Boston and extensively circulated by American Catholics:

Freedom of thought is the soul of Protestantism; it is likewise the soul of modern rationalism
and philosophy. It is one of those impossibilities which only the levity of a superficial reason
can regard as admissable. But a sound mind, that does not feed on empty words, looks upon this
freedom of thought only as simply absurd, and, what is more, as sinful.

You take the liberty of thinking, nevertheless; you feel safe because the Law will protect
you. But do you imagine that this "Law" applies to your Catholic neighbors? Do you imagine
that they are bound by the restraints that bind you? Here is Pope Leo XIII, in his Encyclical
of 1890--and please remember that Leo XIII was the beau ideal of our capitalist statesmen and
editors, as wise and kind and gentle-souled a pope as ever roasted a heretic. He says:

If the laws of the state are openly at variance with the laws of God--if they inflict injury
upon the Church--or set at naught the authority of Jesus Christ which is vested in the Supreme
Pontiff, then indeed it becomes a duty to resist them, a sin to render obedience.

And consider how many fields there are in which the laws of a democratic state do and forever
must contravene the "laws of God" as interpreted by the Catholic Church. Consider for example,
that the Pope, in his decree Ne Temere, has declared that all persons who have been married
by civil authorities or by Protestant clergymen are living in "filthy concubinage"! Consider,
in the same way, the problems of education, burial, prison discipline, blasphemy, poor relief,
incorporation, mortmain, religious endowments, vows of celibacy. To the above list, as given
by Gladstone, one might add many issues, such as birth control, which have arisen since his time.

What the Church means is to rule. Her literature is full of expressions of that intention,
set forth in the boldest and haughtiest and most uncompromising manner. For example, Cardinal
Manning, in the Pro-Cathedral at Kensington, speaking in the name of the Pope:

I acknowledge no civil power; I am the subject of no prince; I claim more than this--I claim
to be the supreme judge and director of the consciences of men---of the peasant that tills
the field, and of the prince that sits upon the throne; of the household of privacy, and the
legislator that makes laws for kingdoms; I am the sole, last supreme judge of what is right
and wrong.

Temporal Power

What this means is, that here in our American democracy the Catholic Church is a rebel; a prisoner
of war who bides his time, watching for the moment to rise in revolt, and meantime making no
secret of his intentions. The pious Leo XIII, addressing all true believers in America, instructed
them as to their attitude in captivity:

The Church amongst you, unopposed by the Constitution and government of your nation, fettered
by no hostile legislation, protected against violence by the common laws and the impartiality
of the tribunals, is free to live and act without hindrance. Yet, though all this is true,
it would be very erroneous to draw the conclusion that in America is to be sought the type
of the most desirable status of the church, or that it would be universally lawful or expedient
for state and church to be, as in America, dissevered and divorced. The fact that Catholicity
with you is in good condition, nay, is even enjoying a prosperous growth, is by all means to
be attributed to the fecundity with which God has endowed His Church .... But she would bring
forth more abundant fruits if, in addition to liberty, she enjoyed the favor of the laws and
patronage of the public authority.

Accordingly, here is Father Phelan of St. Louis, addressing his flock in the "Western Watchman",
June 27, 1913:

Tell us we are Catholics first and Americans or Englishmen afterwards; of course we are. Tell
us, in the conflict between the church and the civil government we take the side of the church;
of course we do. Why, if the government of the United States were at war with the church, we
would say tomorrow, To hell with the government of the United States; and if the church and
all the governments of the world were at war, we would say, To hell with all the governments
of the world .... Why is it that in this country, where we have only seven per cent of the
population, the Catholic church is so much feared? She is loved by all her children and feared
by everybody. Why is it that the Pope has such tremendous power? Why, the Pope is the ruler
of the world. All the emperors, all the kings, all the princes, all the presidents of the world,
are as these altar boys of mine. The Pope is the ruler of the world. Here is a man swollen
to bursting with this Power. Dressed in his holy robes, with his holy incense in his nostrils,
and the faces of the faithful gazing up at him awe-stricken, hear him proclaim:

The Church gives no bonds for her good behavior. She is the judge of her own rights and duties,
and of the rights and duties of the state.

And lest you think that an extreme example of ultramontanist arrogance, listen to the Boston
"Pilot", April 6, 1912, speaking for Cardinal O'Connell, whose official organ it is:

It must be borne in mind that even though Cardinals Farley, O'Connell and Gibbons are at heart
patriotic Americans and members of an American hierachy, yet they are as cardinals foreign
princes of the blood, to whom the United States, as one of the great powers of the world, is
under an obligation to concede the same honors that they receive abroad.

Thus, were Cardinal Farley to visit an American man-of-war, he would be entitled to the salutes
and to naval honors reserved for a foreign royal personage, and at any official entertainment
at Washington the Cardinal will outrank not merely every cabinet officer, the speaker of the
house and the vice-president, but also the foreign ambassadors, coming immediately next to
the chief magistrate himself.

Incidentally, it may be mentioned that when a royal personage not of sovereign rank visits
New York it is his duty to make the first call on Cardinal Farley.

Knights of Slavery

Such is the worldly station of these apostles of the lowly Jesus. And what is their attitude
towards their brothers in God, the rank and file of the membership, whose pennies grease the
wheels of the ecclesiastical machine? His Holiness, the Pope, sent over a delegate to represent
him in America, and at a convention of the Federation of Catholic Societies held in New Orleans
in November, 1910, this gentleman, Diomede Falconio, delivered himself on the subject of Capital
and Labor. We have heard the slave-code of the Anglican disciples of Jesus, the revolutionary
carpenter; now let us hear the slave-code of his Roman disciples:

Human society has its origin from God and is constituted of two classes of people, the rich
and the poor, which respectively represent Capital and Labor.

Hence it follows that according to the ordinance of God, human society is composed of superiors
and subjects, masters and servants, learned and unlettered, rich and poor, nobles and plebeians.

And lest this should not be clear enough, the Pope sent a second representative, Mgr. John
Bonzano, who, speaking at a general meeting of the German Catholic Central-Verein, St. Louis,
1917, declared:

One of the worst evils that may grow out of the European war is the spreading of the doctrine
of Socialism, and the Catholic Church must be ready to counteract such doctrines. We must be
ready to prevent the spread of Socialism and to work against it. As I understand, you have
a society of wealthy people in St. Louis ready for such a campaign. You have experienced leaders
who are masters in their kind of work. They are always insistent to show that this wealth was
and is in close touch with the Church, and therefore it will not fail. No wonder that the "experienced
leaders" of America, our captains of industry and exploiters of labor, are forced, whatever
their own faith may be, to make use of this system of subjection. A few years ago we read in
our papers how a Jewish millionaire of Baltimore was presenting a fortune to the Catholic Church,
to be used in its war upon Socialism. The late Mark Hanna, the shrewdest and most far-seeing
man that Big Business ever brought into power, said that in twenty years there would be two
parties in America, a capitalist and a socialist; and that it would be the Catholic church
that would save the country from Socialism. This brilliant Hindu physicist was awarded the Nobel
Prize in 1930 for his important discovery in the diffusion of light-the "Raman Effect" now known
to every schoolboy.

Waving a reluctant farewell to a crowd of Madras students and friends, Mr. Wright and I set out
for the north. On the way we stopped before a little shrine sacred to the memory of Sadasiva
Brahman, {FN41-10} in whose eighteenth-century life story miracles
cluster thickly.

A larger Sadasiva shrine at Nerur, erected by the Raja of Pudukkottai, is a pilgrimage spot which
has witnessed numerous divine healings.

Many quaint stories of Sadasiva, a lovable and fully-illumined master,
are still current among the South Indian villagers. As a means of demonstrating
the power of the church and the subservience of our politicians, the Catholics have invented
what they call the "Cardinal's Day Mass": An elaborate procession of high ecclesiastics, dressed
in gorgeous robes and jewels, through the streets of Washington, accompanied by a small army
of policemen, paid by non-Catholic taxpayers. The Cardinal seats himself upon a throne, and
our political rulers make obeisance before him. On Sunday, January 14, 1917, there were present
at this political mass the following personages: Four cabinet members and their wives; the
speaker of the House; a large group of senators and representatives; a general of the army
and his wife; an admiral of the navy and his wife; the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court and
his wife, and another Justice of the Supreme Court and his wife.

And understand that the church makes no secret of its purpose in conducting such public exhibitions.
Here is the pious Pope Leo XIII again, in his Encyclical of Nov. 1, 1885:

All Catholics must make themselves felt as active elements in daily political life in the countries
where they live. They must penetrate, wherever possible, in the administration of civil affairs;
must constantly exert the utmost vigilance and energy to prevent the usages of liberty from
going beyond the limits fixed by God's law. All Catholics should do all in their power to cause
the constitutions of states and legislation to be modeled on the principles of the true Church.

And following these instructions, the Catholics are organized for political work. There are
the various Catholic Societies, such as the Knights of Columbus, secret, oath-bound organizations,
the military arm of the Papal Power. These societies boast some three million members, and
control not less than that many votes. The one thing that you can be certain about these votes
is that on every public question, of whatever nature, they will be cast on the side of ignorance
and reaction. Thus, it was the influence of the Catholic Societies which put upon our national
statute books the infamous law providing five years imprisonment and five thousand dollars
fine for the sending through the mail of information about the prevention of conception. It
is their influence which keeps upon the statute-books of New York state the infamous law which
permits divorce only for infidelity, and makes it "collusion" if both parties desire the divorce.
It is these societies which, in every city and town in America, are pushing and plotting to
get Catholics upon library boards, so that the public may not have a chance to read scientific
books; to get Catholics into the public schools and on school-boards, so that children may
not hear about Galileo, Bruno, and Ferrer; to have Catholics in control of police and on magistrates
benches, so that priests who are caught in brothels may not be exposed or punished.

You are shocked at this, you think it a vulgar jest, perhaps; but during a period of "vice
raids" in New York I was told by a captain of police, himself a Catholic, that it was a common
thing for them to get priests in their net. "Of course," the official added, good-naturedly,
"we let them slip out." I understood that he had to do that; for the Pope, in his "Motu Proprio"
decree, has forbidden Catholics to bring a priest into court for any civil crime whatsoever;
he has forbidden Catholic policemen to arrest, Catholic judges to try, and Catholic law-makers
to make laws affecting any priest of the Church of Rome. And of course we know, upon the authority
of a cardinal, that the Pope is "the sole, last, supreme judge of what is right and wrong."
He has held that position for a thousand years and more; and wherever you consult the police
records throughout the thousand years, you find the same entries concerning Catholic ecclesiastics.
I turn to Riley's "Illustrations of London Life from Original Documents," and I find in the
year 1385 a certain chaplain, whose name is considerately suppressed, had a breviary stolen
from him by a loose woman, because he has not given her any money, either on that night or
the one previous. In 1320 John de Sloghtre, a priest, is put in the tower "for being found
wandering about the city against the peace", and Richard Heyring, a priest, is indicted in
the ward of Farringdon and in the ward of Crepelgate "as being a bruiser and nightwalker."
That this has been going on for six hundred years is due, not to any special corruption of
the Catholic heart, but to the practice of clerical celibacy, which is contrary to nature,
a transgression of fundamental instinct. It should be noted that the purpose of this transgression,
which pretends to be spiritual, is really economic; it was the means whereby the church machine
built up its power through the Middle Ages. The priests had children then, as they have them
today; but these children not being recognized, the church machine remained the sole heir of
the property of its clergy.

The Church Militant

Knowing what we know today, we marvel that it was possible for Germany to prepare through so
many years for her assault on civilization, and for England to have slept through it all. In
exactly the same way, the historian of a generation from now will marvel that America should
have slept, while the New Inquisition was planning to strangle her. For we are told with the
utmost explicitness precisely what is to be done. We are to see wiped out these gains of civilization
for which our race has bled and agonized for many centuries; the very gains are to serve as
the means of their own destruction! Have we not heard Pope Leo tell his faithful how to take
advantage of what they find in America--our easy-going trust, our quiet certainty of liberty,
our open-handed and open-homed and hail-fellow-well-met democracy?

We see the army being organized and drilled under our eyes; and we can read upon its banners
its purpose proclaimed. Just as the Prussian military caste had its slogan "Deutschland ueber
Alles!" so the Knights of Slavery have their slogan: "Make America Catholic!"

Their attitude to democratic institutions is attested by the fact that none of their conventions
ever fails in its resolutions to "deeply deplore the loss of the temporal power of Our Father,
the Pope." Their subjection to priestly domination is indicated by such resolutions as this,
bearing date of May 13th, 1914:

The Knights of Columbus of Texas in annual convention assembled, prostrate at the feet of Your
Holiness, present filial regards with assurances of loyalty and obedience to the Holy See and
request the Papal blessing.

On June 10th, 1912, one T. J. Carey of Palestine, Texas, wrote to Archbishop Bonzano, the Apostolic
Delegate: "Must I, as a Catholic, surrender my political freedom to the Church? And by this
I mean the right to vote for the Democratic, Socialist, or Republican parties when and where
I please?" The answer was: "You should submit to the decisions of the Church, even at the cost
of sacrificing political principles." And to the same effect Mgr. Preston, In New York City,
Jan. 1, 1888: "The man who says, 'I will take my faith from Peter, but I will not take my politics
from Peter,' is not a true Catholic."

Such is the Papal machine; and not a day passes that it does not discover some new scheme to
advance the Papal glory; a "Catholic battle-ship" in the United States navy; Catholic chaplains
on all ships of the navy; Catholic holidays---such as Columbus Day--to be celebrated by all
Protestants in America; thirty million dollars worth of church property exempted from taxation
in New York City; mission bells to be set up at the expense of the state of California; state
support for parish schools--or, if this cannot be had, exemption of Catholics from taxation
for school purposes. So on through the list which might continue for pages.

More than anything else, of course, the Papal machine is concerned with education, or rather,
with the preventing of education. It was in its childish days that the race fell under the
spell of the Priestly Lie; it is in his childish days that the individual can be most safely
snared. Suffer little children to come unto the Catholic priest, and he will make upon their
sensitive minds an impression which nothing in after life can eradicate. So the mainstay of
the New Inquisition is the parish-school, and its deadliest enemy is the American school system.
Listen to the Rev. James Conway, of the Society of Jesus, in his book, "The Rights of Our Little
Ones":

Catholic parents cannot, in conscience send their children to American public schools, except
for very grave reasons approved by the ecclesiastical authorities.

While state education removes illiteracy and puts a limited amount of knowledge within the
reach of all, it cannot be said to have a beneficial influence on civilization in general.

The state cannot justly enforce compulsory education, even in case of utter illiteracy, so
long as the essential physical and moral education are sufficiently provided for.

And so, at all times and in all places, the Catholic Church is fighting the public school.
Eternal vigilance is necessary; as "America", the organ of the Jesuits, explains:

Sometimes it is a new building code, or an attempt at taxing the school buildings, which creates
hardships to the parochial and other private schools. Now it is the free text book law that
puts a double burden on the Catholics. Then again it is the unwise extension of the compulsory
school age that forces children to be in school until they are 16 to 18 years old.

And if you wish to know the purpose of the Catholic schools, hear Archbishop Quigley of Chicago,
speaking before the children of the Mary Sodality in the Holy Name Parish-School:

Within twenty years this country is going to rule the world. Kings and emperors will pass away,
and the democracy of the United States will take their place. The West will dominate the country,
and what I have seen of the Western parochial schools has proved that the generation which
follows us will be exclusively Catholic. When the United States rules the world the Catholic
Church will rule the world.

The Church Triumphant

The question may be asked, What of it? What if the Church were to rule? There are not a few
Americans who believe that there have to be rich and poor, and that rule by Roman Catholics
might be preferable to rule by Socialists. Before you decide, at least do not fail to consider
what history has to tell about priestly government. We do not have to use our imaginations
in the matter, for there was once a Golden Age such as Archbishop Quigley dreams of, when the
power of the church was complete, when emperors and princes paid homage to her, and the civil
authority made haste to carry out her commands. What was the condition of the people in those
times? We are told by Lea, in his "History of the Inquisition" that:

The moral condition of the laity was unutterably depraved. Uniformity of faith had been enforced
by the Inquisition and its methods, and so long as faith was preserved, crime and sin was comparatively
unimportant except as a source of revenue to those who sold absolution. As Theodoric Vrie tersely
puts it, hell and purgatory would be emptied if enough money could be found. The artificial
standard thus created is seen in a revelation of the Virgin to St. Birgitta, that a Pope who
was free from heresy, no matter how polluted by sin and vice, is not so wicked but that he
has the absolute power to bind and loose souls. There are many wicked popes plunged in hell,
but all their lawful acts on earth are accepted and confirmed by God, and all priests who are
not heretics administer true sacraments, no matter how depraved they may be. Correctness of
belief was thus the sole essential; virtue was a wholly subordinate consideration. How completely
under such a system religion and morals came to be dissociated is seen in the remarks of Pius
II, that the Franciscans were excellent theologians, but cared nothing about virtue.

This, in fact, was the direct result of the system of persecution embodied in the Inquisition.
When the only unpardonable offence was persistence in some trifling error of belief, such as
the poverty of Christ; when men had before them the example of their spiritual guides as leaders
in vice and debauchery and contempt of sacred things, all the sanctions of morality were destroyed
and the confusion between right and wrong became hopeless. The world has probably never seen
a society more vile than that of Europe in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. The brilliant
pages of Froissart fascinate us with their pictures of the artificial courtesies of chivalry;
the mystic reveries of Rysbroek and of Tauler show us that spiritual life survived in some
rare souls, but the mass of the population was plunged into the depths of sensuality and the
most brutal oblivion of the moral law. For this Alvaro Pelayo tells us that the priesthood
were accountable, and that, in comparison with them, the laity were holy. What was that state
of comparative holiness he proceeds to describe, blushing as he writes, for the benefit of
confessors, giving a terrible sketch of universal immorality which nothing could purify but
fire and brimstone from heaven. The chroniclers do not often pause in their narrations to dwell
on the moral aspects of the times, but Meyer, in his annals of Flanders, under date of 1379,
tells us that it would be impossible to describe the prevalence everywhere of perjuries, blasphemies,
adulteries, hatreds, quarrels, brawls, murder, rapine, thievery, robbery, gambling, whoredom,
debauchery, avarice, oppression of the poor, rape, drunkenness: and similar vices, and he illustrates
his statement with the fact that in the territory of Ghent, within the space of ten months,
there occurred no less than fourteen hundred murders committed in the bagnios, brothels, gambling-houses,
taverns, and other similar places. When, in 1396, Jean sans Peur led his Crusaders to destruction
at Micopolis, their crimes and cynical debauchery scandalized even the Turks, and led to the
stern rebuke of Bajazet himself, who as the monk of St. Denis admits was much better than his
Christian foes. The same writer, moralizing over the disaster at Agincourt, attributes it to
the general corruption of the nation. Sexual relations, he says, were an alternation of disorderly
lust and of incest; commerce was nought but fraud and treachery; avarice withheld from the
Church her tithes, and ordinary conversation was a succession of blasphemies. The Church, set
up by God as a model and protector of the people, was false to all its obligations. The bishops,
through the basest and most criminal of motives, were habitual accepters of persons; they annointed
themselves with the last essence extracted from their flocks, and there was in them nothing
of holy, of pure, of wise, or even of decent.

God in the Schools

But that, you may say, was a long time ago. If so, let us take a modern country in which the
Catholic Church has worked its will. Until recently, Spain was such a country. Now the people
are turning against the clerical machine; and if you ask why, turn to Rafael Shaw's "Spain
From Within":

On every side the people see the baleful hand of the Church, interfering or trying to interfere
in their domestic life, ordering the conditions of employment, draining them of their hard-won
livelihood by trusts and monopolies established and maintained in the interest of the Religious
Orders, placing obstacles in the way of their children's education, hindering them in the exercise
of their constitutional rights, and deliberately ruining those of them who are bold enough
to run counter to priestly dictation. Riots suddenly break out in Barcelona; they are instigated
by the Jesuits. The country goes to war in Morocco; it is dragged into it solely in defense
of the mines owned, actually, if not ostensibly, by the Jesuits. The consumos cannot be abolished
because the Jesuits are financially interested in their continuance. How has that doctrine
worked out in Spain? There was an official investigation of school conditions, the report appearing
in the "Heraldo de Madrid" for November, 1909. In 1857 there had been passed a law requiring
a certain number of schools in each of the 79 provinces: this requirement being below the very
low standards prevailing at that time in other European countries. Yet in 1909 it was found
that only four provinces had the required number of elementary schools, and at the rate of
increase then prevailing it would have taken 150 years to catch up. Seventy-five per cent of
the population were wholly illiterate, and 30,000 towns and villages had no government schools
at all. He had known nothing like it since that day when he had said good-bye to his mother. He wondered
that he could ever have felt any exultation; he wondered that writing and glory and ambition could
ever have seemed worth anything to him at all.

Could he have had his prayer granted he would have prayed that he might always stay in Brockett's,
always have these same friends, watch over Robin as he grew up, talk
to Norah Monogue--and then all the others ... and Mr. Zanti.

He felt fourteen years old ... more miserable than he had ever been.

He kissed Robin again--then he went down to find Mrs. Brockett. Here, too, he was faced with an
unexpected difficulty. The good lady, listening to him sternly in her grim little sitting-room,
refused to hear of his departure. She sat upright in her stiff chair, her thin black dress in
folds about her, the gas-light shining on her neatly parted hair.

"You see, Mrs. Brockett," he explained to her, "I'm no longer in the same position. I can't be
sure of my two pounds a week any more and so it wouldn't be right for me to live in a place
like this."

"If it's expense that you're thinking about," she answered him grimly, "you're perfectly welcome
to stay on here and pay me when you can. I'm sure that one day with so clever a young man--"

"That's awfully good of you, Mrs. Brockett, but of course I couldn't hear of anything like that."
For the third time that evening he had to fight against a disposition to blow his nose and be absurd.
They were, both of them, increasingly grim with every word that they spoke and any outside
observer would have supposed that they were the deadliest of enemies.

"Of course," she began again, "there's a room that I could let you
have at the back of the house that's only four shillings a week and
really you'd be doing me a kindness in taking it off my hands. I'm
sure--"

"No, there's more in it than that," he answered. "I've got
to go away--right away. It's time I had a change of scene. It's good
for me to get along a bit by myself. You've all been too kind to me,
spoilt me--"

She stood up and faced him sternly. "In all my years,"
she said, "I've never spoilt anybody yet and I'm not likely to be
going to begin now. Spoilt you! Bah!"
From first to last we see in him an ardent, uncompromising, incorruptible idealist. His ideals
are narrow, and his devotion to them fanatical; but it is devoid, if not of egoism, at any
rate of self-interest and self-seeking. As he shrank from applying the money entrusted him
to ends of personal luxury, so also he shrank from making his ideas and convictions subserve
any personal ambition or vanity.

The Menace

There are, of course, many people in America who will not rest idle while their country falls
into the condition of Spain. There are anti-Catholic propaganda societies, which send out lecturers
to discuss the Church and its records; and this is exasperating to devout believers, who regard
the Church as holy, and any criticism of it as blasphemy. So we have opportunity to observe
the working out of the doctrine that the Church is superior to the civil law.

On June 12th, 1913, there came to the little town of Oelwein, Iowa, a former priest of the
Catholic Church, named Jeremiah J. Crowley, to deliver a lecture exposing the Papal propaganda.
The Catholics of the town made efforts to intimidate the owner of the place in which the lecture
was to be given; the priest of the town, Father O'Connor, preached a sermon furiously denouncing
the lecturer; and after the lecture the unfortunate Crowley was surrounded by a mob of men,
women and boys, and although he was six feet three in size, he was beaten almost to death.
At the trial which followed it developed that Father O'Connor and also his brother, a judge
on the Superior Bench, were accessories before the fact.

Nor is this a solitary instance. The Catholic military societies, with their uniforms and their
armories, are not maintained for nothing. As Archbishop Quigley declared before the German
Catholic Central Verein:

We have well ordered and efficient organizations, all at the beck and nod of the hierarchy
and ready to do what the church authorities tell them to do. With these bodies of loyal Catholics
ready to step into the breach at any time and present an unbroken front to the enemy we may
feel secure.

And so, on the evening of April 15th, 1914, a group of Catholics entered the Pierce Hotel in
Denver, Colorado, overpowered a police guard and seized the Rev. Otis L. Spurgeon, an anti-Catholic
lecturer. They bound and gagged him, took him to a lonely woods, and beat him to insensibility.
The same thing happened to the Rev. Augustus Barnett, at Buffalo; the Rev. William Black was
killed at Marshall, Texas. In each case the assailants avowed themselves Knights of Columbus,
and efforts to punish them failed, because no jury can be got to convict a Catholic, fighting
for his Pope against a godless state. The most pious Leo XIII has laid down:

It is an impious deed to break the laws of Jesus Christ for the purpose of obeying the magistrates,
or to transgress the law of the Church under the pretext of observing the civil law.

There are papers published to warn Americans against the plotting of this political Church.
One of them, "The Menace," has a circulation of more than a million; and naturally the Knights
of Slavery do not enjoy reading it. Year after year they have marshalled their power to have
this paper barred from the mails--so far, in vain. They caused an obscenity prosecution, which
failed; so finally the press rooms of the paper were blown up with dynamite. At the present
time there is a "Catholic Truth Society" with a publication called "Truth", to oppose the anti-Catholic
campaign; and that is all right, of course--except when the agents who collect the two-dollar
subscriptions to this publication make use of Untruth in their labors--promising absolution
and salvation to the families, dead and living, of those who "come across" with subscriptions.
In the "Bulletin of the American Federation of Catholic Societies" for September, 1915, I find
a record of the ceaseless plotting to bar criticism of the Catholic Church from the mails.
Fitzgerald, a Tammany Catholic congressman, proposes a bill in Washington; and Judge St. Paul,
of New Orleans, a member of the Federation's "law committee", points out the difficulties in
the way of such legislation. You cannot pass a law against ridiculing religion, because the
Catholics want to ridicule Christian Science, Mormonism, and the "Holy Ghost and Us" Society!
The Judge thinks the purpose of the Papal plotters will be accomplished if they can slip into
the present law the words "scurrilous and slanderous"; he hopes that this much can be done
without the American people catching on!

You read these things for the first time, perhaps, and you want to start an American "Kultur-kampf."
I make haste, therefore, to restate the main thesis of this book. It is not the New Inquisition
which is our enemy today; it is hereditary Privilege. It is not Superstition, but Big Business
which makes use of Superstition as a wolf makes use of sheep's clothing.

You remember how, when Americans first awakened to the universal corruption of our politics,
we used to attribute it to the "ignorant foreign vote." Turn to Lecky's "Democracy and Liberty"
and you will see how reformers twenty years ago explained our political depravity. But we probed
deeper, and discovered that the purely American communities, such as Rhode Island, were the
most corrupt of all. It dawned upon us that wherever there was a political boss paying bribes
on election day, there was a captain of industry furnishing the money for the bribes, and taking
some public privilege in return. So we came to realize that political corruption is merely
a by-product of Big Business.

And when we come to probe this problem of the spread of Supersition in America, this amazing
renascence of Romanism in a democracy, we find precisely the same phenomenon. It is not the
poor foreigner who troubles us. We should break down the Catholic machine, and not all the
priests in the hierarchy could stop us--were it not for the Steel Trust and the Coal Trust
and the Beef Trust, the Liquor Trust and the Traction Trust and the Money Trust--those masters
of America who do not want citizens, free and intelligent and self-governing, but who want
the slave-hordes as they come, ignorant, inert, physically, mentally and morally helpless! 

An Australian explorer, Francis Birtles, has recounted that he found the Indian jungles "varied,
beautiful, and safe." His safety charm was flypaper. "Every night I spread a quantity of sheets
around my camp and was never disturbed," he explained. "The reason is psychological. The tiger
is an animal of great conscious dignity. He prowls around and challenges man until he comes
to the flypaper; he then slinks away. No dignified tiger would dare
face a human being after squatting down upon a sticky flypaper!" These help, of course; but the main
sources of growth are, first, the subsidies of industrial exploiters, the majority of whom
are non-Catholic, and second, the privilege of public plunder granted as payment for votes
by politicians who are creatures and puppets of Big Business.

King Coal

The proof of these statements is written all over the industrial life of America. I will stop
long enough to present an account of one industry, asking the reader to accept my statement
that if space permitted I could present the same sort of proof for a dozen other industries
which I have studied--the steel-mills of Western Pennsylvania, the meat-factories of Chicago,
the glass-works of Southern Jersey, the silk-mills of Paterson, the cotton-mills of North Carolina,
the woolen-mills of Massachusetts, the lumber-camps of Louisiana, the copper-mines of Michigan,
the sweat-shops of New York.

In a lonely part of the Rocky Mountains lies a group of enormously valuable coal-mines owned
by the Rockefellers and other Protestant exploiters. The men who work these mines, some twelve
or fifteen thousand in number, come from all the nations of Europe and Asia, and their fate
is that of the average wage-slave. I do not ask anyone to take my word, but present sworn testimony,
taken by the United States Commission on Industrial Relations in 1914. Here is the way the
Italian miners live, as described in a doctor's report:

Houses up the canyon, so-called, of which eight are habitable, and forty-six simply awful;
they are disreputably disgraceful. I have had to remove a mother in labor from one part of
the shack to another to keep dry.

And here is the testimony of the Rev. Eugene S. Gaddis, former superintendent of the Sociological
Department of the Colorado Fuel and Iron Company:

The C. F. & I. Company now own and rent hovels, shacks and dug-outs that are unfit for the
habitation of human beings and are little removed from the pig-sty make of dwellings. And the
people in them live on the very level of a pig-sty. Frequently the population is so congested
that whole families are crowded into one room; eight persons in one small room was reported
during the year.

And here is what this same clergyman has to say about the bosses whom the Rockefellers employ:

The camp superintendents as a whole impressed me as most uncouth, ignorant, immoral, and in
many instances, the most brutal set of men that I have ever met. Blasphemous bullies.

Sometimes the miner grows tired of being robbed of his weights, and applies for the protection
which the law of the state allows him. What happens then?

"When a man asked for a checkweighman, in the language of the super he was getting too smart."

"And he got what?"

"He got it in the neck, generally."

And when these wage-slaves, goaded beyond endurance, went on strike, in the words of the Commission's
report:

Five strikers, one boy, and thirteen women and children in the strikers' tent colony were shot
to death by militiamen and guards employed by the coal companies, or suffocated and burned
to death when these militiamen and guards set fire to the tents in which they made their homes.

And now, what is the position of education in such camps? The Rev. James McDonald, a Methodist
preacher, testified that the school building was dilapidated and unfit. One year there were
four teachers, the next three, and the next only two. The teacher of the primary grade had
a hundred and twenty children enrolled, ninety per cent of whom could not speak a word of English.

Every little bench was seated with two or three. It was over-crowded entirely, and she could
hardly get walking room around there.

And as to the political use made of this deliberately cultivated ignorance, former United States
Senator Patterson testified that the companies controlled all elections and all nominations:

Election returns from the two or three counties in which the large companies operate show that
in the precincts in which the mining camps are located the returns are nearly unanimous in
favor of the men or measures approved by the companies, regardless of party.

And now comes the all-important question. What of the Catholic Church and these evils? The
majority of these mine-slaves are Catholics, it is this Church which is charged with their
protection. There are priests in every town, and in nearly every camp. And do we find them
lifting their voices in behalf of the miners, protesting against the starving and torturing
of thirty or forty thousand human beings? Do we find Catholic papers printing accounts of the
Ludlow massacre? Do we find Catholic journalists on the scene reporting it, Catholic lawyers
defending the strikers, Catholic novelists writing books about their troubles? We do not!

Through the long agony of the fourteen months strike, I know of just one Catholic priest, Father
Le Fevre, who had a word to say for the strikers. One of the first stories I heard when I reached
the strike-field was of a priest who had preached on the text that "Idleness is the root of
all evil," and had been reported as a "scab" and made to shut up. "Who made him?" I asked,
naively, thinking of his church superiors. My informant, a union miner, laughed. "We made him!"
he said.

I talked with another priest who was prudently saving souls and could not be interested in
questions of worldly greed. Max Eastman, reporting the strike in the "Masses", tells of an
interview with a Catholic sister.

"Has the Church done anything to try to help these people, or to bring about peace?" we asked.
"I consider it the most useless thing in the world to attempt it," she replied.

The investigating committee of Congress came to the scene, and several clergymen of the Protestant
Church appeared and bore testimony to the outrages which were being committed against the strikers;
but of all the Catholic priests in the district not one appeared--not one! Several Protestant
clergymen testified that they had been driven from the coal-camps--not because they favored
the unions, but because the companies objected to having their workers educated at all; but
no one ever heard of the Catholic Church having trouble with the operators. To make sure on
this point I wrote to a former clergyman of Trinidad who watched the whole strike, and is now
a first lieutenant in the First New Mexico Infantry. He answered:

The Catholic Church seemed to get along with the companies very cordially. The Church was permitted
in all the camps. The impression was abroad that this was due to favoritism. I honor what good
the Church does, but I know of no instance, during the Colorado coal-strike or at any other
time or place, when the Catholic Church has taken any special interest in the cause of the
laboring men. Many Catholics, especially the men, quit the church during the coal-strike.

The Unholy Alliance

Everywhere throughout America today the ultimate source of all power, political, social, and
religious, is economic exploitation. To all other powers and all other organizations it speaks
in these words: "Help us, and you will thrive; oppose us, and you will be destroyed." It has
spoken to the Catholic Church, for sixteen hundred years the friend and servant of every ruling
class; and the Church has hastened to fit itself into the situation, continuing its pastoral
role as shepherd to the wage-slave vote.

In New York and Boston and Chicago the Church is "Democratic"; so in the Blaine campaign it
was possible for a Republican clergyman to describe the issue as "Rum, Romanism and Rebellion."
But the Holy Office was shrewd and socially ambitious, and the Grand Old Party was desperately
in need of votes, so under the regime of Mark Hanna, the President-Maker, there began a rapprochement
between Big Business and the New Inquisition. Under Hanna the Catholic Church got representation
in the Cabinet; under him the Cardinal's Mass became a government institution, a Catholic College
came to the fore in Washington, and Catholic prelates were introduced in the role of eminent
publicists, their reactionary opinions on important questions being quoted with grave solemnity
by a prostitute press. It was Mark Hanna himself who founded the National Civic Federation,
upon whose executive committee Catholic cardinals and archbishops might work hand in glove
with Catholic labor-leaders for the chloroforming of the American working-class. Hanna's biographer
naively calls attention to the President-maker's popularity among Catholics, high and low,
and the support they gave him. "Archbishop Ireland was in frequent correspondence with him,
and used his influence in Mr. Hanna's behalf."

And this tradition, begun under Hanna, was continued under Roosevelt, and reached its finest
flower in the days of Taft, the most pliant tool of the forces of evil who has occupied the
White House since the days of the Slave Power. President Taft was himself a Unitarian; yet
it was under his administration that the Catholic Church achieved one of its dearest ambitions,
and broke into the Supreme Court. Why not? We can imagine the powers of the time in conference.
It is desired to pack the Court against the possibility of progress; it is desired to find
men who will stand like a rock against change--and who better than those who have been trained
from childhood in the idea of a divine sanction for doctrine and morals? After all, what is
it that Hereditary Privilege wants in America? A Roman Catholic code of property rights, with
a supreme tribunal to play the part of an infallible Pope!

Under this Taft administration the country was governed by the strangest legislative alliance
our history ever saw; a combination of the Old Guard of the Republican Party with the leaders
of the Tammany Democracy of New York. "Bloody shirt" Foraker, senator from Ohio, voting with
the sons of those Irish Catholic mob-leaders whom the Federal troops shot down in the draft-riots!
By this unholy combination a pledge to reduce the tariff was carried out by a bill which greatly
increased its burdens; by this combination the public lands and resources of the country were
fed to a gang of vultures by a thievish Secretary of the Interior. And of course under such
an administration the cause of "Religion" made tremendous strides. Catholic officials were
appointed to public office, Catholic ecclesiastics were accorded public honors, and Catholic
favor became a means to political advancement. You might see a hard-swearing old political
pirate like "Uncle Joe" Cannon, taking his cigar out of the corner of his blasphemous mouth
and betaking himself to the "Cardinal's Day Mass", to bend his stiff knees and bow his hoary
unrepentant head before a jeweled prelate on a throne. You might see an emissary of the United
States government proceeding to Rome, prostrating himself before the Pope, and paying over
seven million dollars of our taxes for lands which the filthy and sensual friars of the Philippine
Islands had filched from the wretched serfs of that country and which the wretched serfs had
won back by their blood in a revolution.

Secret Service

This Taft administration, urged on by the Catholic intrigue, made the most determined efforts
to prevent the spread of radical thought. Because the popular magazines were opposing the plundering
of the country, a bill was introduced into Congress to put them out of business by a prohibitive
postal tax; the President himself devoted all his power to forcing the passage of this bill.
At the same time the Socialist press was handicapped by every sort of persecution. I was at
that time in intimate touch with the "Appeal to Reason", and I know that scarcely a month passed
that the Post Office Department did not invent some new "regulation" especially designed to
limit its circulation. I recall one occasion when I met the editor on his way to Washington
with a trunkful of letters from subscribers who complained that their postmasters refused to
deliver the paper to them; and later on this same editor was prosecuted by a Catholic Attorney
General and sentenced to prison for seeking to awaken the people concerning the Moyer-Haywood case.

From my personal knowledge I can say that under the administration of President Taft the Roman
Catholic Church and the Secret Service of the Federal Government worked hand in hand for the
undermining of the radical movement in America. Catholic lecturers toured the country, pouring
into the ears of the public vile slanders about the private morality of Socialists; while at
the same time government detectives, paid out of public funds, spent their time seeking evidence
for these Catholic lecturers to use. I know one man, a radical labor-leader, whose morals happened
to approach those of the average capitalist politician, and who was prevented by threats of
exposure and scandal from accepting the Socialist nomination for President. I know a dozen
others who were shadowed and spied upon; I know one case--myself--a man who was asking a divorce
from his wife, and whose mail was opened for months.

This subject is one on which I naturally speak with extreme reluctance. I will only say that
my opponent in the suit made no charge of misconduct against me; but those in control of our
political police evidently thought it likely that a man who was not living with his wife might
have something to hide; so for months my every move was watched and all my mail intercepted.
In such a case one might at first suspect one's private opponent; but it soon became evident
that this net was cast too wide for any private agency. Not merely was my own mail opened,
but the mail of all my relatives and friends--people residing in places as far apart as California
and Florida. I recall the bland smile of a government official to whom I complained about this
matter: "If you have nothing to hide you have nothing to fear." My answer was that a study
of many labor cases had taught me the methods of the agent provocateur. He is quite willing
to take real evidence if he can find it; but if not, he has familiarized himself with the affairs
of his victim, and can make evidence which will be convincing when exploited by the yellow
press. In my own case, the matter was not brought to a test, for I went abroad to live; when
I made my next attack on Big Business, the Taft administration had been repudiated at the polls,
and the Secret Service of the government was no longer at the disposal of the Catholic machine.

Tax Exemption

Today the Catholic Church is firmly established and everywhere recognized as one of the main
pillars of American capitalism. It has some fifteen thousand churches, fourteen million communicants,
and property valued at half a billion dollars. Upon this property it pays no taxes, municipal,
state or national; which means, quite obviously, that you and I, who do not go to church, but
who do pay taxes, furnish the public costs of Catholicism. We pay to have streets paved and
lighted and cleaned in front of Catholic churches; we pay to have thieves kept away from them,
fires put out in them, records preserved for them--all the services of civilization given to
them gratis, and this in a land whose constitution provides that Congress (which includes all
state and municipal legislative bodies) "shall make no law respecting a religious establishment."
When war is declared, and our sons are drafted to defend the country, all Catholic monks and
friars, priests and dignitaries are exempted. They are "ministers of religion"; whereas we
Socialists may not even have the status of "conscientious objectors." We do not teach "religion";
we only teach justice and humanity, decency and truth.

In defense of this tax-exemption graft, the stock answer is that the property is being used
for purposes of "education" or "charity". It is a school, in which children are being taught
that "liberty of conscience is a most pestiferous error, from which arises revolution, corruption,
contempt of sacred things, holy institutions, and laws." (Pius IX). It is a "House of Refuge",
to which wayward girls are committed by Catholic magistrates, and in which they are worked
twelve hours a day in a laundry or a clothing sweat-shop. Or it is a "parish-house", in which
a celibate priest lives under the care of an attractive young "house-keeper". Or it is a nunnery,
in which young girls are held against their will and fed upon the scraps from their sisters'
plates to teach them humility, and taught to lie before the altar, prostrate in the form of
a cross, while their "Superiors" walk upon their bodies to impress the religious virtues. "I
was a teacher in the Catholic schools up to a very recent period," writes the woman friend
who tells me of these customs, "and I know about the whole awful system which endeavors to
throttle every genuine impulse of the human will."

Concerning a large part of this church property, the claim of "religious" use has not even
the shadow of justification. In every large city of America you will find acres of land owned
by the Catholic machine, and supposed to be the future site of some institution; but as time
goes on and property values increase, the church decides to build on a cheaper site, and proceeds
to cash in the profits of its investment, precisely as does any other real estate speculator.
Everywhere you turn in the history of Romanism you find it at this same game, doing business
under the cloak of philanthropy and in the holy name of Christ. Read the letter which the Catholic
Bishop of Mexico sent to the Pope in 1647, complaining of the Jesuit fathers and their boundless
graft. In McCabe's "Candid History of the Jesuits" appears a summary:

A remarkable account is given of the worldly property of the fathers. They hold, it seems,
the greater part of the wealth of Mexico. Two of their colleges own 300,000 sheep, besides
cattle and other property. They own six large sugar refineries, worth from half a million to
a million crowns each, and making an annual profit of 100,000 crowns each, while all the other
monks and clergy of Mexico together own only three small refineries. Everything on earth is of
mixed character, like a mingling of sand and sugar. Be like the wise ant which seizes only the sugar,
and leaves the sand untouched. Though many sadhus here still wander in delusion, yet the MELA is
blessed by a few men of God-realization.'

"In view of my own meeting with this exalted master, I quickly agreed with his observation.

"'Sir,'
I commented, 'I have been thinking of the scientific men of the West, greater by far in intelligence
than most people congregated here, living in distant Europe and America, professing different
creeds, and ignorant of the real values of such MELAS as the present
one.

They are the men who could benefit greatly by meetings with India's
masters.

But, although high in intellectual attainments, many Westerners are wedded to rank materialism.
Others, famous in science and philosophy, do not recognize the essential unity in religion.
Their creeds serve as insurmountable barriers that threaten to separate them from us forever.'

"'I
saw that you are interested in the West, as well as the East.' Babaji's
face beamed with approval.

'I felt the pangs of your heart, broad enough for all men, whether Oriental or Occidental.
That is why I summoned you here.

"'East and West must establish a golden middle path of activity and spirituality combined,' he
continued. 'India has much to learn from the West in material development; in return, India can
teach the universal methods by which the West will be able to base its religious beliefs on the unshakable
foundations of yogic science.

"'You, Swamiji, have a part to play in the coming harmonious exchange between Orient and Occident.
Some years hence I shall send you a disciple whom you can train for yoga dissemination in
the West. The vibrations there of many spiritually seeking souls come floodlike to me. I perceive
potential saints in America and Europe, waiting to be awakened.'"

At this point in his story, Sri Yukteswar turned his gaze fully on mine.

"My son," he said, smiling in the moonlight, "you are the disciple that, years ago, Babaji promised
to send me."

I was happy to learn that Babaji had directed my steps to Sri Yukteswar, yet it was hard for
me to visualize myself in the remote West, away from my beloved guru and the simple hermitage
peace.

"Babaji then spoke of the BHAGAVAD GITA," Sri Yukteswar went on. "To my astonishment, he indicated
by a few words of praise that he was aware of the fact that I had written interpretations on various
GITA chapters.

"'At my request, Swamiji, please undertake another task,' the great
master said. 'Will you not write a short book on the underlying basic
unity between the Christian and Hindu scriptures? Show by parallel
references that the inspired sons of God have spoken the same truths,
now obscured by men's sectarian differences.'

"'Maharaj,' {FN36-2}
I answered diffidently, 'what a command! Shall I be able to fulfill
it?'

"Babaji laughed softly. 'My son, why do you doubt?' he said
reassuringly. 'Indeed, Whose work is all this, and Who is the Doer
of all actions? Whatever the Lord has made me say is bound to materialize
as truth.'

"I deemed myself empowered by the blessings of the saint,
and agreed to write the book. Feeling reluctantly that the parting-hour
had arrived, I rose from my leafy seat.

"'Do you know Lahiri?' {FN36-3}
the master inquired. 'He is a great soul, isn't he? Tell him of our
meeting.' He then gave me a message for Lahiri Mahasaya. Its newspapers publish a table of temperatures,
showing the daily contrast between Southern California and the East. This device is effective
in the winter-time; but last June, when for five days and nights the temperature was over 110,
and several times 114--the Los Angeles space was left empty!

In the same way, there is a rule that our earthquake shocks are never mentioned, unless they
destroy whole towns. On the afternoon of Jan. 26th, 1918, a cyclone hit Pasadena, of violence
sufficient to lift a barn over a church-steeple and deposit it in the pastor's front yard.
That evening a friend of mine in Los Angeles called up the office of the "Times" to make inquiry;
and although they are only thirteen miles away, and have a branch office and a special correspondent
in Pasadena, the answer was that they had heard nothing about the cyclone! And next morning
I made a careful search of their columns. On the front page I read: "Fourth Blizzard of Season
Raging in East"; also: "Another Earthquake in Guatemala". But not a line about the Pasadena
cyclone That there was plenty of space in that issue, you may judge from the fact that there
were twenty headlines like the following--many of them representing full page and half page
illustrated "write-ups":

Where Spring is January; Wealth Waits in California; The Bright Side of Sunshine Land; Come
to California: Southland's Arms Outstretched in Cordial Invitation to the East; Flower Stands
Make Gay City Streets; Southland Climate Big Manufacturing Factor; Joy of Life Demonstrated
in Los Angeles' Beautiful Homes; Nymphs Knit and Bathe at Ocean's Sunny Beach; etc.

Now we are in the War and our business is booming, we are making money hand over fist. It is
all the more delightful, because we are putting our souls into it, we are lending our money
to the government and saving the world for Democracy! Our labor unionists have been driven
to other cities, and our Mexican agitators and I. W. W.'s are in jail; so, in the gilt ball-room
of our palatial six-dollar-a-day hotel the four hundred masters of our prosperity meet to pat
themselves on the back, and they invite the new Catholic bishop to come and confer the grace
of God upon their eating.

The Bishop comes; and I take up the "Times"--the labor-hating, labor-baiting, fire-and-slaughter-breathing
"Times"--and here is the episcopal picture on the front page, the arms stretched four columns
wide in oratorical beneficence. How the shepherd of Jesus does love the Merchants and Manufacturers!
How his eloquence is poured out upon them! "You represent, gentlemen, the largest and the most
civilizing secular body in the country. You are the pioneers of American civilization.....
I am glad to be among you; glad that my lines have fallen in this glorious land by the sunset
sea, and honored to meet in intimate acquaintance the big men who have raised here in a few
years a city of metropolitan proportions."

And then, bearing in mind his responsibilities as guardian of Exploitation, the Bishop goes
on to tell them about the coming class-war. And then, of course, the inevitable religious tag:
"How will men obey you, if they believe not in God, who is the author of all authority?" At
which, according to the "Times", "prolonged applause and cheers" from the Merchants and Manufacturers!
The editor of the "Times" goes back to his office, and inspired by this episcopal eloquence
writes a "leader" with the statement that: "We have no proletariat in America!"

Das Centrum

In order to see clearly the ultimate purpose of this Unholy Alliance, this union of Superstition
and the Merchants' and Manufacturers' Association, we have to go to Europe, where the arrangement
has been working for a thousand years. In Europe to-day we see the whole world in conflict
with a band of criminals who have been able to master the minds and lives of a hundred million
highly civilized people. As I write, the Junker aristocracy is at bay, and soon to have its
throat cut; but there comes a Holy Father to its rescue, with the cross of Jesus uplifted,
and a series of pleas for mercy, written in Vienna, edited in Berlin, and sent out from Rome.
The Holy Father loves all mankind with a tender and touching love; his heart bleeds at the
sight of bloodshed and suffering, and he pleads the sacred cause of peace on earth and good-will
toward men.

But what was the Holy Father doing through the forty-three years that the Potsdam gang were
preparing for their assault on the world? How was the Holy Father manifesting his love of peace
and good will? He is, you understand, the "sole, last, supreme judge of what is right and wrong,"
and his followers obey him with the utmost promptness and devotion--they express themselves
as "prostrate at his feet." And when the masters of Prussia came to him and said: "Give us
the power to turn this nation into the world's greatest military empire"--what did the Roman
Church answer? Did it speak boldly for the gentle Jesus, and the cause of peace on earth and
good-will towards men? No, it did not. To Bismarck in Germany it said, precisely as it said
to Mark Hanna in America: "Give us honors and prestige; give us power over the minds of the
young, so that we may plunder the poor and build our cathedrals and feed fat our greed; and
in return we will furnish you with votes, so that you may rule the state and do what you will."

You think there is exaggeration in that statement? Why, we know the very names of the prelates
with whom the master-cynic of the Junkerthum made his "deal." He had tried the method of the
Kultur-kampf, and had failed; but before he repealed the anti-Catholic laws, he made sure that
the Church had learned its lesson, and would nevermore oppose the Prussian ruling caste. We
know how this bargain was carried out; we have the record of the Centrum, the Catholic party
of Germany, whose hundred deputies were the solid rock upon which the military regime of Prussia
was erected. Not a battle-ship nor a Zeppelin was built for which the Black Terror did not
vote the funds; not a school-child was beaten in Posen or Alsace that the New Inquisition did
not shout its "Hoch!" The writer sat in the visitors' gallery of the Reichstag when the Socialists
were protesting against the torturing of miserable Herreros in Africa, and he heard the deputies
of the Holy Father's political party screaming their rage like jaguars in a jungle night. All
over Europe the Catholic Church organized fake labor unions, the "yellows," as they were called,
to scab upon the workers and undermine the revolutionary movement. The Holy Father himself
issued precise instructions for the management of these agencies of betrayal. Hear the most
pious and benevolent Leo XIII:

"They must pay special and principal attention to piety and morality, and their internal discipline
must be directed precisely by these considerations; otherwise they entirely lose their special
character, and come to be very little better than those societies which take no account of
Religion at all."

It is so hard, you see, to keep a man thinking about piety and morality while he is starving!
I am quoting from the Encyclical Letter on "The Condition of Labor," issued in 1891, and addressed
"to our Venerable Brethren, all Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops and Bishops of the Catholic
World in Grace and Communion with the Apostolic See." The purpose of the letter is "to refute
false teaching," and the substance of its message is:

This great labor question cannot be solved except by assuming as a principle that private property
must be held sacred and inviolable.

And again, the purpose of churches proclaimed in language as frank as any used in the present book:

The chief thing to be secured is the safe-guarding, by legal enactment and policy, of private
property. Most of all it is essential in these times of covetous greed, to keep the multitude
within the line of duty; for if all may justly strive to benefit their condition, yet neither
justice nor the common good allows any one to seize that which belongs to another, or, under
the pretext of futile and ridiculous equality, to lay hands on other peoples' fortunes.

And this, you understand, in lands where rapine and conquest, class-tyranny and priestly domination
have been the custom since the dawn of history; in which no property-right can possibly trace
back to any other basis than force. In Austria, for example--Austria, the leader and guardian
of the Holy Alliance--Austria, which had no Reformation, no Revolution, no Kultur-kampf--Austria,
in which the income of the Catholic Primate is $625,000 a year! In other words, Austria is
still to a large extent a "Priestly Empire;" and it was Austria which began the war--began
it in a religious quarrel, with a Slav people which does not acknowledge the Holy Father as
the ruler of the world, but persists in adhering to the Eastern Church. So of course to-day,
when Austria is learning the bitter lesson that they who draw the sword shall perish by the
sword, the heart of the Holy Father is wrung with grief, and he sends out these eloquent peace-notes,
written in Vienna and edited in Berlin. And at the same time his private chaplain is convicted
and sentenced to prison for life as Austria's Master-Spy in Rome!

It is a curious thing to observe--the natural instinct which, all over the world, draws Superstition
and Exploitation together. This war, which is hailed as a war against autocracy, might almost
as accurately be described as a war against the clerical system. Wherever in the world you
find the Papal power strong, there you find sympathy with the Prussian infamy and there you
find German intrigue. In Spain, for example; in Ireland and Quebec, and in the Argentine. The
treatment of Belgium was a little too raw--too many priests were shot at the outset, and so
Cardinal Mercier denounces the Germans; but you notice that he pleads in vain with the Vatican,
which stands firm by its beloved Austria, and against the godless kingdom of Italy. The Kaiser
allows the hope of restoration of the temporal power at the peace settlement; and meantime
the law forbidding the presence of the Jesuits in Germany has been repealed, and all over the
world the propagandists of this order are working for the Kaiser. Sir Roger Casement was raised
a Catholic, and so also "Jim" Larkin, the Irish labor-leader who is touring America denouncing
the Allies. The Catholic Bishop of Melbourne opposed and beat conscription in Australia, and
it was Catholic propaganda of treachery among the ignorant peasant-soldiers from Sicily which
caused the breaking of the Italian line at Tolmino. So deeply has this instinct worked that,
in the fall of 1917 while the Socialist party in New York was campaigning for immediate peace,
the Catholic Irish suddenly forgot their ancient horrors. The Catholic "Freeman's Journal"
published nine articles favoring Socialism in a single issue; while even "The Tablet," the
diocesan paper, began to discover that the Socialists were not such bad fellows after all.
The same "Tablet" which a few years ago allowed Father Belford to declare that Socialists were
mad dogs who should be "stopped with a bullet"!

Note to second edition: Since the above was written, the war fervor has swept America, including
even the rank and file of the Catholics, and what has here been said might seem unfair to persons
who have forgotten the attitude of the Church during the early part of the conflict, and the
struggle it cost to bring the hierarchy into line. It is one of the ironies of history that
the most reactionary organization in the world should be lending its aid to the destruction
of the second most reactionary. When the Catholic Church marches forth to war for Democracy,
it is not drawing America down into the pit, but is letting America pull it out of the pit--at
least for a time, and the spectacle is one in which all lovers of progress will rejoice.

BOOK FOUR

The Church of the Slavers

 See, underneath the Crown of Thorn,
      The eye-balls fierce, the features grim!
  And merrily from night to morn
      We chaunt his praise and worship him--
Great Christus-Jingo, at whose feet
  Christian and Jew and Atheist meet!

 A wondrous god! most fit for those
      Who cheat on 'Change, then creep to prayer;
  Blood on his heavenly altar flows,
      Hell's burning incense fills the air,
  And Death attests in street and lane
  The hideous glory of his reign.

Face of Caesar

The thesis of this book is the effect of fixed dogma in producing mental paralysis, and the
use of this mental paralysis by Economic Exploitation. From that standpoint the various Protestant
sects are better than the Catholic, but not much better. The Catholics stand upon Tradition,
the Protestants upon an Inspired Word; but since this Word is the entire literary product,
history and biography, science and legislation, poetry, drama and fiction of a whole people
for something like a thousand years, it is possible by judicious selection of texts to prove
anything you wish to prove and to justify anything you wish to do. The "Holy Book" being full
of polygamy, slavery, rape and wholesale murder, committed by priests and rulers under the
direct orders of God, it was a very simple matter for the Protestant Slavers to construct a
Bible defense of their system.

They get poor Jesus because he was given to irony, that most dangerous form of utterance. If
he could come back to life, and see what men have done with his little joke about the face
of Caesar on the Roman coin, I think he would drop dead. As for Paul, he was a Roman bureaucrat,
with no nonsense in his make-up; when he ordered, "Servants obey your masters," he meant exactly
what he said. The Roman official stamp which he put upon the gospel of Jesus has been the salvation
of the Slavers from the Reformation on.

In the time of Martin Luther, the peasants of Germany were suffering the most atrocious and
awful misery; Luther himself knew about it, he had denounced the princely robbers and the priestly
land-exploiters with that picturesque violence of which he was a master. But nothing had been
done about it, nothing ever is done about it--until at last the miserable peasants attempted
to organize and win their own rights. Their demands do not seem to us so very criminal as we
read them today; the privilege of electing their own pastors, the abolition of villeinage,
the right to hunt and fish and cut wood in the forest, the reduction of exorbitant rents, extra
payment for extra labor, and--that universal cry of peasant communes whether in Russia, England,
Mexico or sixteenth century Germany--the restoration to the village of lands taken by fraud.
But Luther would hear nothing of slaves asserting their own rights, and took refuge in the
Pauline sociology: If they really wished to follow Christ, they would drop the sword and resort
to prayer; the gospel has to do with spiritual, not temporal, affairs; earthly society cannot
exist without inequalities, etc.

And when the peasants went on in spite of this, he turned upon them and denounced them to the
princes; he issued proclamations which might have been the instructions of Mr. John Wanamaker
to the police-force of his "City of Brotherly Love": "One cannot answer a rebel with reason,
but the best answer is to hit him with the fist until blood flows from the nose." He issued
a letter: "Against the Murderous and Thieving Mob of Peasants," which might have come from
the Reverend Woelfkin, Fifth Avenue Pastor of Standard Oil: "The ass needs to be beaten, and
the populace needs to be controlled with a strong hand. God knew this well, and therefore he
gave the rulers, not a fox's tail, but a sword." He implored these rulers, after the fashion
of Methodist Chancellor Day of the University of Syracuse: "Do not be troubled about the severity
of their repression, for it will save many souls." With such pious exhortations in their ears
the princes set to work, and slaughtered a hundred thousand of the miserable wretches; they
completely aborted the social hopes of the Reformation, and cast humanity into the pit of wage-slavery
and militarism for four centuries. As a church scholar, Prof. Rauschenbusch, puts it:

The glorious years of the Lutheran Reformation were from 1517 to 1525, when the whole nation
was in commotion, and a great revolutionary tidal wave seemed to be sweeping every class and
every higher interest one step nearer to its ideal of life. . . . The Lutheran Reformation
had been most truly religious and creative when it embraced the whole of human life and enlisted
the enthusiasm of all ideal men and movements. When it became "religious" in the narrow sense,
it grew scholastic and spiny, quarrelsome, and impotent to awaken high enthusiasm and noble life.

Deutschland ueber Alles

As a result of Luther's treason to humanity, his church became the state church of Prussia,
and Bible-worship and Devil-terror played their part, along with the Mass and the Confessional,
in building up the Junker dream. A court official--the Oberhofprediger--was set up, and from
that time on the Hohenzollerns were the most pious criminals in Europe. Frederick the Great,
the ancestral genius, was an atheist and a scoffer, but he believed devoutly in religion for
his subjects. He said: "If my soldiers were to begin to think, not one would remain in the
ranks." And Carlyle, instinctive friend of autocrats, tells with jocular approval how he kept
them from thinking:

He recognizes the uses of Religion; takes a good deal of pains with his Preaching Clergy; will
suggest texts to them; and for the rest expects to be obeyed by them, as by his Sergeants and
Corporals. Indeed, the reverend men feel themselves to be a body of Spiritual Sergeants, Corporals,
and Captains, to whom obedience is the rule, and discontent a thing not to be indulged in by
any means.

So the soldiers stayed in the ranks, and Frederick raided Silesia and Poland. His successors
ordered all the Protestant sects into one, so that they might be more easily controlled; from
which time the Lutheran Church has been a department of the Prussian state, in some cases a
branch of the municipal authority. 

"I'm afraid in that case you had better write to the Editor and make an appointment. No, I'm afraid
there is no one..."
Peter melted away. The faces on the chairs were all very glad. The
stone building echoed with some voice that called some one a long
way away. At this time the future maker of the German Empire rose in the Landtag
and made his bow before the world; a young Prussian land-magnate, Otto von Bismarck by name,
he shook his fist in the face of the new German liberalism, and incidentally of the new German
infidelity:

Christianity is the solid basis of Prussia; and no state erected upon any other foundation
can permanently exist.

The present Hohenzollern has diligently maintained this tradition of his line. It was his custom
to tour the Empire in a train of blue and white cars, carrying as many costumes as any stage
favorite, most of them military; with him on the train went the Prussian god, and there was
scarcely a performance at which this god did not appear, also in military costume. After the
failure of the "Kultur-kampf," the official Lutheran religion was ordered to make friends with
its ancient enemy, the Catholic Church. Said the Kaiser:

