FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI.

BY

HARRY CASTLEMON

  CONTENTS

  CHAPTER    I.--THE NEW PAYMASTER

  CHAPTER   II.--A NIGHT EXPEDITION

  CHAPTER  III.--ARCHIE IN A PREDICAMENT

  CHAPTER   IV.--A MARK FOR THE UNION

  CHAPTER    V.--A RUN FOR LIFE

  CHAPTER   VI.--FRANK TURNS DETECTIVE

  CHAPTER  VII.--FRANK'S FIRST COMMAND

  CHAPTER VIII.--AN UNLUCKY FLIGHT

  CHAPTER   IX.--UP THE WASHITA

  CHAPTER    X.--THE PROMOTION

  CHAPTER   XI.--THE RIVAL SPIES

  CHAPTER  XII.--A SCOUTING PARTY

  CHAPTER XIII.--TOM THE COXSWAIN

  CHAPTER  XIV.--A REBEL TRICK

  CHAPTER   XV.--HONORABLY DISCHARGED

FRANK ON THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI.

CHAPTER I.

The New Paymaster.

Vicksburg had fallen, and the army had marched in and taken possession of the city. How Frank
longed to accompany it, that he might see the inside of the rebel stronghold, which had so
long withstood the advance of our fleet and army! He stood leaning against one of the monster
guns, which, at his bidding, had spoken so often and so effectively in favor of the Union,
and for two hours watched the long lines of war-worn soldiers as they moved into the works.
At length a tremendous cheer arose from the city, and Frank discovered a party of soldiers
on the cupola of the court-house, from which, a few moments afterward, floated the Stars and
Stripes. Then came faintly to his ears the words of a familiar song, which were caught up by
the soldiers in the city, then by those who were still marching in, and "We'll rally round
the flag, boys," was sung by an immense choir. The rebels in the streets gazed wonderingly
at the men on the spire, and listened to the song, and the triumphant shouts of the conquering
army, which proclaimed the beginning of the downfall of their confederacy.

To Frank, it was one of the proudest moments of his life--a sight he would not have missed
to be able to float at the mast-head of his vessel the broad pennant of the admiral. All he
had endured was forgotten; and when the Old Flag was unfurled in the air which had but a short
time before floated the "stars and bars," he pulled off his cap and shouted at the top of his
lungs.

Having thus given vent to his feelings of exultation, in obedience to orders, he commenced
the removal of his battery on board the Trenton. It was two days' work to accomplish this,
but Frank, who was impatient to see the inside of the fortifications worked with a will, and
finally the battery was mounted in its old position. On the following day, the Trenton moved
down the river, and came to anchor in front of Vicksburg. Shore liberty was granted, and Frank,
in company with several of his brother officers, strolled about the city. On every side the
houses bore the marks of Union shot and shell, and the streets were blocked with fortifications,
showing that had the city been taken by storm, it was the intention of the rebels to dispute
every inch of the ground. Every thing bore evidence to the fact that the fight had been a most
desperate one; that the rebels had surrendered only when they found that it was impossible
to hold out longer.

In some places the streets ran through deep cuts in the bank, and in these banks were the famous
"gopher holes." They were [ca]ves dug in the ground, into which a person, if he happened to
hear a shell coming, might run for safety. Outside the city, the fortifications were most extensive;
rifle-pits ran in every direction, flanked by strong forts, whose battered walls attested the
fury of the iron hail that had been poured upon them. It was night before Frank was aware of
it, so interested was he in every thing about him, and he returned on board his vessel, weary
with his long walk, but amply repaid by seeing the inside of what its rebel occupants had called
"the Gibraltar of America."

During the next two days, several vessels of the squadron passed the city, on their way to
new fields of action further down the river. One of them--the Boxer, a tin-clad, mounting eight
guns--had Frank on board. He had been detached from the Trenton, and ordered to join this vessel,
which had been assigned a station a short distance below Grand Gulf. As usual, he had no difficulty
in becoming acquainted with his new messmates, and he soon felt perfectly at home among them.
He found, as he had done in every other mess of which he had been a member, that there was
the usual amount of wrangling and disputing, and it amused him exceedingly. All the mess seemed
to be indignant at the caterer, who did not appear to stand very high in their estimation.
The latter, he learned, had just made an "assessment" upon the mess to the amount of ten dollars
for each member; and as there was no paymaster on board, the officers had but very little ready
money, and were anxious to know where all the funds paid into the treasury went to. He also
found that the caterer's authority was not as much respected as he had a right to claim, for
during the very first meal Frank ate in the mess, a dispute arose which threatened for a time
to end in the whole matter being carried before the captain.

One of the members of the mess, who was temporarily attached to the vessel, was a pilot who
had been pressed into the service. He was a genuine rebel, and frequently said that he was
called a traitor because he was in favor of allowing the South to "peaceably withdraw from
the Union." The doctor, a little, fat, jolly man, and a thorough Unionist, who believed in
handling all rebels without gloves, took up the sword, and the debate that followed was long
and stormy. The pilot, as it proved, hardly knew the reasons why the South had attempted to
secede, and was constantly clinching his arguments by saying, "Men who know more, and who have
done more fighting during this war than you, Doctor Brown, say that they have a right to do
so." The debate waxed hotter and hotter, until some of the other members of the mess joined
in with the doctor against the pilot, and the caterer, thinking that the noise the disputants
made was unbecoming the members of a well-regulated mess, at length shouted:

"Silence! Gentlemen, hereafter talking politics in this wardroom is strictly prohibited."

"Eh?" ejaculated the doctor, who was thoroughly aroused, "Do you expect us to sit here and
listen to a conscript running down the Government--a man who never would have entered the service
if he had not been compelled to do so? No, sir! I wouldn't hold my tongue under such circumstances
if all the six-foot-four caterers in the squadron should say so. You are not a little admiral,
to come down here and hoist your broad pennant in this mess-room."

The caterer was astounded when he found his authority thus set at defiance, and without further
parley he retired to his room; and in a few moments returned with the books, papers, and the
small amount of money that belonged to the mess; laying them on the table, he said:

"Gentlemen, you will please elect another caterer."

The debate was instantly hushed, for not one member of the mess, besides the caterer just resigned,
could have been hired to take the responsibility of managing affairs. When the officers had
finished their dinner, they walked carelessly out on deck, as if the question of where the
next meal was to come from did not trouble them in the least. Nothing was done toward an election;
no one took charge of the books or papers, and when the table was cleared away they were thrown
unceremoniously under the water-cooler. The money, however, was taken care of by the doctor.
Dinner-time came, and when Frank, tired and hungry, was relieved from the deck, he inquired
what was to be had to eat.

"There's nothing been done about it yet," answered the officer who relieved him. "The steward
went to several of the members of the mess, and asked what they wished served up; but they
told him that they had nothing to do with the caterer's business, and the consequence is, if
you want any thing to eat, you will have to go into the pantry and help yourself."

Frank was a good deal amused at the obstinacy displayed by the different members of the mess,
and wondered how the affair would end. The mess could not long exist without some one to take
charge of it; but for himself he was not at all concerned. He had paid no initiation fee, because
no one had asked him for it, and he knew that as long as there were provisions in the paymaster's
store-rooms, there was no danger but that he would get plenty to eat. He found three or four
officers in the pantry making their dinner on hard-tack, pickles, and raw bacon. They were
all grumbling over the hard fare, but not one of them appeared willing to assume the office
of caterer.

Things went on in this way for nearly a week, (during which time they had arrived at their
station,) and the doctor, who was fond of good living, could stand it no longer. He went to
the caterer who had resigned, and, after considerable urging, and a solemn promise that politics
should not again be discussed in the mess, the latter was persuaded to resume the management
of affairs. The change from hard crackers and pickles to nice warm meals was a most agreeable
one, and the jolly doctor, according to promise, was very careful what questions were brought
up before the mess for discussion.

By this time, as we have before remarked, the Boxer had arrived at her station. Her crew thought
they were now about to lead a life of idleness and inactivity, for not a rebel had they seen
since leaving Vicksburg. But one morning, while the men were engaged in washing off the forecastle,
they were startled by a roar of musketry, and three of the sailors fell dead upon the deck.

The fight that followed continued for two hours, the rebels finally retiring, not because they
had been worsted, but for the reason that they had grown weary of the engagement. This was
the commencement of a series of attacks which proved to be the source of great annoyance to
the crew of the Boxer. The guerrillas would appear when least expected, and the levee afforded
them a secure hiding-place from which they could not be driven, either with big guns or small
arms. They were fatal marksmen, too; and during the week following, the Boxer's crew lost ten
men. One rebel in particular attracted their attention, and his reckless courage excited their
admiration. He rode a large white horse, and although rendered a prominent mark for the rifles
of the sailors, he always escaped unhurt. He would ride boldly out in full view of the vessel,
patiently wait for someone to expose himself, when the sharp crack of his rifle would be followed
by the report made to the captain, "A man shot, sir."

Frank had selected this man as a worthy foe-man; and every time he appeared the young officer
was on the watch for him. He was very expert with the rifle, and after a few shots, he succeeded
in convincing the rebel that the safest place for him was behind the levee. One morning the
foe appeared in stronger force than usual, and conspicuous among them was the white horse and
his daring rider. The fight that ensued had continued for perhaps half an hour, when the quartermaster
reported the dispatch-boat approaching. As soon as she came within range, the guerrillas directed
their fire against her, to which the latter replied briskly from two guns mounted on her forecastle.
The leader of the rebels was constantly in view, cheering on his men, and discharging his rifle
as fast as he could reload. Frank fired several shots at him, and finding that, as usual, they
were without effect, he asked the captain's permission to try a howitzer on him, which was
granted. He ran below, trained the gun to his satisfaction, and waited for an opportunity to
fire, during which the dispatch-boat came alongside and commenced putting off a supply of stores.

At length the rebel mounted the levee, and reigning in his horse, sat in his saddle gazing
at the vessels, as if not at all concerned. He presented a fair mark, and Frank fired, but
the shell went wild and burst in the woods, far beyond the rebel, who, however, beat a hasty
retreat behind the levee.

"Oh, what a shot!" shouted a voice through the trumpet that led from the pilot-house to the
main deck. "What a shot--altogether too much elevation."

"Who's that, I wonder?" soliloquized Frank. "It was a poor shot, but I'd like to see that fellow,
whoever he is, do any better."

After giving orders to have the gun reloaded and secured, he ran into the wardroom to look
after his mail, at the same time inquiring of every one he met, "Who was that making fun of
my shooting?" But no one knew, nor cared to trouble himself about the matter, for the subject
of conversation was, "We've got a new paymaster."

Frank was pleased to hear this, but was still determined to find the person who had laughed
at his marksmanship, when he saw a pair of feet descending the ladder that led from the cabin
to the pilot-house, and a moment afterward, a smart looking young officer, dressed in the uniform
of a paymaster, stood in the wardroom, and upon discovering Frank, thrust out his hand and
greeted him with--

"What a shot! Been in the service more than two years, and"--

"Why, Archie Winters, is this you?" exclaimed Frank, joyfully.

"Paymaster Winters, if you please" replied Archie, with mock dignity.

"How came you here? What are you doing? Got any money?" hurriedly inquired Frank.

"Got plenty of funds," replied his cousin. "But I say, Frank, how long has this fighting been
going on?"

"Every day for the last week."

Archie shrugged his shoulders, and looked blank.

"I guess I had better go back to Cairo," said he; "these rebels, I hear, shoot very carelessly.
Just before we came alongside here, I was standing on the deck of the dispatch-boat, and some
fellow cracked away at me, sending the bullet altogether too close to my head for comfort."

"Oh, that's nothing, so long as he didn't hit you. You'll get used to that before you have
been here a week. But, Archie, are you really ordered to this vessel?"

Archie at once produced his orders, and, sure enough, he was an acting assistant paymaster,
and ordered to "report to the commanding officer of the U. S. S. Boxer for duty on board that
vessel."

During the two years that Archie had been in the fleet-paymaster's office he had, by strict
attention to his duties, worked his way up from "writer" to corresponding clerk. He had had
ample opportunity to learn the duties of paymaster, and one day he suddenly took it into his
head to make application for the position. He immediately wrote to his father, informing him
of his intention, procured his letters of recommendation, and a month afterward received the
appointment.

Hearing, through Frank, that the Boxer was without a paymaster, he succeeded in getting ordered
to her, and, as he had not written to his cousin of his good fortune, the latter, as may be
supposed, was taken completely by surprise.

Archie was speedily introduced to the officers of the vessel, who were pleased with his off-hand,
easy manners, and delighted with the looks of a small safe which he had brought with him, for
they knew, by the very particular orders he gave concerning it, that there was money in it.

At the end of an hour the rebels seemed to grow weary of the fight, for they drew off their
forces; then, as soon as it was safe on deck, the cousins seated themselves on the guard, to
"talk over old times." Frank gave descriptions of the fights in which he had engaged since
they last met, and also related stories of mess-room life, with which Archie was entirely unacquainted;
and to show him how things were conducted, told him of the jokes the officers frequently played
upon each other.

"Speaking of jokes," said Archie, "reminds me of a little affair I had a hand in at Cairo.

"While the commandant of the station was absent on a leave, his place was supplied by a gentleman
whom, for short, I will call Captain Smith. He was a regular officer, had grown gray in the
service, and was one of the most eccentric men I ever saw. He was extremely nervous, too, and
if a steamer happened to whistle while passing the wharf-boat, it would make him almost wild.

"One day, a man who lived off somewhere in the woods, came down to Cairo to get an appointment
for his son as master's mate. Our office, you know, was just to the right of the door, and,
if there was any thing that bothered me, it was for some body to stick his head over the railing
when I was busy, and ask, 'Is the commandant of the station in?' There was an orderly on watch
day and night, always ready to answer such questions, and besides, there was an abundance of
notices on the walls pointing out the different offices; but in spite of this, every stranger
that came in must stop and make inquiries of me.

"Well, this man came into the office, and as he had evidently never been there before, judging
by the way he gaped at every thing, I told him that it was after office hours, and that he
must call again the next morning about nine o'clock. He took a turn or two across the floor
(by-the-way, he wore squeaking boots, that made a noise like a steam-whistle), and finally
went out.

"The next evening, just as I was locking up my desk, he came in again, and I repeated what
I had told him the night before, that he must come at nine o'clock in the morning--not at night--if
he wished to see the captain, and he went out, after making noise enough with his squeaking
boots to set a nervous man's teeth on edge. Now, would you believe it, that evening, after
I had finished my work, and was starting out for supper, I saw this man coming up the stairs.
He met me with the usual question, 'Is the captain in?' and I suddenly hit upon a plan to get
rid of him, for I had made up my mind that the man didn't know what he was about; so I replied:

"'What do you want? Why don't you come here during our office hours, if you want to see me?'

"I spoke in a gruff voice, and I was so bundled up--for the night was very cold--that I knew
he wouldn't recognize me.

"'I've been busy all day, cap'in,' said he; 'but the fact is'--

"I was afraid that I would be obliged to stand there in the cold and listen to a long, uninteresting
yarn, so I interrupted him.

"'Speak quick, and don't keep me waiting.'

"'Wal, cap'in,' said he, 'I heerd you are in want of officers, an' I come to get a place for
my son; I hear the wages are purty good.'

"'Yes,' I replied, 'we do want officers; but does your son know anything about a ship?'

"'Oh, yes? He's run the river as deck-hand for goin' nigh on to three year.'

"'Then he ought to know something, certainly. Come around tomorrow morning, at nine o'clock
exactly, and I'll see what can be done for you. Now, mind, I say nine o'clock in the morning.'

"Well, the next morning, at the appointed time, to my utter astonishment, the man was on hand,
and, as usual, commenced walking up and down the floor with his squeaking boots. The noise
disturbed everyone within hearing, and presently the captain, who was in his office, and so
busy that he hardly knew what he was about, spoke in a sharp tone:

"'Orderly, pull off those squeaking boots!'

"'It isn't me, sir.' said the orderly; 'it's a gentleman out here waiting to see you, sir.'

"'Then send him in--send him in at once, so that I can get rid of that noise.'

"The man was accordingly shown into the presence of the captain, while I listened with both
ears to hear what was said.

"'Mornin', cap'in,' he began; 'I reckon I'm here on time.'

"'Time! what time? What do you want?' inquired the captain, who always spoke very fast, as
though he were in a hurry to get through with what he had to say. 'What do you want, my good
man. Be lively now.'

"'Why, cap'in, I come here to get that appointment for my son in this ere navy.'

"'Appointment! For your son!' repeated the captain. 'Who is he? I never heard of him.'

"'Wal, really now, cap'in, I'll be shot if you didn't tell me last night that you would make
my son an officer. The wages are good, I hear, an' as I've a debt to pay off on the farm'--

"'Don't bother me!' interrupted the captain, beginning to get impatient.

"'But, cap'in,' urged the man, 'you can't bluff me off this 'ere way. You told me last night
that you wanted officers; you know I met you on the stairs, and you promised, honor bright.'

"'Eh!' ejaculated the captain, in surprise,'my good man, allow me to know what I'm about, will
you? Will you allow me to know myself? Orderly,' he continued, turning to that individual,
who had stood by, convulsed with laughter, which he was vainly endeavoring to conceal, 'orderly,
do you think this man is in his right mind?'

"The orderly said he didn't know; but, taking the man by the arm, showed him out of the office,
telling him to come again, when the captain was not quite so busy.

"The conversation had been carried on in a loud tone, and all the occupants of the different
offices had heard it, and were highly amused, for they knew that somebody had been playing
a joke on the countryman; but it was a long time before I told anyone of the share I had had
in the affair."

CHAPTER II.

A Night Expedition.

"The captain wishes to see you, gentlemen!" said the orderly, stepping up and saluting.

The cousins repaired to the cabin, and after Archie had been introduced to the captain (for
being utterly ignorant of the manner in which things were conducted on shipboard, he had not
yet reported his arrival), his orders were indorsed, and the captain, turning to his desk,
ran his eye hastily over an official document, and said:

"Mr. Nelson, I have received instructions from the admiral to make you the executive officer
of this vessel. Mr. Kearney's resignation has been accepted, and you will take his place. I
am certain, from what I know and have heard of your past history, that I shall have no cause
to regret the change."

After a few moments' conversation with the captain upon unimportant matters, the cousins returned
to the wardroom.

Frank's constant attention to his duties had again been rewarded, and he was now the second
in authority on board the vessel. All orders from the captain must pass through him, and in
the absence of that gentleman he became commander. To say that Frank was delighted would but
feebly express his feelings; he was proud of the honor, and determined that he would prove
himself worthy of it. In fact, he had now reached the height of his ambition, although he had
little dreamed that it would come so soon. He asked nothing more. He had worked hard and faithfully
ever since he had entered the service, but in receiving the appointment of executive officer
he felt amply rewarded.

He was young in years for so responsible a position, but he had no fears of his ability to
perform all the duties required of him, for the routine of ship life had become as familiar
to him as was the road from Lawrence to his quiet little home on the banks of Glen's Creek.
But his promotion did not affect him as it does a great many who suddenly find themselves possessed
of power. He did not "stand upon his rank," nor in his intercourse with his messmates endeavor
to keep constantly before their minds the fact that he was the second in command. Those who
have been in the service--especially in the navy--will recall to mind incidents of this character;
but our hero never forgot the respect he owed to his superiors, and his conduct toward those
under him was marked by the same kindness he had always shown them.

Frank knew that he had something of a task before him. Although he could now turn into his
bunk at night without being called upon to stand his regular watch, he had more difficult duties
to perform. He was responsible for the manner in which affairs were conducted about decks,
for the neat appearance of the vessel and of the men; and as the former executive officer had
been rather careless in this respect, Frank knew that his first move must be made in that direction.

For the next two days, as the rebels did not trouble them, Frank worked early and late, and
the results of his labor were soon made apparent. Every one remarked the improved appearance
of the men, who, at the Sunday morning muster, appeared on deck in spotless uniforms and well-blacked
shoes. After the roll had been called, and the captain, in company with Frank, proceeded to
inspect the vessel, the young officer knew that his improvements had been appreciated when
the former, who was an old sailor, said, with a smile of satisfaction:

"Mr. Nelson, this begins to look something like a ship, sir. This really looks like business.
The admiral may come here now and inspect the vessel as soon as he pleases."

The next morning, as Frank sat at the table in the wardroom, engaged in answering the letters
he had received by the dispatch-boat, and Archie was in his office straightening out his books
and papers, a bullet came suddenly crashing through the cabin--a signal that the rebels had
again made their appearance. Frank, who had become accustomed to such interruptions, deliberately
wiped his pen, corked his ink-stand, and was carefully putting away his letters, when there
was a hurrying of feet in the office; the door flew open, and Archie, divested of his coat,
bounded into the cabin, exclaiming:

"A fellow can't tell when he's safe in this country. I wish I was back in the fleet-paymaster's
office. I wouldn't mind a good fair fight, but this thing of being shot at when you least expect
it isn't pleasant."

As Archie spoke, he hurriedly seized a gun from the rack, which had been put up in the cabin
in order to have weapons close at hand, and sprang up the ladder that led into the pilothouse.
Frank, although he laughed heartily at his cousin's rapid movements, was a good deal surprised,
for he had always believed him to be possessed of a good share of courage. It would, however,
have tried stronger nerves than Archie's; but men who had become familiar with such scenes,
who had learned to regard them merely as something disagreeable which could not be avoided,
could not sympathize with one in his situation, and many a wink was exchanged, and many a laugh
indulged in, at the expense of the "green paymaster."

When Frank had put away his writing materials, he ran below to see that the ports were all
closed; after which he returned to the wardroom, and, securing a rifle, went into the pilot-house,
where he found Archie engaged in reloading his gun, while the officers were complimenting him
on a fine shot he had just made.

"Mr. Nelson," exclaimed the doctor, as Frank made his appearance, "I guess your white horseman
is done for now. The paymaster lifted him out of his saddle as clean as a whistle."

Frank looked out at one of the ports, and, sure enough, there was the white horse running riderless
about, and his wounded master was being carried behind the levee. The officers continued to
fire as often as a rebel showed himself, but the latter seemed to have lost all desire for
fighting, for they retreated to the plantation-house which stood back from the river, out of
range of the rifles, where they gathered in a body as if in consultation, now and then setting
up defiant yells, which came faintly to the ears of those in the pilot-house.

"They are saucy enough now that they are out of harm's way," said Archie, turning to his cousin.
But the latter made no reply. He stood leaning on his rifle, gazing at the guerrillas, as if
busily engaged with his own thoughts, and finally left the pilot-house and sought an interview
with the captain.

"I have been thinking, sir," said he, as he entered the cabin and took the chair offered him,
"that if that house out there had been burned long ago, we should not have had ten men killed
by those guerrillas. They seem to use that building as their head-quarters, and if it could
be destroyed they would cease to trouble us."

"That's my opinion," replied the captain. "But who is to undertake the job? Who's to go out
there, in the face of three or four hundred rebels, and do it? I can't, with a crew of only
fifty men."

"I didn't suppose it could be done openly, sir; but couldn't it be accomplished by stratagem
in the night, for instance?"

The captain shook his head; but Frank, who was not yet discouraged, continued:

"I have not made this proposition, captain, without thinking it all over--without taking into
consideration all the chances for and against it--and I still think it could be accomplished."

"Well, how would you go to work?" asked the captain, settling back in his chair with the air
of a man who had made his decision, from which he was not to be turned.

Frank then proceeded to recount the plans he had laid for the accomplishment of his object,
to which the captain listened attentively, and when Frank had ceased, he rose to his feet and
paced the cabin. He knew that the young officer had before engaged in expeditions similar to
the one he now proposed, when, in carrying out his designs, he had exhibited the skill and
judgment of a veteran. In the present instance, his plans were so well laid, that there appeared
to be but little chance for failure. After a few moments' consideration, the captain again
seated himself, and said:

"Well, Mr. Nelson, it shall be as you propose. If you succeed, I am certain that this guerrilla
station will be broken up; if you fail, it will only be what many a good officer has done before
you."

"I assure you, sir, I shall leave no plan untried to insure my success," replied Frank, as
he left the cabin.

"What's the matter now?" inquired Archie, as his cousin entered the wardroom. "Been getting
a blowing up already?"

"Oh, no!" replied Frank. "Come in here, and I'll tell you all about it;" and he drew Archie
into the office, where he proceeded to tell him all that had been determined upon. When he
had finished, the latter exclaimed:

"I want to go with you. Will you take me?"

Frank thought of Archie's behavior but a few moments before, and wondered what use he could
posssibly be in an expedition like the one proposed.

"If you do go," he answered, at length, "you'll be sorry for it. It requires those who are
accustomed to such business; and you have never been in an action in your life. The undertaking
is dangerous."

"I don't care if it is," answered Archie. "That's just the reason why I want to go--to be with
you; and I warrant you I'll stick to you as long as any body."

"Besides," began Frank, "if any thing should happen to you"--

"I'm just as likely to get back as you are," replied Archie, excitedly, "and I want to go."

After considerable urging, Frank finally asked and obtained permission for Archie to accompany
the expedition, at which the latter was overjoyed. He was very far from realizing the danger
there was in the undertaking, and had as little idea of what would be required of him as he
had of the moon.

The cousins passed the afternoon in the pilothouse, watching the movements of the guerrillas
through spy-glasses, studying the "lay of the land," the directions in which the different
roads ran--in short, nothing was omitted which they thought might be useful for them to know.
Just before night a storm set in; the wind blew, and the rain fell in torrents; and, although
Frank regarded it as something in their favor, under any other circumstances he would have
preferred tumbling into bed to venturing out in it. The hammocks were not piped as usual, but
all hands were to remain on deck during the night, to be ready to lend assistance in case it
was required. At ten o'clock the cutter lay alongside the vessel, the crew were in their places,
and Frank and his cousin, surrounded by the officers who had assembled to see them off, stood
on the guards ready to start.

"Paymaster," said Frank, turning to his cousin, "hadn't you better remain on board?" (He addressed
him as paymaster, for, of course, it would have been contrary to naval rules to call him by
his given name in the presence of the captain.)

"No, sir," answered Archie, quickly buttoning up his pea-jacket with a resolute air. "Do you
suppose I'm going to back out now? If you do, you are mistaken. I'm not afraid of a little rain."

Frank made no reply, but, after shaking hands with the captain and officers, followed his cousin
into the cutter, which floated off into the darkness amid the whispered wishes for "good luck"
from all the ship's company who had witnessed its departure. Frank took the helm, and turned
the boat down the river. Not an oar was used, for the young officer did not know but the rebels
had posted sentries along the bank, whom the least splashing in the water would alarm. Archie
sat beside his cousin, with his collar pulled up over his ears, and his hands thrust into the
pockets of his pea-jacket, heartily wishing that Frank had chosen a pleasanter night for their
expedition. For half an hour they floated along with the current in silence, until Frank, satisfied
that he had gone far enough down the river to get below the sentries, if any were posted on
the bank, gave the order to use the oars, and turned the cutter's head toward the shore, which
they reached in a few moments.

The crew quietly disembarked, and as the sailors gathered about him, Frank said,

"Now, men, I'm going to leave you here until the paymaster and myself can go up to the house,
and accomplish what we have come for. Tom," he added, turning to the coxswain of the cutter,
"you will have charge of the boat, and remember you are in no case to leave her. We may be
discovered, and get into a fight. If we do, and are cut off from the river and unable to get
back, I'll whistle, and you will at once answer me, so that I may know that you hear me, and
pull off to the vessel. We'll take care of ourselves. Do you understand?"

The crew of the cutter were old sailors--men who had followed the sea through storm and sunshine
all their lives. They had been in more than one action, too, during the rebellion, and had
gladly volunteered for the expedition, supposing that they were to accompany Frank wherever
he went. During the short time the latter had been on board the Boxer, they had become very
much attached to him. Although he was a very strict officer, and always expected every man
to do his duty promptly, he always treated them with the greatest kindness, and never spoke
harshly to them. This was so different from the treatment they had usually received at the
hands of their officers, that it won their hearts; and, although they admired his courage,
they would have felt much better pleased had they received orders to accompany him.

"Don't you understand, Tom?" again asked Frank, seeing that the coxswain hesitated.

"Oh, yes, sir," replied the sailor, touching his hat; "I understand, sir. But, Mr. Nelson,
may I be so bold as to ask one question--one favor, I may say?"

"Certainly; speak it out," answered Frank, who little imagined what thoughts were passing through
the minds of his men. "What is it? Do you wish to go back to the ship, and leave us here alone?"

"No, sir," answered all the men in a breath.

"Mr. Nelson," said the coxswain, "I never yet refused duty because there was danger in it,
and I'm too old a man to begin now. You have here, sir, twelve as good men as ever trod a ship's
deck, and you know, sir, that when you passed the word for volunteers for this expedition,
you didn't have to call twice. But we all thought that we should go with you to the end; and,
to tell the truth, sir, we don't like the idea of you and the paymaster going off alone among
them rebels. You are sure to get into trouble, and we want to go with you."

On more than one occasion had Frank been made aware of the affection his men cherished for
him, and he felt as proud of it as he did of the uniform he wore; but he had never been more
affected than he was on the present occasion.

"Men," he answered, in a voice that was none of the steadiest, "I assure you I appreciate the
interest you take in my welfare, and were I going to fight, I should certainly take you with
me; but sometimes two can accomplish more than a dozen. Besides, I promised the captain that
I would leave you here, and I must do so. Now, remember and pull off to the vessel if you hear
me whistle."

"Yes, sir," replied the coxswain; "but it'll be the first time I ever deserted an officer in
trouble."

The sailors were evidently far from being pleased with this arrangement, but they were allowed
no opportunity to oppose it, even had they felt inclined to do so, for Frank and his cousin
speedily disappeared in the darkness.

CHAPTER III.

Archie in a Predicament.

As soon as the young officers had reached the top of the bank, they paused to take their bearings,
and to select some landmark that would enable them to easily find the boat again. Away off
in the darkness they saw the twinkling of a light, which they knew was in the house which the
guerrillas were using as their head-quarters.

"Now, Archie," said Frank, "take a good look at this big tree here" (pointing to the object
in question) "so that you will know it again. The boat lies in the river exactly in a line
with that tree. Now, if you should be separated from me and discovered, make straight for the
cutter. But if you are cut off from it, run up the river until you get a little above where
the vessel lies, and then jump in and swim out to her. Do you understand?"

"Yes," replied Archie.

"Be careful of your weapons," continued his cousin, "and keep them dry and ready for instant
use. Don't be captured--whatever you do, don't be captured!"

"I'll look out for that," answered Archie "But, Frank," he continued, "why did you tell the
men to pull back to the vessel if we should be cut off from the river? I should think that
would be just the time you would want them to remain."

"Why," replied Frank, "the very first thing the rebels would think of, if we were discovered,
would be to capture our boat, and while part of them were after us, the others would run to
the river and gobble up boat, crew, and all. Then they would know that we were still on shore,
and would scour the country to find us. But if the boat goes off to the vessel, the rebels
will be more than half inclined to believe that we have gone off too, and, consequently, will
not take the pains to hunt us which they would do if they knew we were still on shore. But
let us be moving; we've no time to waste."

Frank started toward the house, carefully picking his way over the wet, slippery ground, now
and then pausing to listen, and to reconnoiter as well as the darkness would permit, and finally
stopped scarcely a stone's throw from the building. Not a guerrilla had they seen. Not dreaming
that the "yankee gun-boatmen" would have the audacity to attack them when they knew the rebels
were so far superior in numbers, the latter had neglected to post sentries, and Frank was satisfied
that their approach had not been discovered.

"Now, Archie," said he, as they drew up behind a tree for concealment, "you stay here, and
I'll see if I can set fire to that house."

"There are people in it," said his cousin; "I just saw a man pass by that window where the
light is."

"Then they must look out for themselves," answered Frank. "That's what we have to do when they
shoot into our cabin. Now, you stay here, and if you hear any shooting, run for the boat."

"What will you do?" asked Archie.

"Oh, I'll take care of myself. Good-bye."

As Frank spoke he moved silently toward the house, and was soon out of sight.

"Now," soliloquized Archie, "I am to stay here, am I? That's what I was ordered to do, but
I don't know whether I'll obey or not. It is evident Frank left me here to keep me out of harm's
way. Perhaps he thinks that because I have never smelt powder, I am a coward; but I'll show
him that I am not."

So saying, Archie stepped out from behind his tree, and walked slowly toward the house. When
he arrived opposite the window from which the light shone, he stopped and looked in. He did
not, however, go up close to the window, or he certainly would have been seen; but he remained
standing at a respectful distance, so that he would have some chance for escape, in case he
should be discovered.

The sight that met his gaze would have been sufficient to deter most men from attempting to
burn the house. The room was filled with men, some of whom were lying on the floor on their
blankets, others sitting around the table, and one or two were walking about the apartment.
In the corner stood their arms, ready to be seized at a moment's warning. And this was but
one of the rooms; perhaps the whole house was filled with guerrillas.

"My eye!" said Archie to himself, "what a hornet's nest would be raised about our ears, if
we should be discovered."

His heart beat faster than usual, as he moved back from the window, and walked silently around
to the other side of the house. Here also was a window, from which a light shone, and as, like
the other, it was destitute of a curtain, every thing that went on within could be plainly
seen by Archie, who took his station behind some bushes that stood at a little distance from
the house. The room had three occupants, whom Archie at once set down as officers. One of them
carried his arm in a sling. He was a tall, powerful-looking man, and Archie recognized in him
the daring rider of the white horse--the chief of the guerrillas.

"I wonder what the old chap would say if he knew I was about," thought Archie--"I, who gave
him that wound. I'd be booked for Shreveport, certain."

He was interrupted in his meditations by the movements of the officers, who arose and approached
the door, bringing their chairs with them. The storm had ceased, and as there was no longer
any necessity of remaining in the house, the rebels were, no doubt, moving to cooler quarters.
Archie at once thought of retreating; but the thought had scarcely passed through his mind,
when the door opened, the rebels walked out on the portico, and seating themselves in their
chairs, deposited their feet on the railing; while the young officer stretched himself out
behind the bush, heartily wishing that he could sink into the ground out of sight.

"A very warm evening, colonel," said one of the rebels, fanning himself with his hat.

"Very," answered the guerrilla chief, gently moving his wounded arm, little dreaming that the
one who gave him that wound was at that very moment lying behind the bushes into which he had
just thrown the stump of his cigar. "It's very warm. I wish I had that rascally Yank that shot
me," he added, "this wound is very painful."

Archie upon hearing this was almost afraid that the beating of his heart, which thumped against
his ribs with a noise that frightened him, would certainly reveal to the rebels the fact that
the "rascally Yank" was then in their immediate vicinity.

"But, if our plans work," continued the colonel, "in less than a week from this time they will
all be on the way to Shreveport."

"May I ask, colonel," said the one who had not yet spoken, "how soon those boats will be ready?"

"Major Jackson reports that they will be finished by to-morrow night, and it will take all
of one day to run them down the creek to the river."

"Then by Thursday evening," said the one who had first spoken, "we may be ready to make the
attempt."

"Yes, if the night is favorable."

"But, colonel, all these gun-boats are supplied with hot water, and that, you know, is the
worst kind of an enemy to fight. Men will run from that who wouldn't flinch before cold steel."

"Oh, we must take the Yanks by surprise, of course. The boats will hold fifty men each, and
we must drop down the river so that we will land one on each side of the vessel. If the night
is dark--and we shall not make the attempt unless it is--we can get within pistol-shot of her
before we are discovered, and by the time their men get fairly out of bed she's ours. Hark!
what noise was that?"

The rebels listened for a moment, and one of them replied:

"I didn't hear any thing."

"Well, I did," returned the colonel, "and it sounded very much like some one shouting for help.
I'm certain I heard it."

Archie, who lay in his concealment, trembling like a leaf, was also confident that he had heard
something that sounded like a call for assistance. What if it was Frank in danger, and shouting
to the cutter's crew for help? The thought to Archie was a terrible one, and he forgot the
dangers of his own situation, and thought only of his cousin. But if Frank was in trouble,
why did he not give the signal to the cutter's crew? Archie waited and listened for it, but
did not hear it given.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, the rebels sat on the portico listening,
and at length the colonel said:

"I know I hear something now, but it is the tramping of a horse. I suppose it is Tibbs, coming
with the mail."

The colonel's surmise proved to be correct, for in a few moments a man rode up, and dismounting
so close to Archie that the latter could have touched him, tied his horse to the very bush
which formed his concealment; then, throwing a pair of well-filled saddle-bags across his shoulder,
he ran up the steps, saying:

"Good evening, gentlemen. What! colonel, are you wounded?" he added, on seeing the rebel's
bandaged arm.

"Yes; this makes four times I have been shot while in the service. But how is the mail?"

"Rather heavy," answered the man. "If you have any letters to go, you will have to furnish
another bag--these are full."

"All right," said the colonel; then raising his voice, he called out, "Bob! Bob! Where is that
black rascal?"

"Heyar, sar," answered a voice, and presently a negro came around the corner of the house,
and removing his tattered hat, stood waiting for orders.

"Bob," said the colonel, "tell Stiles that the mail is all ready to go across the river."

Stiles! How Frank would have started could he have heard that name! He would have known then,
had he not before been aware of the fact, that he was again among Colonel Harrison's Louisiana
Wild-cats.

The negro, in obedience to his orders, disappeared, but soon returned, with the intelligence
that Stiles was not to be found.

"Not to be found," echoed the colonel; "that's twice he has failed me. But this mail must not
be delayed. Tell Damon I want to see him."

The negro again disappeared, and in a few moments came back with a soldier, to whom the colonel
said:

"Damon, here's a mail that must go across the river to-night. Can you pull an oar?"

"Yas," replied the man.

"Then get some one to go with you, and start at once. The skiff, you know, is in the creek,
just above where that Yankee gun-boat lies."

"Yas," answered the man again, as he took the mail-bags which the colonel handed him.

"This one," continued the rebel, pointing to a small canvas bag which one of his officers had
just brought out of the house--"this one contains my mail--all official documents, to go to
Richmond. Be careful of it. Don't let the Yankees get hold of you."

"No," replied the soldier, as he shouldered the mail and disappeared.

The conversation that followed, of which Archie heard every word, served to convince him that,
although the rebels kept up a bold front, and appeared sanguine of success in their attempts
to destroy the Government, yet among themselves they acknowledged their cause to be utterly
hopeless unless some bold stroke could be made to "dishearten the Yankees."

In spite of Archie's dangerous situation, which had tried his nerves severely, he listened
to every word that was uttered, and even became interested in what the rebels were saying.
Now and then he was called to a sense of his situation by the movements of the horse, which,
being restive, came very near stepping on him as he pranced about.

Damon had been gone about half an hour, and the colonel had just commenced explaining to the
man who had brought the mail the manner in which the capture of the Boxer was to be effected,
when suddenly the report of a pistol startled every one on the portico. A moment afterward
came another, which was followed by a yell of agony.

"What's that?" exclaimed the colonel, springing from his chair in alarm. "Are we attacked?
Get out there, every mother's son of you!" he continued, as the men, having been aroused by
the noise, came pouring out of the rooms in which they were quartered. "Every man able to draw
a saber get out there! Run for the river! That's where the reports sounded, and if there are
any boats there capture them. That will keep the Yankees on shore, and we can hunt them up
at our leisure!"

The men ran out of the house and started for the river at the top of their speed, at the same
time yelling with all the strength of their lungs, while the colonel and his officers ran into
their room, and hastily seizing such weapons as came first to their hands, followed after.
To describe Archie's feelings, as he lay there behind that bush and listened to the sounds
of pursuit, were impossible. The noise the rebels made seemed to bewilder him completely, for
he lay on the ground several moments, it seemed to him, without the power to move hand or foot.

Suddenly the thought struck him that now was the time to accomplish the object of the expedition.
The house was deserted, and the yells, which grew fainter and fainter, told him that the rebels
were getting further away. Yes, it was now or never. In an instant, Archie's courage and power
of action returned. Springing to his feet, he ran to the end of the portico, on which were
piled several bales of hay and bundles of fodder, which the rebels no doubt intended for their
horses. But Archie determined that they should be put to a different use, for he quickly drew
from his pocket two large bottles filled with coal oil, which he threw over the hay. He then
applied a match, and in an instant it was in a blaze. He waited a moment to see it fairly started,
and then sprang off the portico. As he passed the door, he heard an ejaculation of surprise,
followed by the report of a pistol, and the noise of a bullet as it whizzed past his head.
It frightened him, and at the same time acted upon him as the crack of a whip does upon a spirited
horse; for when the rebel who fired the shot had reached the portico, Archie had disappeared
in the darkness.

CHAPTER IV.

A Mark for the Union.

Let us now return to Frank, whom we left setting out for the house, after having given Archie
emphatic instructions to remain behind the tree until his return. He did not feel at all at
his ease after he had left his cousin, for he might have stationed him in the most dangerous
place that could have been found; and what if Archie should be discovered and captured? He
was well enough acquainted with his cousin's disposition to know that he would not surrender
without a fight; but what could he do when opposed by a regiment of veteran rebels? Frank thought
not of his own peril, for that was something he had fully expected to encounter before he started.
This was not the first time he had voluntarily placed himself in danger; but with Archie the
case was different; and Frank was several times on the point of returning to his cousin and
making use of his authority, as commander of the expedition, to send him back to the boat.
By the time these thoughts had passed through his mind, he had reached a log-cabin which stood
at a little distance from the house; and as he halted behind it, to shelter himself from the
storm, still debating upon the course he ought to pursue in regard to Archie, some one inside
the cabin commenced singing--

  "I'll lay ten dollars down
  And chuck 'em up one by one!"

If there was any more of the song, the rebel evidently did not know it, for he kept singing
these two lines over and over, now and then varying the monotony of the performance by whistling.
Frank stood for some moments listening to him, and finally began moving cautiously around the
cabin, to find some opening through which he could look and see what was going on inside. He
presently discovered a hole between the logs, and, upon looking in, saw a man seated on the
floor before a fire-place, in which burned some pine knots, engaged in whittling out an oar
with his bowie-knife. On the floor near him lay one evidently just finished. At the opposite
side of the room stood a bag, from the mouth of which peeped several letters.

A thought struck Frank--which would be of the most benefit, to burn the house or to capture
the mail, which might contain information of the greatest importance? Undoubtedly the latter
would be of the most consequence. Then he debated long and earnestly upon the chances of escaping
with the mail, should he attempt its capture. The man who had charge of it was a most powerful-looking
fellow, who knowing the importance of his trust, and the certainty of receiving prompt and
effective assistance from his comrades, would, no doubt, fight most desperately, unless he
could be taken at disadvantage and secured before he had time to think of resistance. Besides,
the cabin was scarcely fifty feet distant from the house, which Frank knew was filled with
men, for he could hear them walking about the rooms and talking to each other. The least unusual
noise would certainly alarm them, in which case escape would be entirely out of the question
Frank, we say, thought over all these things, and finally coming to the conclusion that it
would be worse than useless to attempt the capture of the mail, turned his attention to the
house. How was he to set fire to it?

Frank, we know, was not wanting in courage, but he had learned, by experience, that there are
times when "discretion is the better part of valor." When he proposed the expedition, he had
not expected to find the entire regiment quartered in the house. He had supposed that the men
would find sleeping-rooms in the negro quarters, which were nearly a half mile back, while
the house would be reserved for the officers. But the rebels surely would not remain up all
night, and when they had all gone to bed would be the time to execute his purpose. He would
not abandon his project until he had given it a trial, or fully satisfied himself that the
undertaking was utterly impracticable. For the present, he would remain where he was; something
might "turn up" which would be to his advantage.

At this moment a man entered the cabin, the door of which stood open, and inquired:

"Going over to-night, Stiles?"

Frank was thunderstruck, and he now saw the necessity of attempting nothing unless it promised
complete success. As the reader has already learned, he was among his old enemies, the Wildcats.
Upon making this discovery he was both astonished and alarmed--astonished, for it seemed to
him that he could scarcely make a move in any direction without being confronted by the redoubtable
Wild-cats. This was the second time he had found himself among them before he was aware of
it. He was alarmed, because he knew, by experience, the treatment he would receive if he should
fall into their hands without the prospect of an immediate exchange.

But his attention was again drawn to the men in the cabin.

"Yes," replied Stiles, in answer to his companion's question, "I'm going over to-night--allers
makin' due 'lowance for bein' ketched by the Yanks."

"Here's some mail, then," continued the man, thrusting several letters into the bag. "How soon
do you start?"

"Jest as soon as Tibbs comes with the up-country mail, an' I get the kernel's letters. Was
you takin' a chaw of tobaker, Bob?"

"No, I wasn't," replied the other, quickly thrusting his hand into his pocket, as if to protect
the precious article. "Tobacco is scarce."

"Now, Bob," said Stiles, "I know you've got some. Me an' you's allers been good friends."

The rebel could not withstand this appeal, although he produced his "plug" very reluctantly,
and as he handed it to his companion, said:

"Stiles, you're a dead beat. Go easy on that, now, if you please, because it's all there is
in the regiment."

The rebel cut off a huge piece of the weed, and, thrusting it into his cheek, went on with
his work, while Bob returned to his quarters. He had scarcely quitted the cabin before Frank
had all his plans laid. He would go back after Archie, and together they would lie in wait
on the bank of the river, and, if possible, capture that mail. With this determination, he
was moving slowly away from the cabin, when a door, which he had not before noticed, suddenly
opened, and Stiles came out, and turning the corner, stood face to face with Frank, and scarcely
an arm's length from him. With the latter, retreat without discovery was, of course, impossible.
There was but one course he could pursue, and that presented but a small chance for success.
He was, however, allowed no time for deliberation, for the rebel, quickly recovering from his
surprise, turned to run; but with one bound Frank overtook him, and throwing him to the ground,
caught him by the throat, stifling a cry for help that arose to his lips. This it was that
had alarmed the colonel and Archie; and had the former investigated the matter, Frank would
again have been a prisoner in the hands of the Wild-cats.

Stiles struggled desperately to free himself from the strong grasp that held him, until Frank
pulled one of his revolvers from the pocket of his pea-jacket and presented it at his head.

"Do you surrender?" he asked, releasing his hold of the rebel's throat.

"Yes," replied Stiles, faintly. "Don't shoot, Yank!"

"You shall not be harmed if you behave yourself. Have you any weapons?"

"No! They are all in the shanty!"

Frank, after searching the rebel's pockets and satisfying himself of the truth of this statement,
continued:

"Get up! Now, I know you have friends all around you, but if you have the least desire to live,
you'll not make any noise; although you may alarm the camp, it will not save you. Do you understand?"

"Have I got a pair of ears?" asked the rebel.

"Well, if you have, you hear what I say," returned Frank. "Now go this way," he added, pointing
toward the river.

The rebel, who had a wholesome fear of the revolver which Frank held in his hand, ready cocked,
obeyed, without the slightest hesitation, and they reached the bank of the river, where the
cutter lay, without being discovered.

"Now," said Frank, "I want to ask you a few questions. Where do you keep the boat in which
you were going to carry that mail?"

"In the creek, jest above where that ar' gunboat lies, replied Stiles."

"How many of you were to go?"

"Two--me an' another feller."

"Well, now, the colonel won't find you when he wants you. What will he do?"

"Oh, he'll send some body else. The mail must go, an' it makes no odds who takes it, so long
as he don't get ketched."

"That's all I want to know," said Frank. Then, going to the top of the bank, he called out:

"Tom, come up here!"

The coxswain soon made his appearance, and Frank said:

"Now, Stiles, you're a prisoner."

"Dog gone ef I keer," he replied, "so long as I get plenty of grub an' tobaker."

The rebel was marched down the bank, and Frank again bent his steps toward the house, intending
to find his cousin, and, with his assistance, to capture the mail. When he arrived at the tree
where he had left Archie, the latter was not to be seen. This, however, did not give him any
uneasiness, for Archie, he thought, had doubtless gone back to the cutter. Frank had already
made up his mind to go back after him, when he saw a man walk up to the cabin in which he had
first discovered the man who was now his prisoner, and heard him call out:

"Massa Stiles! de mail all ready, sar!"

Receiving no answer, the negro walked into the cabin, but finding it vacant, went out to make
the report to the colonel that Stiles was not to be found. From this Frank knew that he had
no time to lose. Stiles had told him that some one else would be sent with the mail, and as
it was all ready, a man would soon be found to take his place. If he went back after Archie,
he might be too late. He must attempt it alone, and unaided. Walking out from behind the tree,
he started toward the creek, where lay the boat in which the mail was to be carried.

The creek he found without difficulty; but the boat was evidently hidden away, for he searched
up and down the bank for it without success. If he found it, it was his intention to cut it
loose, and allow it to drift out into the river, thus depriving the rebels of the means of
carrying their mail. But failing in this, he ran up the bank, and awaited the coming of the
rebels. It was a hazardous undertaking to attempt the capture of two men, both of whom were,
no doubt, well armed; but Frank had great confidence in the looks of his revolvers, and hoped
to accomplish his object without alarming the rebels in the house.

He had waited perhaps a quarter of an hour, when he heard footsteps approaching, and presently
he discovered the two men for whom he had been watching. One carried the mail-bags, and the
other a pair of oars, the same, no doubt, which Stiles had but a short time before completed.
Frank waited until they were almost upon him, and then sprang up with a revolver in each hand,
which he pointed straight at the heads of the men, exclaiming:

"You're my prisoners. Don't make any resistance."

The rebels were astonished, and the man who carried the mail-bags threw them down and held
his arms above his head, in token of surrender. But the other, after regarding the officer
for a moment, as if to make sure that it was a human being with whom he had to deal, dropped
his oars, and before his captor was aware of his intention, drew a pistol and fired. Frank
felt a sharp pain in his left shoulder, and the revolver which he held in that hand fell from
his grasp. He had received his first wound, but although thoroughly frightened, he did not
lose his presence of mind. If he had, he would soon have been recalled to a sense of his dangerous
situation, for the rebel again cocked his revolver; but this time Frank fired first, and the
rebel sank to the ground with a loud yell. In an instant Frank turned upon the other; but he
appeared to be too much under the influence of fear to lend his comrade any assistance.

All thought of concealment was now out of the question. The rebels in the house had, of course,
been alarmed, and Frank's only chance for escape with his prisoner and the mail was to reach
the cutter as soon as possible, and pull off to the vessel. Hastily relieving the prisoner
of his weapons, he directed him to pick up the mail and follow the course he pointed out.

The prisoner did as he was ordered; but they had not gone far when a loud yelling announced
that the rebels in the house had been alarmed, and were in pursuit. Frank kept close behind
his prisoner, who, through fear of the revolver, ran at a rapid rate, but they had further
to run to reach the cutter than the guerrillas, and the latter gained rapidly. The prisoner,
who was not long in discovering this, slackened his pace considerably, although he appeared
to be doing his utmost. Frank, however, was not deceived. Thrusting his revolver into his pocket,
he seized the rebel by the nape of the neck, and helped him over the ground in a manner more
rapid than agreeable. Had the man been aware of the fact that his captor had but one arm that
he could use, he might not have submitted so quietly as he did. Frank, whose whole mind was
wrapped up in the idea of saving his prisoner and the mail, did not stop to think of this,
but pushed his man ahead to such good advantage that they succeeded in reaching the cutter
before their pursuers. He marched the rebel down the bank in the most lively manner, and tumbled
him into the boat, where he was instantly seized and secured.

The sailors, who had heard the noise of the pursuit, and waited impatiently for the appearance
of their officer, were all in their places, and as Frank sprang in, he shouted:

"Shove off--lively now, lads!"

The cutter was speedily pushed from the shore, and the oars got out and handled by twelve strong
fellows, all good oarsmen.

"Let fall--give away together," again commanded Frank, who, in spite of the pain of his wound,
began to chuckle over his good luck in securing the mail. "The rebs will give us a volley,"
he continued, "unless we get out of sight in the darkness before they reach the bank. So, pick
her up, lads, and walk right away with her."

The sailors, understanding the order, and rejoicing in the escape of their young officer, whose
safety and well-being they regarded as infinitely of more importance than their own, gave way
manfully on the muffled oars, which made no sound as they bent beneath the sturdy strokes,
and the cutter flew noiselessly through the water, The rebels reached the bank but a few moments
after the cutter had left, but neither seeing nor hearing any thing of her, they contented
themselves with uttering their yells, and firing a volley into the darkness in the direction
they supposed the boat had gone.

But their attention was soon called to another quarter, for a bright flame shot up from the
house. The boat's crew saw it, and could scarcely refrain hurrahing; but knowing that they
were not yet out of range of the guerrillas' rifles, they gave vent to their jubilant feelings
by redoubling their efforts at the oars.

"Mr. Nelson," whispered the coxswain, "may I be allowed to say that was well done, sir!"

"I didn't do that, Tom," answered Frank, in a faint voice, as he gazed in surprise at the burning
house, and thought of his cousin. "Is Paymaster Winters in the cutter?"

Frank hardly dared to ask the question, for if his cousin had been in the boat he would have
known it before that time.

"The paymaster!" repeated the coxswain; "no, sir. He went away with you, sir, and I haven't
seen him since. He's missing, that's a fact."

Frank felt ready to faint on hearing this, and very bitterly did he censure himself for allowing
his cousin to accompany him! But regrets were useless; the mischief had been done, and could
not be undone. He had one hope, however, to which he still clung--that Archie might be on board
the vessel. Perhaps, not daring to attempt to find his way back to the cutter, through fear
of capture, he had swam on board and was now safe. He would soon know.

In a few moments they had reached the Boxer, and as the cutter came along side, Frank seized
the mail-bags and sprang out. After giving the officer of the deck, who met him at the gangway,
instructions in regard to the prisoners, he ran up the stairs that led to the wardroom. Here
he met the captain, who, taking him familiarly by the arm, led him into the cabin, exclaiming:

"Mr. Nelson, I congratulate you, sir; it was well done, sir! The house is all in a blaze."

"Captain," said Frank, "I didn't do that, sir. Is the paymaster on board?

"Why, no, sir; not unless he came with you."

"I haven't seen him, captain, since I left him within a short distance of that house. If he
is not on board, sir, he's out there yet, and he has fired the building."

"Why, Mr. Nelson," exclaimed the captain, for the first time noticing Frank's pale face and
useless hand, from which the blood was dripping, "you are wounded, sir. Orderly, orderly, send
the doctor here at once."

CHAPTER V.

A Run for Life.

Archie was as light of foot as an antelope, and fear lent him wings. In obedience to his cousin's
instructions, he ran up the river, directing his course through a thick woods, jumping over
logs and making his way through the bushes with a rapidity that surprised himself. The rebel
who had discovered him followed for a short distance, but finding that he was losing ground,
he stopped and fired his revolver in the direction he supposed Archie had gone; but the bullets
went wide of the mark, and the latter, who now regarded his escape as a thing beyond a doubt,
laughed when he thought how cleverly he had accomplished the object of the expedition.

Having reached a safe distance from the house, he stopped and listened. He distinctly heard
the crackling of flames, and presently a bright light shone over the trees. The building was
fairly in a blaze. He was, however, allowed scarcely a moment to congratulate himself, for
the yells of the guerrillas plainly told him that they had discovered the fire, and were commencing
pursuit. Archie again set out, intent on reaching clear ground as soon as possible, for he
knew that no plan would be left untried to capture him. His situation was still any thing but
a pleasant one, but he was sanguine of reaching the vessel in safety, until a long-drawn-out
bay came echoing through the woods, and drove the blood back upon his heart. The rebels were
following him with a blood-hound!

For a moment Archie staggered as though he had been struck a severe blow by some unseen hand,
but quickly realizing the fact that his safety depended upon his own exertions and the use
he made of the next few moments, he speedily recovered his presence of mind, and hastily securing
his revolvers, which, up to this time, he had carried in the pockets of his pea-jacket, he
pulled off that garment, and throwing it on the ground, started off at the top of his speed.

Being thus relieved of a great incumbrance, he made headway rapidly, but, fast as he ran, he
heard that dreadful sound coming nearer, mingled with loud yells of triumph from the pursuing
rebels He had, with surprise and indignation, listened to Frank's description of his run from
Shreveport, when he and his companions had been pursued with blood-hounds, little imagining
that he would ever be placed in a similar situation.

And how did it happen that he had not aroused the hound while he was about the house? Had he
moved so silently that the animal had not heard him, or had he been in the building with the
men? This question Archie could not answer. But one thing was certain, and that was that the
hound was, at that very moment, on his trail, and unless he soon reached the river his capture
was beyond a doubt. He, however, had no fears of being overpowered by the hound. He fully realized
the fact that he would soon be overtaken, and had resolved to shoot the animal the moment he
made his appearance.

The yells of the rebels grew fainter, and Archie knew he was gaining on them. This gave him
encouragement. In fact, since the hound had opened on his trail, after the first momentary
feeling of terror had vanished, he had retained his coolness in a remarkable degree, and had
counted over his chances for capture and escape with surprising deliberation for one who had
never before been placed in so exciting and dangerous a situation. We have seen that he felt
fear. Had it been otherwise he must have possessed nerves of steel, or have been utterly destitute
of the power of reasoning; but that fear did not so completely overpower him as it had but
a short time before, when he lay behind the bush, and listened to the guerrilla's plan for
the capture of the Boxer and her crew. On the contrary, it nerved him to make the greatest
exertions to effect his escape.

In a few moments, to his great joy, he emerged from the woods and entered an open field, across
which he ran with redoubled speed. Directly in front of him was another belt of timber, and
beyond that lay the river, which, if he could reach, he would be safe. The baying of the hound
had continued to grow louder and louder, and, when Archie had accomplished perhaps half the
distance across the field, a crashing in the bushes and an impatient bark announced, in language
too plain to be misunderstood, that the hound had discovered him.

In an instant he stopped, faced about, and drew one of his revolvers. Stooping down close to
the ground, he finally discovered the hound, which approached with loud yelps, that were answered
by triumphant cheers from the pursuing rebels. Waiting until the animal was so close to him
that he presented a fair mark, Archie raised his revolver and fired. The hound bounded into
the air, and, after a few struggles, lay motionless on the ground. Scarcely waiting to witness
the effect of the shot, the young officer sprang to his feet, and again started for the river.
The yells of the rebels--who had heard the shot, and knew, from the silence that followed,
that the hound was dead--again arose fierce and loud; but Archie, knowing that his pursuers
had now lost the power of following him with certainty, considered the worst part of the danger
as past.

But he had to deal with those who could not be easily deceived. Colonel Harrison, knowing that
the only chance for escape was by the river, had lined the banks with men, and, as Archie neared
the woods, a voice directly in front of him called out:

"It's all up now, Yank! Drop that shootin'-iron, or you're a gone sucker!"

Archie's heart fairly came up into his mouth. He had little expected to find an enemy in that
quarter, but, without waiting an instant, he turned and ran up the river again, hoping that
he might soon be able to get above the sentinels. The rebel, hearing the sound of his footsteps,
and knowing that he was retreating, shouted:

"Halt, Yank! halt! or I'll shoot--blamed if I don't!"

And he did shoot, and Archie heard the bullet as it sung through the air behind him.

The rebel, without stopping to load his gun, started in pursuit; but Archie, who was running
for his life, soon left him behind. As the latter ran he heard shots fired on all sides of
him, showing that he was completely surrounded.

Escape seemed utterly impossible; and fearing that he might run into the very midst of the
guerrillas when he least expected it, he threw himself behind a log in the edge of the woods,
and awaited the issue of events with feelings that can not be described. He now had little
hope of being able to elude his pursuers, who, he was certain, would keep the river closely
guarded until daylight, when they would soon discover his hiding-place. He could not go on
without fear of running against some of his enemies, in the dark, and to remain where he was,
appeared equally dangerous. But of one thing he was certain--and as the thought passed through
his mind, he clutched his revolvers desperately--and that was, if he was captured, it would
require more than one man to do it.

Presently he heard footsteps approaching, and two rebels came up. One of them he knew, by his
voice, was the very man who had just fired at him.

"I know he went this yere way," said he.

"Wal, hold on a minit," said the other, panting loudly; "let's rest a leetle--I'm nigh gin
out;" and he seated himself so close to Archie that, had it been daylight, he would certainly
have been discovered.

"I'll be dog-gone," said the one who had first spoken, "ef this 'ere night's work don't beat
all natur'. Them ar Yanks ain't no fools, dog ef they ar!"

"Who'd a thought it?" returned his companion. "Them ar two fellers come out here an' burn a
house with more'n three hundred men in it? Dog-gone! But how did that other feller get away?"

"Oh, he had a boat," answered the other, "an he got thar afore we could ketch him. He's on
board his gun-boat afore this time. I jest ketched a glimpse of him as he was goin' down the
bank. He had Damon by the neck, an' he was makin' him walk turkey, now I tell yer."

"Damon ketched!" ejaculated his companion. "An' what's come on the kernel's mail?"

"Gone up--the hul on it! Damon's got the bracelets on by this time. But come, let's go on."

All this while the rebels had been coming up, and Archie could hear them in the woods, on all
sides of him, yelling and swearing, like demons. He had one source of consolation, however--his
cousin was safe; and, judging by the rebels' conversation, he had not gone back to the vessel
empty-handed.

Archie lay for some time listening to the movements of the rebels, almost afraid to breathe
lest it should be overheard, when he was suddenly startled by a stunning report, which was
followed by a hissing and shrieking in the air; a bright light shone in his eyes for an instant,
and the next, the woods echoed with the bursting of a shell. The guerrillas had scarcely time
to recover from their astonishment when there came another, and another, each one followed
by groans and cries of anguish that made the young officer shudder.

Frank Nelson had gained the Boxer in safety, and although surprised and alarmed at the absence
of Archie--who, he thought, would make the best of his way back to the vessel when left to
himself--he knew by the yelling of the rebels, and the pistol-shots that were occasionally
heard, that they had not yet captured him. The noise of the chase plainly told the Boxer's
crew that the fugitive was making the best of his way up the river, and Frank had opened fire
on the rebels to create, if possible, a diversion in his cousin's favor. His shells were thrown
with fatal accuracy, and the guerrillas, taken completely by surprise, and having no levee
to protect them, beat a hasty retreat.

Although threatened by a new danger, Archie was so overjoyed that he could scarcely refrain
from shouting, and as soon as he was satisfied that his pursuers were out of hearing, he crawled
from his concealment and ran toward the river. The shells still kept dropping into the woods
at regular intervals, making music most pleasant to Archie's ears, for he knew that as long
as the fire was continued, his chances for escape were increased. But in his eagerness he never
thought of the men who had been posted on the bank, and as he dashed through the woods, several
shots were fired at him by the rebels concealed in the bushes. But he reached the water in
safety, and struck out for the vessel. A few random shots were fired at him, which Archie heard
as they whistled past him; but his good fortune had not deserted him, and he again escaped
unhurt. The reports of the guns on board the Boxer pointed out the direction in which he was
to go, and in a quarter of an hour he was within hailing-distance of the vessel. The splashing
he made in the water soon attracted the attention of the sentry on the forecastle, who, having
been instructed by Frank, had kept a good look-out. A rope was thrown to Archie, who was pulled
on board the vessel in a state of complete exhaustion.

Frank was soon informed of the safe return of his cousin, and Archie, almost too weak to speak
plainly, was carried to his room, where, after being divested of his wet clothes, he was put
to bed, and left in a sound sleep. The next morning, however, he appeared in the mess-room,
as lively as ever, and none the worse for his long run; while Frank, who began to suffer from
his wound, was confined to his bed.

The latter listened to his cousin's narration of the part he had borne in the expedition, and
in admiration of Archie's bravery, forgot the lecture he had intended to administer. The officers,
who had not expected such an exhibition of courage in one whose cheek had blanched at the whistle
of a rebel bullet, were astonished, and it is needless to say that no more jokes were indulged
in at the expense of the "green paymaster."

For two months Frank held his position as executive officer of the Boxer, during which time
the vessel was twice inspected by the admiral. He now had little to do beyond the regular routine
of ship duties, for the guerrilla-station had been broken up by the burning of the plantation-house,
and vessels were seldom fired into on the Boxer's beat. But this was not to continue long,
for, one day, the dispatch-boat brought orders for him to report on board the Michigan--which
lay at the mouth of Red River--as executive officer of that vessel.

This was still another advancement, for the Michigan was an iron-clad, mounted fourteen guns,
and had a crew of one hundred and seventy men. But Frank would have preferred to remain in
his present position. After considerable hard work, he had brought the Boxer's crew into an
admirable state of discipline; every thing about decks went off as smoothly as could be desired,
and besides, Archie was on board, and he did not wish to leave him. But he never hesitated
to obey his orders, and as soon as he had packed his trunk, and taken leave of his messmates,
he went on board the dispatch-boat, and in a few days arrived at his new vessel.

The captain of the Michigan had written to the admiral, requesting that a "first-class, experienced
officer" might be sent him for an executive, but when Frank presented himself and produced
his orders, that gentleman was astonished. After regarding the young officer sharply for a
moment, he said:

"The admiral, no doubt, knows his own business, but let me tell you, young man, that you have
no easy task before you."

He no doubt thought that a person of Frank's years was utterly incapable of filling so responsible
a position. The latter, with his usual modesty, replied that he would endeavor to do his duty,
and after he had seen his baggage taken care of, he went into the wardroom, where he found
a young officer seated at the table reading. He arose as Frank entered, and thrusting out his
hand, greeted him with--

"I'm glad to meet you again, Mr. Nelson, and among friends, too."

It was George Le Dell, the escaped prisoner, whom he had met during his memorable flight from
Shreveport. Frank had not seen him, nor even heard of him, since he had left him on board the
Ticonderoga; but here he was, "among the defenders of the Old Flag" again, in fulfillment of
the promise he had made his rebel father, in the letter which Frank had read to his fellow
fugitives in the woods, where they had halted for the day. He was not changed--his face still
wore that sorrowful expression--and Frank found that he rarely took part in the conversation
around the mess-table. He was an excellent officer, the especial favorite of the captain, and
beloved by all his messmates, who, very far from suspecting the cause of his quiet demeanor,
called him "Silence."

Frank heartily returned his cordial greeting, and the two friends talked for a long time of
scenes through which they had passed together--subjects still fresh in their memories--until
the entrance of an officer put a stop to the conversation. Frank understood, by this, that
he was the only one of the ship's company who knew any thing of George's past history.

The change from the cool, comfortable quarters of the Boxer to the hot wardroom of the ironclad
was not an agreeable one; but Frank was not the one to complain, and he entered upon his duties
with his accustomed cheerfulness and alacrity. He was allowed very little rest. The captain
of the Michigan--which was the flag-ship of the third division of the squadron--was a regular
officer, who believed in always keeping the men busy at something, and Frank was obliged to
be on his feet from morning until night. The decks were scrubbed every day, the bright work
about the guns and engines cleaned, the small boats washed out, and then came quarters, and
drilling with muskets or broad-swords. After this, if there was nothing else to be done, the
outside of the vessel was scrubbed, or the chimneys repainted. In short, the Michigan was the
pattern of neatness, and her crew, being constantly drilled, knew exactly what was required
of them, and were ready for any emergency.

For several months little occurred to relieve the monotony of ship-life beyond making regular
trips from one end of their beat to the other; but when spring opened, gun-boats and transports,
loaded with soldiers, began to assemble, and preparations were made for the Red River expedition.
At length every thing was ready, and one pleasant morning the gun-boats weighed their anchors
and led the way up the river.

Frank stood on deck as the vessels steamed along, and could not help drawing a contrast between
his present position and the one in which he was placed when he first saw Red River. Then,
he and his companions were fugitives from a rebel prison; they had been tracked by bloodhounds,
and followed by men at whose hands, if retaken, they could expect nothing but death. He remembered
how his heart bounded with joy on the morning when he and his associates, in their leaky dug-out,
had arrived in sight of the Mississippi. Then, he was ragged, hatless, and almost shoeless,
weary with watching, and living in constant fear of recapture. Now, he was among friends, the
Old Flag waved above him, and he was the second in command of one of the finest vessels in
the squadron.

The passage up the river was without incident worthy of note, and in a short time they arrived
at the obstructions which the rebels had placed in the river nine miles below Fort De Russy.
A vast amount of time and labor had been expended upon these obstructions, but they were speedily
cleared away, and the fleet passed on. They had expected a stubborn resistance at the fort,
but it had been captured by the army after a short engagement, and the gun-boats kept on to
Alexandria.

CHAPTER VI.

Frank turns Detective.

A day or two after the arrival of the fleet at Alexandria, it became known that several persons
belonging to the rebel secret service were hovering about in the vicinity of the village, with
the intention of destroying some of the vessels by torpedoes--contrivances made to resemble
pieces of coal--which were to be placed in those barges out of which the boats were supplied
with fuel. By some means the names of these persons became known to the admiral, who issued
a general order, calling on all the officers of the squadron to kill or capture them wherever
found.

The same day the order was issued Frank obtained shore liberty, and while roaming about the
town, espied a name on a sign that immediately attracted his attention. It was one of the names
borne in the general order.

"There's one of the rascals, now," soliloquized Frank, "or, rather, where he has been. I wonder
where he is. I'll see if I can't find out something about him. If he could be caught, he would
be put in a place where he wouldn't lay any more plans to blow up Union gun-boats."

The sign which had attracted his attention bore the name and occupation of the individual in
question--"S. W. ABBOTT, Chemist."

The store had been closed on the approach of the Union forces, and was now in the possession
of several army surgeons and their assistants, who were overhauling its contents, and appropriating
whatever they thought might be of service to them. A negro was leaning against the counter,
and of him Frank inquired--

"Boy, do you belong here?"

"No, sar," he answered, indignantly; "I 'longs nowhar. I'se a free man, I is. I'se a soger."

"Never been in this town before?"

"No, sar."

Frank left the store, and walked slowly up the street toward the hotel, wondering where he
could go to make inquiries concerning the man whom he wished to find. It was evident that this
was the hardest task he had yet undertaken. He knew the rebel's name, and that was all. He
had no idea how he looked, and, although the admiral's order stated that he was loitering about
the village, he might, at that moment, be fifty miles away, or Frank might have already passed
him on the street.

There were several men dressed in butternut clothes hanging about the hotel, and Frank determined
to enter into conversation with one of them, and, if possible, learn something about Abbott.
An opportunity was soon offered, for one of the butternuts approached him, and inquired--

"Got any Northern money--greenbacks?"

"Some," replied Frank.

"Wal," continued the man, "I'll give you five dollars in Confederate money fur one dollar in
greenbacks. Is it a bargain?"

"Confederate money!" repeated Frank. "Of what use would it be to me? And I am greatly mistaken
if it will be of use to you much longer."

"Wal, I want your money fur a keepsake," replied the man. I know you-uns don't like our money,
but we-uns hev got to use it or go without any,"

"Well, I'll trade," said Frank. "Your paper will no doubt be a curiosity to the folks at home."
As he spoke, he produced the dollar, and the butternut drew out of his capacious pocket a huge
roll of bills--tens, twenties, and fifties, enough to have made him independent if it had been
good money--and selecting a five-dollar bill, handed it to Frank, who thrust it carelessly
into his pocket.

"I'll allow that you-uns don't seem to be a bad lot of fellers," said the butternut; "but I
don't see what you-uns want to come down hyar to fight we-uns for. We-uns never done nothing
to you-uns."

"Every rebel I meet says the same thing," said Frank. "But who were the richest men in this
place before the war broke out?"

The man mentioned several names, among which was that of Abbott, the chemist.

"Abbott, Abbott," repeated Frank, as if trying to recall the man to mind; "I've heard that
name before. Is he a Northern man?"

"No; he's allers lived at the South. His house is right back of the hotel, third door from
the corner, on the right-hand side as you go up the street."

Frank had learned something, but he did not think it safe to question the man further, for
fear of exciting his suspicions; so, after a few unimportant remarks, he turned on his heel
and walked into the hotel, which was used as the army head-quarters. Here he remained for nearly
half an hour, to give the man of whom he had received his information time to leave the place,
and then directed his steps toward Mr. Abbott's dwelling. He had no difficulty in finding it,
for he followed the butternut's directions, and the rebel's name was borne on the door-plate.
The house, however, was deserted; the blinds were closed, as were those of all the neighboring
houses. Mr. Abbott, with his family, if he had any, had doubtless removed out of reach of the
Union forces. Did he ever visit his home when in town? or did he make his head-quarters somewhere
else? were questions that suggested themselves to Frank, but which, of course, he could not
answer; neither did he dare to question any of the citizens, for they might be Mr. Abbott's
friends, who would not fail to inform him that particular inquiries were being made, which
would lead him to act more cautiously. Frank did not know what plan to adopt, but walked listlessly
about the streets until he heard the Michigan's bell strike half-past three o'clock. He must
be on board by four, as the admiral was to be there to inspect the vessel. He was reluctant
to leave without having accomplished any thing more than the discovery of the rebel's dwelling;
but there was no help for it, and he walked slowly toward the landing, where he found a boat
waiting for him.

That night, although he retired early, he slept but little, but tossed restlessly about in
his bunk, endeavoring to conjure up some plan by which he might capture the rebel; and when
he fell asleep, he dreamed about the subject uppermost in his mind. He thought that, after
several days' patient watching, he finally discovered his man; but all attempts to capture
him were unavailing. When he pursued, the rebel would disappear in a magical way, that was
perfectly bewildering. Finally, he dreamed that the rebel assumed the offensive, and one day
he met him in the street, carrying in his hand something that looked like a lump of coal, which
he threw at Frank. It proved, however, to be a torpedo, for it exploded with a loud report,
and as Frank sprang over a fence that ran close by the sidewalk, to escape, he came violently
in contact with the walls of a house. At this stage of his dream he was suddenly awakened.
To his no small amazement, he found himself stretched on the floor of his room, his head jammed
against the door, through which one of the wardroom boys, a very small specimen of a contraband,
was endeavoring to escape, while the look of terror depicted on his face, and the energy with
which he strove to open the door, showed that he had sustained something of a fright. On the
opposite side of the room stood the doctor, who gazed at Frank for a moment with open mouth
and eyes, and then threw himself on the bed, convulsed with laughter.

Frank rose slowly to his feet, and commenced drawing on his clothes, while the little negro
disappeared through the door like a flash.

"Mr. Nelson," said the doctor, as soon as he could speak, "you can't make that jump again,
sir. I came in to awaken you," he continued, "and was just going to put my hand on you, when
you sprang out of your bunk upon your trunk, and then back again; and just as the darkey was
coming in, you made another jump, and landed against the door, frightening him so that I actually
believe he turned pale. Were you dreaming?"

"Yes," answered Frank, with a laugh; "I was getting out of the way of a torpedo."

"Well, you certainly jumped far enough to get out of the way of almost any thing," replied
the doctor, after he had indulged in another hearty fit of laughter. "Hurry up; breakfast is
nearly ready."

Frank felt the effects of his agility in the shape of a severe pain over his left eye, which
had been occasioned by his head coming in contact with the door-knob, and his "big jump" was
the source of a good deal of merriment at the breakfast-table.

Frank went ashore in the ten-o'clock boat, and, after strolling about with his companions for
a short time, invented a satisfactory excuse for his absence, and started toward Mr. Abbott's
house, which, to his joy, he found open, with a negro engaged in sweeping the steps.

"Boy, who lives here?" he inquired.

The negro gave the desired information, adding: "He ain't hyar though, but missus will be home
dis arternoon."

"Where's your master?"

"Oh, he done gone off somewhar. I 'spects he don't like for to see you Yankee sogers hyar."

As the negro ceased speaking, having finished his work, he turned and went into the house,
while Frank was about to move away, wondering what was the next thing to be done, when a boy
approached and opened the gate.

"What do you want?" asked Frank.

The boy held up a letter which he carried in his hand, and Frank, seeing that it was addressed
to Mrs. Abbott, at once concluded that it contained information which might be of the greatest
value to him.

"It is all right," said he; "I'll attend to it;" at the same time taking the note and handing
some money to the boy, who departed well satisfied. Frank then walked down the street, and,
as soon as he was out of sight of the house, opened the letter and read as follows:

HEYWARD'S PLANTATION, March 20, 1864.

"Will be at home at eight o'clock this evening. Have my baggage ready to start for Shreveport
early in the morning."

No name was signed to the note, but Frank was certain that he now had the matter in his own
hands, and that any preparations Mrs. Abbott might make for her husband's journey to Shreveport
would only be thrown away. He at once directed his steps toward the landing, hailed his vessel
for a boat, and when he had arrived on board and reported to the captain, showed that gentleman
the note, at the same time requesting permission to remain on shore after dark, in order to
capture the rebel.

"I should be only too happy to allow you to do so, Mr. Nelson," said the captain, "for you
seem to be particularly fortunate in every thing of this description you undertake. But, as
it is the admiral's order that all officers repair on board their vessels at sundown, he must
be consulted in regard to the matter. Orderly, tell the officer of the deck to have the gig
called away. We will go up to the flag-ship," he continued, "and talk to the admiral."

The gig was soon manned, and after Frank had buckled on his sword (for all officers visiting
the flag-ship were required to wear their side-arms), he stepped into the boat with the captain,
and in a short time they were in the presence of the admiral. The captain, in a few words,
explained the nature of the visit, showed him the note Frank had intercepted, and ended by
repeating the young officer's request that he might be allowed to remain on shore after dark.

"Certainly," replied the admiral, "certainly. If you succeed, young man, we shall have one
less of these secret-service fellows to fear." Then, turning to one of his clerks, he gave
him an order which Frank did not hear, after which he asked:

"How did you discover the whereabouts of this man Abbott, Mr. Nelson?"

Frank then proceeded to give the admiral an account of all he had done, how he had seen the
rebel's name on the sign, learned his residence, and secured the note. To all of which the
latter listened with attention.

"I hope you will succeed in capturing him," said he. "If you do, bring him here; I want a look
at him. Here," he continued, as his clerk handed him a letter, "is a request that the provost-marshal
will furnish you with a pass. Good luck to you, young man."

Their business being finished, Frank followed the captain out of the cabin, and returned on
board the Michigan.

All that afternoon Frank was in a fever of excitement. He was impatient for the night to come,
that he might know whether or not his attempt was to be crowned with success. A hundred things
might happen to prevent it. The rebel might not come home, or the note might have been written
with the intention of having it intercepted, in order to throw the one into whose hands it
might fall on the wrong scent; or it might be written in cipher, and mean directly opposite
to what Frank had supposed. But he consoled himself with the thought that he had done, and
would still continue to do, all in his power to obey the admiral's general order, and if he
failed, the blame would not rest with him.

When the sundown boat was called away, Frank, after exchanging his uniform for a citizen's
dress, and his cap for a tattered slouch-hat, thrust a revolver into his pocket, stepped into
the cutter, and was soon set on shore. He walked directly to the office of the provost-marshal,
which was in the hotel, and finding that officer at his desk, handed him the admiral's note,
which ran as follows:

  "U. S. FLAG-SHIP BLACKHAWK,
  "OFF ALEXANDRIA, LA., March 20, 1864.

"SIR:--Please furnish the bearer, Acting Ensign Frank Nelson, with a pass. He has important
business to perform, which may detain him on shore most of the night, and it is absolutely
necessary, for the successful accomplishment of his mission, that he should not be interfered
with.     Very respectfully, your obd't serv't.,

                           DAVID D. PORTER, Rear Admiral,
                                       Com'd'g Miss. Squadron.
  U. S. Provost Marshal,
                Alexandria, La.

"Your business must be important indeed, judging by the language of this note," said the marshal.
"You shall not be troubled."

While he was speaking he had been writing an order commanding "all guards and patrols to allow
the bearer the freedom of the city, as he was under special orders from the admiral, and must
not be detained."

"There," said he, after he had finished the pass and handed it to Frank. "That will take you
through all right. You have my best wishes for your success."

Frank thanked him, and putting the pass carefully away in his pocket, walked out of the hotel
fully satisfied on one point, and that was, if his success depended upon the good wishes of
his friends, failure was impossible. He walked slowly down the street toward the place where
the soldiers were encamped; for as it lacked fully an hour and a half of the appointed time,
he did not wish to be seen loitering about the house, as it might excite the suspicions of
its inmates, who would not fail to send word to Mr. Abbott that the house was being watched.
Time moved altogether too slowly for the impatient young officer, but at length he heard the
flag-ship's bell strike half-past seven, and as it had begun to grow dark, he walked toward
the house, and took his station in the shadow of some trees on the opposite side of the street.
At the end of an hour his patience was rewarded, for he heard the sound of approaching footsteps,
and a man passed by the house. Frank knew, from the suspicious manner in which he gazed about,
that if it was not the man for whom he was waiting, it was some other guilty fellow who ought
to be secured. Presently he returned, and after again looking cautiously about him, ascended
the steps and knocked lightly at the door, which was almost instantly opened, and a voice exclaimed:

"Massa Abbott, I'se glad to"--

The rest of the sentence Frank did not hear, for the moment the man entered the hall, the door
was closed again. Now was the time for Frank, who hastily crossed the street, and noiselessly
ascended the steps. Here he paused for a moment to draw his revolver, and then suddenly opened
the door and sprang into the hall. He was met by the negro, the same, no doubt, whom he had
heard welcoming his master, who, not liking the looks of the huge six-shooter which the officer
flourished before his eyes, beat a hasty retreat. Frank kept on and entered the parlor, where
he found his man standing in the middle of the floor, pale and breathless. No one else was
in the room.

"Mr. Abbott," said Frank, "you're my prisoner!"

The man, who was so terrified that he seemed to have lost even the power of speech, surrendered
his weapons and submitted to his captor, who led him out of the house and toward the flag-ship,
which they reached in safety. The admiral received Frank with great cordiality, and after listening
to his account of the manner in which the capture of the prisoner had been effected, he ordered
the cutter called away, and the young officer, rejoicing over his success, was sent on board
his vessel.

CHAPTER VII.

Frank's First Command.

The next morning, just after quarters, while the officers were getting ready to go on shore,
a boat from the flag-ship came alongside, and the officer in charge of it was shown into the
cabin, as he said he had business with the captain. Frank, who thought he had accomplished
sufficient to satisfy him to remain on board, sat in the wardroom reading, when the orderly
entered and informed him that the captain desired his presence in the cabin.

"Mr. Nelson," said he, "here's an order from the admiral, directing me to furnish you with
a cutter and an armed crew, and to send you to the flag-ship for orders. I am also instructed
to appoint an executive to fill your place during your absence. I expect you will be sent off
on some expedition; so you had better prepare for a long trip."

The officer who brought the order having returned to his vessel, the captain accompanied Frank
on deck, and ordered the second cutter to be called away and furnished with a crew well armed.
In a short time the boat was ready, and Frank, buckling on his side-arms, took leave of the
captain and started toward the flag-ship, wondering what duty he was now called upon to perform,
and fully determined that whatever orders he might receive, however dangerous or difficult,
should be executed, if within the bounds of possibility.

When he arrived on board the Blackhawk, an officer, who appeared to be waiting for him, conducted
him into the cabin, where the admiral sat writing at his desk.

"Good morning, Mr. Nelson," said he; "take a chair, sir."

Frank took the seat pointed out to him, and the admiral, taking from his desk a bundle of papers,
carefully tied up, continued:

"It has always been my habit, Mr. Nelson, not to let a brave or skillful action pass unrewarded,
any more than I would allow a bad one to pass unpunished. I am now about to give you a much
more important, and perhaps dangerous, commission than has yet been intrusted to you. This
package contains official documents of the greatest importance, and I want you to go down the
river, and deliver it to the commanding naval officer, whom you will find at Acklen's plantation,
opposite the mouth of Red River. I know there are rebels all along the banks, but whatever
you do, don't allow these letters to fall into their hands. There are iron weights in the package,
and if you should be in danger of capture, throw it overboard. You will take passage on the
army transport that now lies at the stern of this vessel, all ready to start. I send the cutter
and armed crew with you, for the reason that the rebels may sink the transport, in which case
you can escape in your boat; for those letters must go through, if possible; perhaps the success
of this expedition depends upon them. The transport, you will find, is in command of a second-lieutenant.
I should feel much safer if I could put one of my own officers in charge, but, as the boat
belongs to the army, I have no authority in the matter. After you have executed your orders,
return, by first opportunity, to your vessel, and report to me by letter. Now, sir, you may
go, for they are waiting for you. Remember, I say the success or failure of this entire expedition
may depend upon you; and don't forget that you are the young man that saved the Milwaukee."

Frank bowed himself out of the cabin, sprang into the cutter, and started toward the transport
that lay alongside of the bank, a short distance below the flag-ship. As he stepped on board,
he was met by a flashy-looking young lieutenant, dressed in a brand-new uniform, who greeted
him with the inquiry:

"Are you ready at last? I have been waiting an hour for you. Business is business, you know,
and when I command a ship, I don't like to be detained."

The lieutenant said this, probably, to impress upon Frank's mind the important fact that he
was the captain of the steamer, and must be respected and obeyed accordingly. Frank, who knew
that he was not subject to the orders of the lieutenant only so far as the safety of the vessel
was concerned, replied that he had come as soon as he could after he had received his orders,
and turning to his men, directed part of them to make the cutter fast to the stern of the steamer,
and the others to carry their arms to the boiler-deck, where they could be readily seized in
case of emergency. The transport was a small side-wheel boat belonging to the quarter-master's
department. The deck-hands were all soldiers--perhaps half a dozen of them in all--the only
steamboatmen on board being one pilot, four engineers, and as many firemen. The steamer was
armed with two howitzers, mounted on the boiler-deck, and the muskets of the soldiers were
stacked in the cabin. The boilers were protected by bales of cotton, which were piled on the
guards, and the pilot-house was defended in the same manner. A few bales were also placed on
the boiler-deck to serve as a breastwork. The whole was under the command of the lieutenant,
who, judging by the orders he issued, knew nothing whatever of the management of a boat.

Frank had been on board but a few moments, when the engineer's bell rang, to inform the pilot
that all was ready for the start. The tower on four sides will contain four huge clocks lit up
by electric light.

Lofty, roomy halls with ceilings arched and decorated with stucco
panelling; devices and symbols of the quarterings of the Provincial
arms, lead to the interior of the buildings, which though simple,
seems well adapted for public offices.

Broad, well lighted corridors, divide in two each wing and afford ready access to the various
departments located on both sides.

Each flat communicates with the adjoining one by broad, splendid black
walnut staircases decked with arabesques in gilt carving.

The design, elevation and general plan of the edifices, were prepared and drafted by Mr. Eugene
Tache, the Assistant-Commissioner of Crown Lands.

The internal divisions and specifications were laid out under the direction of Mr. P. Gauvreau,
the Engineer of Public Works; the contractor was F. X. Cimon, M.P.

Messrs. Beaucage & Chaliauvert, undertook the cut stone work, which was carried out by their
foreman, Mr. Bourgeaud.

Messrs. Cerat & Vincent, of Montreal, are contractors for the sculpture in stone, and the galvanized
iron roof and ornamentation in the same material and in zinc was
executed by Messrs. De Blois & Bernier, of Montreal, whilst Mitchell
& Co. contracted for the heating apparatus.

The whole building when completed is expected to cost about $800,000.

Opposite looms out the long tea-caddy-looking building, built by the Sandfield Macdonald Government
in 1862,--the Volunteer Drill Shed. Its length, if not its beauty,
attracts notice.

"Ferguson's house," next it, noted by Professor Silliman in his "Tour between Hartford and
Quebec in 1819," is now difficult to recognize; its present owner,
A. Joseph, Esq., has added so much to its size.

This antiquated dwelling certainly does not belong to a new dispensation.

Another land-mark of the past deserves notice--the ex-Commander of the Forces' lofty quarters;
from its angular eaves and forlorn aspect it generally went by the name of "Bleak House." I
cannot say whether the place was ever haunted, but it ought to have been. [149] On the summit
of the plateau, formerly known as Buttes- a-Nepveu, and facing Mr. John Roche's stately mansion,
Hon. P. Garneau and M. Bilodeau have constructed handsome terraces of cut-stone dwellings. We are
now in the Grande Allee--the forest avenue, which two hundred years ago led to Sillery Wood.
On turning and looking back as you approach Bleak House, you have an excellent view of the
Citadel, and of the old French works which extend beyond it, to the extremity of the Cape,
overlooking l'Anse de Meres. A little beyond Bleak-House, at the top of what is generally known
as Perrault's Hill, stands the Perrault [150] homestead, dating back to 1820, l'Asyle Champetre--now
tastefully renovated and owned by Henry Dinning, Esq. The roof and facade of a Chalet Suisse
would much enhance its appearance. The adjoining range of heights, occupied by the Martello
Towers, the Garneau and Bilodeau Terraces, &c., were called the Buttes-a-Nepveu, after one
of their first French owners. "It was here that Murray took his stand on the morning of April
28th, 1760, to resist the advance of Levis, and here commenced the hardest-fought, the bloodiest
action of the war, which terminated in the defeat of Murray, and
his retreat within the city".

The Martello Towers are bomb-proof, they were four [151] in number, and formed a chain of forts
extending along the ridge from the St. Lawrence to the River St. Charles. The fact that this
ridge commanded the city, unfortunately induced Murray to leave it and attempt to fortify the
heights, in which he was only partially successful, owing to the frost being still in the ground.

The
British Government were made aware of the fact, and seeing that from the improved artillery
the city was now fully commanded from the heights, which are about seven hundred yards distant,
decided to build the Towers. Arrangements were accordingly made by Col. Brock, then commanding
the troops in Canada. In 1806 the necessary materials were collected, and in the following year
their construction commenced.

They were not, however, completed till 1812. The original estimate for the four was L8,000, but
before completion the Imperial Government had expended nearly L12,000. They are not all of
the same size, but, like all Martello Towers, they are circular and
bomb-proof.

The exposed sides are thirteen feet thick and gradually diminish like the horns of the crescent
moon, to seven feet in the centre of the side next the city walls.

The first or lower story contains tanks, store-rooms and magazine; the second has cells for
the garrison, with port-holes for two guns. On the top there used to be one 68-pounder carronade,
two 24 and two 9-pounders.

A party of Arnold's soldiers ascended these heights in November, 1775, and advanced quite close
to the city walls, shouting defiance at the little garrison. A few shots soon dispersed the
invaders, who retraced their steps to Wolfe's Cove. At the Buttes-a-Nepveu great criminals were
formerly executed. Here, La Corriveau, the St. Vallier Lafarge, met her deserved fate, in 1763,
after being tried by one of Governor Murray's Courts-martial for murdering her husband. After
death she was hung in chains, or rather in a solid iron cage, at the fork of four roads, at
Levi, close to the spot where the Temperance Monument has since been built. The loathsome form
of the murderess caused more than one shudder amongst the peaceable peasantry of Levi, until
some brave young men one dark night, cut down the horrid cage, and hid it deep under ground,
next to the cemetery at Levi, where, close to a century afterwards, it was dug up and sold to
Barnum's agent for his museum.

Sergeant Jas. Thompson describes in his diary, under date 18th Nov., 1782, another memorable
execution:

"This day two fellows were executed for the murder and robbery of Capt. Stead, Commander of one
of the Treasury Brigs, on the evening of the 31st Dec., 1779, between
the Upper and Lower Town.

The criminals went through Port St. Louis, about 11 o'clock, at a
slow and doleful pace, to the place where justice had allotted them
to suffer the most ignominious death.

It is astonishing to see what a crowd of people followed the tragic scene. Even our people on
the works (Cape Diamond) prayed Capt. Twiss for leave to follow the
hard-hearted crowd."

It was this Capt. Twiss who subsequently furnished the plan and built a temporary citadel in 1793.

In
1793, we have also, recorded in history, another doleful procession
of red-coats, the Quebec Garrison accompanying to the same place of
execution as a mess-mate (Draper), a soldier of the Fusileers, then
commanded by the young Duke of Kent, who, after pronouncing the sentence
of death, as commander, over the trembling culprit kneeling on his
coffin, as son and representative of the Sovereign, exercised the
Royal prerogative of mercy and pardoned poor Draper.

Look down Perrault's hill towards the south. There stands, with a few shrubs and trees in the
foreground, the Military Home--where infirm soldiers, their widows and children, could find
a refuge. It has recently been purchased and converted into the "Female Orphan Asylum." It forms
the eastern boundary of a large expanse of verdure and trees, reaching the summit of the lot
originally intended by the Seminary of Quebec for a Botanical Garden;
subsequently it was contemplated to build their new seminary there
to afford the boys abundance of fresh air.

Alas! Other counsels prevailed.

Its western boundary is a road leading to the new District Jail--a stone structure of great
strength, surmounted with a diminutive tower, admirably adapted,
one would imagine, for astronomical pursuits.

From its glistening cupola, Commander Ashe's Provincial Observatory
is. visible to the east.

I was forgetting to notice the substantial building, dating from 1855--the Ladies' Home. The
Protestant Ladies of Quebec have here, at no small expense and trouble,
raised a useful asylum, where the aged and infirm may find shelter.

This, and the building opposite, St. Bridget's Asylum, with its growing fringe of trees and green
plots, are decided ornaments to the Grande Allee.

The old burying ground of 1832, with all its ghastly memories of the Asiatic scourge, has assumed
quite an ornate, nay a respectable aspect.

Close to the toll-bar on the Grande Allee, may yet be seen one of the meridian stones which
serve to mark the western boundary of the city, beyond the Messrs.
Lampson's mansion.

On the adjoining domain, well named "Battlefield Cottage," formerly the property of Col. Charles
Campbell, now owned by Michael Connolly, Esq., was the historic well
out of which a cup of water was obtained to moisten the parched lips
of the dying hero, James Wolfe, on the 13th September, 1759.

The well was filled in a few years ago, but not before it was nigh
proving fatal to Col. Campbell's then young son,--(Arch.

Campbell, Esq., of Thornhill.) Its site is close to the western boundary fence, in the garden,
behind "Battlefield Cottage." Here we are at those immortal plains--the Hastings of the two
races once arrayed in battle against one another at Quebec.

The western boundary of the Plains is a high fence enclosing Marchmont, for years the cherished
family seat of John Gilmour, Esq., now occupied by Col. Fred Turnbull,
of the Canadian Hussars.

On the north-east corner of the Belvedere Road, may be seen a range of glass houses, put up
by J. Doig, formerly gardener at Benmore.

A few minutes more brings the tourist to the Hon. D. Price's villa, Wolfe- field, where may
be seen the precipitous path up the St. Denis burn, by which the Highlanders and British soldiers
gained a footing above, on the 13th September, 1759, and met in battle
array to win a victory destined to revolutionize the New World.

The British were piloted in their ascent of the river by a French prisoner brought with them
from England--Denis de Vitre, formerly a Quebecer of distinction. Their landing place at Sillery
was selected by Major Robert Stobo, who had, in May, 1759, escaped
from a French prison in Quebec, and joined his countrymen, the English,
at Louisbourg, from whence he took ship again to meet Admiral Saunders'
fleet at Quebec.

The tourist next drives past Thornhill, for years owned by Arch.

Campbell, Esq., P.S.C., Sir Francis Hincks' old home when Premier
to Lord Elgin.

Opposite appear the leafy glades of Spencer Wood, so grateful a summer retreat, that Lord Elgin
used to say, "There he not only loved to live, but would like to rest his bones." Next comes
Spencer Grange, the seat of J. M. LeMoine, Esq.; then Woodfield,
the homestead, of the Hon. Wm.

Sheppard [152] in 1847, later on of Messrs. John Lawson and Jas Gibb.

[153] Facing the Woodfield property, on the Gomin Road, are visible the extensive vineries and peach
houses of Hon. Geo. Okill Stuart, Judge of the Vice-Admiralty Court.

The eye next dwells on the rustic church of St. Michael, embowered
in evergreens.

This handsome little temple of worship where the Governors of Canada usually attended, when living
at Spencer Wood, contain several memorial window. Southwards looms out, at Sous- les-Bois, the
stately convent of Jesus-Marie; on the edge of the bank, to the south-east, at Pointe-a-Pizeau,
stands the R. C. Church of St. Colomb de Sillery, in a most commanding position; on the Sillery
heights, north-west of the Church of St. Michael, the late Bishop George J. Mountain owned a
delightful summer retreat, recently sold to Albert H. Furniss, Esq.; then you meet with villas innumerable--one
of the most conspicuous is Benmore House, Col. Rhodes' country seat. Benmore is well worthy of
a call, were it only to procure a bouquet. This is not merely the Eden of roses; Col. Rhodes
has combined the farm with the garden. His underground rhubarb and mushroom cellars, his boundless
asparagus beds and strawberry plantations, are a credit to Quebec.

Next come Clermont, [154] Beauvoir, [155] Kilmarnock, [156] Cataraqui, [157] Kilgraston, [158]
Kirk-Ella, [159] Meadow Bank, [160] Ravenswood, [161] Dornald, [162] until, after a nine miles'
drive, Redclyffe closes the rural landscape--Redclyffe, [163] on the top of Cap Rouge Promontory.
There, many indications yet mark the spot where Roberval's ephemeral colony wintered as far back
as 1542. You can now, if you like, return to the city by the same route, or select the Ste.
Foye Road, skirting the classic heights where General Murray, six months after the first battle
of the Plains, lost the second, on the 28th April, 1760; the St. Foye Church was then occupied
by the British soldiers. Beausejour is a beautiful demesne, where M. Ls. Bilodeau has several
reservoirs, for the propagation of trout. Your gaze next rests on Holland House, Montgomery's
headquarters in 1775, behind which is Holland tree, overshadowing, as of yore, the grave of the Hollands.
[164]

The view, from the St. Foye Road, of the gracefully meandering St. Charles below, especially
during the high tides, is something to be remembered.

The tourist shortly after detects the iron pillar, surmounted by
a bronze statue of Bellona, presented in 1855 by Prince Napoleon Bonaparte--
intended to commemorate the fierce struggle at this spot on the 28th
April, 1760.

In close vicinity, appear the bright parterres or umbrageous groves
of Bellevue, [165] Hamwood, [166] Bijou, [167] Westfield, [168] Sans-Bruit,
and the narrow gothic arches of Finlay Asylum; soon you re-enter by
St. John's Suburbs, with the broad basin of the St. Charles and the
pretty Island of Orleans staring you in the face.

The principal objects to be noted in this street are: on the north side, St. John's Church,
built in 1848--a large but not very elegant temple of R. C. worship,
capable of seating 2,000 persons; on the south side, St. Mathew's
Church, (Church of England,) a handsome structure, whose beginnings,
in 1828; were associated with the late Bishop G. J. Mountain's ministrations
and munificence.

The exertions of the Rev. Chs. Hamilton and the generous donations of his brother, Robert Hamilton,
and other members of the family, have been mainly instrumental in enlarging and decorating this
building. Close by, is the new French Protestant Church. We shall close this short sketch with
a mention of the "Quebec Protestant Burying Ground," originally bought by the Government of
the Province of Quebec, from the heirs of St. Simon, partly on the 9th December, 1771, and
partly on the 22nd August, 1778. In the year 1823, Lord Dalhousie made a grant of this ground
to the "Trustees of the Protestant Burying Ground," in whose hands
it has remained until the 19th May,, 1860, when the cemetery was declared
closed by the 23rd Vict., chap.

70. Major Thomas Scott, Pay- master of the 70th Regiment, a brother to Sir Walter, was buried
here in 1823. Major Thomas Scott was at one time charged with having written "Rob Roy." And
next to St. John Gate, looms out the handsome new building of the Y. M. C. A Association facing the
new Montcalm Market.

ASSOCIATION HALL.

"The first Young Men's Christian Association in this city was organized
about twenty years ago, but it soon collapsed, having run into debt.

A second attempt resulted in the formation of another Association
in 1867, which was also a failure.

The present Association was established in January, 1870.

It had a very small beginning--five young men met in a merchant's
office in the Lower Town for prayer and conference and they formed
the nucleus of the present Association.

John C. Thomson, Esq., now President of the Association, a gentleman
well known for his active interest in all good works, was one of the
five.

Soon after this prayer meeting, a canvass was made among young men,
and 150 names obtained.

Henry Fry Esq., merchant, was elected first President, and Mr. W. Ahern, Secretary. For three years
the Association occupied rooms over the hardware store of Messrs. Belanger & Gariepy, Fabrique street,
and, in 1873, removed to the rooms above Mr. McLeod's drug store, which it vacated to enter
upon an enlarged sphere of labour in its elegant new building. It is admirably situated, facing
the Montcalm market."

"In October 1875, a delegation of Y. M. C. A. workers visited this
city, including Messrs. Crombie, Budge, Cole, &c. The revival services
which followed their visit will still be fresh in the memory of our
readers.

Two results, both fraught with very great importance to the Association, followed their visit. One
was the engagement of Mr. T. S. Cole as permanent Secretary, the
other was the development of a scheme for the construction of a building
to be specially adapted, and regularly set apart for the use of the
Association.

On a memorable Monday evening in October, 1877, in the Methodist
Church in this city, the scheme was first publicly discussed.

At this meeting some $5,000 was subscribed, and the canvass next
day resulted in large additions to the above.

Up to the present, $19,000 have been subscribed towards the structure,
and over $15,000 paid in, including the proceeds of the ladies' bazaar
last year (1879).

"The site of the building, one of the most valuable, and certainly one of the most eligible for
the purpose in the city was obtained by purchase from the Dominion
Government by auction in the month of January, 1878.

The plans for the building were secured by competition, the successful architect being Mr.
J. F. Peachy. The cost of the whole building, when completed, will be $40,000, but at present only
the front portion has been erected.

The back wing will be commenced when a few thousand dollars more have been subscribed towards
it. It is to contain the gymnasium below, and above a large hall 100 feet by 56, with seating
accommodation for 700 people on the floor and 300 in the galleries.

This hall will be furnished with an independent entrance from Glacis street, twelve feet wide.
The lot upon which the present building is erected contains 21,000 square feet, being 186 feet
in depth, and having a frontage on St. John street of 106 feet. The front building covers the
whole extent of frontage and has a depth of 50 feet. It is built of stone and brick, the whole
front being stone and cut glass. It contains three flats including the mansard. Over the main
entrance is an open Bible, upon which is engraved Matt.

XXIII., 8. Above the centre Window in raised letters in stone, are the words "Quebec Young
Men's Christian Association, 1879." Immediately behind the front structure is a small building
which forms a room for the daily prayer meeting.

It may be reached from Glacis street, and also by a staircase leading down to it from the entrance
hall of the main building."

"The lower part of the edifice has been fitted up as stores. The main entrance to Association
Hall, in the middle of the front, is by a spacious staircase twelve
feet wide, at the foot of which are elegant double swinging doors
with plate glass.

Beneath this stairway is the heating apparatus, which has been placed in the building by Mr.
Thomas Andrews, of St. John street, and is on an entirely new and highly approved principle.
The whole second flat, is set apart for Association use. One-half of it composes the reading
room. This magnificent apartment which is one of the finest reading rooms on the Continent,
is 45 by 46 feet, having a height of 18 feet, with windows on three sides, the balcony window
on the North overlooking the whole of the country between St. Roch's and the Laurentian Mountains.
Opposite the top of the stairway on the landing of this flat, is the door leading to the Secretary's
room, which is fitted with glass, in order that the Secretary may see everybody coming up
stairs into the reading room or elsewhere.

This room is about 12 by 18 feet, and has on either side of it, the committee room and cloak room,
both of about similar dimensions. Opposite the committee room is the lavatory, &c., for the use
of members

.


Frank gave the necessary orders, and in a few moments they were again on their way down the
river, while the lieutenant walked into the cabin and threw himself on a lounge, heartily wishing
there were no gun-boat men in existence. As soon as they were fairly under way, Frank, seeing
that the lieutenant took no further notice of what was going on, ran below to set the watch;
then, after satisfying himself that every thing was right about decks, and that their weapons
were ready for instant use, he stretched himself on a blanket in the cabin, and with his precious
dispatches (which he had carried with him wherever he went) for a pillow, was soon fast asleep.

About midnight he was suddenly awakened by a terrific crash, and sprang to his feet to find
the cabin shrouded in darkness and filled with smoke. Hastily thrusting his dispatches into
his pocket, he commenced groping for his side-arms, which, on retiring, he had placed by his
side, while a commotion on deck told him that the crew were hurrying to their stations. When
he had found his sword, he ran out of the cabin, and saw his men drawn up behind the cotton-bales,
under charge of the coxswain, who ran up to his officer and hurriedly asked for orders. The
latter did not long remain ignorant of the nature of the attack, for a shell plunged into the
cabin which he had just left, and, exploding with a deafening report, filled the air with fragments
of furniture, and tore a large hole in the deck above the boilers. The night was very dark,
but still there was light enough for Frank to see that the boat, no longer obeying her helm,
was drifting broadside toward the battery, the position of which could be easily determined
by the flash of its guns; and it was evident that unless those guns could be speedily silenced,
the transport would be altogether demolished, or disabled so that she would fall into the hands
of the rebels. Turning to the coxswain, Frank inquired:

"Is that cutter ready for immediate use?"

"All ready, sir," was the answer.

"Let loose those guns, then. Fire!"

The two howitzers belched forth their contents, but while they were being reloaded, another
broadside from the battery plunged into the boat, followed by the hissing and shrieking of
steam. A shot had struck the boilers! The thought had scarcely passed through Frank's mind,
when the pilot sprang down the steps, exclaiming:

"Mr. Nelson, the tiller-rope is shot away, sir, and the boat is on fire!"

In short, much sooner than Frank had expected, the transport was a complete wreck.

The cotton-bales on the guards had been set on fire by a bursting shell; the tiller-rope shot
away, rendering it impossible to steer the boat; the boilers penetrated, and the engine-room
filled with hot steam, which now began to rise and envelop the men on the boiler-deck. Soldiers
and sailors at once deserted their quarters and ran about in confusion, while Frank, with his
handkerchief in his mouth, to prevent his inhaling the steam, stood wondering, where so many
things were to be done, which ought to be done first. He was quickly called to action by the
pilot, who, as he ran down the steps that led to the forecastle, exclaimed:

"Let every man take care of himself!"

When that man, who had been in nearly all the battles fought on the Mississippi River--who
had run the batteries at Vicksburg, and had twice, in the heat of action, swam from a sinking
vessel--when he deserted his post, it was useless for any one to remain. The transport could
be of no further use to them, and to stay on board was to court either death from the hot,
blinding steam, or the shells that all the while came crashing into the boat, or capture and
hard treatment at the hands of the rebels. So thought Frank, as he followed his men to the
forecastle, intending to enter the cutter, and, if possible, run by the battery and reach the
Mississippi.

The steam rolled over the lower deck in thick clouds, rendering it impossible for him to go
aft. There was now but one way to reach the cutter, and that was to jump overboard and swim
to her. This order was promptly given, and as promptly obeyed by the men, who sprang into the
water, one after another, followed by Frank, who, however, had lingered a moment to pull off
his side-arms and coat, which would only impede his progress, and to secure his dispatches,
which he tied to his waist with a strong cord he happened to have in his pocket.

But when he reached the stern of the boat, he found that this means of escape had been destroyed.
A shell from the battery had struck the cutter, and her wreck, still hold by the rope with
which she had been made fast, floated along with the steamer, which was slowly drifting toward
the bank. Only one of his men was to be seen, and that was the coxswain, who was holding on
to the wreck, awaiting the appearance of his officer. The others, giving up all hopes of escape,
had doubtless turned toward the shore.

"Now, here's a job, sir," said the coxswain, apparently as unconcerned as if there had not
been a rebel within a hundred miles. "Here is a job. What's to be done now, sir?"

Frank had just asked himself the same question. He could easily reach the shore, which was
but a few yards distant, but there he would certainly be captured by the rebels, who were running
along the bank, yelling like demons.

There was but one course he could pursue and save himself and dispatches, and that was to swim
down the river and endeavor to pass the battery. In the darkness he might escape undiscovered.

"Bob, are you a good swimmer?" he asked, turning to the coxswain.

"Yes sir! can swim all day," was the reply.

"Then follow me as silently as possible, and we may yet escape."

As Frank spoke, he swam down the river with swift, noiseless strokes, anxious to get as far
as possible from the boat before the fire, which now began to make rapid headway, should light
up the river and discover them to the rebels. The latter had ceased firing, and were scattered
along the bank, making prisoners of the transport's crew as fast as they touched the shore.
When Frank had reached the place where the battery was stationed, he turned upon his back,
and allowed himself to float along with the current, and, aided by the darkness and the smoke
of the burning transport, which blew down the river, he and his companion passed the dangerous
point undiscovered. Here Frank again struck out, his every movement followed by the coxswain,
who was close behind him, and who floated through the water like a cork.

For nearly an hour they remained in the river, and it was not until the shouts of the rebels
could be no longer heard, that Frank, feeling for the present safe from pursuit, swam to the
shore and sat down to rest, and to determine upon their future movements.

CHAPTER IX.

Up the Washita.

All noise of pursuit, if any had been made, had died away, and not a sound disturbed the stillness
of the woods. But Frank had learned, by experience, that silence was not indicative of safety,
for it might, at any moment, be broken by the report of muskets, or a sudden demand for surrender
from enemies who had followed them so silently that their approach had not been discovered.
He bent suspicious glances upon the woods on all sides of him, and was ready to plunge into
the water again upon hearing the least sounds of pursuit.

What had become of the wounded pilot, the lieutenant, and the rest of the cutter's crew? All
who had succeeded in reaching the shore, were, beyond a doubt, prisoners.

Frank shuddered when he thought of the hard fare and harder treatment that awaited the poor
fellows, recalling to mind incidents of his own capture and escape, which made him doubly anxious
to reach the Mississippi as soon as possible, where he would be safe among friends.

After resting nearly an hour, for their long swim had wearied them, they continued their flight
down the river, being careful to keep close to the bank, so that in case of emergency they
could again take to the water. The shore was covered with logs and bushes, and their progress
was slow and laborious. But daylight came at length, and shortly afterward they discovered
a transport coming up the river. When she arrived opposite to them, Frank hailed her, and the
boat landed and took them on board. Frank gave the information that there was a battery above,
and the captain, not liking the idea of trusting his unarmed vessel within range of its guns,
ordered the pilot to round-to and start down the river again. The order was obeyed at once,
and Frank and the coxswain, who now began to breathe more freely, went below and stood before
the fire-doors to dry their clothing. About noon they arrived at the Mississippi River, the
transport landing alongside the vessel of the commanding naval officer, to whom Frank delivered
his dispatches in triumph, at the same time apologizing for his appearance, for he was without
coat, hat, or side-arms.

Among these dispatches of the admiral were orders for two tin-clads to report at Alexandria.
These vessels were to be used to keep the banks clear of rebels, to carry dispatches, and to
convoy unarmed steamers up and down the river. The necessary orders were promptly issued, and
in a short time the tin-clads came alongside; their commanders received their instructions,
after which the vessels steamed up Red River, one of them having Frank and the coxswain on
board. The former had in his possession several official documents addressed to the admiral.
If he could have seen the inside of one of them, he would have found (greatly to his surprise)
that it contained a complete history of the run from Alexandria, that it spoke in the highest
terms of his skill and bravery, and ended with a recommendation for a master's appointment.
This letter had been written by the captain to whom Frank had delivered his dispatches, he
having learned the full particulars from the coxswain, whom he had summoned into his presence
while Frank was in the wardroom eating his dinner. The sailor described all that had happened
in glowing language, dwelling with a good deal of emphasis upon the "pluck" displayed by his
young officer, and the ignorance and cowardice of the lieutenant, and ended with saying, "He
didn't think of nothing, sir, but them dispatches; and it an't every man that could have saved
'em, sir." The captain fully agreed with the coxswain, and when the latter was dismissed, he
gave his pants a vigorous hitch, and said to himself, "If Mr. Nelson don't get another stripe
around his arm now, may I be keelhauled." And one, to have seen him, would have thought that
he was as much pleased at the prospect as though he was about to receive the appointment himself.
Frank, of course, knew nothing of this, and little imagining that he was carrying a recommendation
for his promotion, he put the letters carefully away in his pocket, thinking, no doubt, they
were all-important official documents.

A short time before dark they arrived at the junction of the Black and Washita Rivers, where
Frank found the Michigan anchored, in company with four or five other gun-boats. He reported
his safe return to his captain, and then went into the wardroom and sat down to report to the
admiral by letter, according to his instructions. After all he had passed through, one would
suppose that his report would have been a long one; but he wisely thought that all the admiral
cared to know was that his dispatches had been safely delivered. He therefore wrote, in the
briefest manner--

"I have the honor to report that, in obedience to your orders of the 20th inst., I took passage
on board the United States army transport "Key-West," for the mouth of Red River, with dispatches,
which were delivered into the hands of the commanding naval officer there. I have to-day returned
on board my vessel."

This was all. No glowing description of the gallant manner in which he had taken the transport
by the battery, no mention of the ever-watchful eye he had kept upon his dispatches, or of
his long swim from the burning wreck, but a few simple lines, that told the admiral all he
wished to know; namely, that his letters had reached their destination. This report Frank placed
before the captain, who wrote upon it "approved and respectfully forwarded," (for all letters
from subordinate officers to the admiral had to pass through the captain's hands,) and the
letter was put into the general mail. Frank then, in obedience to the captain's order, proceeded
to give that gentleman a minute account of the manner in which he had executed his orders,
together with the names of the men belonging to the cutter's crew who were missing, and wound
up with the request that "something might be done for the coxswain," for he was a brave man,
and a good sailor. As the Michigan had but one boatswain's mate, (she was entitled to two,)
the captain determined to promote the man, who was at once summoned into the cabin and presented
with the boatswain's whistle. He retired, proud of his promotion, and firm in his belief that
"the captain and Mr. Nelson were the best men afloat."

Frank, so weary that he could scarcely walk, was glad to get to bed; but the captain sat for
a long time at his desk, writing a letter to the admiral, which contained the statement that,
in his opinion, "Acting Ensign Frank Nelson, by the gallant manner in which he had executed
the important business intrusted to him, had nobly earned his promotion, and, by the skill
and judgment he had exhibited in handling the transport, had shown that he was fully capable
of taking charge of a vessel of his own, and that his past history, taken in connection with
his recent exploit, was sufficient guarantee that the honor of the flag would never suffer
in his hands."

Frank, all unconscious of the admiration his gallant behavior had excited in the mind of the
captain, slept soundly until daylight, when he was called up to get the vessel under way. The
expedition was composed of five gun-boats, and its destination was Monroe, a small town about
two hundred miles up Washita River. Its object was to capture cotton, and to destroy any fortifications
that might be found along the banks. The remainder of the fleet, which was at Alexandria when
Frank left, had gone up Red River, toward Shreveport. Had he been allowed his choice in the
matter, Frank would have preferred to accompany the latter expedition, as he then would have
been able, after Shreveport had been captured, to visit the prison in which he had been confined,
and from which he had escaped in so remarkable a manner. He thought over all the scenes through
which he had passed--his capture, the march to Shreveport, his flight from the prison, the
bayonet-fight in the woods, the chase by blood-hounds--and they seemed to him like a dream.

George Le Dell, who was the officer of the deck, stood close beside Frank, gazing about as
if every object that met his eye was a familiar one. Every turn of the paddle-wheels was bringing
him nearer to the home of his childhood, from which he was now excluded by the stern mandate
of his rebel father. Ever since he had been attached to the Michigan, he and Frank had been
bosom friends. The dangers through which they had passed while fugitives from a rebel prison--their
hair-breadth escapes from recapture--could never be forgotten. No one on board besides Frank
knew any thing of George's past history. In accordance with the latter's desire, the secret
was closely kept, and no one imagined that the pale, quiet young officer was any relation to
the rebel general whose house it had been ordered should be burned. Ever since the receipt
of that order, every one remarked that George Le Dell had been unusually thoughtful, but no
one knew the cause.

"Mr. Nelson," said he, at length, "I wish I could have gone up Red River. I want to see home
once more, but I don't want to stand by and see the old house burned over the heads of my mother
and sisters. I don't deny that the order is a just one, but I don't want to see it executed.
I begin to believe that I am a good prophet," he continued, after a moment's pause. "I told
father, in the last letter I ever wrote to him, that this war would bring him nothing but suffering
and disgrace, and I think he will find that I told the truth."

As George ceased speaking, he turned and walked to another part of the deck, to meet the captain,
who at that moment came out of his cabin.

Among all the ship's company, there was but one that could sympathize with George, and that
one was Frank. The young officer cherished an honest enmity toward the traitors whose bloody
hands were stretched out to pull down the Old Flag under which his ancestors had fought and
died, but when Frank looked upon the pale face of his messmate, and listened to his oft-repeated
sentiments of loyalty, and heard him, in his quiet way, expressing his firm belief in the final
triumph of the Government and the total overthrow of the rebellion, and when he witnessed his
quiet submission to his cruel fate, knowing that he was cut off from all further intercourse
with his relatives, he could not help pitying both him and his rebel parents. But he knew,
from those letters he had read, and which George still preserved, and from what he had witnessed
on that memorable night when he and his companions had stopped at the plantation and asked
for food, that the general and his family had taken part with the rebellion, not to secure
any rights which they imagined had been denied them, but to assist in "establishing a confederacy
of their own, whose corner-stone should be slavery," and to destroy "every vestige of the old
Union." Like George, he knew that the order to burn the house was a just one; but he would
have been much better pleased had some other boat been selected to execute it. He did not pity
the rebels so much, but he did not want to witness the sorrow his messmate would experience
when he saw the home of his boyhood enveloped in flames.

The next day, as the two friends stood together on deck, George suddenly said--

"We're almost there. I know these woods well. I've caught many a string of fish off that log
that lies in the water just ahead."

About half a mile further on, the Michigan came round a sharp bend in the river, and they saw
the plantation before them. Every thing looked just as it did on that long-to-be-remembered
night when George had suddenly presented himself before his relatives, who thought him safe
in the prison at Tyler. There were the broad stone steps that led up to the portico on which
the major had stood while making known his wants, and just in front of them were the posts
to which the general and his sons had fastened their horses before entering the house.

The fleet did not stop, as they had expected, but kept on up the river, and in a few moments
more the plantation was out of sight. No doubt the burning of the house was to be put off until
their return.

The expedition reached Monroe without mishap, and without seeing a single armed rebel, only
stopping now and then to pick up cotton, which was scattered all along the bank. The vessels
remained at anchor in front of the town for two days, and after burning the public buildings,
and picking up some escaped Union prisoners, started down the river again. The Michigan led
the way, and on the afternoon of the second day came to anchor in front of General Le Dell's
plantation.

"Mr. Nelson," said the captain, as he stepped down out of the pilot-house, "order two companies
of small-armed men to be called away, and you and Mr. Le Dell get ready to go on shore with
me. By the way," he added, turning to George, "I have orders to burn out this rebel namesake
of yours."

"So I have heard, sir," replied George, while not a muscle of his face quivered to show the
surprise and sorrow he felt at being obliged to accompany the expedition ashore. He had hoped
that some other officer would be chosen to accompany the captain, but he could not ask to be
excused from duty without exciting suspicions. The reason why he did not wish to go could be
easily guessed, and if the truth became known, it would be followed by what he particularly
desired to avoid--the sympathy of all his messmates. He would accompany the expedition, but
he would neither enter the house or go into the presence of his mother and sisters, and he
might return without being recognized. By the time he had buckled on his sword and returned
to the deck the men were ready, when, in obedience to Frank's order, he marched them on board
the tug, which lay at the stern of the Michigan. When they reached the shore, Frank instructed
George to post sentries all around the house, both to guard against surprise, and also to prevent
the escape of any rebel soldiers who might chance to be in the building, after which he accompanied
the captain to the door, where they were met by Mrs. Le Dell and her daughters, who coldly
received their salutations, and waited for them to make known the object of their visit.

"Madam," said the captain, addressing himself to Mrs. Le Dell, "I am ordered to burn your house."

"I have been expecting it for a long time," was the reply.

"I will give you a reasonable time," continued the captain, "to remove your valuables."

The lady then requested that an hour might be allowed her to send for a neighbor, who lived
several miles distant, to come with his team to remove the furniture to a place of safety,
as all the wagons about the plantation had been given up to the rebel army. This was granted,
and a note, which was first presented for the inspection of the captain, was at once dispatched
to summon the neighbor.

In the meantime, Frank and George were strolling about the plantation, the latter feasting
his eyes on every familiar object, and recalling to mind incidents of the "good old times,"
as he expressed it. Frank also recognized two objects; one was the barn where he and his fellow-fugitives
had halted to hold a consultation before going up to the house; and the other was the fence
behind which the captain had left their prisoner, bound hand and foot. While thus engaged,
a little boy, who had approached them without being discovered, suddenly called out,

"George!"

The latter turned, as the familiar voice reached his ear, and held out his hands to his brother,
who sprang toward him, threw his arms around his neck, and burst into tears. There was one
among George's relatives who still remembered and loved him.

"George," sobbed the little fellow, "are you a Yankee 'bolitionist?"

Tears choked George's utterance, and the boy, suddenly breaking from his arms, ran toward the
house, and scrambling up the steps, burst into the room where the captain and ladies were seated,
and astonished them all with:

"Mother, mother! George is here! He's come back!"

Both mother and daughter appeared to be considerably agitated upon receiving this news, and
the captain noticing it, the suspicion flashed across his mind that it was one of their rebel
friends. He glanced out at the door, and saw his two officers standing quietly together, the
sentinels walking their beats, and felt satisfied that the rebel, whoever he was, might consider
himself a prisoner.

"Who do you mean, my little man?" he asked, putting his hand on the boy's head. "What is his
other name?"

"George Le Dell," replied the boy, promptly. "He's my brother. He's out there," and he pointed
toward the place where George and Frank were standing.

"Is that your brother?" asked the captain in surprise, as he turned toward Mrs. Le Dell for
an explanation.

"I have a son in the Federal navy," replied the lady.

"Then, madam," said the captain, "if that young man out there is your son, allow me to say
that you have every reason to be proud of him."

At this moment the neighbor for whom they had sent arrived, and he and the captain held a long
conversation; after which, to his surprise, Frank was ordered to collect the men and march
them on board the tug. The Michigan remained at her anchorage until the flag-ship of the expedition
came down, when the two captains had a short consultation, and both vessels got under way and
steamed down the river. The reason given why the order to burn the house was not executed was
this: Unlike the majority of rebel commanders, General Le Dell had always treated Union prisoners
who had fallen into his hands with the greatest humanity. Although he seemed to be particularly
spiteful toward George, whom he called a "young traitor," he always endeavored to make the
condition of other prisoners as tolerable as possible. The truth of this was attested by the
soldiers they had picked up at Monroe, all of whom were officers, and they had done much toward
saving the property. The captain of the Michigan had delayed to fulfill his orders until the
arrival of his superior, in order to communicate some news he had received from the man who
had been sent to remove the furniture, and when the flag-ship arrived, the order had been countermanded.

"Perhaps every thing will come out right after the war," said George, as the two friends stood
watching the plantation as long as it remained in eight. "If it does, we'll have the old house
to live in."

On the way down the river, large quantities of cotton were captured, which made both officers
and men look forward to a good share of prize-money, and one afternoon--about a week after
leaving Monroe--they reached Black River in safety.

CHAPTER X.

The Promotion.

The next day, in obedience to orders from the admiral, the Michigan steamed up Red River, and
came to an anchor in front of Fort De Russy. A few rebel soldiers had taken possession of the
fortifications, and the vessel had scarcely dropped her anchor when they opened upon her with
muskets. All hands were ordered under cover, and for two days were kept closely confined below.
The bullets, which constantly whistled over the deck, did no damage beyond cutting down the
flag--which, however was promptly hoisted again--and battering up the officers' rooms on the
quarter-deck, which were not iron-clad. Several attempts were made to dislodge the rebels,
but, as usual, without success. On the third day, however, a heavy firing up the river, in
the direction of Alexandria, announced that the expedition was returning, and the rebels, fearing
capture, hastily withdrew. Toward evening the fleet came in sight, some of the transports having
gun-boats alongside of them for protection. The entire fleet bore marks of the handiwork of
the rebels, in the shape of battered casemates, broken chimneys, and shattered upper works.
Little had been accomplished beyond the capture of cotton, and both officers and men teemed
delighted to find themselves once more on the way to the Mississippi River.

In about an hour after the first boats of the fleet had made their appearance, a tin-clad came
down, bearing the admiral's flag, and rounded-to and landed a short distance below the Michigan.
Close behind her came another of the mosquito fleet, towed by a transport. Both vessels were
badly cut up, especially the gun-boat, which was almost a wreck. Both chimneys had either been
broken off by branches of trees or shattered by a shell, and her casemates were pierced in
a hundred places. Her engines had also been disabled, and her wheel hung motionless in the
water. Still she retained enough of her former appearance for Frank to recognize in her his
old vessel, the Boxer; besides, he saw his cousin on the guards waving his handkerchief to
him. While Frank stood watching the vessel, wondering how any of her crew could have escaped,
and how Archie had conducted himself during the fights through which he had passed, the captain
came up out of his cabin and exclaimed:

"Mr. Nelson, you're wanted on board the flagship! Don't wait to get your side-arms, but go
at once. The admiral is in a great hurry to see you!"

Frank, wondering what new orders he was about to receive, ran down the ladder that led to the
afterguard, reached the shore on a plank that extended from the stern of the vessel to the
bank, and in a short time was in the presence of the admiral.

That gentleman was so busy that he did not notice Frank, until one of his clerks exclaimed:

"Admiral! here's Captain Nelson, sir."

"Ah, yes," said the admiral, scarcely looking up from his work. "Sit down, captain; I'm very
busy just at present."

Captain! Frank knew that neither the admiral nor his clerks were in the habit of making mistakes,
but he thought they were certainly mistaken this time. Perhaps they were so busy they had not
taken time to see who he was. But he was not kept long in suspense, for the admiral, after
signing his name to several documents, turned in his chair, and picking up some letters that
lay on his desk, handed them to Frank, saying:

"Captain, there are your orders. I only wanted to see you to say that I wish them obeyed with
the least possible delay. Have the Boxer back here as soon as you can, for I want to use her.
Get your baggage on board and start at once."

Frank, so bewildered that he scarcely knew what the admiral was saying, took the letters and
hurried back to the Michigan. The captain met him at the gangway, and extending his hand, said,
with a smile:

"I'm sorry to have you leave us, Mr. Nelson. I suppose you have got it?"

"I have something, sir," replied Frank, "but I don't know what it is."

As he spoke, he tore open one of the envelopes, and hastily running his eye over the letter
it contained, found, to his astonishment, that he was an acting master. The next one he opened
was an order for him to report "to the commanding officer of the U. S. S. Boxer for duty and
command of that vessel." The other contained instructions for him to "proceed to Cairo without
delay, and place his vessel under repairs, and as soon as she was put in condition for service,
to return and report to the admiral."

"Just as I expected," said the captain, who seemed to be as highly elated as Frank himself.
"Just as I expected, sir. You deserve it, and I congratulate you."

Frank made some reply, in his excitement he hardly knew what, and hurried off to pack his trunk
and bed-clothes. This being accomplished, his baggage was carried to the cutter, which lay
alongside, and after taking leave of the captain and his messmates, he stepped into the boat
and started for his vessel, which still lay at the bank, below the flagship, with the transport
which was to tow her to Cairo. As he stepped on board the Boxer, he was met by Archie, and
several of his old messmates, who greeted him cordially. The executive officer was in command,
and to him Frank showed his orders, and requested that his baggage might be conveyed into the
cabin. He then went on deck, and after ascertaining that the transport was ready to start,
ordered the line cast off, and both vessels were soon on their course down the river.

After finding they were fairly under way, Frank, accompanied by Archie, went into the cabin,
and sat down to collect his thoughts, for, in the excitement of his unexpected promotion, he
moved like one in a dream. The cabin steward had already taken his trunk into his state-room,
and was engaged in making his bed. Captain Nelson! How strangely it sounded; and Frank repeated
it several times, and gazed about the cabin as if he could scarcely believe that he was awake.
He read his appointment and orders over and over again, both to fully understand what was required
of him, and to convince himself that he was in reality the commander of a vessel. When he was
made the executive officer of the very boat he now commanded, he had reached the height of
his ambition, and his present position was a step higher than he had dared to look.

The captain of a gun-boat generally lives in a little world of his own. He has a cabin all
to himself, messes alone, and rarely has intercourse with his officers, except upon business.
If he has a messmate, it is either a clerk, or the paymaster or doctor of the vessel. Frank
was not entitled to a clerk, but he had a paymaster, and, at his request, Archie at once commenced
the removal of his baggage into one of the vacant state-rooms in the cabin. While thus engaged,
the orderly announced the executive officer, who entered to inquire if Frank had any orders
to give. The latter replied that he had not, and for nearly an hour he remained in conversation
with the executive, during which he learned the exact state of affairs about decks. Every thing
appeared to be going on smoothly, and Frank had no desire to show his authority by issuing
unnecessary orders. One by one the wardroom and steerage officers came in to congratulate the
young commander, and when bed-time came they returned to their quarters, saying among themselves
that "Captain Nelson didn't feel any bigger in his new position than he would if he were nothing
but a Johnny master's mate."

One afternoon, after they had reached the Mississippi River, as Frank sat at his desk, writing
a letter to his mother, and Archie lay on the sofa close by, engaged in reading, there was
a commotion on deck, and the orderly burst into the cabin, exclaiming--

"Rebels, cap'n! A battery just ahead, sir!" And he had scarcely spoken, when there was a roar
of cannon, and the shells burst over and about the vessels.

"Call to quarters," said Frank, as he sprang to his feet and ran into his room after his side-arms
and the keys to the magazine.

The orderly disappeared, followed by Archie, who, throwing his book into the furthest corner
of the cabin, ran on deck, without even waiting to get his hat.

After ordering the executive, who met him at the door, to have the lamps in the magazine lighted,
and to prepare for action, Frank ran into the pilothouse, and looking up the river, discovered
a smoke arising from a point half a mile in advance of them.

"Captain," shouted the commander of the transport, who stood in his pilot-house, "what do you
want me to do?"

"Take us up the river as fast as you can," shouted Frank, in reply.

The captain had evidently seen some stirring times while up Red River. He was not accustomed
to the noise and confusion of battle, and his actions indicated that he did not like the idea
of attempting to run by the battery. But his orders from the admiral were to take the Boxer
to Cairo as soon as possible, and he dared not disobey them.

"All ready below, sir," was the word at this moment passed up through the trumpet.

All the guns on board the Boxer were pointed at the battery, and the crew impatiently waited
for the order to fire. Frank stood at his post, watching the battery through a spy-glass, and
waiting until they should come to close quarters, so that he could make every shot count. All
this while the shells had been dropping into the water, and shrieking through the air about
the vessels, and one or two had found a lodgement in the wheel-house of the transport. They
kept on in silence until they arrived almost opposite the battery, which stood out in plain
view, unprotected by levee or other breastwork, and Frank then gave the order to open upon
them. The crash that followed the order, as every gun that could be brought to bear upon the
battery belched forth its contents, was terrific. Shells and canister rattled over the bank,
cutting down the rebel gunners, and disabling one of their cannon. As quickly as possible,
the guns were reloaded, and almost before the rebels had recovered from their panic, another
broadside was poured into them, and when the smoke cleared away, the battery was standing deserted.
Here was an opportunity that, to Frank, had he possessed men enough to back him up, would not
have been lost; he would have landed, and captured the battery. But he was ignorant of the
force of the rebels. There might be a regiment of them hidden away in the woods--enough to
have captured the vessels the moment they touched the bank--and to have lost the Boxer scarcely
a week after he had been placed in command of her would have been a misfortune indeed. He kept
on up the river, shelling the woods as long as he could bring a gun to bear upon them.

In a few days they arrived at Cairo, where Frank reported to the commandant of the station,
and his vessel was at once placed in the hands of the workmen at the navy-yard. The work was
rapidly pushed forward, and at the end of a month she was declared ready for service, and after
she had been furnished with a full crew from the receiving ship, and Archie had laid in a stock
of paymaster's stores, the Boxer, in obedience to orders, started down the river to report
to the admiral.

CHAPTER XI.

The Rival Spies.

They found the admiral at Natchez, and when Frank had reported his arrival, he was ordered
to take his station at Gaines' Landing--a place noted for guerrillas--which they reached in
safety. Her husband drank, struck her! At the end of three years they had separated Her family,
of whom she seemed very proud, held a high position in Paris, but
ever since her marriage had refused to receive her.

She was the niece of the Chief Rabbi.
 What kind of a craft is that?"

Frank looked in the direction indicated, and an object about the size of a man's head could
be dimly seen in the water, silently but rapidly approaching the vessel. It came from toward
the nearest shore, and the thought that it was a torpedo instantly flushed through his mind.
Taking the spy-glass from the quarter-master, he leveled it at the object, and could distinctly
see that it was a human head, and that it belonged to some one who was an excellent swimmer,
for he was making rapid progress through the water.

"I don't see any torpedo there," said he, at length, handing the glass to his cousin, "for
the fellow, whoever he is, is using both hands." Then raising his it voice, he called out,
"Who comes there?"

"A friend," was the scarcely audible reply.

"Come on board here."

"That's just what I want to do," answered the man, who, with a few more strokes, was near enough
to be seized by the quarter-master--who had ran below with a lantern--and lifted upon the guards.

"Who are you, and what are you doing here at this time of night?" asked Frank, as soon as the
man had come on deck. 

We have pointed out a goodly number in the first pages (10-16) of
the "Album du Touriste."

To what we have already said we shall add the following details:

THE UNION HOTEL.

It would appear that the site upon which the Union Hotel was built [65] (1805), and where previously
stood the dwelling of Dr. Longmore, Staff Medical Officer, now occupied by the offices of
the Journal de Quebec, &c., was owned by Governor D'Ailleboust, about the year 1650. He had
reserved to himself, on the 10th January, 1649, the strip of ground comprised between Fort
and Treasury Streets on the one side, and the streets Buade and Ste. Anne on the other side. At
the corner of Treasury and Buade Streets, on the west, Jean Cote possessed a piece of ground (emplacement)
which he presented as a dowry in 1649, to his daughter Simonne, who married Pierre Soumandre.

The
grounds of the Archbishop's Palace formed part of the field possessed
by Couillard, whose house stood in the now existing garden of the
Seminary, opposite the gate which faces the principal alley, the foundations
of which were discovered and brought to light by the Abbe Laverdiere
in 1866.

The Union Hotel was for years the meeting place of our festive ancestors, when the assembly balls
brought together the Saxon and the Gaul; it also recalls warlike
memories of 1812.

THE AMERICAN PRISONERS.
In looking over old fyles of our city journals, we find in the Quebec
Mercury of 15th September, 1812, the following item:

"On Friday,
arrived here the detained prisoners taken with Gen. Hull, at Detroit. Sam, and their raid into the rebel
camp, which resulted in the capture of Colonel Peckham. He also related other little incidents
which Frank had not forgotten, and which proved that he was in reality the scout whom he had
met in the trenches, and not a rebel spy, as he had at first feared. Being fully satisfied
on this point, the major was conducted into the cabin, and while he was exchanging his wet
clothes for some that Frank and Archie had provided for him, the former ordered his steward
to prepare supper for their guest, for he knew, by experience, that a man who had been a prisoner
among the rebels was hungry. The major sat down to the table with a most ravenous appetite,
and the good things the steward had prepared rapidly disappeared. When he had finished his
meal, in answer to Frank's inquiry how he came to be a prisoner, he gave the following account
of his adventures, which he remarked were a "little ahead of any thing he had ever gone through."

"In the first place," said he, "I must tell you what became of my comrade, Sam, as it was in
endeavoring to assist him that I was captured. His career as a scout, although an exciting
one, full of stirring adventures and hair-breadth escapes, was brought to a close soon after
the capture of Vicksburg.

"When the army again took up its line of march, we made several excursions into the rebel lines,
and one night we stopped at a plantation-house to shelter ourselves from the rain, for it was
storming violently, and also to see if we could not pick up some information that might be
of use to us. The only inmate of the house was an old woman, who, believing us to be rebels,
talked freely with us on all subjects; and during the conversation, which finally turned upon
scouting, informed us that there was a scout in the rebel army who was far ahead of any "Yank"
that ever lived. He was described as a daring, quick-witted fellow, and many a disaster that
had befallen us was owing to him. As I listened to the stories told of him, I came to the conclusion
that there was a good deal of truth in them, and that some spy must indeed have been in our
camp, for the woman was acquainted with several moves we had made, and which had been defeated,
the particulars of which, I thought, were known only to the general and his staff. This led
me to believe that the scout, whoever he was, staid about head-quarters, else how could he
obtain so much information.

"The woman seemed to be well acquainted with him and his movements, and told us of several
of his exploits, which, if true, showed the spy to be a man admirably fitted for his position.
I listened attentively to all she said, in hopes I should learn something of his personal appearance,
for I had made up my mind that as soon as I could find out his movements, he and I would have
a meeting, But all I could learn was that his name was Bob Cole.

"'Well,' said I,'do you know that as long as I have been in the army, I have never seen this man?'"

"'Haven't yer!' exclaimed the woman, in surprise. 'Wal, come to think, I don't know as that
is so funny, arter all, 'cause he's in the Yankee camp most of the time, an', as they think
he is one of them, he goes an' comes when he pleases, He's a smart one, I tell yer. Some of
the boys told me that he is a goin' to bring in a prisoner this week, in the shape of a Yankee
scout an' spy. Bill Striker is his name, I believe. Do yer know him?'

"I couldn't help starting when I found that I was known to this noted rebel; but the woman
didn't notice it, and I replied:

"Oh, yes! I've heard of him.'

"'Cordin' to all accounts,' continued the woman, 'this Yankee an't much behind Bob, for he
has often been in our camp, an' he don't allers go back empty-handed. If he ketches a feller
in an out-of-the-way place, he is sartin to gobble him up. But his time is most up now, 'kase
Bob never fails in any thing when he onct gets his mind sot on it, an' when I heerd that he
was a goin' to ketch this Yank, I believed he would do it.

"It was very encouraging to sit there and listen to a person talk so confidently of my speedy
capture; but, as it happened, I had been put on my guard, and another thing, I didn't have
quite as much faith in Bob Cole as his rebel friends had, and was in no way concerned about
his being able to fulfill his promise. It set me to thinking, however, and I determined I would
not sleep sound until I had found him, and then there would be a prisoner taken, sure; but
it wouldn't be Bill Striker.

"'What kind of a looking man is he?' I asked, at length.

"'Oh, he's a'--

"Just at this moment we heard several horsemen going by the house, and Sam exclaimed:

"'There are some of our boys now. Perhaps we are wanted.'

"I knew well enough what he meant. Although we had frequently met rebels while scouting about
through their lines, we were not at all fond of them, and did not want to be in their company
if we could help it.

"Those who had just gone by might at any moment return and enter the house; and besides, it
occurred to me that if I was so well known to the rebel spy, I was not safe except in our own
camp. I might, at any time, run into a trap he had laid for me. At any rate, we thought it
best to get within our lines as soon as possible; so, without waiting to hear the woman's description
of Bob Cole, we bid her good night.

"We reached our camp in safety, reported our return, and the next morning I walked up to headquarters,
where I remained until dark, talking with the general's hostler, and keeping an ear open for
news, but was obliged to go away without hearing any. The next day I was kept busy carrying
dispatches, and when I returned at night, I learned that Sam had gone into the rebel camp,
as they were making some movement, the particulars of which the general was anxious to learn.
I thought nothing of it at the time, but when night came and he did not return, I began to
fear that he had been captured or killed. It then occurred to me that if I could get back to
the house where lived the woman who had told us of Bob Cole, I might learn something that would
be to my advantage; so I put on my rebel uniform, and in a few moments was out of the lines.
I reached the house in safety, and was delighted to find there were no rebels about. The woman
seemed glad to see me, brought me a cup of water to drink, and after a few minutes' conversation
exclaimed:

"'Wal, they've gobbled up one of them fellers!'

"'Which one?' I asked.

"'I don't know his name. Bob done it. He seed him leave the Yankee camp, an' follered him,
an' while they were ridin' along together, he tuk out his pistol an' told the Yank to give
up his we'pons; but the feller wouldn't do it, an' Bob had to shoot him. But he didn't kill
him; he only shot him through the shoulder. He's sartin to be hung.'

"You can easily imagine my feelings as I sat there and listened to this. It required a strong
effort to subdue my feelings.

"'How does Bob Cole disguise himself?' I asked, in as firm a voice as I could command. 'What
does he do in the Yankee camp?'

"'That's what nobody, 'sides Bob an' the general, knows,' answered the woman. 'Didn't you never
see him? He's a little man, has black hair and eyes, wears no whiskers, and allers rides a
little gray horse. He's smart, I tell yer.'

"After talking awhile longer with the woman without learning any thing further, I mounted my
horse and returned to camp. While I was eating my supper, I called to mind all the scouts with
whom I was acquainted, but not one of them answered to the description of Bob Cole. There was
one man in camp, however, who did answer the description, and that was the general's hostler.
Could it he possible that he was the spy?

"At this moment an orderly entered to tell me that I was wanted at head-quarters. I followed
him to the general's tent, received my orders, and began to get ready for the journey. As I
came out of the tent I met the hostler, who inquired:

"'Are you off again to-night, Bill?'

"I replied in the affirmative, and he continued:

"'Well, good luck to you. Don't let the rebs get hold of you.'

"I mounted my horse and rode out of the camp, fully satisfied that if he was the spy I would
soon know it.

"The night was very dark, but I had traveled the road often enough to be well acquainted with
it, and in an hour after I left our camp, I had passed the rebel sentries, and was fairly within
their lines. As I was riding quietly along, keeping a good look-out on all sides, and pausing
now and then to listen, I suddenly heard the clatter of horses' hoofs behind me, and some one
called out, in a low voice:

"Bill! Bill Striker!'

"I instantly stopped, and a moment afterward up galloped the hostler.

"'Don't make so much noise, Jim,' said I, nastily. 'But what on earth brings you here? Where
are you going?'

"'I'm after you,' he replied. 'The general told me to overtake you, and say that he had neglected
to give you some very important orders.'

"All this while he had been coming nearer and nearer to me, and having now got within reach,
he suddenly seized my bridle, and presenting a revolver, exclaimed:

"'Bill Striker, your scouting is up now! You're my prisoner!'

"If he imagined that he had taken me by surprise he was very much mistaken. In an instant I
had knocked aside the revolver, which exploded, sending the ball harmlessly past my head, and
in a moment more I had wrested the weapon from him. Then, almost before he had time to think
twice, I lifted him off his horse and laid him across my saddle, in front of me, as if he had
been a bag of corn. He was very strong, as wiry as an eel, and struggled most desperately;
but I had him at disadvantage, and when I thought of Sam, who was now a prisoner through the
treachery of this fellow, I felt as if I had the strength of ten men. By the time I had fairly
got hold of him, I was tearing down the road toward our lines, while his own horse had gone
on toward the rebel camp. My only danger was in being cut off by the pickets. These passed,
I would be safe, for I had no fears of being overtaken. There was no time to avoid them in
jumping over fences and running through fields, for I knew that the report of the revolver
had been heard, and that, unless I could reach our lines in a very few moments, Bob Cole would
again be a free man and I would be the prisoner. I used my spurs freely, and my horse, which
seemed to understand that he was called upon to make use of his best speed, carried us over
the ground at a tremendous rate. In a short time I came within sight of a fire burning by the
side of the road. I heard a loud command to halt, followed by the noise of a bullet as it whistled
by my head, and the pickets were passed in safety. Half an hour afterward I dismounted in front
of the general's tent, and delivered up my prisoner. You can't imagine how surprised our boys
were to learn that we had had a rebel spy in our camp so long without knowing it. Bob Cole
had played his cards remarkably well, and if Sam and I had not stopped at that house to get
out of the rain, there's no knowing how much longer he would have been at liberty. But he was
safe in the guard-house at last, and I must confess that I breathed more freely. If he was
the only rebel who knew me, there was now no danger of running into a trap laid for my capture.
My first hard work must be to attempt Sam's release. But in those days, I had faith. I loved,
I was happy, and disposed to be still more so. Full of ardour for my work, I had as soon as I
was married begun a new poem, and in the evening I read to her the verses of the day. I wished
to make her enter completely into my existence. The first time or two, she said to me: "Very
pretty," and I was grateful to her for this childish approbation,
hoping that in time she would comprehend better what was the very
breath of my life.

Poor creature! I thought they would pass without discovering me,
but was mistaken, for one of them drew in his horse and exclaimed--

"'Wal, ef here an't another,' and I was speedily surrounded, and commanded to 'hand over my
we'pons.'

"'Look here, boys,' said I, 'I've got a pass,' and I made a motion to produce it.

"'Oh, we don't want to see your pass,' said the corporal who had charge of the squad; 'we've
seed a dozen to-night that wasn't no 'count. You must go to the guard-house, 'cause you know
it's the general's orders that nobody goes out o' camp.'

"This showed me that I was not suspected of being a Federal, but was arrested as one of their
own men who was endeavoring to get out of the lines.

"'I know it's mighty hard,' continued the corporal, 'not to let a feller go home, when p'rhaps
it an't five miles off; but orders is orders, you know. Howsomever, you wont hev no trouble
to get out o' the guard-house, 'cause--by gum! ef here an't some more,' and, as he spoke, he
left me, and rode up to three men who were crouching in the fence-corner by the roadside. These
were speedily secured, and we went on our way toward the guard-house. The rebel army, it appeared,
was encamped in a part of the country where a number of regiments had been raised, and the
men, anxious to see home and friends once more, were deserting by hundreds--'taking French,'
as we call it. As we rode along, I learned something, from the conversation of my captors,
that made me wish I had never taken Bob Cole prisoner, and that was, that Sam had died from
the effects of the wound he had received while resisting the rebel. This was, perhaps, better
than being hung, but how I wished I had known it before taking the spy to camp. I had put myself
in danger without being able to be of any assistance to Sam, and I now set my wits to work
to conjure up some plan for escape.

"Finally, after capturing one more rebel who was about to 'take French,' we reached the guard
house, which was a rickety old barn. As we entered the door, the rebels, with whom the house
was filled, greeted us with loud yells, and slapped us on our backs, as though they looked
upon our capture as a most excellent joke. The majority of our fellow-prisoners were confined
for attempting to leave the camp to visit their friends; but putting them in the guard-house
was only a farce, for I had not been in the room fifteen minutes before I saw three men make
their escape through a window. I determined to try the same thing; so, after waiting a few
moments, to see that they were not brought back, I walked up to the window and looked out.
A sentinel was standing at the corner of the building, but as soon as he saw me he shouldered
his gun and walked off, whistling. It was plain that he had no objections to my making my escape
if I wished to do so, and, as soon as he was out of sight, I crawled out of the window, dropped
to the ground, and walked off with an appearance of unconcern I was very far from feeling.

"I had lost my horse, but that did not trouble me, for the camp was not far off, and I had
no fears of pursuit. I had scarcely got safely out of their lines, however, before I became
aware that I was followed. I turned and saw a party of men, who, keeping their horses on the
grass at the side of the road, had succeeded in getting within pistol-shot before I heard them.
As I sprang over a fence I heard my name pronounced, followed by the report of several revolvers
and carbines, that sent the bullets about me altogether too close for comfort.

"Well, to make a long story short, I laid about in the woods for a month, making a raid now
and then on a chicken-roost, to supply my commissary department; but all this while the rebels
followed me like blood-hounds. THE POET.

You cite Delacroix, I reply Victor Hugo. Do you think that marriage hampered him for instance,
while writing so many admirable books?

THE PAINTER.

I think as a matter of fact, that marriage did not hamper him in anything. But all husbands have
not the genius that obtains pardon, nor a halo of glory with which to dry the tears they cause
to flow. It cannot be very amusing to be the wife of a genius. There are plenty of labourers'
wives who are happier.

THE POET.

A curious thing, all the same, this special pleading against marriage, by a married man, who is happy
in being so.

THE PAINTER.

I repeat that I don't give myself as an example.

My opinion is formed by all the sad things I have seen elsewhere; all the misunderstandings so
frequent in the households of artists, and caused solely by their abnormal life. Look at that
sculptor who, in full maturity of age and talent, has just exiled himself, leaving wife and children
behind him.

Public opinion condemns him, and certainly I offer no excuse for him.

And, nevertheless, I can well understand how he arrived at such a
point!

Here was a fellow who adored his art, and had a horror of the world, and society. The wife, though
amiable and intelligent, instead of shielding him from the social obligations he loathed, condemned
him for some ten years to all the exactions they involved. Thus she induced him to undertake
a lot of official busts, horrible respectabilities in velvet skull caps, frights of women utterly
devoid of grace; she disturbed him ten times a day with importunate visitors, and then every
evening laid out for him a dress suit and light gloves, and dragged him from drawing-room to
drawing-room. You will tell me he could have rebelled, could have replied point-blank: "No!"
But don't you know that the very fact of our sedentary existences
leaves us more than other men dependent on domestic influence?

The atmosphere of the home envelopes us, and if some touch of the ideal does not lighten it,
soon wearies and drags us down. Moreover, the artist as a rule puts what force and energy he
has into his work, and after his solitary and patient struggles, finds himself left with no will
to oppose to the petty importunities of life. With him, feminine tyrannies have free play. No
one is more easily conquered and subdued. Only, beware! He must not
be made to feel the yoke too heavily. If one day the invisible bonds
with which he is surreptitiously fettered are drawn too tight and
arrest the artistic effort, he will all at once tear them asunder,
and, mistrusting his own weakness, will fly like our sculptor, over
the hills and far away.

The wife of this sculptor was astounded at
his flight. The unhappy creature is still wondering: "What can I have
done to him?" Nothing. She simply did not understand him. For it is
not enough to be good and intelligent to be the true helpmate of an
artist, A woman must also possess infinite tact, smiling abnegation;
and all this is found only by a miracle in a young creature, curious
though ignorant as regards life. She is pretty, she has married a
well-known man, received everywhere; why should she not wish to show
herself a little on his arm? Is it not quite natural?

Captain Wilson received them cordially, listened with a good deal of interest to the scout's
plan for the capture of the guerrilla, and finally gave Frank permission to "do as he pleased
in the matter," adding, "You have never yet failed in an undertaking of this kind, and I shall
fully expect you to succeed in the present instance. I will be here again in about a week,
and you can turn the prisoner over to me." The confident manner in which the captain spoke
of his success, made Frank more determined than ever to capture the guerrilla, if within the
bounds of possibility. After giving a short report of the state of affairs on his station,
he returned to the Boxer, highly delighted with the result of the interview. Archie was no
less pleased, for, although he had not said a word about accompanying his cousin, he looked
upon it as a settled thing that he was to be one of the expedition. Frank, who knew the danger
of the undertaking, and was anxious to keep Archie out of harm's way, would have preferred
to leave him behind; but, as the latter had shown, in a remarkable manner, that he was equal
to any emergency, the young commander could not deny him on the ground that he had never "smelt
powder."

The major advised Frank to take at least one more man; and this one was soon forthcoming in
the shape of Tom, the coxswain of the first cutter, the same who had been left in charge of
the boat on the night that Frank and Archie had broken up the head-quarters of the "Louisiana
Wildcats." He was at once summoned into the cabin, and after the object of the proposed expedition
had been explained to him, Frank inquired: "Now, Tom, do you want to go with us?" "Douse my
to'-gallant top-lights! yes sir," he replied, eagerly. "But, Cap'n Nelson, I wouldn't like
to be left behind, sir, when it comes to the dangerous part of the business, like I was on
the night when the paymaster burned that house. I want to go with you to the end, sir, an'
if I ever show the white feather, then may I be keelhauled!"

Frank assured him that he would be allowed to accompany them wherever they went, and the coxswain
departed satisfied.

When night came, the gig was called away, and Frank, accompanied by the major, Archie, and
the coxswain, was set on shore. When the boat had returned to the vessel, which was now in
command of the executive officer, the major led his companions through the woods toward the
place where the horses were to be obtained. They traveled in silence, following the motions
of their guide, who walked along as if he well understood what he was about. The expedition
certainly promised better than any in which Frank had before engaged. It was led by a man accustomed
to scenes of danger, and was altogether composed of those whose courage and determination had,
more than once, been thoroughly tested. They were all well armed, and, in addition to a brace
of revolvers, the coxswain carried a heavy saber; for, as he remarked, he might be called upon
to "repel boarders," and he wanted some weapon that he knew how to use.

After three or four hours' walk through the woods they came to a fence, where the major paused.
Before them was a wide field, in which stood a plantation-house. Bright lights gleamed in the
windows, and the major turned to his companions and said:

"There are more people in the house than there were last night."

They all listened intently, and could hear an indistinct murmur of voices, and now and then
the tramping of horses in the road that ran in front of the house.

"There are some rebel soldiers in there," continued the major, "and we can now get our horses
without any difficulty, already saddled and bridled."

As he spoke, he led the way along the fence toward the road, and they presently came in sight
of half a dozen horses which were tied in front of the house. No orders were necessary, for
each one knew what was required of him. In a few moments they had quietly secured their horses,
and were riding noiselessly down the road. As soon as they were out of sight of the house,
they began to make an examination of their prizes, and found that the rebels, who, no doubt,
had little dreamed that any one would disturb them there, had left their sabers attached to
their saddles, and their pistols in their holsters. Frank and Archie also found themselves
possessed, the former of a fine double-barrel shot-gun, loaded with buck-shot, and the latter
of a heavy carbine; and the ammunition for each of these weapons had been left on the saddles.
The horses were splendid animals, evidently the fruits of a raid upon some well-stocked barn-yard,
for they appeared fresh and vigorous, and had undoubtedly been accustomed to the best of care.
As soon as they were out of hearing of the people in the house, they put their horses into
a gallop, and as the road was excellent, they made rapid headway. For hour after hour they
kept on, stopping only now and then to water their horses. Just before daylight the major,
who had scarcely spoken during the whole ride, suddenly came to a halt. As his companions gathered
about him, he said, almost in a whisper: "Now, boys, we are at our journey's end. There's the
house!" and as he spoke, he pointed to a large building just ahead of them. "My advice, captain,"
he continued, turning to Frank, "would be to ride carefully up in front of the house, hitch
our horses--for of course, we must not lose them--and then burst open the door and gobble up
the guerrilla before he has time to get out of bed."

This plan was adopted. Riding noiselessly up to the gate, they dismounted, and after tying
their horses, they drew their sabers (as it was their intention to rely entirely upon the sight
of these weapons to bring the guerrilla to terms). Then they entered the yard, and ascended
the steps that led on to a wide portico. Here the major, who was in advance, paused a moment,
to see that his companions were close behind him, and then, placing his shoulder against the
door, with one strong push, forced it open. They all sprang into the house, Frank and Archie
being close beside the major, and found themselves, to their utter astonishment, in the presence
of a dozen guerrillas, who started from their blankets in alarm. So great was their surprise,
that both parties for an instant stood gazing at each other, as if suddenly deprived of the
power of action.

"Sink my tarry wig, Cap'n Nelson, but here's a scrape for honest men to be in!" exclaimed the
coxswain, who had kept as close to his officer as possible. "Here is a scrape!"

Their position was not an enviable one. There they were, forty miles from their vessel, almost
in the heart of an enemy's country, and confronted by three times their number of armed rebels,
who, no doubt, could be speedily reinforced. It was too late to retreat, even had they felt
disposed to do so. But the idea never once entered their heads. So intent were they upon the
capture of the guerrilla chief, that they thought of nothing else, and they were perfectly
well aware that the only way to get out of the house was to fight their way through their enemies.

The period of inaction lasted only for an instant; then a few of the rebels, springing to their
feet, retreated precipitately through the back door; but the others, recovering from their
surprise, and comprehending the nature of the attack, bravely stood their ground, and one tall
fellow sprang forward and struck savagely at the major with his sword. But the scout was on
the alert, receiving the blow upon his own saber, and before the rebel had time to renew his
attack, a shot from a revolver stretched him lifeless on the floor.

This opened the fight. The example of the rebel was quickly followed by his comrades, who,
depending wholly upon their sabers, rushed upon the officers with the utmost fury. But they
were bravely met. The latter stubbornly held their ground, and parrying the blows directed
at them, used their revolvers with deadly effect. At this moment a door at the further end
of the hall suddenly opened, and a man sprang out, carrying a short, heavy sword.

"Give it to 'em, lads!" he shouted, hurrying forward to join in the fight. "Give it to 'em.
No quarter to the Yankees!"

This was the guerrilla chief, and the order he had just given told Frank and his companions,
in plain language, that if overpowered, no mercy would be shown them.

The rebels, encouraged by the voice of their leader, redoubled the fury of their attacks, and
the officers were driven to the wall. The coxswain, on entering, had closed the door to prevent
the escape of the guerrilla, and thus their retreat was cut off; but they had the advantage
of position, for the rebels, unable to get behind them, must make their attacks in front. Already
had their ranks been thinned by the fire of the revolvers, but those who had at first retreated
now began to return and take the places of those who had been shot down. At last Frank's revolver
was empty. He had another in his pocket, but could not get an opportunity to draw it. He must
now depend upon his saber. Grasping it with both hands, he bravely met the attack of the leader
of the guerrillas, who had succeeded in working his way in front of him. The latter's heavy
sword descended with terrible force. Frank's guard was broken down, and he was sent reeling
to the floor. The rebel again raised his sword, and, as Frank was entirely unarmed, he gave
himself up for lost. One thought of home, of his mother and sister, flashed through his mind,
and then he saw the bright blade swiftly descending. It was met, however, by the coxswain,
who seeing the danger of his officer, interposed his own sword, and turned the rebel's weapon
aside. Frank was on his feet again in an instant, and seeing a musket, with a bayonet attached,
standing in the corner, he seized it with a shout of joy. If there was any thing he thoroughly
understood, it was the bayonet-exercise. He remembered that the knowledge of it had once saved
his life, and he had never let an opportunity to perfect himself in it pass unimproved. He
now felt safe; and seeing the coxswain gradually retreating before the furious attacks of the
guerrilla chief, he sprang forward, and with one blow sent the sword flying from his hand and
bore him to the floor. This move was seconded by Archie, who sprang to his cousin's side with
a revolver in each hand, firing right and left among the rebels, who, dismayed at the fall
of their leader, began to retreat. But so closely were they followed, that escape was impossible.
The chief, after trying in vain to regain his feet, and seeing the bayonet pointed straight
at his breast, shouted most lustily for quarter.

"Surrender!" shouted the major. "Throw down your arms!"

The rebels having lost more than half of their number, and knowing the deadly effects of the
revolvers which were aimed at their heads, gladly complied, and the fight was at an end.

Although Frank and his companions had heard the order, "No quarter to the Yankees!" the thought
of taking vengeance upon those who, had they been the victors, would have shown no mercy, never
once entered their heads--they were more humane.

With the surrender of the rebels the object of the expedition had been accomplished--the guerrilla
chief was their prisoner!

CHAPTER XIII.

Tom the Coxswain.

Now that the excitement was over, and Frank began to think more calmly, he found that he was
wounded. The blow which had broken down his guard had spent its force on his head, which was
bleeding profusely from a long, ragged cut. His face and clothing were covered with blood,
but the wound had caused him no inconvenience. After Archie had bandaged it with his handkerchief,
Frank began to look about him. The force of the rebels had originally consisted of fifteen
men, of whom eight were lying, either dead or wounded, upon the floor. He could scarcely believe
his eyes, and wondered how he and his companions had ever secured a victory against such heavy
odds. Had the rebels, instead of relying upon their sabers and the superiority of their numbers,
made use of the firearms that during the fight had become scattered about the hall, the result
would have been far different. The fight, although a most severe one while it lasted, was not
of more than five minutes' duration, and during that time eight rebels had been disabled, and
six captured by four determined men; one only had escaped. As Archie afterward said, in a letter
to his father, "It was the biggest little fight" he was ever engaged in.

"Now, boys," said the major, as soon as he had satisfied himself that the remaining rebels
were disarmed, "we've no time to lose. Paymaster, you and the coxswain station yourselves in
those doors, and keep a good look-out, to prevent surprise. Captain, we will secure these prisoners."

One of the blankets that lay on the floor was speedily cut into strips, and with these the
rebels, one after the other, were bound hand and foot. While this was going on, the leader
of the guerrillas stood leaning against the wall, no doubt looking into the future, and pondering
upon the punishment which, according to his own barbarous mode of warfare, he was certain would
be meted out to him. He well knew what course he would have pursued, had he been the victor
instead of the prisoner, and, judging his captors by himself, he fully expected a speedy and
terrible vengeance to be taken upon him. As these thoughts passed through his mind, he determined
to make one bold effort at escape. Hastily glancing toward the door, where Archie stood looking
up and down the road, he suddenly sprang forward, and giving him a violent push, that sent
him headlong upon the portico, he jumped down the steps, and started for the gate at the top
of his speed; but before he had gone half the distance, he was overtaken by the coxswain and
thrown to the ground. The sailor, instead of standing in the door, in his eagerness, as he
expressed it, to "ketch the first glimpse of any guerrilla craft that might be sailin' about,"
had come round to the front of the house just as the rebel had made his attempt to escape.
Archie sprang to his feet and ran to the assistance of the coxswain, and by the time Frank
and the major arrived, the rebel, who struggled most desperately, had been overpowered, and
his hands bound behind his back. In a few moments more the prisoners were all secured, and,
after a horse had been caught and saddled, the guerrilla placed upon it, his hands still bound,
and the coxswain was ordered to take charge of him. The dead and wounded, together with the
other prisoners, were left in the house, the doors of which were closed and fastened. They
would, no doubt, soon be relieved by their friends, for the rebel who had escaped would, of
course, procure assistance as soon as possible.

As soon as the major had satisfied himself that every thing was ready for the start, he mounted
his horse and led the way down the road. It was now broad daylight, and their first thought
was to place a safe distance between themselves and the scene of the fight, and then halt in
the woods until night, when they would return to the vessel. But if this plan was adopted,
it would give the guerrillas, who, of course, would hasten to the rescue of their leader, time
to get between them and the river, in which case their capture was certain. Frank, who believed
that every instant of time was valuable, and who delighted in dashing exploits, was in favor
of returning at once to the vessel. Their horses were comparatively fresh, and, if they rode
rapidly, they could make good their retreat before a sufficient force could be collected to
pursue them. The major and Frank talked over these different plans as they rode along side
by side, and the latter course was finally adopted. It was at once communicated to the others,
and they pushed forward with all possible speed. Frank and the major rode in front, followed
by the coxswain, who held fast to the horse which their prisoner rode, and Archie brought up
the rear. In this manner they dashed along, passing several plantation-houses, whose inmates
ran to the doors and gazed at them in astonishment. Half a dozen miles were passed over in
this way without stopping, except to water their horses, and without seeing a single armed
rebel, and Frank began to hope that the dangerous part of the undertaking was passed. If attacked
by a superior force, the chances were that they would not only lose their prisoner, whose capture
had been effected in so gallant a manner, but also their own liberty, and the thought of the
treatment they would receive, judging by the order the guerrilla chief had given his men at
the commencement of the fight, was enough to nerve them to make the greatest exertions to effect
their escape. They had reloaded their pistols, the effective use of which had gained them a
victory over almost four times their number, and Frank and Archie carried the shot-gun and
carbine which they had found attached to the saddles of their horses, ready for instant use.

The rapid pace at which they were traveling had, at the end of an hour, put half a dozen miles
more between them and the house where the fight had taken place, and they began to hope that,
if they were followed at all, they were leaving the enemy behind. At length they came to a
place where the road ran through a deep ravine, the sides of which were thickly covered with
trees and bushes. They dashed along, their horses hoofs ringing loud and clear on the hard
road, but as they came suddenly around a bend, almost before they were aware of it, they had
run into the very midst of a small band of rebels, who were traveling as rapidly as themselves.
They were not entirely unprepared for this encounter. Although they had hoped that they might
be able to avoid it, they had held themselves in readiness for it, while the rebels, being
taken by surprise, scattered in every direction, as if fully expecting to see a whole army
of Federals close at their heels. As they dashed by, Frank fired both barrels of his gun, which
emptied more than one saddle, and the others had just time to follow with a volley from their
revolvers, when another bend in the road hid them from sight. It was quickly done. Before the
rebels had time to think twice, the danger was over. The enemy had met them, sent three of
their number to the ground, and disappeared as rapidly as they had come. But the rebels did
not remain long inactive. They quickly satisfied themselves that those who had just passed
were not the advance-guard of an army, as they had at first supposed, and presently the officers
heard the clatter of hoofs behind them, accompanied with loud yells, and knew that the guerrillas
had commenced the pursuit. Although, as we have said, the rebels had but a small force, they
still greatly outnumbered Frank's party, and nothing but the most rapid flight could save them.
Frank's only fear was that their pursuers would come in sight of them, and begin to pick them
off at long range with their carbines, a proceeding which nothing but the numerous windings
in the road prevented.

"If we do not get into a scrimmage, boys," said the major, speaking as calmly as though he
was at that very moment safe in the cabin of the Boxer, "we must stick together, if possible;
but if they come on us in a heavy force, we must separate and every man take care of himself."

"Oh, you needn't look so mighty pleased, Johnny!" exclaimed the coxswain, addressing himself
to his prisoner, who now looking upon his rescue as beyond a doubt, could not repress a smile
of triumph. "Shiver my timbers! you're not loose yet. You're just as safe here as though you
were in the brig [Footnote: The brig is a small dark apartment in the hold of a vessel, in
which culprits are confined.] and in double irons. Look as mad as you please, Johnny," he continued,
as the guerrilla scowled savagely upon him, "a man who has smelt powder in a'most every battle
fought on the Mississippi River an't often skeered by looks."

The major had, several times during the retreat, cautioned the coxswain to keep a fast hold
of his prisoner, and not to allow him to escape under any circumstances. But Frank, who knew
his man, had never thought the caution necessary. He had often seen the sailor in action on
board ship, and the gallant manner in which he had saved his officer's life during the fight
at the house, had fully satisfied the young commander that the coxswain was not the man to
shrink from his duty because it was dangerous. His reply to the major had been:

"If this Johnny rebel an't safe in the brig tonight, sir, then Captain Nelson will have to
make a new cox'son for the first cutter, an' another cap'n for that number two gun. I'll either
take him safe through, or I'll never hear the bo'son pipe to dinner ag'in."

All this while they had been tearing along the road as fast as their horses could carry them,
but rapidly as they went, the sounds of pursuit grew louder, and the yells fiercer and more
distinct, showing that the guerrillas were gaining on them. Suddenly they emerged from the
woods, and found before them a long, straight road, with broad fields on each side. Before
they could pass this, the rebels would certainly come in sight, and, if they did not overtake
them, they would at least open fire on them with their carbines.

Frank gradually drew in his horse and fell back beside his cousin. Archie was deadly pale,
but he sat firmly on his horse and handled his carbine with a steady hand.

"Archie," said he, "you and I must cover the retreat of the others. Don't waste your ammunition
now."

They had accomplished perhaps a quarter of the distance across the road when the foremost of
their pursuers came in sight. In an instant Archie turned in his saddle, and leaving his horse
to pick out his own road, he raised his gun to his shoulder and fired. A moment afterward a
riderless horse was rearing and plunging about among the rebels, throwing them into confusion.
This was the time for Frank, and he discharged both barrels of his gun in quick succession.
The buckshot must have done terrible execution, for when the smoke cleared away, they saw the
rebels retreating to the cover of the bushes. One, more daring than the rest, lingered a moment,
to fire his carbine, and the fugitives heard the bullet sing through the air above their heads.

Although they were not more than five minutes crossing the road and entering the woods on the
opposite side, it seemed an age to them, and they had scarcely reached the cover of the trees,
when the rebels again coming in sight, fired a scattering volley after them, which rattled
through the trees and sent a shower of leaves and twigs about them. The guerrillas then continued
the pursuit as fiercely as ever, every time they came in sight firing their carbines, which
Archie answered with effect; but they wisely kept out of range of the buck-shot in Frank's
double-barrel.

Hour after hour the chase continued, the guerrillas every time they appeared having their ranks
thinned by Archie's unerring rifle, until finally the fugitives heard a sound that told them
in plain language that their danger was yet by no means passed. A whole chorus of hoarse yells
arose from the depths of the woods, showing that their pursuers had received heavy reinforcements,
and were urging forward their horses to overtake them, But the river was not more than two
miles distant, and as the rebels were fully a quarter of a mile behind, they were confident
they would yet escape, if their horses could hold out fifteen minutes longer. For some time
past this had been their only fear. The rapid pace was telling on the animals severely, and
Frank's horse especially began to show signs of distress, the young commander having several
times been obliged to use the point of his saber to compel him to keep pace with the others.
The rebels gained rapidly, and presently, just as the fugitives emerged from the woods, in
full view of the river, they could hear the tramping of their horses behind them. Before them
was a clear space of fully a mile in extent, that must be crossed before they reached the river,
and their pursuers might overtake and capture them within sight of their vessel. Presently
several men were seen running about on the deck of the Boxer, and then a puff of smoke arose
from one of the ports, and a shell went shrieking over their heads and burst in the woods.

The crew of the vessel, in obedience to Frank's orders, had kept a good look-out for them,
and hearing the yells of the pursuing rebels, had at once opened fire. When the smoke cleared
away, Frank saw the crew of the gig hurrying to their places. The boat was lowered into the
water, and pulled rapidly toward the shore. If they could but reach the bank of the river they
would be safe. At this moment the rebels appeared in sight, and a volley from their carbines
sent the bullets about the fugitives like hail-stones. Frank turned in his saddle and fired
one barrel of his gun among them, and was about to give them the contents of the other, when
his horse stumbled and fell, throwing him at full length on the ground. Frank had been expecting
this, and for the last half hour had ridden with his feet out of the stirrups, so that in case
the accident did happen, he would not be entangled in the saddle. As it was, he was thrown
some distance in advance of the horse, which, too exhausted to rise, lay panting on the ground.
Frank, however, instantly recovered his feet, and was about to start after his companions,
when he saw the coxswain, with a knife in his hand, working desperately to free himself from
the saddle of his own fallen horse. Frank at once sprang to his assistance, and catching the
knife from his hand, severed the strap that confined him, and set him at liberty. The coxswain,
as soon as he had regained his feet, ran up to the horse which the prisoner rode, and which
had stopped the moment the sailor fell, and pulling the guerrilla from the saddle, lifted him
in his arms as though he had been an infant, and ran toward the boat. The rebels by this time
were within easy rifle-range, and in spite of the shells that burst about them, seemed determined
to effect the release of their leader, until one more accurately aimed than the others, exploded
in their very midst, cutting down horses and riders with terrible slaughter; another and another
followed, and when Frank and his companions stepped into the gig, the rebels were in full retreat.
When they arrived on board the vessel, the coxswain delivered his prisoner to the master-at-arms,
who ironed him, and lodged him safely in the brig.

Their long ride had taxed their endurance to the utmost; but, by the next day, they had fully
recovered from their fatigue, and shortly after dinner Frank ordered the officer of the deck
to have all hands mustered. The crew speedily assembled on the quarter-deck, and among them
stood the coxswain, who, at a motion from Frank, stepped out from among his companions, holding
his cap in his hand, and looking altogether like a man who expected "a good blowing up" for
some grievous offense. But he soon found that he was not to be reprimanded, for, to his utter
astonishment, Frank proceeded to give the officers and crew a full account of the fight at
the house, speaking in the highest terms of the old sailor's bravery. He then addressed the
coxswain, saying:

"Now, Tom, what can I do for you? What do you want? Would you like a leave of absence, to go
home and visit your friends?"

"Avast heavin' there, Cap'n Nelson, if you please!" answered the coxswain, hastily. "I was
brought up on board a man-o'-war, sir," he continued, whirling his cap in his hand, "an' have
follered the sea for goin' nigh on to thirty-five year, but this is the first time I ever had
my cap'n say, 'Thank ye, Tom,' to me for doin' my duty. I an't the only chap, sir, that wouldn't
see harm come to you. There's many a man in this crew that would have done the same thing,
at the risk of his own life. As for home an' friends, sir, I have none. But, cap'n, there's
one favor I have thought of askin' you for. There's no gunner's-mate on board this vessel,
an' I think I can take charge of the magazine--don't you, sir?"

This was a small reward for a man to ask of the captain, who would gladly have granted him
any favor in his power; but promotion on board ship, among the men, is given only to the most
deserving, and the old sailor made this request with a timidity he had never shown before an
enemy; and even after he had made it, he regarded his officer as though he fully expected a
refusal. But Frank, who could scarcely refrain from smiling at the man's earnest manner, turned
to Archie and said:

"Paymaster, please rate Thomas Willis on your books as gunner's-mate from the time the other
mate was discharged."

This was something more than the coxswain had expected. The former gunner's-mate had been discharged
from the service nearly two months before, and this gave the old sailor a considerable amount
of back pay. Frank had delayed the appointment of a gunner's-mate, not because he did not need
one, but because there were many good men among his crew, and he wished to give the appointment
to the most deserving, and thus make promotion something worth working for. Frank then dismissed
the men, who returned to the lower deck, fully satisfied in their own minds that "Cap'n Nelson
was the best man any crew ever sailed under."

CHAPTER XIV.

A Rebel Trick.

The next day Frank and the major made out their reports of the expedition. The former's, as
usual, was short and to the point, conveying, in a few lines, the information that their object
had been accomplished. He described the fight in the house as a "short skirmish," and made
it appear that their success was owing to the gallant behavior of the major, Archie, and the
coxswain. In fact, one, to have read the report, would have supposed that Frank had been merely
a looker-on, instead of one of the principal actors. But the major went more into details,
and the part Frank had taken in the fight was described in glowing language, and his bravery
highly complimented. While thus engaged, the orderly entered the cabin and reported a small
party of rebels approaching with a flag of truce. Frank went on deck, and saw several men galloping
toward the vessel, waving a white flag, to attract their attention. When they reached the top
of the bank, they dismounted from their horses, and appeared to be waiting for some one to
come ashore.

For some moments, Frank was undecided how to act. He remembered that he had once been sent
on shore with a flag of truce which had not been respected, he having been detained a prisoner,
and he did not like the idea of receiving a white flag from men whom he knew would not respect
it themselves; besides, he had received no orders in regard to communicating with the rebels,
and he did not know whether he had a right to do so or not.

"Well, major, what do you think of this, sir?" he asked, turning toward the scout, who stood
close at his side.

"It's a trick of some kind, captain," replied the latter. "Depend upon it, it's a trick."

"If that is so," said Frank, "I will try and find out what it is." Then, raising his voice,
he called out, "What do you want out there?"

"I want to come on board," shouted one of the rebels, in reply. "I want to see the captain."

"Well, speak out; you can't come on board. What do you want?"

The rebels consulted together for a few moments, and then one of them replied:

"We have a Yankee prisoner, and want to exchange him for Captain Thorne. If you will let one
of us come on board, perhaps we can make some arrangements with you."

"You can't come on board," shouted Frank, "that's settled. But where's your prisoner?"

"Out in the woods, under guard."

"They've got no prisoner, captain," said the major. The missionaries are apt to colour everything,
and they never have the chance of knowing the interior life as Mariner
knew it.

It was this conviction that led me to make Mariner my cheval de bataille in "Evolution of Theology."

I
am giving a good deal of trouble--ill for the last week, and at present
with a sharp lumbago! so nice!

With our love to Mrs. Campbell and yourself.

Ever yours,

T.H. Huxley.

[The circumstances under which the following letter was written are these. The activity of the
Home Rulers and the lethargy of Unionists had caused one side only
of the great question then agitating English politics to be represented
in the American press, with the result that the funds of the Nationalists
were swelled by subscriptions from persons who might have acted otherwise
if the arguments on the other side had been adequately laid before
them.

Mr. Albert Grey, M.P., therefore had arranged for a series of clear,
forcible pronouncements from strong representative Englishmen against
a separate Parliament, to be cabled over to New York to a syndicate
of influential newspapers, and his American advisers desired that
the opening statement should be from Huxley.

Although it will be seen from the letter that he would not undertake this task, Mr. Grey showed
the letter to one or two of the leading Liberal Unionists to strengthen their hands, and begged
permission to publish it for the benefit of the whole party. Accordingly, it appeared in the "Times"
of April 13, 1886.]

Casalini, W. Bournemouth, March 21, 1886.

Dear Mr. Grey,

I am as much opposed to the Home Rule scheme as any one can possibly be, and if I were a political
man I would fight against it as long as I had any breath left in me; but I have carefully kept out
of the political field all my life, and it is too late for me now to think of entering it.

Anxious watching of the course of affairs for many years past has persuaded me that nothing short
of some sharp and sweeping national misfortune will convince the majority of our countrymen
that government by average opinion is merely a circuitous method of going to the devil; and
that those who profess to lead but in fact slavishly follow this average opinion are simply
the fastest runners and the loudest squeakers of the herd which is rushing blindly down to its
destruction.

It is the electorate, and especially the Liberal electorate, which is responsible for the present state
of things. It has no political education. It knows well enough that 2 and 2 won't make 5 in a
ledger, and that sentimental stealing in private life is not to be tolerated; but it has not been
taught the great lesson in history that there are like verities in national life, and hence
it easily falls a prey to any clever and copious fallacy-monger who appeals to its great heart
instead of reminding it of its weak head.

Politicians have gone on flattering and cajoling this chaos of political
incompetence until the just penalty of believing their own fictions
has befallen them, and the average member of Parliament is conscientiously
convinced that it is his duty, not to act for his constituents to
the best of his judgment, but to do exactly what they, or rather the
small minority which drives them, tells him to do.

Have we a real
statesman? A man of the calibre of Pitt or Burke, to say nothing of
Strafford or Pym, who will stand up and tell his countrymen that this
disruption of the union is nothing but a cowardly wickedness--an act
bad in itself, fraught with immeasurable evil--especially to the people
of Ireland; and that if it cost his political existence, or his head,
for that matter, he is prepared to take any and every honest means
of preventing the mischief?

I see no sign of any. This is the fust time I was ever on a gun-boat."

"Certainly," replied Archie, who had received his instructions from Frank; "look about all
you please;" and while the steward was weighing the coffee and sugar, he accompanied the man
about the vessel. There were not more than a dozen sailors on deck, and most of these appeared
to be asleep.

"Be these all the fellers you-uns hev got?" asked the man.

"What's the use of having any more?" replied Archie. "There's no danger here."

"That's so," was the answer; "I haint seed a rebel round for more 'n six months, dog-gone if
I hev."

The man walked slowly about the deck, carefully examining every thing he saw, and acting altogether
like a backwoodsman who had never seen a gun-boat before. Finally, he said:

"I've heered as how all these 'ere boats hev got hot water; has yourn?"

"Oh, yes, we've got plenty of hot water, but it takes an hour to screw the hose on, so that
we can use it."

By this time the provisions were ready, and the market men took their departure, expressing
themselves fully satisfied that it wouldn't be a "healthy job" for any rebels to attempt the
capture of the Boxer, and promising to be on hand the next day but one with more "garden truck."

As soon as their boat was out of sight, the hatches were raised, the crew poured up out of
the hold, and in a short time the Boxer's deck presented its usual appearance of neatness and
order. Frank's object had been accomplished, for the market men had gone away satisfied that
twenty determined men could easily effect the capture of the gun-boat, and they seemed determined
to make the most of what they had seen. Gaines's Landing had been a regular mail station, and
the rebels had only been deterred from sending it across the river by the presence of the Boxer.
The market men, however, had discovered, as they supposed, that the vessel was but poorly manned,
and this being communicated to their leader, (for, as Frank had suspected, they belonged to
a regularly-organized band of guerrillas,) the latter determined to dispatch his mail at once.

That night, about ten o'clock, as Frank and Archie sat in the cabin reading, the orderly reported
that lights were seen moving about on shore. This was something unusual, and when Frank had
watched the light for a moment, he came to the conclusion that the rebels were making some
movements, the nature of which he was, of course, unable to determine; but he resolved, if
possible, to find out what was going on, and turning to the officer of the deck, ordered the
cutter to be called away and furnished with an armed crew. This order was speedily and quietly
executed, and when the boat was ready, Frank and his cousin stepped into it, and were pulled
noiselessly up the river. The place where the light shone was about half a mile from the vessel,
and when they came opposite to it, the crew rested on their oars, giving only an occasional
stroke to keep the cutter from floating down the stream, and waited impatiently for the rebels
to show themselves.

The light, which gleamed from the shore opposite to the town, seemed to come from a dark lantern,
for it would blaze up brightly for a moment, and then disappear. Presently an answering light
was shown from the shore nearest to them, when Archie whispered--

"There's a boat coming!"

Frank listened, and could hear the slow, measured strokes of oars, which grew louder and louder
as the boat approached. It seemed to be heading directly toward them, and in a few moments
more it could be dimly seen, moving through the darkness.

"Give way together!" commanded Frank, and the cutter, propelled by twelve oars, shot alongside
the approaching boat, and the sailors seized the gunwale and held her fast. Resistance was
useless. Three rebels quietly delivered up their weapons, and one large, well-filled mail-bag
was stowed away under the stern sheets of the cutter. The prisoners were taken on board the
Boxer, and delivered into the charge of the master-at-arms, while their boat, a leaky affair,
requiring constant bailing to keep it afloat, was unceremoniously allowed to sink. The light
on the opposite shore was still shown, now at shorter intervals, as if the persons who were
managing it had begun to grow impatient. This was the source of much merriment among the sailors,
who hoped the "rebels would not grow tired of waiting for their mail."

The next day the Manhattan again came up the river, and, as she approached, made signals for
Frank to go on board of her. The gig was called away, and taking the reports of the expedition
the young officer and his prisoners shortly stood in the presence of Captain Wilson, who, as
soon as he had secured the prisoners, conducted Frank into the cabin. The latter, after presenting
his reports, proceeded to give the captain a history of the expedition which had resulted in
the capture of the guerrilla chief, of the interview with the flag of truce, and of the manner
in which he had deceived the market men and captured the mail, upon hearing which the captain
sprang from his chair, and giving Frank a hearty slap on the back, exclaimed:

"Well done, sir! well done! Then you are not entirely unprepared to hear what I have to tell
you. I picked up a runaway darkey yesterday, who informs me that the rebels are making preparations
to capture the Boxer!"

"I knew something was going on, sir," replied Frank, "and if that is what they are up to, they
will not find me unprepared."

"Well, that is what they intend to do. They have been building two large boats, into which
they are going to put a sufficient force to overpower you. The attempt is to be made on Wednesday
night. Of course, they hope to be able to take you by surprise. This contraband I picked up
says he worked on the boats, and that they will hold about forty men each. I shall not be far
off when the fight takes place, although I do not suppose you will need any assistance."

The two officers then began an examination of the mail, in hopes it would throw some further
light upon the movements of the guerrillas; but most of the letters were unofficial, and not
a word was said about the proposed attempt to capture the Boxer.

At the end of an hour, Frank returned on board his vessel, and the Manhattan steamed down the
river toward her station.

CHAPTER XV.

Honorably Discharged.

When Frank reached the Boxer, he sent for the executive officer, told him of what he had heard,
and also laid before him the plans he had adopted to defeat the rebels, which met the hearty
approval of that gentleman. Frank did not think it best to delay putting the vessel in a state
of defense, for the rebels might make the attempt at any time; so he instructed the executive
officer to see that the men were kept under cover, so that the rebels, if any were on the watch,
might not be able to judge of their numbers. When hammocks were piped that night, not more
than a dozen men answered the call, and when bedtime came, the sailors stretched themselves
out on deck, ready to take their posts at a moment's warning. The guns were all carefully loaded,
the hot-water hose got ready for use, and the anchor fixed so that it could be slipped in an
instant. Outside, the appearance of the vessel was not changed, the only thing noticeable being
the quantity of smoke that came out of her chimneys. At eight o'clock Frank inspected the boat,
and after seeing that every man was in his place, he lay down on the sofa in the cabin, without
removing his clothes, and fell asleep. When he awoke, he arose and went on deck, just as the
ship's bell was striking midnight. It was very dark, and the only sound that broke the stillness
was the splashing of the wheels of a steamer as she went on her way up the river. For an hour
he remained on deck, listening, but without hearing any thing suspicious until just as he was
about to return to the cabin. He had started down the stairs, when he heard a slight splashing
ahead of the vessel, like a heavy oar dipped carefully into the water. He listened a moment,
and the sound was repeated.

"There they are! They're coming, sure!" said Archie, who stood at his cousin's side.

"Yes, sir," said Tom, the gunner's-mate, who, in his eagerness to be the first to announce
the approach of the rebels, had remained on deck during the whole night. "That's them, sir!"

"Tell the officer of the deck to call all hands to quarters as quietly as possible," said Frank.

The officer ran below, and the young commander heard the sound again, still faint, but nearer
and more distinct than the others. It was well that he had not put off his preparations to
receive the rebels, for they were certainly approaching. Presently the pilots came up and took
their stations at the wheel, and a moment afterward the executive officer came up and reported
the crew ready for action. So quietly had the men been aroused, that Frank had not heard them
as they moved to their stations. Nearer and nearer came the sound of oars, and suddenly a large
flatboat, crowded with men, loomed up through the darkness.

"On deck, there!" whispered Frank, leaning over the rail and speaking to a sailor on the forecastle.
"Slip that anchor."

There was the rattling of a chain as this order was executed, and as the man sprang through
one of the ports, a sheet of flame covered the forecastle, and two twenty-four pound shells
went crashing and shrieking among the rebels.

The pilots rang the bell for the engineers to "come ahead," and as the Boxer turned out into
the river, thus bringing her broadside guns to bear on the boat, two more shells completed
the ruin. The rebels were caught in their own trap. Their boat was sinking, half their number
either dead or wounded, and all who were able to swim were springing into the water and making
for the nearest shore.

It was so dark Frank could not see the havoc that had been made among the guerrillas, and he
was about to give them another broadside, when he heard loud cries for quarter. That boat was
disposed of, and he turned to look for the other, (for Captain Wilson had said there were two
of them,) but it was not to be seen. As he afterward learned, the guerrillas, having been completely
deceived as to the force of the Boxer, had crowded sixty men into one boat, thinking that force
sufficient to insure an easy victory. After running up the river nearly a mile without seeing
any signs of the boat, the Boxer returned to her station, and found the rebel craft hard and
fast aground. Her deck was covered with dead and wounded, and Frank at once turned his attention
to taking care of the latter. Twenty-three wounded guerrillas were conveyed on board the vessel,
and delivered into the charge of the doctor and his steward, together with nearly a dozen prisoners,
who, being unable to swim, had not dared to leave the boat. The dead were left where they had
fallen. The Boxer then returned to her anchorage, and Frank, feeling safe for the remainder
of the night, ordered hammocks to be piped, a command which the sailors gladly obeyed, for
their soft mattresses were much more comfortable than the hard deck. By the time every thing
had been restored to order, the quarter-master reported the Manhattan approaching. Frank answered
her signals, and as she came alonside, Captain Wilson sprang on board.

"How is it, captain?" he inquired, as Frank met him at the gangway. "Mercy!" he exclaimed,
as he entered the door and saw the wounded rebels lying in rows on the deck. "Lively while
it lasted, wasn't it? How many men have you lost?"

"None, sir," replied Frank. "If the rebels fired a shot at us, I don't know it."

"When I heard the firing," continued the captain, "I was afraid you had neglected to make preparations
to receive them, and had got yourself into a bad scrape. But I see you are able to take care
of yourself."

The captain then returned on board his vessel, which moved out into the river and came to anchor
at a short distance from the Boxer, while Frank retired to his room and fell asleep, well satisfied
with his night's work.

Early the next morning, a single rebel appeared on the bank, with a flag of truce, and a boat
being sent out from the Manhattan, he was conveyed on board that vessel. In a short time, however,
it returned and set the rebel on board the Boxer.

"I want permission to bury our dead," said the guerrilla, on being shown into the cabin.

"You must see Captain Wilson about that," replied Frank. "I have no authority while he is here."

"I have just been to see him," replied the rebel, "and he sent me to you. He says you command
this station."

This was a compliment seldom paid a young officer; but the fact was, Captain Wilson was so
elated at Frank's success, that he determined to take every opportunity to make his approval
known. The young commander, of course, granted the request, and soon after the Manhattan steamed
down the river.

About a week afterward, a tin-clad came up, and her captain came on board the Boxer and presented
Frank with written orders to report to Captain Wilson without delay.

"I expect," said he, "that you will take my old station. If you do, you will have your hands
full, for boats are fired into every day; but, somehow, I was always at the wrong end of my
beat to meet the rebels."

When the captain had returned on board his vessel, the Boxer got up steam, and, in obedience
to her orders, started down the river. They found Captain Wilson the next day, and Frank was
assigned a new station. His beat was about five miles in length, and was a noted place for
guerrillas. Steamboat captains dreaded to pass it, for their boats were fired into, and often
badly cut up. The rebels had a battery of three guns, with which they were constantly dodging
from one point to another, always taking good care, however, to keep out of reach of the gun-boats.
On the second day Frank arrived at his station, and while running idly about--for his orders
from Captain Wilson were to "keep moving"--a steamer passed them on her way up the river, and
Frank ordered the pilot to round-to and follow her. The order was obeyed, but they had not
gone more than half a mile, when a battery, mounted on a point which ran for some distance
out into the river, opened on the steamer. The Boxer was at that moment behind the point and
out of sight of the rebels, who, however, were soon made aware of her presence; for they had
scarcely fired two rounds before a shell dismounted one of their guns. Their surprise was complete,
and abandoning their battery, they ran into the woods for protection. The Boxer rounded the
point, all the while shelling the woods, and Frank, seeing the guns deserted, landed with his
vessel and secured them. That guerrilla station was, for the present, broken up. So thought
Frank, who ordered the pilot to proceed up the river until he found the Manhattan. The next
day the battery was delivered up to Captain Wilson, who sent it by the dispatch-boat to Mound
City, which was then the naval station.

From that time hostilities along the river gradually ceased. All Englishmen, however, who have
young and beautiful wives, should, if they are not indifferent about their conduct, avoid
a trip to Paris, &c. tho' it be but for "a six weeks tour." She must be good and wise too, if
six weeks does not corrupt her mind and debauch her morals, and that too by her own sex, which
is infinitely the most dangerous company. A French woman is as great an adept at laughing an
English-woman into all contempt of fidelity to her husband, as married English-women are in
general, in preparing them during their first pregnancy, for the
touch of a man-midwife,--and both from the same motive; i.e. to do,
as they have done, and bring all the sex upon a level.

XXIX.
One by one the sailors came into the cabin, and the hearty grasp of their hands, and the earnest
manner in which they wished their commander "plain sailing through life," showed that their
feelings were not unlike his own.

One morning, upon inquiry at the navy-yard post-office, Frank was presented with two official
documents, which proved to be leaves of absence for himself and Archie for three months, "At
the expiration of that time," so read the document, "if your services, are no longer required,
you will he honorably discharged from the navy of the United States. Acknowledge the receipt
of this leave, and send your address to the department."

As soon as this order had been complied with, the cousins began to make preparations to start
for home. Their trunks had been packed several days before, in readiness for an immediate departure,
and in three hours after the receipt of their leaves they had taken their seats in the train
bound for Portland. The ride had never seemed so long, nor had the cars ever moved so slowly:
but, in due time, they reached the city in safety. Frank remained but one day in Portland,
for he was anxious to reach home. The "Julia Burton" still made her regular trips from Augusta
to Lawrence, and on the third day he reached the village. Brave was the first to welcome him
as he stepped out of the hack that had conveyed him from the wharf to the cottage, and not
recognizing his master, muffled up as he was in his heavy overcoat, he stood at the gate, growling
savagely, as if to warn him that he had ventured close enough. But one word was sufficient.
The faithful animal had not forgotten the sound of the familiar voice, and bounding over the
fence, he nearly overpowered his master with caresses.

The meeting with his mother and sister we shall not attempt to describe. Those who have passed
through similar scenes can easily imagine that joy reigned supreme in that house.

About a week after his arrival at home, Archie Winters and his parents reached the village,
the latter having "taken a holiday" in honor of the young paymaster's safe return. The cousins
spent their furlough in visiting their old hunting and fishing-grounds, and in calling upon
their friends. George and Harry Butler had returned, the former with an empty sleeve, having
lost his arm in the Battle of the Wilderness. But all their companions had not been as fortunate
as themselves. More than one had been offered upon the altar of their country, and many a familiar
face was missing.

At the expiration of their three months' leave, Frank and Archie received their honorable discharges
from the service, the sight of which recalled vividly to their minds many a thrilling scene
through which they had passed. How changed the scene now from that when they had first bid
adieu to their homes, to join the ranks of their country's defenders! "Then a gigantic rebellion
was in progress; armed men sentineled each other from Virginia to the Rio Grande; and the land
was filled with the crash of contending armies. Now, the rebel forces are vanquished, their
banner in the dust; the slave empire that was to rise upon the ruins of the Republic is itself
in ruins; and the soldiers and sailors of the Union, returning their weapons to the arsenals,
have exchanged their honored blue for the citizen's garb, and resumed their peaceful avocations,
as modest and unassuming as though they had never performed the deeds of valor that have filled
the whole civilized world with wonder."

Frank and Archie are proud of the part they have borne in the war of the Rebellion, and will
never forget their varied and eventful experience in the MISSISSIPPI SQUADRON.

