This disaster in the country of the Miamis showed the United States how hard it would be to
break the spirit of the red men. War having effected nothing, it was again decided to resort
to entreaty. A number of chiefs of different tribes were invited to go to Philadelphia, and
among them was Captain Brant. 'I can assure you,' wrote the secretary of state in the federal
government to Brant on February 2, 1792, 'that the President of the United States will be highly
gratified by receiving and conversing with a chief of such eminence as you are, on a subject
so interesting and important to the human race.' After some persuasion Brant consented to go
and, proceeding on horseback by way of the Mohawk valley, he arrived at the capital city on
June 20. There he was gladly welcomed, and every effort was made to win him for the United
States. 'I was offered a thousand guineas down,' wrote the War Chief at a later time, 'and
to have the half-pay and pension I receive from Great Britain doubled, merely on condition
that I would use my endeavours to bring about a peace. But this I rejected.' The American authorities
then held out an even more tempting bait. They would give him pre-emption rights over land
estimated to be worth twenty thousand pounds and an annual allowance of fifteen hundred dollars.
But Brant steadfastly refused, and his reason was very plain. How could he accept such a bribe?
'They might expect me,' he said, 'to act contrary to His Majesty's interest and the honour
of our nations.' He did, however, promise that he would urge the Miamis to come to terms with
the United States, and that he would go to them for that purpose.

As he was on his way home from Philadelphia he found that a Dutch-American, named Dygert, was
pursuing him with the intention of making an attempt upon his life. In New York, while he was
talking to several officers at his lodgings in Broadway, he happened to peer out, and saw a
man in the street below with his eyes intently fixed on the window of his room.

'There is Dygert now,' he cried.

Colonel Willet, one of the officers, went down and accused the man of basely plotting Brant's
assassination. 

Industrial Intelligence

Every student has, as a part of her trade education, such academic work, art, and physical training
as seems necessary; when she passes certain standards she is then
allowed to devote full time to her selected occupation.



On his safe return to Canada Brant was taken ill and was not able to attend a grand council
held in the autumn at Au Glaize, on the Great Miami. When the council met it was agreed that
hostilities should be suspended until a fresh council should be held at Miami Rapids.

During the winter of 1792-93 Brant received a visit from Simcoe, lieutenant-governor of Upper
Canada, at his home on Grand River. This officer, who had lately been installed at Niagara,
carried a letter to the War Chief from his old friend Lord Percy, now the Duke of Northumberland,
together with a brace of pistols that the duke had sent to him. Simcoe was on his way to Detroit
by sled, and stopped for three days at the Mohawk village. A feu de joie was fired in his honour,
flags were hoisted, and the Indians made a display of their trophies of war.

Brant and some of the redskins accompanied the lieutenant-governor as far as the Thames river,
where was situated the village of the Delawares. Here the War Chief was forced to return. Soon
afterwards His Excellency again halted at Grand River on his way back. The Indians entertained
him in royal style, performing the calumet dance, the feather dance, and several other dances
of their tribe.

In the middle of the summer of 1793 a great assembly of Indians took place at Miami Rapids.
Commissioners who were sent to represent the United States were not allowed to approach the
place of meeting. Brant made three speeches, urging upon the Indians the advisability of peace.
But the red men were still headstrong, and the commissioners had to go away without having
reached any understanding with them.

The end of the struggle, however, was coming fast. In 1794 General Wayne marched to the neighbourhood
of Fort Miami with a numerous force, defeated the Indians at the Fallen Timbers, and drove
them before him in all directions. Crestfallen and heartsore, they saw that the day of the
white man had come at last. Brant stood by as their helper to the very end, but it availed
them little. The Black Snake, as they called General Wayne, had beaten them, and they knew
he would beat them again. The tribesmen who had come from the far west withdrew sullenly across
the Mississippi, the other races submitted, and the Treaty of Greenville was signed with General
Wayne on August 3, 1795. The ox-cart began to rumble north of the Ohio; the tall forests fell
before the settler's axe, and the red man lived and walked no more alone by the 'River Beautiful.'

CHAPTER XIV

THE CHURCH BELL RINGS

Joseph Brant had been a valiant warrior; he had dealt with the affairs of the Six Nations wisely
and well. But he had never forgotten that one of the first duties of any ruler is to be, in
some sense, a priest unto his people. From a lad, he seems to have been a devoted Christian.
The alarms of war had drawn his mind for a period, it is true, to worldly considerations alone,
but now that strife had ceased he became once more the friend of the missionary and sought
to supply the spiritual needs of the tribes over which his influence was felt.

Like every Indian, the wonderful things which Brant saw all about him in nature held his mind
in a spell. To him there was One who had created all things, and who was ever ready and willing
to sustain His children. On one occasion in council Brant spoke of the primitive freedom of
the Indian people, and then exclaimed: 'This country was given to us by the Great Spirit above;
we wish to enjoy it.' He went on to tell how the Indians had tried to get peace, how their
efforts had failed, and how their patience was now all gone. Yet there was one covert in which
they might find shelter in time of storm. 'We therefore throw ourselves,' was his final utterance,
'under the protection of the Great Spirit above, who, we hope, will order all things for the best.'

While Brant was on his second visit to England, the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel
in Foreign Parts asked his help in getting out their printed books for the Indians. He willingly
assented, and soon had a new edition of the Prayer and Psalm Book in preparation, He translated
also the Gospel of St Mark. The Prayer and Psalm Book and his translation of the Gospel of
St Mark were issued as one book. The publication of this volume must have brought a feeling
of pride to the breast of the Mohawk chief. The book was a work of art, well printed and with
some fine engravings. The frontispiece depicted the inside of a chapel, in which the king and
queen were standing with a bishop on each side of them. The monarch and his consort were handing
sacred books to the Indians, who were clustered about in an expectant attitude.

A few years later Brant translated into the Mohawk tongue the Liturgy of the Anglican Church
as well as a doctrinal primer. Copies of these were sent to Harvard University, and its corporation
replied with a cordial vote of thanks to the War Chief for his gift. Brant also planned to
write a comprehensive history of the Six Nations, but unfortunately this work seems never to
have been commenced.

Hardly had the Mohawks settled at Grand River when they began to feel that they should have
a church building in which to worship. Funds were gathered, and as early as 1785 they were
laying the foundations of a suitable edifice. This building, which was reared in the depths
of the forest about two miles from the centre of what is now the city of Brantford, generally
went by the name of 'The Old Mohawk Church.' In 1904, on a petition to the king, it was given
the title of 'His Majesty's Chapel of the Mohawks.' Thus was restored the name of the church
in which the Indians were wont to worship in the Mohawk valley. With its square tower, quaint
slender steeple, and the graves of bygone generations of red men who have worshipped in it
gathered about its walls, it is a venerable reminder of the past. The Bible which was first
used in 'The Old Mohawk Church' was a gift from Queen Anne to the tribesmen in 1712 and was
brought to Grand River from their former home on the Mohawk. The silver communion plate was
part of a service which had also been presented to them by the same queen before they came
to Canada. It was of burnished silver and bore the Royal Coat of Arms. The remaining pieces
of this set were given to the Indians who settled in the Bay of Quinte district. In the year
1786 there was sent to the church a large and melodious bell. This was a presentation from
the British government, and on it was stamped the arms of the reigning House of Hanover.

In all the wide region later known as the province of Upper Canada, as yet no other Protestant
sanctuary had opened its doors for the use of Christian believers. With the erection of this
temple of the Mohawks begins the history of the Protestant churches in one of the fairest sections
of the Dominion of Canada. It was a sweet and solemn bell that pealed out its message when
service was held on those Sabbaths in pioneer days. Into the solitudes it rang, wakening the
stillness, echoing to hill-top, and throbbing down to distant valley. Up and along the river
stole the gladsome strain, the first call to prayer ever heard in this scarcely broken wilderness.
From among the trees emerged the exiled people of the Long House. They mingled together; they
entered the courts of the Great Spirit, silent and full of awe. There they listened to the
Gospel story and burst forth into many happy songs of thanksgiving and of love.

Brant was very desirous of securing a missionary who would suit the tastes of all. He tried
to get a resident missionary in the person of his friend Davenport Phelps, but the bishop of
Quebec refused Phelps ordination; and it was not until 1822, when the New England Company took
over the missionary work on the Mohawk reserve, that the Indians of Grand River had a resident
pastor. He was also told that, at a council held that day, it had been decided to arm the Indians
and "have them give the emigrants a brush, and, if they killed part or all, so much the better."
When asked who authorized this, Haight replied, "It is the will of
all in authority," and Lee was told that he was to carry out the order.

The intention then was to have the Indians do the killing without any white assistance. On
his way home Lee met a large body of Indians who said they were ordered by Haight, Higbee, and Bishop
Klingensmith, to kill and rob the emigrants, and wanted Lee to lead them. He told them to camp near
the emigrants and wait for him; but they made the attack, as described, early Monday morning, without
capturing the camp, and drove the whites into an intrenchment from which they could not dislodge
them. On this occasion a great company of Senecas had come all the way from
New York state in order to compete for the mastery with their kinsmen, the Mohawks. The contest
lasted for three days before the Senecas finally won the valuable stakes which were offered
as the prize.

The field which was cleared for the game was fairly extensive, the goals being placed about
five hundred feet apart. The teams had sixty men a side. When any one dropped out from either
party another was supposed to take his place, and so the energies of the contestants did not
flag. The netted rackets employed in the game of lacrosse were three and a half feet in length,
straight at the handle but curved at the other end. The broad portion used for throwing or
carrying the ball was formed of thongs of deerskin, interwoven and drawn firm and tight. It
was a picturesque sight when the opposing teams were ready to commence play. The animated warriors
were nude except for a breech-cloth reaching to the knee. When all was in readiness, an Indian
maiden came tripping into the centre of the field. She was prettily attired after the custom
of her tribe, wore bracelets of silver and a red tiara decked with eagle feathers. Placing
the ball among the players, she hurried from the field of play. Two experts from the rival
parties then raised the ball between their rackets and strove to make the first successful
throw. The great game had now begun, and each time the ball went through a goal it counted
one tally. The score-keepers, who were chosen from the older sachems of the tribes, were invested
with peculiar powers. If one team was making far less tallies than its opponent, they could
diminish its rival's score (without the players' knowledge, however) in order that the contest
might be protracted. Games of this vigorous kind have made the athletes of the Six Nations
noted in both Canada and the United States down to the present day.

CHAPTER XV

THE PINE-TREE TOTTERS

It came to pass before long that the Indians wished to dispose of some of the land granted
to them on Grand River. The United Empire Loyalists and others, lured by the prospect of cheap
land, kept crossing into Canada from the United States; accessions to the population of the
Great Lakes region had come by immigration from the British Isles, and the country was making
forward strides. Straggling settlers and speculators were often anxious to purchase land in
the richer districts when they could get it at a low price. It happened, however, that after
the redskins had sold and leased bits of their territory to such persons, the provincial government
began to interfere. The land, it said, belonged to the Indians only so long as they remained
upon it. They could not, therefore, sell any of it, as they had no direct ownership of the soil.

This decision shed a new light upon the proprietary rights of the Six Nations in Canada and
the Indians were sorely perplexed. Game was plenty,--deer, wild turkeys, and prairie hens,--but while
the members of this party were better supplied with provisions than their followers, there was
no surplus among them, and by April many families were really destitute of food.
 In 1793 Governor Simcoe issued a new proclamation respecting the grant, but this
did not end the dispute. The province still claimed the right of pre-emption with respect to
the whole of their reserve. Later on the matter was carried to England, and the British government
tended to favour the Indians' claims. But nothing was done, owing to contentions among the
redskins themselves. It was only, indeed, after Brant's death that the affair was finally settled.
The sale of large tracts of Indian land was then authorized, and the money received was safely
invested for the benefit of the Mohawks and others of the Six Nations in Canada. In connection
with this difficult question Brant had intended making a trip to England, but was forced to
abandon the idea.

