Among the humbler helpers of man, the pig holds an important place. He has had no small share
in the betterment of the estate of his masters. One of the large questions which beset men
in their unconscious endeavors to lay the foundations of civilization was that of food-supply.
No sooner does a population become sedentary than the wildernesses about its dwelling-place
are rapidly cleared of the large game, so that the chase affords but little save amusement.
Therefore a provision in the way of meat has to be obtained from domesticated animals. The
flocks and herds supply this need, though in a costly way. Sheep have a value for their wool;
horned cattle develop slowly, and are, moreover valuable, the oxen for their strength and the
cows for their milk. Horses are too valuable to be used for food, save in times of exceeding
stress; and none but the lowest savages are willing to send their faithful dogs to the pot.
From the beginning of his experience with man the pig has been found the cheapest and most
serviceable domesticated animal as a source of food-supply.

We can trace the origin of our domesticated pigs more clearly than in the case of the most
of the other subjugated animals. The creature is evidently descended from the wild boar of
Europe and Asia; and though long under domestication and greatly varied from its primitive
stock, it readily reverts to something like its original form when allowed to betake itself
once more to the wilds. The domestication of the species appears to have been accomplished
at several different points in Asia and Europe. The forms which are found in eastern Asia differ
from those which are kept in the western portion of the great continent, and may have their
blood commingled with that of another species which is native in that part of the world.

Among our domesticated animals the pig is exceptional in the fact that it has been bred for
its flesh alone; for although the hide is valuable and the hair serves certain purposes, as
in the manufacture of brushes, these uses are only incidental and modern. They have not affected
the plan of the breeder, whose aim has been to produce the largest weight of flesh in the shortest
time, and with the least expenditure of food. In this peculiar task the success has been remarkable,
the creature having been made to vary from its primitive condition in an extraordinary manner.
In its wild state the species develops slowly, requiring, perhaps, three or four years to attain
its maximum size. It never becomes very fat, but remains an agile, swift-footed, and fierce
tenant of the wilds. Under the conditions of subjugation the pig has been brought to a state
in which its qualities of mind and body have undergone a very great change. In the more developed
breeds, even the males, when kept about the barnyard, are quiet-natured and not at all dangerous.
The creatures have become slow-moving; they attain their full development in about half the
time required for the growth of their wild kindred, and when adult they may outweigh them in
the ratio of four to one.

The effect arising from the food-supply which our pigs afford is well seen in the use which
is made of their flesh in all the ruder work of men, at least in the case of those of our race.
Our soldiers and sailors are to a great extent fed on the flesh of these creatures, which lends
itself readily to preservation by the use of salt. So rapidly can these animals be bred, owing
to the number of young which they produce in a litter and the swiftness of their growth, that
sudden demands for an increase in the supply, such as occurred at the outbreak of our civil
war, can quickly be met. If the need should arise, the quantity of pork produced in this country
could readily be doubled within eighteen months. This is the case with no other source of flesh-supply,
and this fact gives the pig a peculiar importance.

Owing to the remarkably complete domestication of this animal, and also to the fact that it
is omnivorous, the creature has ever been a favorite with the cotter class. Those folk, who
can afford neither sheep nor horned cattle, can often provide the food for pigs, and thus,
in turn, be much better fed than they would otherwise be.

It is only within two centuries that our pigs have attained to anything like the domestication
in which we commonly find them. Of old they were allowed to range the forests, much as they
do in certain parts of our Southern States at the present day. In some parts of Europe, particularly
in the southern portion of the continent, this method of rearing and feeding is still common.
It was and is advantageous, for the reason that the creature, by its remarkably keen sense
of smelling and its singular capacity for overturning the ground, is able to provide itself
with abundant food in the way of grubs and roots which are not at the disposition of any other
animal. It was only as the public forests disappeared that pigs came to receive any considerable
part of their provender from the products of tilled fields. In this stage of our agriculture,
when all the land was possessed, the life of the pig was necessarily more restricted, and he
became the denizen of a pen. In the earlier state there was no cost for his keeping; in the
latter, except so far as he could be fed from the waste of a household, he is an expensive animal.

It is with this last state of the pig, when he became the most housed of our domesticated animals,
that the work of the breeder really began. The aim of those who have developed the pig has
been, as we have said, to obtain the most rapid growth along with the greatest weight of fat,
and to accomplish the results with the least expenditure in the way of food. Although the animal
has been subjected to selective experiments, looking to these ends, for not more than a century,
or say about forty generations of the species, the amount of variation which has been attained
is singularly great, the form and habits having been changed more rapidly, and in a larger
measure, than in the case of any other of our domesticated animals. It may fairly be said that
this creature is more obedient to the will of the practical selectionist than any other with
which we have experimented.

It is commonly assumed that our pigs are among the least intelligent of the creatures which
man has turned to his use. This impression is due to the fact that the conditions in which
these animals are kept insure their degradation by cutting them off from all the natural mental
training which wild animals, as well as the other tenants of the fields, receive. In the state
of nature or in the condition of domestication which existed before pigs became captives in
their pens, they were among the most alert and sagacious animals with which man has come in
contact. Their wits were quick and their sympathies with their kind remarkably strong. Trainers
have found these creatures more apt in receiving instruction than any other of our mammals,
and the things which they can be made to do appear to indicate a native intelligence nearer
to that of man than is found in any other species below the level of the apes.

