But by pluck and resolution he succeeded in making good some inch of standing room within the
court before the Solicitor-General began his statement, and he was able to hear every word
that was said. That statement was not more pleasing to him than to the rector of Yoxham. His
first quarrel was with the assertion that titles of nobility are in England the outward emblem
of noble conduct. No words that might have been uttered could have been more directly antagonistic
to his feelings and political creed. It had been the accident of his life that he should have
been concerned with ladies who were noble by marriage and birth, and that it had become a duty
to him to help to claim on their behalf empty names which were in themselves odious to him.
It had been the woman's right to be acknowledged as the wife of the man who had disowned her,
and the girl's right to be known as his legitimate daughter. Therefore had he been concerned.
But he had declared to himself, from his first crude conception of an opinion on the subject,
that it would be hard to touch pitch and not be defiled. The lords of whom he heard were, or
were believed by him to be, bloated with luxury, were both rich and idle, were gamblers, debauchers
of other men's wives, deniers of all rights of citizenship, drones who were positively authorised
to eat the honey collected by the working bees. With his half-knowledge, his ill-gotten and
ill-digested information, with his reading which had all been on one side, he had been unable
as yet to catch a glimpse of the fact that from the ranks of the nobility are taken the greater
proportion of the hardworking servants of the State. His eyes saw merely the power, the privileges,
the titles, the ribbons, and the money;--and he hated a lord. When therefore the Solicitor-General
spoke of the recognised virtue of titles in England, the tailor uttered words of scorn to his
stranger neighbour. "And yet this man calls himself a Liberal, and voted for the Reform Bill,"
he said. "In course he did," replied the stranger; "that was the way of his party." "There
isn't an honest man among them all," said the tailor to himself. This was at the beginning
of the speech, and he listened on through five long hours, not losing a word of the argument,
not missing a single point made in favour of the Countess and her daughter. It became clear
to him at any rate that the daughter would inherit the money. When the Solicitor-General came
to speak of the nature of the evidence collected in Italy, Daniel Thwaite was unconsciously
carried away into a firm conviction that all those concerned in the matter in Italy were swindlers.
The girl was no doubt the heiress. The feeling of all the court was with her,--as he could
well perceive. But in all that speech not one single word was said of the friend who had been
true to the girl and to her mother through all their struggles and adversity. The name of Thomas
Thwaite was not once mentioned. It might have been expedient for them to ignore him, Daniel,
the son; but surely had there been any honour among them, any feeling of common honesty towards
folk so low in the scale of humanity as tailors, some word would have been spoken to tell of
the friendship of the old man who had gone to his grave almost a pauper because of his truth
and constancy. But no;--there was not a word!

And he listened, with anxious ears, to learn whether anything would be said as to that proposed
"alliance,"--he had always heard it called an alliance with a grim smile,--between the two
noble cousins. Heaven and earth had been moved to promote "the alliance." But the Solicitor-General
said not a word on the subject,--any more than he did of that other disreputable social arrangement,
which would have been no more than a marriage. All the audience might suppose from anything
that was said there that the young lady was fancy free and had never yet dreamed of a husband.
Nevertheless there was hardly one there who had not heard something of the story of the Earl's
suit,--and something also of the tailor's success.

When the court broke up Daniel Thwaite had reached standing-room, which brought him near to
the seat that was occupied by Serjeant Bluestone. He lingered as long as he could, and saw
all the barristers concerned standing with their heads together laughing, chatting, and well
pleased, as though the day had been for them a day of pleasure. "I fancy the speculation is
too bad for any one to take it up," he heard the Serjeant say, among whose various gifts was
not that of being able to moderate his voice. "I dare say not," said Daniel to himself as he
left the court; "and yet we took it up when the risk was greater, and when there was nothing
to be gained." He had as yet received no explicit answer to the note which he had written to
the Countess when he sent her the copy of his father's will. He had, indeed, received a notice
from Mr. Goffe that the matter would receive immediate attention, and that the Countess hoped
to be able to settle the claim in a very short time. But that he thought was not such a letter
as should have been sent to him on an occasion so full of interest to him! But they were all
hard and unjust and bad. The Countess was bad because she was a Countess,--the lawyers because
they were lawyers,--the whole Lovel family because they were Lovels. At this moment poor Daniel
Thwaite was very bitter against all mankind. He would, he thought, go at once to the Western
world of which he was always dreaming, if he could only get that sum of £500 which was manifestly
due to him.

But as he wandered away after the court was up, getting some wretched solitary meal at a cheap
eating-house on his road, he endeavoured to fix his thoughts on the question of the girl's
affection to himself. Taking all that had been said in that courtly lawyer's speech this morning
as the groundwork of his present judgment, what should he judge to be her condition at the
moment? He had heard on all sides that it was intended that she should marry the young Earl,
and it had been said in his hearing that such would be declared before the judge. No such declaration
had been made. Not a word had been uttered to signify that such an "alliance" was contemplated.
Efforts had been made with him to induce him to withdraw his claim to the girl's hand. The
Countess had urged him, and the lawyers had urged him. Most assuredly they would not have done
so,--would have in no wise troubled themselves with him at all,--had they been able to prevail
with Lady Anna. And why had they not so prevailed? The girl, doubtless, had been subjected
to every temptation. She was kept secure from his interference. Hitherto he had not even made
an effort to see her since she had left the house in which he himself lived. She had nothing
to fear from him. She had been sojourning among those Lovels, who would doubtless have made
the way to deceit and luxury easy for her. He could not doubt but that she had been solicited
to enter into this alliance. Could he be justified in flattering himself that she had hitherto
resisted temptation because in her heart of hearts she was true to her first love? He was true.
He was conscious of his own constancy. He was sure of himself that he was bound to her by his
love, and not by the hope of any worldly advantage. And why should he think that she was weaker,
vainer, less noble than himself? Had he not evidence to show him that she was strong enough
to resist a temptation to which he had never been subjected? He had read of women who were
above the gilt and glitter of the world. When he was disposed to think that she would be false,
no terms of reproach seemed to him too severe to heap upon her name; and yet, when he found
that he had no ground on which to accuse her, even in his own thoughts, of treachery to himself,
he could hardly bring himself to think it possible that she should not be treacherous. She
had sworn to him, as he had sworn to her, and was he not bound to believe her oath?

Then he remembered what the poet had said to him. The poet had advised him to desist altogether,
and had told him that it would certainly be best for the girl that he should do so. The poet
had not based his advice on the ground that the girl would prove false, but that it would be
good for the girl to be allowed to be false,--good for the girl that she should be encouraged
to be false, in order that she might become an earl's wife! But he thought that it would be
bad for any woman to be an earl's wife; and so thinking, how could he abandon his love in order
that he might hand her over to a fashion of life which he himself despised? The poet must be
wrong. He would cling to his love till he should know that his love was false to him. Should
he ever learn that, then his love should be troubled with him no further.

But something must be done. Even, on her behalf, if she were true to him, something must be
done. Was it not pusillanimous in him to make no attempt to see his love and to tell her that
he at any rate was true to her? These people, who were now his enemies, the lawyers and the
Lovels, with the Countess at the head of them, had used him like a dog, had repudiated him
without remorse, had not a word even to say of the services which his father had rendered.
Was he bound by honour or duty to stand on any terms with them? Could there be anything due
to them from him? Did it not behove him as a man to find his way into the girl's presence and
to assist her with his courage? He did not fear them. What cause had he to fear them? In all
that had been between them his actions to them had been kind and good, whereas they were treating
him with the basest ingratitude.

But how should he see Lady Anna? As he thought of all this he wandered up from Westminster,
where he had eaten his dinner, to Russell Square and into Keppel Street, hesitating whether
he would at once knock at the door and ask to see Lady Anna Lovel. Lady Anna was still staying
with Mrs. Bluestone; but Daniel Thwaite had not believed the Countess when she told him that
her daughter was not living with her. He doubted, however, and did not knock at the door.

CHAPTER XXX.

JUSTICE IS TO BE DONE.

It must not be thought that the Countess was unmoved when she received Daniel Thwaite's letter
from Keswick enclosing the copy of his father's will. She was all alone, and she sat long in
her solitude, thinking of the friend who was gone and who had been always true to her. She
herself would have done for old Thomas Thwaite any service which a woman could render to a
man, so strongly did she feel all that the man had done for her. As she had once said, no menial
office performed by her on behalf of the old tailor would have been degrading to her. She had
eaten his bread, and she never for a moment forgot the obligation. The slow tears stood in
her eyes as she thought of the long long hours which she had passed in his company, while,
almost desponding herself, she had received courage from his persistency. And her feeling for
the son would have been the same, had not the future position of her daughter and the standing
of the house of Lovel been at stake. It was not in her nature to be ungrateful; but neither
was it in her nature to postpone the whole object of her existence to her gratitude. Even though
she should appear to the world as a monster of ingratitude, she must treat the surviving Thwaite
as her bitterest enemy as long as he maintained his pretensions to her daughter's hand. She
could have no friendly communication with him. She herself would hold no communication with
him at all, if she might possibly avoid it, lest she should be drawn into some renewed relation
of friendship with him. He was her enemy,--her enemy in such fierce degree that she was always
plotting the means of ridding herself altogether of his presence and influence. To her thinking
the man had turned upon her most treacherously, and was using, for his own purposes and his
own aggrandizement, that familiarity with her affairs which he had acquired by reason of his
father's generosity. She believed but little in his love; but whether he loved the girl or
merely sought her money, was all one to her. Her whole life had been passed in an effort to
prove her daughter to be a lady of rank, and she would rather sacrifice her life in the basest
manner than live to see all her efforts annulled by a low marriage. Love, indeed, and romance!
What was the love of one individual, what was the romance of a childish girl, to the honour
and well-being of an ancient and noble family? It was her ambition to see her girl become the
Countess Lovel, and no feeling of gratitude should stand in her way. She would rather slay
that lowborn artisan with her own hand than know that he had the right to claim her as his
mother-in-law. Nevertheless, the slow tears crept down her cheeks as she thought of former
days, and of the little parlour behind the tailor's shop at Keswick, in which the two children
had been wont to play.

But the money must be paid; or, at least, the debt must be acknowledged. As soon as she had
somewhat recovered herself she opened the old desk which had for years been the receptacle
of all her papers, and taking out sundry scribbled documents, went to work at a sum in addition.
It cannot be said of her that she was a good accountant, but she had been so far careful as
to have kept entries of all the monies she had received from Thomas Thwaite. She had once carried
in her head a correct idea of the entire sum she owed him; but now she set down the items with
dates, and made the account fair on a sheet of note paper. So much money she certainly did
owe to Daniel Thwaite, and so much she would certainly pay if ever the means of paying it should
be hers. Then she went off with her account to Mr. Goffe.

Mr. Goffe did not think that the matter pressed. The payment of large sums which have been
long due never is pressing in the eyes of lawyers. Men are always supposed to have a hundred
pounds in their waistcoat pockets; but arrangements have to be made for the settling of thousands.
"You had better let me write him a line and tell him that it shall be looked to as soon as
the question as to the property is decided," said Mr. Goffe. But this did not suit the views
of the Countess. She spoke out very openly as to all she owed to the father, and as to her
eternal enmity to the son. It behoved her to pay the debt, if only that she might be able to
treat the man altogether as an enemy. She had understood that, even pending the trial, a portion
of the income would be allowed by the courts for her use and for the expenses of the trial.
It was assented that this money should be paid. Could steps be taken by which it might be settled
at once? Mr. Goffe, taking the memorandum, said that he would see what could be done, and then
wrote his short note to Daniel Thwaite. When he had computed the interest which must undoubtedly
be paid on the borrowed money he found that a sum of about £9,000 was due to the tailor. "Nine
thousand pounds!" said one Mr. Goffe to another. "That will be better to him than marrying
the daughter of an earl." Could Daniel have heard the words he would have taken the lawyer
by the throat and have endeavoured to teach him what love is.

Then the trial came on. Before the day fixed had come round, but only just before it, Mr. Goffe
showed the account to Serjeant Bluestone. "God bless my soul!" said the Serjeant. "There should
be some vouchers for such an amount as that." Mr. Goffe declared that there were no vouchers,
except for a very trifling part of it; but still thought that the amount should be allowed.
The Countess was quite willing to make oath, if need be, that the money had been supplied to
her. Then the further consideration of the question was for the moment postponed, and the trial
came on.

On the Tuesday, which had been left a vacant day as regarded the trial, there was a meeting,--like
all other proceedings in this cause, very irregular in its nature,--at the chambers of the
Solicitor-General, at which Serjeant Bluestone attended with Messrs. Hardy, Mainsail, Flick,
and Goffe; and at this meeting, among other matters of business, mention was made of the debt
due by the Countess to Daniel Thwaite. Of this debt the Solicitor-General had not as yet heard,--though
he had heard of the devoted friendship of the old tailor. That support had been afforded to
some extent,--that for a period the shelter of old Thwaite's roof had been lent to the Countess,--that
the man had been generous and trusting, he did know. He had learned, of course, that thence
had sprung that early familiarity which had enabled the younger Thwaite to make his engagement
with Lady Anna. That something should be paid when the ladies came by their own he was aware.
But the ladies were not his clients, and into the circumstances he had not inquired. Now he
was astounded and almost scandalized by the amount of the debt.

"Do you mean to say that he advanced £9,000 in hard cash?" said the Solicitor-General.

"That includes interest at five per cent., Sir William, and also a small sum for bills paid
by Thomas Thwaite on her behalf. She has had in actual cash about £7,000."

"And where has it gone?"

"A good deal of it through my hands," said Mr. Goffe boldly. "During two or three years she
had no income at all, and during the last twenty years she has been at law for her rights.
He advanced all the money when that trial for bigamy took place."

"God bless my soul!" said Mr. Serjeant Bluestone.

"Did he leave a will?" asked the Solicitor-General.

"Oh, yes; a will which has been proved, and of which I have a copy. There was nothing else
to leave but this debt, and that is left to the son."

"It should certainly be paid without delay," said Mr. Hardy. Mr. Mainsail questioned whether
they could get the money. Mr. Goffe doubted whether it could be had before the whole affair
was settled. Mr. Flick was sure that on due representation the amount would be advanced at
once. The income of the property was already accumulating in the hands of the court, and there
was an anxiety that all just demands,--demands which might be considered to be justly made
on the family property,--should be paid without delay. "I think there would hardly be a question,"
said Mr. Hardy.

"Seven thousand pounds advanced by these two small tradesmen to the Countess Lovel," said the
Solicitor-General, "and that done at a time when no relation of her own or of her husband would
lend her a penny! I wish I had known that when I went into court yesterday."

"It would hardly have done any good," said the Serjeant.

"It would have enabled one at any rate to give credit where credit is due. And this son is
the man who claims to be affianced to the Lady Anna?"

"The same man, Sir William," said Mr. Goffe.

"One is almost inclined to think that he deserves her."

"I can't agree with you there at all," said the Serjeant angrily.

"One at any rate is not astonished that the young lady should think so," continued the Solicitor-General.
"Upon my word, I don't know how we are to expect that she should throw her early lover overboard
after such evidence of devotion."

"The marriage would be too incongruous," said Mr. Hardy.

"Quite horrible," said the Serjeant.

"It distresses one to think of it," said Mr. Goffe.

"It would be much better that she should not be Lady Anna at all, if she is to do that," said
Mr. Mainsail.

"Very much better," said Mr. Flick, shaking his head, and remembering that he was employed
by Lord Lovel and not by the Countess,--a fact of which it seemed to him that the Solicitor-General
altogether forgot the importance.

"Gentlemen, you have no romance among you," said Sir William. "Have not generosity and valour
always prevailed over wealth and rank with ladies in story?"

"I do not remember any valorous tailors who have succeeded with ladies of high degree," said
Mr. Hardy.

"Did not the lady of the Strachy marry the yeoman of the wardrobe?" asked the Solicitor-General.

"I don't know that we care much about romance here," said the Serjeant. "The marriage would
be so abominable, that it is not to be thought of."

"The tailor should at any rate get his money," said the Solicitor-General, "and I will undertake
to say that if the case be as represented by Mr. Goffe--"

"It certainly is," said the attorney.

"Then there will be no difficulty in raising the funds for paying it. If he is not to have
his wife, at any rate let him have his money. I think, Mr. Flick, that intimation should be
made to him that Earl Lovel will join the Countess in immediate application to the court for
means to settle his claim. Circumstanced as we are at present, there can be no doubt that such
application will have the desired result. It should, of course, be intimated that Serjeant
Bluestone and myself are both of opinion that the money should be allowed for the purpose."

As the immediate result of this conversation, Daniel Thwaite received on the following morning
letters both from Mr. Goffe and Mr. Flick. The former intimated to him that a sum of nine thousand
odd pounds was held to be due to him by the Countess, and that immediate steps would be taken
for its payment. That from Mr. Flick, which was much shorter than the letter from his brother
attorney, merely stated that as a very large sum of money appeared to be due by the Countess
Lovel to the estate of the late Thomas Thwaite, for sums advanced to the Countess during the
last twenty years, the present Earl Lovel had been advised to join the Countess in application
to the courts, that the amount due might be paid out of the income of the property left by
the late Earl; and that that application would be made "immediately." Mr. Goffe in his letter,
went on to make certain suggestions, and to give much advice. As this very large debt, of which
no proof was extant, was freely admitted by the Countess, and as steps were being at once taken
to ensure payment of the whole sum named to Daniel Thwaite, as his father's heir, it was hoped
that Daniel Thwaite would at once abandon his preposterous claim to the hand of Lady Anna Lovel.
Then Mr. Goffe put forward in glowing colours the iniquity of which Daniel Thwaite would be
guilty should he continue his fruitless endeavours to postpone the re-establishment of a noble
family which was thus showing its united benevolence by paying to him the money which it owed him.

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE VERDICT.

On the Wednesday the court reassembled in all its judicial glory. There was the same crowd,
the same Lord Chief Justice, the same jury, and the same array of friendly lawyers. There had
been a rumour that a third retinue of lawyers would appear on behalf of what was now generally
called the Italian interest, and certain words which had fallen from the Solicitor-General
on Monday had assured the world at large that the Italian interest would be represented. It
was known that the Italian case had been confided to a firm of enterprising solicitors, named
Mowbray and Mopus, perhaps more feared than respected, which was supposed to do a great amount
of speculative business. But no one from the house of Messrs. Mowbray and Mopus was in court
on the Wednesday morning; and no energetic barrister was ever enriched by a fee from them on
behalf of the Italian widow. The speculation had been found to be too deep, the expenditure
which would be required in advance too great, and the prospect of remuneration too remote even
for Mowbray and Mopus. It appeared afterwards that application had been made by those gentlemen
for an assurance that expenses incurred on behalf of the Italian Countess should be paid out
of the estate; but this had been refused. No guarantee to this effect could be given, at any
rate till it should be seen whether the Italian lady had any show of justice on her side. It
was now the general belief that if there was any truth at all in the Italian claim, it rested
on the survivorship, at the time of the Cumberland marriage, of a wife who had long since died.
As the proof of this would have given no penny to any one in Italy,--would simply have shown
that the Earl was the heir,--Messrs. Mowbray and Mopus retired, and there was an end, for ever
and a day, of the Italian interest.

Though there was the same throng in the court as on the Monday, there did not seem to be the
same hubbub on the opening of the day's proceedings. The barristers were less busy with their
papers, the attorneys sat quite at their ease, and the Chief Justice, with an assistant judge,
who was his bench-fellow, appeared for some minutes to be quite passive. Then the Solicitor-General
arose and said that, with permission, he would occupy the court for only a few minutes. He
had stated on Monday his belief that an application would be made to the court on behalf of
other interests than those which had been represented when the court first met. It appeared
that he had been wrong in that surmise. Of course he had no knowledge on the subject, but it
did not appear that any learned gentleman was prepared to address the court for any third party.
As he, on behalf of his client, had receded from the case, his Lordship would probably say
what, in his Lordship's opinion, should now be the proceeding of the court. The Earl Lovel
abandoned his plea, and perhaps the court would, in those circumstances, decide that its jurisdiction
in the matter was over. Then the Lord Chief Justice, with his assistant judge, retired for
a while, and all the assembled crowd appeared to be at liberty to discuss the matter just as
everybody pleased.

It was undoubtedly the opinion of the bar at large, and at that moment of the world in general,
that the Solicitor-General had done badly for his client. The sum of money which was at stake
was, they said, too large to be played with. As the advocate of the Earl, Sir William ought
to have kept himself aloof from the Countess and her daughter. In lieu of regarding his client,
he had taken upon himself to set things right in general, according to his idea of right. No
doubt he was a clever man, and knew how to address a jury, but he was always thinking of himself,
and bolstering up something of his own, instead of thinking of his case and bolstering up his
client. And this conception of his character in general, and of his practice in this particular,
became the stronger, as it was gradually believed that the living Italian Countess was certainly
an impostor. There would have been little good in fighting against the English Countess on
her behalf;--but if they could only have proved that the other Italian woman, who was now dead,
had been the real Countess when the Cumberland marriage was made, then what a grand thing it
would have been for the Lovel family! Of those who held this opinion, the rector of Yoxham
was the strongest, and the most envenomed against the Solicitor-General. During the whole of
that Tuesday he went about declaring that the interests of the Lovel family had been sacrificed
by their own counsel, and late in the afternoon he managed to get hold of Mr. Hardy. Could
nothing be done? Mr. Hardy was of opinion that nothing could be done now; but in the course
of the evening he did, at the rector's instance, manage to see Sir William, and to ask the
question, "Could nothing be done?"

"Nothing more than we propose to do."

"Then the case is over," said Mr. Hardy. "I am assured that no one will stir on behalf of that
Italian lady."

"If any one did stir it would only be loss of time and money. My dear Hardy, I understand as
well as any one what people are saying, and I know what must be the feeling of many of the
Lovels. But I can only do my duty by my client to the best of my judgment. In the first place,
you must remember that he has himself acknowledged the Countess."

"By our advice," said Mr. Hardy.

"You mean by mine. Exactly so;--but with such conviction on his own part that he positively
refuses to be a party to any suit which shall be based on the assumption that she is not Countess
Lovel. Let an advocate be ever so obdurate, he can hardly carry on a case in opposition to
his client's instructions. We are acting for Lord Lovel, and not for the Lovel family. And
I feel assured of this, that were we to attempt to set up the plea that that other woman was
alive when the marriage took place in Cumberland, you, yourself, would be ashamed of the evidence
which it would become your duty to endeavour to foist upon the jury. We should certainly be
beaten, and, in the ultimate settlement of the property, we should have to do with enemies
instead of friends. The man was tried for bigamy and acquitted. Would any jury get over that
unless you had evidence to offer to them that was plain as a pikestaff, and absolutely incontrovertible?"

"Do you still think the girl will marry the Earl?"

"No; I do not. She seems to have a will of her own, and that will is bent the other way. But
I do think that a settlement may be made of the property which shall be very much in the Earl's
favour." When on the following morning the Solicitor-General made his second speech, which
did not occupy above a quarter of an hour, it became manifest that he did not intend to alter
his course of proceeding, and while the judges were absent it was said by everybody in the
court that the Countess and Lady Anna had gained their suit.

"I consider it to be a most disgraceful course of proceeding on the part of Sir William Patterson,"
said the rector to a middle-aged legal functionary, who was managing clerk to Norton and Flick.

"We all think, sir, that there was more fight in it," said the legal functionary.

"There was plenty of fight in it. I don't believe that any jury in England would willingly
have taken such an amount of property from the head of the Lovel family. For the last twenty
years,--ever since I first heard of the pretended English marriage,--everybody has known that
she was no more a Countess than I am. I can't understand it; upon my word I can't. I have not
had much to do with law, but I've always been brought up to think that an English barrister
would be true to his client. I believe a case can be tried again if it can be shown that the
lawyers have mismanaged it." The unfortunate rector, when he made this suggestion, no doubt
forgot that the client in this case was in full agreement with the wicked advocate.

The judges were absent for about half an hour, and on their return the Chief Justice declared
that his learned brother,--the Serjeant namely,--had better proceed with the case on behalf
of his clients. He went on to explain that as the right to the property in dispute, and indeed
the immediate possession of that property, would be ruled by the decision of the jury, it was
imperative that they should hear what the learned counsel for the so-called Countess and her
daughter had to say, and what evidence they had to offer, as to the validity of her marriage.
It was not to be supposed that he intended to throw any doubt on that marriage, but such would
be the safer course. No doubt, in the ordinary course of succession, a widow and a daughter
would inherit and divide among them in certain fixed proportions the personal property of a
deceased but intestate husband and father, without the intervention of any jury to declare
their rights. But in this case suspicion had been thrown and adverse statements had been made;
and as his learned brother was, as a matter of course, provided with evidence to prove that
which the plaintiff had come into the court with the professed intention of disproving, the
case had better go on. Then he wrapped his robes around him and threw himself back in the attitude
of a listener. Serjeant Bluestone, already on his legs, declared himself prepared and willing
to proceed. No doubt the course as now directed was the proper course to be pursued. The Solicitor-General,
rising gracefully and bowing to the court, gave his consent with complaisant patronage. "Your
Lordship, no doubt, is right." His words were whispered, and very probably not heard; but the
smile, as coming from a Solicitor-General,--from such a Solicitor-General as Sir William Patterson,--was
sufficient to put any judge at his ease.

Then Serjeant Bluestone made his statement, and the case was proceeded with after the fashion
of such trials. It will not concern us to follow the further proceedings of the court with
any close attention. The Solicitor-General went away, to some other business, and much of the
interest seemed to drop. The marriage in Cumberland was proved; the trial for bigamy, with
the acquittal of the Earl, was proved; the two opposed statements of the Earl, as to the death
of the first wife, and afterwards as to the fact that she was living, were proved. Serjeant
Bluestone and Mr. Mainsail were very busy for two days, having everything before them. Mr.
Hardy, on behalf of the young lord, kept his seat, but he said not a word--not even asking
a question of one of Serjeant Bluestone's witnesses. Twice the foreman of the jury interposed,
expressing an opinion, on behalf of himself and his brethren, that the case need not be proceeded
with further; but the judge ruled that it was for the interest of the Countess,--he ceased
to style her the so-called Countess,--that her advocates should be allowed to complete their
case. In the afternoon of the second day they did complete it, with great triumph and a fine
flourish of forensic oratory as to the cruel persecution which their client had endured. The
Solicitor-General came back into court in time to hear the judge's charge, which was very short.
The jury were told that they had no alternative but to find a verdict for the defendants. It
was explained to them that this was a plea to show that a certain marriage which had taken
place in Cumberland in 181--, was no real or valid marriage. Not only was that plea withdrawn,
but evidence had been adduced proving that that marriage was valid. Such a marriage was, as
a matter of course, primâ facie valid, let what statements might be made to the contrary by
those concerned or not concerned. In such case the burden of proof would rest entirely with
the makers of such statement. No such proof had been here attempted, and the marriage must
be declared a valid marriage. The jury had nothing to do with the disposition of the property,
and it would be sufficient for them simply to find a verdict for the defendants. The jury did
as they were bid; but, going somewhat beyond this, declared that they found the two defendants
to be properly named the Countess Lovel, and Lady Anna Lovel. So ended the case of "Lovel v.
Murray and Another."

The Countess, who had been in the court all day, was taken home to Keppel Street by the Serjeant
in a glass coach that had been hired to be in waiting for her. "And now, Lady Lovel," said
Serjeant Bluestone, as he took his seat opposite to her, "I can congratulate your ladyship
on the full restitution of your rights." She only shook her head. "The battle has been fought
and won at last, and I will make free to say that I have never seen more admirable persistency
than you have shown since first that bad man astounded your ears by his iniquity."

"It has been all to no purpose," she said.

"To no purpose, Lady Lovel! I may as well tell you now that it is expected that his Majesty
will send to congratulate you on the restitution of your rights."

Again she shook her head. "Ah, Serjeant Bluestone;--that will be but of little service."

"No further objection can now be made to the surrender of the whole property. There are some
mining shares as to which there may be a question whether they are real or personal, but they
amount to but little. A third of the remainder, which will, I imagine, exceed--"

"If it were ten times as much, Serjeant Bluestone, there would be no comfort in it. If it were
ten times that, it would not at all help to heal my sorrow. I have sometimes thought that when
one is marked for trouble, no ease can come."

"I don't think more of money than another man," began the Serjeant.

"You do not understand."

"Nor yet of titles,--though I feel for them, when they are worthily worn, the highest respect,"
as he so spoke the Serjeant lifted his hat from his brow. "But, upon my word, to have won such
a case as this justifies triumph."

"I have won nothing,--nothing,--nothing!"

"You mean about Lady Anna?"

"Serjeant Bluestone, when first I was told that I was not that man's wife, I swore to myself
that I would die sooner than accept any lower name; but when I found that I was a mother, then
I swore that I would live till my child should bear the name that of right belonged to her."

"She does bear it now."

"What name does she propose to bear? I would sooner be poor, in beggary,--still fighting, even
without means to fight, for an empty title,--still suffering, still conscious that all around
me regarded me as an impostor, than conquer only to know that she, for whom all this has been
done, has degraded her name and my own. If she does this thing, or, if she has a mind so low,
a spirit so mean, as to think of doing it, would it not be better for all the world that she
should be the bastard child of a rich man's kept mistress, than the acknowledged daughter of
an earl, with a countess for her mother, and a princely fortune to support her rank? If she
marries this man, I shall heartily wish that Lord Lovel had won the case. I care nothing for
myself now. I have lost all that. The king's message will comfort me not at all. If she do
this thing I shall only feel the evil we have done in taking the money from the Earl. I would
sooner see her dead at my feet than know that she was that man's wife;--ay, though I had stabbed
her with my own hand!"

The Serjeant for the nonce could say nothing more to her. She had worked herself into such
a passion that she would listen to no words but her own, and think of nothing but the wrong
that was still being done to her. He put her down at the hall door in Keppel Street, saying,
as he lifted his hat again, that Mrs. Bluestone should come and call upon her.

CHAPTER XXXII.

WILL YOU PROMISE?

The news of the verdict was communicated the same evening to Lady Anna,--as to whose name there
could now no longer be any dispute. "I congratulate you, Lady Anna," said the Serjeant, holding
her hand, "that everything as far as this trial is concerned has gone just as we could wish."

"We owe it all to you," said the girl.

"Not at all. My work has been very easy. In fact I have some feeling of regret that I have
not been placed in a position that would enable me to earn my wages. The case was too good,--so
that a poor aspiring lawyer has not been able to add to his reputation. But as far as you are
concerned, my dear, everything has gone as you should wish. You are now a very wealthy heiress,
and the great duty devolves upon you of disposing of your wealth in a fitting manner." Lady
Anna understood well what was meant, and was silent. Even when she was alone, her success did
not make her triumphant. She could anticipate that the efforts of all her friends to make her
false to her word would be redoubled. Unless she could see Daniel Thwaite, it would be impossible
that she should not be conquered.

The Serjeant told his wife the promise which he had made on her behalf, and she, of course,
undertook to go to Keppel Street on the following morning. "You had better bring her here,"
said the Serjeant. Mrs. Bluestone remarked that that might be sooner said than done. "She'll
be glad of an excuse to come," answered the Serjeant. "On such an occasion as this, of course
they must see each other. Something must be arranged about the property. In a month or two,
when she is of age, she will have the undisputed right to do what she pleases with about three
hundred thousand pounds. It is a most remarkable position for a young girl who has never yet
had the command of a penny, and who professes that she is engaged to marry a working tailor.
Of course her mother must see her."

Mrs. Bluestone did call in Keppel Street, and sat with the Countess a long time, undergoing
a perfect hailstorm of passion. For a long time Lady Lovel declared that she would never see
her daughter again till the girl had given a solemn promise that she would not marry Daniel
Thwaite. "Love her! Of course I love her. She is all that I have in the world. But of what
good is my love to me, if she disgraces me? She has disgraced me already. When she could bring
herself to tell her cousin that she was engaged to this man, we were already disgraced. When
she once allowed the man to speak to her in that strain, without withering him with her scorn,
she disgraced us both. For what have I done it all, if this is to be the end of it?" But at
last she assented and promised that she would come. No;--it would not be necessary to send
a carriage for her. The habits of her own life need not be at all altered because she was now
a Countess beyond dispute, and also wealthy. She would be content to live as she had ever lived.
It had gone on too long for her to desire personal comfort,--luxury for herself, or even social
rank. The only pleasure that she had anticipated, the only triumph that she desired, was to
be found in the splendour of her child. She would walk to Bedford Square, and then walk back
to her lodgings in Keppel Street. She wanted no carriage.

Early on the following day there was heard the knock at the door which Lady Anna had been taught
to expect. The coming visit had been discussed in all its bearings, and it had been settled
that Mrs. Bluestone should be with the daughter when the mother arrived. It was thought that
in this way the first severity of the Countess would be mitigated, and that the chance of some
agreement between them might be increased. Both the Serjeant and Mrs. Bluestone now conceived
that the young lady had a stronger will of her own than might have been expected from her looks,
her language, and her manners. She had not as yet yielded an inch, though she would not argue
the matter at all when she was told that it was her positive duty to abandon the tailor. She
would sit quite silent; and if silence does give consent, she consented to this doctrine. Mrs.
Bluestone, with a diligence which was equalled only by her good humour, insisted on the misery
which must come upon her young friend should she quarrel with the Countess, and with all the
Lovels,--on the unfitness of the tailor, and the impossibility that such a marriage should
make a lady happy,--on the sacred duty which Lady Anna's rank imposed upon her to support her
order, and on the general blessedness of a well-preserved and exclusive aristocracy. "I don't
mean to say that nobly born people are a bit better than commoners," said Mrs. Bluestone. "Neither
I nor my children have a drop of noble blood in our veins. It is not that. But God Almighty
has chosen that there should be different ranks to carry out His purposes, and we have His
word to tell us that we should all do our duties in that state of life to which it has pleased
Him to call us." The excellent lady was somewhat among the clouds in her theology, and apt
to mingle the different sources of religious instruction from which she was wont to draw lessons
for her own and her children's guidance; but she meant to say that the proper state of life
for an earl's daughter could not include an attachment to a tailor; and Lady Anna took it as
it was meant. The nobly born young lady did not in heart deny the truth of the lesson;--but
she had learned another lesson, and she did not know how to make the two compatible. That other
lesson taught her to believe that she ought to be true to her word;--that she specially ought
to be true to one who had ever been specially true to her. And latterly there had grown upon
her a feeling less favourable to the Earl than that which he had inspired when she first saw
him, and which he had increased when they were together at Yoxham. It is hard to say why the
Earl had ceased to charm her, or by what acts or words he had lowered himself in her eyes.
He was as handsome as ever, as much like a young Apollo, as gracious in his manner, and as
gentle in his gait. And he had been constant to her. Perhaps it was that she had expected that
one so godlike should have ceased to adore a woman who had degraded herself to the level of
a tailor, and that, so conceiving, she had begun to think that his motives might be merely
human, and perhaps sordid. He ought to have abstained and seen her no more after she had owned
her own degradation. But she said nothing of all this to Mrs. Bluestone. She made no answer
to the sermons preached to her. She certainly said no word tending to make that lady think
that the sermons had been of any avail. "She looks as soft as butter," Mrs. Bluestone said
that morning to her husband; "but she is obstinate as a pig all the time."

"I suppose her father was the same way before her," said the Serjeant, "and God knows her mother
is obstinate enough."

When the Countess was shown into the room Lady Anna was trembling with fear and emotion. Lady
Lovel, during the last few weeks, since her daughter had seen her, had changed the nature of
her dress. Hitherto, for years past, she had worn a brown stuff gown, hardly ever varying even
the shade of the sombre colour,--so that her daughter had perhaps never seen her otherwise
clad. No woman that ever breathed was less subject to personal vanity than had been the so-called
Countess who lived in the little cottage outside Keswick. Her own dress had been as nothing
to her, and in the days of her close familiarity with old Thomas Thwaite she had rebuked her
friend when he had besought her to attire herself in silk. "We'll go into Keswick and get Anna
a new ribbon," she would say, "and that will be grandeur enough for her and me too." In this
brown dress she had come up to London, and so she had been clothed when her daughter last saw
her. But now she wore a new, full, black silk dress, which, plain as it was, befitted her rank
and gave an increased authority to her commanding figure. Lady Anna trembled all the more,
and her heart sank still lower within her, because her mother no longer wore the old brown
gown. When the Countess entered the room she took no immediate notice of Mrs. Bluestone, but
went up to her child and kissed her. "I am comforted, Anna, in seeing you once again," she said.

"Dear, dearest mamma!"

"You have heard, I suppose, that the trial has been decided in your favour?"

"In yours, mamma."

"We have explained it all to her, Lady Lovel, as well as we could. The Serjeant yesterday evening
gave us a little history of what occurred. It seems to have been quite a triumph."

"It may become a triumph," said the Countess;--"a triumph so complete and glorious that I shall
desire nothing further in this world. It has been my work to win the prize; it is for her to
wear it,--if she will do so."

"I hope you will both live to enjoy it many years," said Mrs. Bluestone. "You will have much
to say to each other, and I will leave you now. We shall have lunch, Lady Lovel, at half-past
one, and I hope that you will join us."

Then they were alone together. Lady Anna had not moved from her chair since she had embraced
her mother, but the Countess had stood during the whole time that Mrs. Bluestone had been in
the room. When the room door was closed they both remained silent for a few moments, and then
the girl rushed across the room and threw herself on her knees at her mother's feet. "Oh, mamma,
mamma, tell me that you love me. Oh, mamma, why have you not let me come to you? Oh, mamma,
we never were parted before."

"My child never before was wilfully disobedient to me."

"Oh, mamma;--tell me that you love me."

"Love you! Yes, I love you. You do not doubt that, Anna. How could it be possible that you
should doubt it after twenty years of a mother's care? You know I love you."

"I know that I love you, mamma, and that it kills me to be sent away from you. You will take
me home with you now;--will you not?"

"Home! You shall make your own home, and I will take you whither you will. I will be a servant
to minister to every whim; all the world shall be a Paradise to you; you shall have every joy
that wealth, and love, and sweet friends can procure for you,--if you will obey me in one thing."
Lady Anna, still crouching upon the ground, hid her face in her mother's dress, but she was
silent. "It is not much that I ask after a life spent in winning for you all that has now been
won. I only demand of you that you shall not disgrace yourself."

"Oh, mamma, I am not disgraced."

"Say that you will marry Lord Lovel, and all that shall be forgotten. It shall at any rate
be forgiven, or remembered only as the folly of a child. Will you say that you will become
Lord Lovel's wife?"

"Oh, mamma!"

"Answer me, Anna;--will you say that you will receive Lord Lovel as your accepted lover? Get
up, girl, and look me in the face. Of what use is it to grovel there, while your spirit is
in rebellion? Will you do this? Will you save us all from destruction, misery, and disgrace?
Will you remember who you are;--what blood you have in your veins;--what name it is that you
bear? Stand up, and look me in the face, if you dare."

Lady Anna did stand up, and did look her mother in the face. "Mamma," she said, "we should
understand each other better if we were living together as we ought to do."

"I will never live with you till you have promised obedience. Will you, at any rate, pledge
to me your word that you will never become the wife of Daniel Thwaite?" Then she paused, and
stood looking at the girl, perhaps for a minute. Lady Anna stood before her, with her eyes
turned upon the ground. "Answer me the question that I have asked you. Will you promise me
that you will never become the wife of Daniel Thwaite?"

"I have promised him that I would."

"What is that to me? Is your duty to him higher than your duty to me? Can you be bound by any
promise to so great a crime as that would be? I will ask you the question once more, and I
will be governed by your answer. If you will promise to discard this man, you shall return
home with me, and shall then choose everything for yourself. We will go abroad and travel if
you wish it, and all things shall be prepared to give you pleasure. You shall have at once
the full enjoyment of all that has been won for you; and as for your cousin,--you shall not
for a while be troubled even by his name. It is the dear wish of my heart that you should be
the wife of Earl Lovel;--but I have one wish dearer even than that,--one to which that shall
be altogether postponed. If you will save yourself, and me, and all your family from the terrible
disgrace with which you have threatened us,--I will not again mention your cousin's name to
you till it shall please you to hear it. Anna, you knelt to me, just now. Shall I kneel to you?"

"No, mamma, no;--I should die."

"Then, my love, give me the promise that I have asked."

"Mamma, he has been so good to us!"

"And we will be good to him,--good to him in his degree. Of what avail to me will have been
his goodness, if he is to rob me of the very treasure which his goodness helped to save? Is
he to have all, because he gave some aid? Is he to take from me my heart's blood, because he
bound up my arm when it was bruised? Because he helped me some steps on earth, is he to imprison
me afterwards in hell? Good! No, he is not good in wishing so to destroy us. He is bad, greedy,
covetous, self-seeking, a very dog, and by the living God he shall die like a dog unless you
will free me from his fangs. You have not answered me. Will you tell me that you will discard
him as a suitor for your hand? If you will say so, he shall receive tenfold reward for his--goodness.
Answer me, Anna;--I claim an answer from you."

"Mamma!"

"Speak, if you have anything to say. And remember the commandment, Honour thy--" But she broke
down, when she too remembered it, and bore in mind that the precept would have called upon
her daughter to honour the memory of the deceased Earl. "But if you cannot do it for love,
you will never do it for duty."

"Mamma, I am sure of one thing."

"Of what are you sure?"

"That I ought to be allowed to see him before I give him up."

"You shall never be allowed to see him."

"Listen to me, mamma, for a moment. When he asked me to--love him, we were equals."

"I deny it. You were never equals."

"We lived as such,--except in this, that they had money for our wants, and we had none to repay
them."

"Money can have nothing to do with it."

"Only that we took it. And then he was everything to us. It seemed as though it would be impossible
to refuse anything that he asked. It was impossible to me. As to being noble, I am sure that
he was noble. You always used to say that nobody else ever was so good as those two. Did you
not say so, mamma?"

"If I praise my horse or my dog, do I say that they are of the same nature as myself?"

"But he is a man; quite as much a man as,--as any man could be."

"You mean that you will not do as I bid you."

"Let me see him, mamma. Let me see him but once. If I might see him, perhaps I might do as
you wish--about him. I cannot say anything more unless I may see him."

The Countess still stormed and still threatened, but she could not move her daughter. She also
found that the child had inherited particles of the nature of her parents. But it was necessary
that some arrangement should be made as to the future life, both of Lady Anna and of herself.
She might bury herself where she would, in the most desolate corner of the earth, but she could
not leave Lady Anna in Bedford Square. In a few months Lady Anna might choose any residence
she pleased for herself, and there could be no doubt whose house she would share, if she were
not still kept in subjection. The two parted then in deep grief,--the mother almost cursing
her child in her anger, and Lady Anna overwhelmed with tears. "Will you not kiss me, mamma,
before you go?"

"No, I will never kiss you again till you have shown me that you are my child."

But before she left the house, the Countess was closeted for a while with Mrs. Bluestone, and,
in spite of all that she had said, it was agreed between them that it would be better to permit
an interview between the girl and Daniel Thwaite. "Let him say what he will," argued Mrs. Bluestone,
"she will not be more headstrong than she is now. You will still be able to take her away with
you to some foreign country."

"But he will treat her as though he were her lover," said the Countess, unable to conceal the
infinite disgust with which the idea overwhelmed her.

"What does it matter, Lady Lovel? We have got to get a promise from her, somehow. Since she
was much with him, she has seen people of another sort, and she will feel the difference. It
may be that she wants to ask him to release her. At any rate she speaks as though she might
be released by what he would say to her. Unless she thought it might be so herself, she would
not make a conditional promise. I would let them meet."

"But where?"

"In Keppel Street."

"In my presence?"

"No, not that; but you will, of course, be in the house,--so that she cannot leave it with
him. Let her come to you. It will be an excuse for her doing so, and then she can remain. If
she does not give the promise, take her abroad, and teach her to forget it by degrees." So
it was arranged, and on that evening Mrs. Bluestone told Lady Anna that she was to be allowed
to meet Daniel Thwaite.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

DANIEL THWAITE RECEIVES HIS MONEY.

There was of course much commotion among all circles of society in London as soon as it was
known to have been decided that the Countess Lovel was the Countess Lovel, and that Lady Anna
was the heiress of the late Earl. Bets were paid,--and bets no doubt were left unpaid,--to
a great amount. Men at the clubs talked more about the Lovels than they had done even during
the month preceding the trial. The Countess became on a sudden very popular. Exaggerated stories
were told of the romance of her past life,--though it would have been well nigh impossible
to exaggerate her sufferings. Her patience, her long endurance and persistency were extolled
by all. The wealth that would accrue to her and to her daughter was of course doubled. Had
anybody seen her? Did anybody know her? Even the Murrays began to be proud of her, and old
Lady Jemima Magtaggart, who had been a Murray before she married General Mag, as he was called,
went at once and called upon the Countess in Keppel Street. Being the first that did so, before
the Countess had suspected any invasion, she was admitted,--and came away declaring that sorrow
must have driven the Countess mad. The Countess, no doubt, did not receive her distant relative
with any gentle courtesy. She had sworn to herself often, that come what come might, she would
never cross the threshold of a Murray. Old Lord Swanage, who had married some very distant
Lovel, wrote to her a letter full of very proper feeling. It had been, he said, quite impossible
for him to know the truth before the truth had come to light, and therefore he made no apology
for not having before this made overtures of friendship to his connection. He now begged to
express his great delight that she who had so well deserved success had been successful, and
to offer her his hand in friendship, should she be inclined to accept it. The Countess answered
him in a strain which certainly showed that she was not mad. It was not her policy to quarrel
with any Lovel, and her letter was very courteous. She was greatly obliged to him for his kindness,
and had felt as strongly as he could do that she could have no claim on her husband's relations
till she should succeed in establishing her rights. She accepted his hand in the spirit in
which it had been offered, and hoped that his Lordship might yet become a friend of her daughter.
For herself,--she feared that all that she had suffered had made her unfit for much social
intercourse. Her strength, she said, had been sufficient to carry her thus far, but was now
failing her.

Then, too, there came to her that great glory of which the lawyer had given her a hint. She
received a letter from the private secretary of his Majesty the King, telling her that his
Majesty had heard her story with great interest, and now congratulated her heartily on the
re-establishment of her rank and position. She wrote a very curt note, begging that her thanks
might be given to his Majesty,--and then she burned the private secretary's letter. No congratulations
were anything to her till she should see her daughter freed from the debasement of her engagement
to the tailor.

Speculation was rife as to the kind of life which the Countess would lead. That she would have
wealth sufficient to blaze forth in London with all the glories of Countess-ship, there was
no doubt. Her own share of the estate was put down as worth at least ten thousand a year for
her life, and this she would enjoy without deductions, and with no other expenditure than that
needed for herself. Her age was ascertained to a day, and it was known that she was as yet
only forty-five. Was it not probable that some happy man might share her wealth with her? What
an excellent thing it would be for old Lundy,--the Marquis of Lundy,--who had run through every
shilling of his own property! Before a week was over, the suggestion had been made to old Lundy.
"They say she is mad, but she can't be mad enough for that," said the Marquis.

The rector hurried home full of indignation, but he had a word or two with his nephew before
he started. "What do you mean to do now, Frederic?" asked the rector with a very grave demeanour.

"Do? I don't know that I shall do anything."

"You give up the girl, then?"

"My dear uncle; that is a sort of question that I don't think a man ever likes to be asked."

"But I suppose I may ask how you intend to live?"

"I trust, uncle Charles, that I shall not, at any rate, be a burden to my relatives."

"Oh; very well; very well. Of course I have nothing more to say. I think it right, all the
same, to express my opinion that you have been grossly misused by Sir William Patterson. Of
course what I say will have no weight with you; but that is my opinion."

"I do not agree with you, uncle Charles."

"Very well; I have nothing more to say. It is right that I should let you know that I do not
believe that this woman was ever Lord Lovel's wife. I never did believe it, and I never will
believe it. All that about marrying the girl has been a take in from beginning to end;--all
planned to induce you to do just what you have done. No word in courtesy should ever have been
spoken to either of them."

"I am as sure that she is the Countess as I am that I am the Earl."

"Very well. It costs me nothing, but it costs you thirty thousand a year. Do you mean to come
down to Yoxham this winter?"

"No."

"Are the horses to be kept there?" Now hitherto the rich rector had kept the poor lord's hunters
without charging his nephew ought for their expense. He was a man so constituted that it would
have been a misery to him that the head of his family should not have horses to ride. But now
he could not but remember all that he had done, all that he was doing, and the return that
was made to him. Nevertheless he could have bit the tongue out of his mouth for asking the
question as soon as the words were spoken.

"I will have them sold immediately," said the Earl. "They shall come up to Tattersal's before
the week is over."

"I didn't mean that."

"I am glad that you thought of it, uncle Charles. They shall be taken away at once."

"They are quite welcome to remain at Yoxham."

"They shall be removed,--and sold," said the Earl. "Remember me to my aunts. Good bye." Then
the rector went down to Yoxham an angry and a miserable man.

There were very many who still agreed with the rector in thinking that the Earl's case had
been mismanaged. There was surely enough of ground for a prolonged fight to have enabled the
Lovel party to have driven their opponents to a compromise. There was a feeling that the Solicitor-General
had been carried away by some romantic idea of abstract right, and had acted in direct opposition
to all the usages of forensic advocacy as established in England. What was it to him whether
the Countess were or were not a real Countess? It had been his duty to get what he could for
the Earl, his client. There had been much to get, and with patience no doubt something might
have been got. But he had gotten nothing. Many thought that he had altogether cut his own throat,
and that he would have to take the first "puny" judgeship vacant. "He is a great man,--a very
great man indeed," said the Attorney-General, in answer to some one who was abusing Sir William.
"There is not one of us can hold a candle to him. But, then, as I have always said, he ought
to have been a poet!"

In discussing the Solicitor-General's conduct men thought more of Lady Anna than her mother.
The truth about Lady Anna and her engagement was generally known in a misty, hazy, half-truthful
manner. That she was engaged to marry Daniel Thwaite, who was now becoming famous and the cause
of a greatly increased business in Wigmore Street, was certain. It was certain also that the
Earl had desired to marry her. But as to the condition in which the matter stood at present
there was a very divided opinion. Not a few were positive that a written engagement had been
given to the Earl that he should have the heiress before the Solicitor-General had made his
speech,--but, according to these, the tailor's hold over the young lady was so strong, that
she now refused to abide by her own compact. She was in the tailor's hands and the tailor could
do what he liked with her. It was known that Lady Anna was in Bedford Square, and not a few
walked before the Serjeant's house in the hopes of seeing her. The romance at any rate was
not over, and possibly there might even yet be a compromise. If the Earl could get even five
thousand a year out of the property, it was thought that the Solicitor-General might hold his
own and in due time become at any rate a Chief Baron.

In the mean time Daniel Thwaite remained in moody silence among the workmen in Wigmore Street,
unseen of any of those who rushed there for new liveries in order that they might catch a glimpse
of the successful hero,--till one morning, about five days after the trial was over, when he
received a letter from Messrs. Goffe and Goffe. Messrs. Goffe and Goffe had the pleasure of
informing him that an accurate account of all money transactions between Countess Lovel and
his father had been kept by the Countess;--that the Countess on behalf of herself and Lady
Anna Lovel acknowledged a debt due to the estate of the late Mr. Thomas Thwaite, amounting
to £9,109 3s. 4d., and that a cheque to that amount should be at once handed to him,--Daniel
Thwaite the son,--if he would call at the chambers of Messrs. Goffe and Goffe, with a certified
copy of the probate of the will of Thomas Thwaite the father.

Nine thousand pounds,--and that to be paid to him immediately,--on that very day if he chose
to call for it! The copy of the probate of the will he had in his pocket at that moment. But
he worked out his day's work without going near Goffe and Goffe. And yet he thought much of
his money; and once, when one of his employers spoke to him somewhat roughly, he remembered
that he was probably a better man than his master. What should he now do with himself and his
money,--how bestow himself,--how use it so that he might be of service to the world? He would
go no doubt to some country in which there were no earls and no countesses;--but he could go
nowhere till he should know what might be his fate with the Earl's daughter, who at present
was his destiny. His mind was absolutely divided. In one hour he would say to himself that
the poet was certainly right;--and in the next he was sure that the poet must have been wrong.
As regarded money, nine thousand pounds was as good to him as any sum that could be named.
He could do with that all that he required that money should do for him. Could he at this time
have had his own way absolutely, he would have left all the remainder of the wealth behind
him, to be shared as they pleased to share it between the Earl and the Countess, and he would
have gone at once, taking with him the girl whom he loved. He would have revelled in the pride
of thinking that all of them should say that he had wanted and had won the girl only,--and
not the wealth of the Lovels; that he had taken only what was his own, and that his wife would
be dependent on him, not he on her. But this was not possible. It was now months since he had
heard the girl's voice, or had received any assurance from her that she was still true to him.
But, in lieu of this, he had the assurance that she was in possession of enormous wealth, and
that she was the recognised cousin of lords and ladies by the dozen.

When the evening came he saw one of his employers and told the man that he wished that his
place might be filled. Why was he going? Did he expect to better himself? When was he going?
Was he in earnest? Daniel told the truth at once as far as the payment of the money was concerned.
He was to receive on the following day a sum of money which had been due to his father, and,
when that should have been paid him, it would not suit him to work longer for weekly wages.
The tailor grumbled, but there was nothing else to be said. Thwaite might leave them to-morrow
if he wished. Thwaite took him at his word and never returned to the shop in Wigmore Street
after that night.

On reaching his lodgings he found another letter,--from Serjeant Bluestone. The Countess had
so far given way as to accede to the proposition that there should be a meeting between her
daughter and the tailor, and then there had arisen the question as to the manner in which this
meeting should be arranged. The Countess would not write herself, nor would she allow her daughter
to do so. It was desirable, she thought, that as few people should know of the meeting as possible,
and at last, most unwillingly, the Serjeant undertook the task of arranging it. He wrote therefore
as follows;--

   Mr. Serjeant Bluestone presents his compliments to Mr.
   Daniel Thwaite. Mr. Thwaite has no doubt heard of the
   result of the trial by which the Countess Lovel and her
   daughter have succeeded in obtaining the recognition of
   their rank. It is in contemplation with the Countess and
   Lady Anna Lovel to go abroad, but Lady Anna is desirous
   before she goes of seeing the son of the man who was her
   mother's staunch friend during many years of suffering.
   Lady Anna will be at home, at No. ---- Keppel Street, at
   eleven o'clock on Monday, 23rd instant, if Mr. Thwaite can
   make it convenient to call then and there.

   Bedford Square,
   17th November, 18--.

   If Mr. Thwaite could call on the Serjeant before that
   date, either early in the morning at his house, or on
   Saturday at his chambers, ---- ----, Inner Temple, it
   might perhaps be serviceable.

The postscript had not been added without much consideration. What would the tailor think of
this invitation? Would he not be disposed to take it as encouragement in his pernicious suit?
Would he not go to Keppel Street with a determination to insist upon the girl's promise? The
Serjeant had thought that it would be best to let the thing take its chance. But the Serjeant's
wife, and the Serjeant's daughters, and the Countess, too, had all agreed that something if
possible should be said to disabuse him of this idea. He was to have nine thousand pounds paid
to him. Surely that might be sufficient. But, if he was greedy and wanted more money, more
money should be given to him. Only he must be made to understand that the marriage was out
of the question. So the Serjeant again gave way, and proposed the interview. Daniel sent back
his compliments to the Serjeant and begged to say he would do as he was bid. He would call
at the Serjeant's chambers on the Saturday, and in Keppel Street on the following Monday, at
the hours named.

On the next morning,--the first morning of his freedom from the servitude of Wigmore Street,--he
went to Messrs. Goffe and Goffe. He got up late and breakfasted late, in order that he might
feel what it was to be an idle man. "I might now be as idle as the young Earl," he said to
himself; "but were I to attempt it, what should I do with myself? How should I make the hours
pass by?" He felt that he was lauding himself as the idea passed through his mind, and struggled
to quench his own pride. "And yet," said he in his thoughts, "is it not fit that I should know
myself to be better than he is? If I have no self-confidence, how can I be bold to persevere?
The man that works is to him that is idle, as light is to darkness."

He was admitted at once to Mr. Goffe's private room, and was received with a smiling welcome,
and an outstretched hand. "I am delighted, Mr. Thwaite, to be able to settle your claim on
Lady Lovel with so little delay. I hope you are satisfied with her ladyship's statement of
the account."

"Much more than satisfied with the amount. It appeared to me that I had no legal claim for
more than a few hundred pounds."

"We knew better than that, Mr. Thwaite. We should have seen that no great injury was done.
But luckily the Countess has been careful, and has put down each sum advanced, item by item.
Full interest has been allowed at five per cent., as is quite proper. The Countess is an excellent
woman of business."

"No doubt, Mr. Goffe. I could have wished that she would have condescended to honour me with
a line;--but that is a matter of feeling."

"Oh, Mr. Thwaite; there are reasons;--you must know that there are reasons."

"There may be good reasons or bad reasons."

"And there may be good judgment in such matters and bad judgment. But, however,--. You will
like to have this money by a cheque, no doubt. There it is, £9,109 3s. 4d. It is not often
that we write one cheque for a bigger sum than that, Mr. Thwaite. Shall I cross it on your
bankers? No bankers! With such a sum as that let me recommend you to open an account at once."
And Mr. Goffe absolutely walked down to Fleet Street with Daniel Thwaite the tailor, and introduced
him at his own bank. The business was soon transacted, and Daniel Thwaite went away westward,
a capitalist, with a cheque book in his pocket. What was he to do with himself? He walked east
again before the day was over, and made inquiries at various offices as to vessels sailing
for Boston, New York, Baltimore, and Quebec. Or how would it be with him if he should be minded
to go east instead of west? So he supplied himself also with information as to vessels for
Sydney. And what should he do when he got to the new country? He did not mean to be a tailor.
He was astonished to find how little he had as yet realised in his mind the details of the
exodus which he had proposed to himself.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

I WILL TAKE YOUR WORD FOR NOTHING.

On the Saturday, Daniel was at the Serjeant's chambers early in the morning,--long before the
hour at which the Serjeant himself was wont to attend. No time had in fact been named, and
the tailor had chosen to suppose that as he had been desired to be early in Bedford Square,
so had it also been intended that he should be early in the Temple. For two hours he walked
about the passages and the courts, thinking ill of the lawyer for being so late at his business,
and endeavouring to determine what he would do with himself. He had not a friend in the world,
unless Lady Anna were a friend;--hardly an acquaintance. And yet, remembering what his father
had done, what he himself had helped to do, he thought that he ought to have had many friends.
Those very persons who were now his bitterest enemies, the Countess and all they who had supported
her, should have been bound to him by close ties. Yet he knew that it was impossible that they
should not hate him. He could understand their feelings with reference to their own rank, though
to him that rank was contemptible. Of course he was alone. Of course he would fail. He was
almost prepared to acknowledge as much to the Serjeant. He had heard of a certain vessel that
would start in three days for the rising colony called New South Wales, and he almost wished
that he had taken his passage in her.

At ten o'clock he had been desired to call at eleven, and as the clock struck eleven he knocked
at the Serjeant's door. "Serjeant Bluestone is not here yet," said the clerk, who was disposed
to be annoyed by the man's pertinacity.

"He told me to come early in the morning, and this is not early."

"He is not here yet, sir."

"You told me to come at eleven, and it is past eleven."

"It is one minute past, and you can sit down and wait for him if you please." Daniel refused
to wait, and was again about to depart in his wrath, when the Serjeant appeared upon the stairs.
He introduced himself, and expressed regret that he should have found his visitor there before
him. Daniel, muttering something, followed the lawyer into his room, and then the door was
closed. He stood till he was invited to sit, and was determined to make himself disagreeable.
This man was one of his enemies,--was one who no doubt thought little of him because he was
a tailor, who suspected his motives, and was anxious to rob him of his bride. The Serjeant
retired for a moment to an inner room, while the tailor girded up his loins and prepared himself
for battle.

"Mr. Thwaite," said the Serjeant, as he re-entered the room, "you probably know that I have
been counsel for Lady Lovel and her daughter in the late trial." Daniel assented by a nod of
his head. "My connection with the Countess would naturally have been then closed. We have gained
our cause, and there would be an end of it. But as things have turned out it has been otherwise.
Lady Anna Lovel has been staying with Mrs. Bluestone."

"In Bedford Square?"

"Yes, at my house."

"I did not know. The Countess told me she was not in Keppel Street, but refused to inform me
where she was staying. I should not have interfered with her ladyship's plans, had she been
less secret with me."

"Surely it was unnecessary that she should tell you."

"Quite unnecessary;--but hardly unnatural after all that has occurred. As the Countess is with
you only a friend of late date, you are probably unaware of the former friendship which existed
between us. There was a time in which I certainly did not think that Lady Lovel would ever
decline to speak to me about her daughter. But all this is nothing to you, Serjeant Bluestone."

"It is something to me, Mr. Thwaite, as her friend. Is there no reason why she should have
treated you thus? Ask your own conscience."

"My conscience is clear in the matter."

"I have sent for you here, Mr. Thwaite, to ask you whether you cannot yourself understand that
this which you have proposed to do must make you an enemy to the Countess, and annul and set
aside all that kindness which you have shown her? I put it to your own reason. Do you think
it possible that the Countess should be otherwise than outraged at the proposition you have
made to her?"

"I have made no proposition to her ladyship."

"Have you made none to her daughter?"

"Certainly I have. I have asked her to be my wife."

"Come, Mr. Thwaite, do not palter with me."

"Palter with you! Who dares to say that I palter? I have never paltered. Paltering is--lying,
as I take it. Let the Countess be my enemy. I have not said that she should not be so. She
might have answered my letter, I think, when the old man died. In our rank of life we should
have done so. It may be different with lords and titled ladies. Let it pass, however. I did
not mean to make any complaint. I came here because you sent for me."

"Yes;--I did send for you," said the Serjeant, wishing with all his heart that he had never
been persuaded to take a step which imposed upon him so great a difficulty. "I did send for
you. Lady Anna Lovel has expressed a wish to see you, before she leaves London."

"I will wait upon Lady Anna Lovel."

"I need hardly tell you that her wish has been opposed by her friends."

"No doubt it was."

"But she has said with so much earnestness that she cannot consider herself to be absolved
from the promise which she made to you when she was a child--"

"She was no child when she made it."

"It does not signify. She cannot be absolved from the promise which I suppose she did make--"

"She certainly made it, Serjeant Bluestone."

"Will you allow me to continue my statement? It will not occupy you long. She assures her mother
that she cannot consider herself to be absolved from that promise without your sanction. She
has been living in my house for some weeks, and I do not myself doubt in the least that were
she thus freed an alliance would soon be arranged between her and her cousin."

"I have heard of that--alliance."

"It would be in every respect a most satisfactory and happy marriage. The young Earl has behaved
with great consideration and forbearance in abstaining from pushing his claims."

"In abstaining from asking for that which he did not believe to be his own."

"You had better hear me to the end, Mr. Thwaite. All the friends of the two young people desire
it. The Earl himself is warmly attached to his cousin."

"So am I,--and have been for many years."

"We all believe that she loves him."

"Let her say so to me, Serjeant Bluestone, and there shall be an end of it all. It seems to
me that Lord Lovel and I have different ideas about a woman. I would not take the hand of a
girl who told me that she loved another man, even though she was as dear to me, as,--as Lady
Anna is dear to me now. And as for what she might have in her hand, it would go for naught
with me, though I might have to face beggary without her. It seems to me that Lord Lovel is
less particular in this matter."

"I do not see that you and I have anything to do with that," replied the Serjeant, hardly knowing
what to say.

"I have nothing to do with Lord Lovel, certainly,--nor has he with me. As to his cousin,--it
is for her to choose."

"We think,--I am only telling you what we think;--but we think, Mr. Thwaite, that the young
lady's affections are fixed on her cousin. It is natural that they should be so; and watching
her as closely as we can, we believe such to be the case. I will be quite on the square with
you, Mr. Thwaite."

"With me and with everybody else, I hope, Serjeant Bluestone."

"I hope so," said the Serjeant, laughing; "but at any rate I will be so with you now. We have
been unable to get from Lady Anna any certain reply,--any assurance of her own wishes. She
has told her mother that she cannot accept Lord Lovel's addresses till she has seen you." The
Serjeant in this was not quite on the square, as Lady Anna had never said so. "We believe that
she considers it necessary, to her conscience, to be made free by your permission, before she
can follow her own inclinations and accede to those of all her friends."

"She shall have my permission in a moment,--if she will ask for it."

"Could you not be more generous even than that?"

"How more generous, Serjeant Bluestone?"

"Offer it to her unasked. You have already said that you would not accept her hand if you did
not believe that you had her heart also,--and the sentiment did you honour. Think of her condition,
and be generous to her."

"Generous to her! You mean generous to Lady Lovel,--generous to Lord Lovel,--generous to all
the Lovels except her. It seems to me that all the generosity is to be on one side."

"By no means. We can be generous too."

"If that be generosity, I will be generous. I will offer her that permission. I will not wait
till she asks for it. I will beg her to tell me if it be true that she loves this cousin, and
if she can say that it is true, she shall want no permission from me to be free. She shall
be free."

"It is not a question, you see, between yourself and Lord Lovel. It is quite out of the question
that she should in any event become your wife. Even had she power to do it--"

"She has the power."

"Practically she has no such power, Mr. Thwaite. A young person such as Lady Anna Lovel is
and must be under the control of her natural guardian. She is so altogether. Her mother could
not,--and would not,--constrain her to any marriage; but has quite sufficient power over her
to prevent any marriage. Lady Anna has never for a moment supposed that she could become your
wife since she learned what were the feelings of her mother and her family." The Serjeant certainly
did not keep his promise of being "on the square." "But your generosity is necessary to enable
Lady Lovel to bring to a happy termination all those sufferings with which her life has been
afflicted."

"I do not owe much to the Countess; but if it be generous to do as I have said I would do,--I
will be generous. I will tell her daughter, without any question asked from her, that she is
free to marry her cousin if she wishes."

So far the Serjeant, though he had not been altogether as truthful as he had promised, had
been discreet. He had said nothing to set the tailor vehemently against the Lovel interest,
and had succeeded in obtaining a useful pledge. But, in his next attempt, he was less wise.
"I think, you know, Mr. Thwaite, that the Countess also has been generous."

"As how?"

"You have received £9,000 already, I believe."

"I have received what I presume to be my own. If I have had more it shall be refunded."

"No;--no; by no means. Taking a liberal view of the matter, as the Countess was bound to do
in honour, she was, I think, right in paying you what she has paid."

"I want nothing from her in what you call honour. I want nothing liberal. If the money be not
mine in common honesty she shall have it back again. I want nothing but my own."

"I think you are a little high flown, Mr. Thwaite."

"I dare say I may be,--to the thinking of a lawyer."

"The Countess, who is in truth your friend,--and will always be your friend if you will only
be amenable to reason,--has been delighted to think that you are now in possession of a sum
of money which will place you above want."

"The Countess is very kind."

"And I can say more than that. She and all her friends are aware how much is due to your father's
son. If you will only aid us in our present project, if you will enable Lady Anna to become
the wife of her cousin the Earl, much more shall be done than the mere payment of the debt
which was due to you. It has been proposed to settle on you for life an annuity of four hundred
pounds a year. To this the Countess, Earl Lovel, and Lady Anna will all agree."

"Has the consent of Lady Anna been asked?" demanded the tailor, in a voice which was low, but
which the Serjeant felt at the moment to be dangerous.

"You may take my word that it shall be forthcoming," said the Serjeant.

"I will take your word for nothing, Serjeant Bluestone. I do not think that among you all,
you would dare to make such a proposition to Lady Anna Lovel, and I wonder that you should
dare to make it to me. What have you seen in me to lead you to suppose that I would sell myself
for a bribe? And how can you have been so unwise as to offer it after I have told you that
she shall be free,--if she chooses to be free? But it is all one. You deal in subterfuges till
you think it impossible that a man should be honest. You mine underground, till your eyes see
nothing in the open daylight. You walk crookedly, till a straight path is an abomination to
you. Four hundred a year is nothing to me for such a purpose as this,--would have been nothing
to me even though no penny had been paid to me of the money which is my own. I can easily understand
what it is that makes the Earl so devoted a lover. His devotion began when he had been told
that the money was hers and not his,--and that in no other way could he get it. Mine began
when no one believed that she would ever have a shilling for her fortune,--when all who bore
her name and her mother's ridiculed their claim. Mine was growing when my father first asked
me whether I grudged that he should spend all that he had in their behalf. Mine came from giving.
His springs from the desire to get. Make the four hundred, four thousand;--make it eight thousand,
Serjeant Bluestone, and offer it to him. I also will agree. With him you may succeed. Good
morning, Serjeant Bluestone. On Monday next I will not be worse than my word,--even though
you have offered me a bribe."

The Serjeant let the tailor go without a word further,--not, indeed, having a word to say.
He had been insulted in his own chambers,--told that his word was worthless, and his honesty
questionable. But he had been so told, that at the moment he had been unable to stop the speaker.
He had sat, and smiled, and stroked his chin, and looked at the tailor as though he had been
endeavouring to comfort himself with the idea that the man addressing him was merely an ignorant,
half-mad, enthusiastic tailor, from whom decent conduct could not be expected. He was still
smiling when Daniel Thwaite closed the door, and he almost laughed as he asked his clerk whether
that energetic gentleman had taken himself down-stairs. "Oh, yes, sir; he glared at me when
I opened the door, and rushed down four steps at a time." But, on the whole, the Serjeant was
contented with the interview. It would, no doubt, have been better had he said nothing of the
four hundred a year. But in the offering of bribes there is always that danger. One can never
be sure who will swallow his douceur at an easy gulp, so as hardly to betray an effort, and
who will refuse even to open his lips. And then the latter man has the briber so much at advantage.
When the luscious morsel has been refused, it is so easy to be indignant, so pleasant to be
enthusiastically virtuous! The bribe had been refused, and so far the Serjeant had failed;--but
the desired promise had been made, and the Serjeant felt certain that it would be kept. He
did not doubt but that Daniel Thwaite would himself offer the girl her freedom. But there was
something in the man, though he was a tailor. He had an eye and a voice, and it might be that
freedom offered, as he could offer it, would not be accepted.

Daniel, as he went out into the court from the lawyer's presence, was less satisfied than the
lawyer. He had told the lawyer that his word was worth nothing, and yet he had believed much
that the lawyer had said to him. The lawyer had told him that the girl loved her cousin, and
only wanted his permission to be free that she might give her hand and her heart together to
the young lord. Was it not natural that she should wish to do so? Within each hour, almost
within each minute, he regarded the matter in lights that were perfectly antagonistic to each
other. It was natural that she should wish to be a Countess, and that she should love a young
lord who was gentle and beautiful;--and she should have his permission accorded freely. But
then, again, it was most unnatural, bestial, and almost monstrous, that a girl should change
her love for a man, going from one man to another, simply because the latter man was gilt with
gold, and decked with jewels, and sweet with perfume from a hairdresser's. The poet must have
been wrong there. If love be anything but a dream, surely it must adhere to the person, and
not be liable to change at every offered vantage of name or birth, of rank or wealth.

But she should have the offer. She should certainly have the offer.

CHAPTER XXXV.

THE SERJEANT AND MRS. BLUESTONE AT HOME.

Lady Anna was not told till the Saturday that she was to meet her lover, the tailor, on the
following Monday. She was living at this time, as it were, in chains, though the chains were
gilded. It was possible that she might be off at any moment with Daniel Thwaite,--and now the
more possible because he had money at his command. If this should occur, then would the game
which the Countess and her friends were playing, be altogether lost. Then would the checkmate
have been absolute. The reader will have known that such a step had never been contemplated
by the man, and will also have perceived that it would have been altogether opposed to the
girl's character; but it is hoped that the reader has looked more closely into the man's motives
and the girl's character than even her mother was able to do. The Countess had thought that
she had known her daughter. She had been mistaken, and now there was hardly anything of which
she could not suspect her girl to be capable. Lady Anna was watched, therefore, during every
minute of the four and twenty hours. A policeman was told off to protect the house at night
from rope ladders or any other less cumbrous ingenuity. The servants were set on guard. Sarah,
the lady's-maid, followed her mistress almost like a ghost when the poor young lady went to
her bedroom. Mrs. Bluestone, or one of the girls, was always with her, either indoors or out
of doors. Out of doors, indeed, she never went without more guards than one. A carriage had
been hired,--a luxury with which Mrs. Bluestone had hitherto dispensed,--and the carriage was
always there when Lady Anna suggested that she should like to leave the house. She was warmly
invited to go shopping, and made to understand that in the way of ordinary shopping she could
buy what she pleased. But her life was inexpressibly miserable. "What does mamma mean to do?"
she said to Mrs. Bluestone on the Saturday morning.

"In what way, my dear?"

"Where does she mean to go? She won't live always in Keppel Street?"

"No,--I do not think that she will live always in Keppel Street. It depends a good deal upon
you, I think."

"I will go wherever she pleases to take me. The lawsuit is over now, and I don't know why we
should stay here. I am sure you can't like it."

To tell the truth, Mrs. Bluestone did not like it at all. Circumstances had made her a gaoler,
but by nature she was very ill constituted for that office. The harshness of it was detestable
to her, and then there was no reason whatever why she should sacrifice her domestic comfort
for the Lovels. The thing had grown upon them, till the Lovels had become an incubus to her.
Personally, she liked Lady Anna, but she was unable to treat Lady Anna as she would treat any
other girl that she liked. She had told the Serjeant more than once that she could not endure
it much longer. And the Serjeant did not like it better than did his wife. It was all a labour
of love, and a most unpleasant labour. "The Countess must take her away," the Serjeant had
said. And now the Serjeant had been told by the tailor, in his own chambers, that his word
was worth nothing!

"To tell you the truth, Lady Anna, we none of us like it,--not because we do not like you,
but because the whole thing is disagreeable. You are creating very great misery, my dear, because
you are obstinate."

"Because I won't marry my cousin?"

"No, my dear; not because you won't marry your cousin. I have never advised you to marry your
cousin, unless you could love him. I don't think girls should ever be told to marry this man
or that. But it is very proper that they should be told not to marry this man or that. You
are making everybody about you miserable, because you will not give up a most improper engagement,
made with a man who is in every respect beneath you."

"I wish I were dead," said Lady Anna.

"It is very easy to say that, my dear; but what you ought to wish is, to do your duty."

"I do wish to do my duty, Mrs. Bluestone."

"It can't be dutiful to stand out against your mother in this way. You are breaking your mother's
heart. And if you were to do this thing, you would soon find that you had broken your own.
It is downright obstinacy. I don't like to be harsh, but as you are here, in my charge, I am
bound to tell you the truth."

"I wish mamma would let me go away," said Lady Anna, bursting into tears.

"She will let you go at once, if you will only make the promise that she asks of you." In saying
this, Mrs. Bluestone was hardly more upon the square than her husband had been, for she knew
very well, at that moment, that Lady Anna was to go to Keppel Street early on the Monday morning,
and she had quite made up her mind that her guest should not come back to Bedford Square. She
had now been moved to the special severity which she had shown by certain annoyances of her
own to which she had been subjected by the presence of Lady Anna in her house. She could neither
entertain her friends nor go out to be entertained by them, and had told the Serjeant more
than once that a great mistake had been made in having the girl there at all. But judgment
had operated with her as well as feeling. It was necessary that Lady Anna should be made to
understand before she saw the tailor that she could not be happy, could not be comfortable,
could not be other than very wretched,--till she had altogether dismissed her low-born lover.

"I did not think you would be so unkind to me," sobbed Lady Anna through her tears.

"I do not mean to be unkind, but you must be told the truth. Every minute that you spend in
thinking of that man is a disgrace to you."

"Then I shall be disgraced all my life," said Lady Anna, bursting out of the room.

On that day the Serjeant dined at his club, but came home about nine o'clock. It had all been
planned so that the information might be given in the most solemn manner possible. The two
girls were sitting up in the drawing-room with the guest who, since the conversation in the
morning, had only seen Mrs. Bluestone during dinner. First there was the knock at the door,
and then, after a quarter of an hour, which was spent up-stairs in perfect silence, there came
a message. Would Lady Anna have the kindness to go to the Serjeant in the dining-room. In silence
she left the room, and in silence descended the broad staircase. The Serjeant and Mrs. Bluestone
were sitting on one side of the fireplace, the Serjeant in his own peculiar arm-chair, and
the lady close to the fender, while a seat opposite to them had been placed for Lady Anna.
The room was gloomy with dark red curtains and dark flock paper. On the table there burned
two candles, and no more. The Serjeant got up and motioned Lady Anna to a chair. As soon as
she had seated herself, he began his speech. "My dear young lady, you must be no doubt aware
that you are at present causing a great deal of trouble to your best friends."

"I don't want to cause anybody trouble," said Lady Anna, thinking that the Serjeant in speaking
of her best friends alluded to himself and his wife. "I only want to go away."

"I am coming to that directly, my dear. I cannot suppose that you do not understand the extent
of the sorrow that you have inflicted on your parent by,--by the declaration which you made
to Lord Lovel in regard to Mr. Daniel Thwaite." There is nothing, perhaps, in the way of exhortation
and scolding which the ordinary daughter,--or son,--dislikes so much as to be told of her,
or his, "parent." "My dear fellow, your father will be annoyed," is taken in good part. "What
will mamma say?" is seldom received amiss. But when young people have their "parents" thrown
at them, they feel themselves to be aggrieved, and become at once antagonistic. Lady Anna became
strongly antagonistic. If her mother, who had always been to her her "own, own mamma," was
going to be her parent, there must be an end of all hope of happiness. She said nothing, but
compressed her lips together. She would not allow herself to be led an inch any way by a man
who talked to her of her parent. "The very idea of such a marriage as this man had suggested
to you under the guise of friendship was dreadful to her. It could be no more than an idea;--but
that you should have entertained it was dreadful. She has since asked you again and again to
repudiate the idea, and hitherto you have refused to obey."

"I can never know what mamma really wants till I go and live with her again."

"I am coming to that, Lady Anna. The Countess has informed Mrs. Bluestone that you had refused
to give the desired promise unless you should be allowed to see Mr. Daniel Thwaite, intimating,
I presume, that his permission would be necessary to free you from your imaginary bond to him."

"It would be necessary."

"Very well. The Countess naturally felt an abhorrence at allowing you again to be in the presence
of one so much beneath you,--who had ventured to address you as he has done. It was a most
natural feeling. But it has occurred to Mrs. Bluestone and myself, that as you entertain this
idea of an obligation, you should be allowed to extricate yourself from it after your own fashion.
You are to meet Mr. Thwaite,--on Monday,--at eleven o'clock,--in Keppel Street."

"And I am not to come back again?"

When one executes the office of gaoler without fee or reward, giving up to one's prisoner one's
best bedroom, and having a company dinner, more or less, cooked for one's prisoner every day,
one does not like to be told too plainly of the anticipated joys of enfranchisement. Mrs. Bluestone,
who had done her best both for the mother and the girl, and had done it all from pure motherly
sympathy, was a little hurt. "I am sure, Lady Anna, we shall not wish you to return," she said.

"Oh, Mrs. Bluestone, you don't understand me. I don't think you know how unhappy I am because
of mamma."

Mrs. Bluestone relented at once. "If you will only do as your mamma wishes, everything will
be made happy for you."

"Mr. Thwaite will be in Keppel Street at eleven o'clock on Monday," continued the Serjeant,
"and an opportunity will then be given you of obtaining from him a release from that unfortunate
promise which I believe you once made him. I may tell you that he has expressed himself willing
to give you that release. The debt due to him, or rather to his late father, has now been paid
by the estate, and I think you will find that he will make no difficulty. After that anything
that he may require shall be done to forward his views."

"Am I to take my things?" she asked.

"Sarah shall pack them up, and they shall be sent after you if it be decided that you are to
stay with Lady Lovel." They then went to bed.

In all this neither the Serjeant nor his wife had been "on the square." Neither of them had
spoken truly to the girl. Mrs. Bluestone had let the Countess know that with all her desire
to assist her ladyship, and her ladyship's daughter, she could not receive Lady Anna back in
Bedford Square. As for that sending of her things upon certain conditions,--it was a simple
falsehood. The things would certainly be sent. And the Serjeant, without uttering an actual
lie, had endeavoured to make the girl think that the tailor was in pursuit of money,--and of
money only, though he must have known that it was not so. The Serjeant no doubt hated a lie,--as
most of us do hate lies; and had a strong conviction that the devil is the father of them.
But then the lies which he hated, and as to the parentage of which he was quite certain, were
lies told to him. Who yet ever met a man who did not in his heart of hearts despise an attempt
made by others to deceive--himself? They whom we have found to be gentler in their judgment
towards attempts made in another direction have been more than one or two. The object which
the Serjeant had in view was so good that it seemed to him to warrant some slight deviation
from parallelogrammatic squareness;--though he held it as one of his first rules of life that
the end cannot justify the means.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

IT IS STILL TRUE.

On Sunday they all went to church, and not a word was said about the tailor. Alice Bluestone
was tender and valedictory; Mrs. Bluestone was courteous and careful; the Serjeant was solemn
and civil. Before the day was over Lady Anna was quite sure that it was not intended that she
should come back to Bedford Square. Words were said by the two girls, and by Sarah the waiting-maid,
which made it certain that the packing up was to be a real packing up. No hindrance was offered
to her when she busied herself about her own dresses and folded up her stock of gloves and
ribbons. On Monday morning after breakfast, Mrs. Bluestone nearly broke down. "I am sure, my
dear," she said, "we have liked you very much, and if there has been anything uncomfortable
it has been from unfortunate circumstances." The Serjeant bade God bless her when he walked
off half an hour before the carriage came to take her, and she knew that she was to sit no
longer as a guest at the Serjeant's table. She kissed the girls, was kissed by Mrs. Bluestone,
got into the carriage with the maid, and in her heart said good-bye to Bedford Square for ever.

It was but three minutes' drive from the Serjeant's house to that in which her mother lived,
and in that moment of time she was hardly able to realise the fact that within half an hour
she would be once more in the presence of Daniel Thwaite. She did not at present at all understand
why this thing was to be done. When last she had seen her mother, the Countess had solemnly
declared, had almost sworn, that they two should never see each other again. And now the meeting
was so close at hand that the man must already be near her. She put up her face to the carriage
window as though she almost expected to see him on the pavement. And how would the meeting
be arranged? Would her mother be present? She took it for granted that her mother would be
present. She certainly anticipated no pleasure from the meeting,--though she would be glad,
very glad, to see Daniel Thwaite once again. Before she had time to answer herself a question
the carriage had stopped, and she could see her mother at the drawing-room window. She trembled
as she went up-stairs, and hardly could speak when she found herself in her mother's presence.
If her mother had worn the old brown gown it would have been better, but there she was, arrayed
in black silk,--in silk that was new and stiff and broad and solemn,--a parent rather than
a mother, and every inch a Countess. "I am so glad to be with you again, mamma."

"I shall not be less glad to have you with me, Anna,--if you will behave yourself with propriety."

"Give me a kiss, mamma." Then the Countess bent her head and allowed her daughter's lips to
touch her cheeks. In old days,--days that were not so very old,--she would kiss her child as
though such embraces were the only food that nourished her.

"Come up-stairs, and I will show you your room." Then the daughter followed the mother in solemn
silence. "You have heard that Mr. Daniel Thwaite is coming here, to see you, at your own request.
It will not be many minutes before he is here. Take off your bonnet." Again Lady Anna silently
did as she was bid. "It would have been better,--very much better,--that you should have done
as you were desired without subjecting me to this indignity. But as you have taken into your
head an idea that you cannot be absolved from an impossible engagement without his permission,
I have submitted. Do not let it be long, and let me hear then that all this nonsense is over.
He has got what he desires, as a very large sum of money has been paid to him." Then there
came a knock at the door from Sarah, who just showed her face to say that Mr. Thwaite was in
the room below. "Now go down. In ten minutes I shall expect to see you here again;--or, after
that, I shall come down to you." Lady Anna took her mother by the hand, looking up with beseeching
eyes into her mother's face. "Go, my dear, and let this be done as quickly as possible. I believe
that you have too great a sense of propriety to let him do more than speak to you. Remember,--you
are the daughter of an earl; and remember also all that I have done to establish your right
for you."

"Mamma, I do not know what to do. I am afraid."

"Shall I go with you, Anna?"

"No, mamma;--it will be better without you. You do not know how good he is."

"If he will abandon this madness he shall be my friend of friends."

"Oh, mamma, I am afraid. But I had better go." Then, trembling she left the room and slowly
descended the stairs. She had certainly spoken the truth in saying that she was afraid. Up
to this moment she had not positively made up her mind whether she would or would not yield
to the entreaties of her friends. She had decided upon nothing,--leaving in fact the arbitrament
of her faith in the hands of the man who had now come to see her. Throughout all that had been
said and done her sympathies had been with him, and had become the stronger the more her friends
had reviled him. She knew that they had spoken evil of him, not because he was evil,--but with
the unholy view of making her believe what was false. She had seen through all this, and had
been aroused by it to a degree of firmness of which her mother had not imagined her to be capable.
Had they confined themselves to the argument of present fitness, admitting the truth and honesty
of the man,--and admitting also that his love for her and hers for him had been the natural
growth of the familiar friendship of their childhood and youth, their chance of moulding her
to their purposes would have been better. As it was they had never argued with her on the subject
without putting forward some statement which she found herself bound to combat. She was told
continually that she had degraded herself; and she could understand that another Lady Anna
might degrade herself most thoroughly by listening to the suit of a tailor. But she had not
disgraced herself. Of that she was sure, though she could not well explain to them her reasons
when they accused her. Circumstances, and her mother's mode of living, had thrown her into
intimacy with this man. For all practical purposes of life he had been her equal,--and being
so had become her dearest friend. To take his hand, to lean on his arm, to ask his assistance,
to go to him in her troubles, to listen to his words and to believe them, to think of him as
one who might always be trusted, had become a second nature to her. Of course she loved him.
And now the martyrdom through which she had passed in Bedford Square had changed,--unconsciously
as regarded her own thoughts,--but still had changed her feelings in regard to her cousin.
He was not to her now the bright and shining thing, the godlike Phoebus, which he had been
in Wyndham Street and at Yoxham. In all their lectures to her about her title and grandeur
they had succeeded in inculcating an idea of the solemnity of rank, but had robbed it in her
eyes of all its grace. She had only been the more tormented because the fact of her being Lady
Anna Lovel had been fully established. The feeling in her bosom which was most hostile to the
tailor's claim upon her was her pity for her mother.

She entered the room very gently, and found him standing by the table, with his hands clasped
together. "Sweetheart!" he said, as soon as he saw her, calling her by a name which he used
to use when they were out in the fields together in Cumberland.

"Daniel!" Then he came to her and took her hand. "If you have anything to say, Daniel, you
must be very quick, because mamma will come in ten minutes."

"Have you anything to say, sweetheart?" She had much to say if she only knew how to say it;
but she was silent. "Do you love me, Anna?" Still she was silent. "If you have ceased to love
me, pray tell me so,--in all honesty." But yet she was silent. "If you are true to me,--as
I am to you, with all my heart,--will you not tell me so?"

"Yes," she murmured.

He heard her, though no other could have done so.

   "A lover's ears will hear the lowest sound
    When the suspicious head of theft is stopped."

"If so," said he, again taking her hand, "this story they have told me is untrue."

"What story, Daniel?" But she withdrew her hand quickly as she asked him.

"Nay;--it is mine; it shall be mine if you love me, dear. I will tell you what story. They
have said that you love your cousin, Earl Lovel."

"No;" said she scornfully, "I have never said so. It is not true."

"You cannot love us both." His eye was fixed upon hers, that eye to which in past years she
had been accustomed to look for guidance, sometimes in joy and sometimes in fear, and which
she had always obeyed. "Is not that true?"

"Oh yes;--that is true of course."

"You have never told him that you loved him."

"Oh, never."

"But you have told me so,--more than once; eh, sweetheart?"

"Yes."

"And it was true?"

She paused a moment, and then gave him the same answer, "Yes."

"And it is still true?"

She repeated the word a third time. "Yes." But she again so spoke that none but a lover's ear
could have heard it.

"If it be so, nothing but the hand of God shall separate us. You know that they sent for me
to come here." She nodded her head. "Do you know why? In order that I might abandon my claim
to your hand. I will never give it up. But I made them a promise, and I will keep it. I told
them that if you preferred Lord Lovel to me, I would at once make you free of your promise,--that
I would offer to you such freedom, if it would be freedom. I do offer it to you;--or rather,
Anna, I would have offered it, had you not already answered the question. How can I offer it
now?" Then he paused, and stood regarding her with fixed eyes. "But there,--there; take back
your word if you will. If you think that it is better to be the wife of a lord, because he
is a lord, though you do not love him, than to lie upon the breast of the man you do love,--you
are free from me." Now was the moment in which she must obey her mother, and satisfy her friends,
and support her rank, and decide that she would be one of the noble ladies of England, if such
decision were to be made at all. She looked up into his face, and thought that after all it
was handsomer than that of the young Earl. He stood thus with dilated nostrils, and fire in
his eyes, and his lips just parted, and his head erect,--a very man. Had she been so minded
she would not have dared to take his offer. They surely had not known the man when they allowed
him to have this interview. He repeated his words. "You are free if you will say so;--but you
must answer me."

"I did answer you, Daniel."

"My noble girl! And now, my heart's only treasure, I may speak out and tell you what I think.
It cannot be good that a woman should purchase rank and wealth by giving herself to a man she
does not love. It must be bad,--monstrously bad. I never believed it when they told it me of
you. And yet when I did not hear of you or see you for months--"

"It was not my fault."

"No, sweetheart;--and I tried to find comfort by so saying to myself. 'If she really loves
me, she will be true,' I said. And yet who was I that I should think that you would suffer
so much for me? But I will repay you,--if the truth and service of a life may repay such a
debt as that. At any rate hear this from me;--I will never doubt again." And as he spoke he
was moving towards her, thinking to take her in his arms, when the door was opened and Countess
Lovel was within the room. The tailor was the first to speak. "Lady Lovel, I have asked your
daughter, and I find that it is her wish to adhere to the engagement which she made with me
in Cumberland. I need hardly say that it is my wish also."

"Anna! Is this true?"

"Mamma; mamma! Oh, mamma!"

"If it be so I will never speak word to you more."

"You will; you will! Do not look at me like that. You will speak to me!"

"You shall never again be child of mine." But in saying this she had forgotten herself, and
now she remembered her proper cue. "I do not believe a word of it. The man has come here and
has insulted and frightened you. He knows,--he must know,--that such a marriage is impossible.
It can never take place. It shall never take place. Mr. Thwaite, as you are a living man, you
shall never live to marry my daughter."

"My lady, in this matter of marriage your daughter must no doubt decide for herself. Even now,
by all the laws of God,--and I believe of man too,--she is beyond your control either to give
her in marriage or to withhold her. In a few months she will be as much her own mistress as
you now are yours."

"Sir, I am not asking you about my child. You are insolent."

"I came here, Lady Lovel, because I was sent for."

"And now you had better leave us. You made a promise which you have broken."

"By heavens, no. I made a promise and I have kept it. I said that I would offer her freedom,
and I have done so. I told her, and I tell her again now, that if she will say that she prefers
her cousin to me, I will retire." The Countess looked at him and also recognised the strength
of his face, almost feeling that the man had grown in personal dignity since he had received
the money that was due to him. "She does not prefer the Earl. She has given her heart to me;
and I hold it,--and will hold it. Look up, dear, and tell your mother whether what I say be true."

"It is true," said Lady Anna.

"Then may the blight of hell rest upon you both!" said the Countess, rushing to the door. But
she returned. "Mr. Thwaite," she said, "I will trouble you at once to leave the house, and
never more to return to it."

"I will leave it certainly. Good bye, my own love." He attempted again to take the girl by
the hand, but the Countess, with violence, rushed at them and separated them. "If you but touch
him, I will strike you," she said to her daughter. "As for you, it is her money that you want.
If it be necessary, you shall have, not hers, but mine. Now go."

"That is a slander, Lady Lovel. I want no one's money. I want the girl I love,--whose heart
I have won; and I will have her. Good morning, Lady Lovel. Dear, dear Anna, for this time good
bye. Do not let any one make you think that I can ever be untrue to you." The girl only looked
at him. Then he left the room; and the mother and the daughter were alone together. The Countess
stood erect, looking at her child, while Lady Anna, standing also, kept her eyes fixed upon
the ground. "Am I to believe it all,--as that man says?" asked the Countess.

"Yes, mamma."

"Do you mean to say that you have renewed your engagement to that low-born wretch?"

"Mamma,--he is not a wretch."

"Do you contradict me? After all, is it come to this?"

"Mamma,--you, you--cursed me."

"And you will be cursed. Do you think that you will do such wickedness as this, that you can
destroy all that I have done for you, that you make yourself the cause of ruin to a whole family,
and that you will not be punished for it? You say that you love me."

"You know that I love you, mamma."

"And yet you do not scruple to drive me mad."

"Mamma, it was you who brought us together."

"Ungrateful child! Where else could I take you then?"

"But I was there,--and of course I loved him. I could not cease to love him because,--because
they say that I am a grand lady."

"Listen to me, Anna. You shall never marry him; never. With my own hands I will kill him first;--or
you." The girl stood looking into her mother's face, and trembling. "Do you understand that?"

"You do not mean it, mamma."

"By the God above me, I do! Do you think that I will stop at anything now;--after having done
so much? Do you think that I will live to see my daughter the wife of a foul, sweltering tailor?
No, by heavens! He tells you that when you are twenty-one, you will not be subject to my control.
I warn you to look to it. I will not lose my control, unless when I see you married to some
husband fitting your condition in life. For the present you will live in your own room, as
I will live in mine. I will hold no intercourse whatever with you, till I have constrained
you to obey me."

CHAPTER XXXVII.

LET HER DIE.

After the scene which was described in the last chapter there was a very sad time indeed in
Keppel Street. The Countess had been advised by the Serjeant and Mrs. Bluestone to take her
daughter immediately abroad, in the event of the interview with Daniel Thwaite being unsatisfactory.
It was believed by all concerned, by the Bluestones, and the Goffes, by Sir William Patterson
who had been told of the coming interview, and by the Countess herself, that this would not
be the case. They had all thought that Lady Anna would come out from that meeting disengaged
and free to marry whom she would,--and they thought also that within a very few weeks of her
emancipation she would accept her cousin's hand. The Solicitor-General had communicated with
the Earl, who was still in town, and the Earl again believed that he might win the heiress.
But should the girl prove obstinate;--"take her away at once,--very far away;--to Rome, or
some such place as that." Such had been Mrs. Bluestone's advice, and in those days Rome was
much more distant than it is now. "And don't let anybody know where you are going," added the
Serjeant,--"except Mr. Goffe." The Countess had assented;--but when the moment came, there
were reasons against her sudden departure. Mr. Goffe told her that she must wait at any rate
for another fortnight. The presence of herself and her daughter were necessary in London for
the signing of deeds and for the completion of the now merely formal proofs of identity. And
money was again scarce. A great deal of money had been spent lately, and unless money was borrowed
without security, and at a great cost,--to which Mr. Goffe was averse,--the sum needed could
hardly be provided at once. Mr. Goffe recommended that no day earlier than the 20th December
should be fixed for their departure.

It was now the end of November; and it became a question how the intermediate time should be
passed. The Countess was resolved that she would hold no pleasant intercourse at all with her
daughter. She would not even tell the girl of her purpose of going abroad. From hour to hour
she assured herself with still increasing obduracy that nothing but severity could avail anything.
The girl must be cowed and frightened into absolute submission,--even though at the expense
of her health. Even though it was to be effected by the absolute crushing of her spirits,--this
must be done. Though at the cost of her life, it must be done. This woman had lived for the
last twenty years with but one object before her eyes,--an object sometimes seeming to be near,
more often distant, and not unfrequently altogether beyond her reach, but which had so grown
upon her imagination as to become the heaven to which her very soul aspired. To be and to be
known to be among the highly born, the so-called noble, the titled from old dates,--to be of
those who were purely aristocratic, had been all the world to her. As a child,--the child of
well-born but poor parents, she had received the idea. In following it out she had thrown all
thoughts of love to the wind and had married a reprobate earl. Then had come her punishment,--or,
as she had conceived it, her most unmerited misfortunes. For many years of her life her high
courage and persistent demeanour had almost atoned for the vice of her youth. The love of rank
was strong in her bosom as ever, but it was fostered for her child rather than for herself.
Through long, tedious, friendless, poverty-stricken years she had endured all, still assuring
herself that the day would come when the world should call the sweet plant that grew by her
side by its proper name. The little children hooted after her daughter, calling her girl in
derision The Lady Anna,--when Lady Anna had been more poorly clad and blessed with less of
the comforts of home than any of them. Years would roll by, and they should live to know that
the Lady Anna,--the sport of their infantine cruelty,--was Lady Anna indeed. And as the girl
became a woman the dream was becoming a reality. The rank, the title, the general acknowledgment
and the wealth would all be there. Then came the first great decisive triumph. Overtures of
love and friendship were made from the other side. Would Lady Anna consent to become the Countess
Lovel, all animosities might be buried, and everything be made pleasant, prosperous, noble,
and triumphant!

It is easy to fill with air a half-inflated bladder. It is already so buoyant with its own
lightness, that it yields itself with ease to receive the generous air. The imagination of
the woman flew higher than ever it had flown when the proposition came home to her in all its
bearings. Of course it had been in her mind that her daughter should marry well;--but there
had been natural fears. Her child had not been educated, had not lived, had not been surrounded
in her young days, as are those girls from whom the curled darlings are wont to choose their
wives. She would too probably be rough in manner, ungentle in speech, ungifted in accomplishments,
as compared with those who from their very cradles are encompassed by the blessings of wealth
and high social standing. But when she looked at her child's beauty, she would hope. And then
her child was soft, sweet-humoured, winning in all her little ways, pretty even in the poor
duds which were supplied to her mainly by the generosity of the tailor. And so she would hope,
and sometimes despair;--and then hope again. But she had never hoped for anything so good as
this. Such a marriage would not only put her daughter as high as a Lovel ought to be, but would
make it known in a remarkable manner to all coming ages that she, she herself, she the despised
and slandered one,--who had been treated almost as woman had never been treated before,--was
in very truth the Countess Lovel by whose income the family had been restored to its old splendour.

And so the longing grew upon her. Then, almost for the first time, did she begin to feel that
it was necessary for the purposes of her life that the girl whom she loved so thoroughly, should
be a creature in her hands, to be dealt with as she pleased. She would have had her daughter
accede to the proposed marriage even before she had seen Lord Lovel, and was petulant when
her daughter would not be as clay in the sculptor's hand. But still the girl's refusal had
been but as the refusal of a girl. She should not have been as are other girls. She should
have known better. She should have understood what the peculiarity of her position demanded.
But it had not been so with her. She had not soared as she should have done, above the love-laden
dreams of common maidens. And so the visit to Yoxham was permitted. Then came the great blow,--struck
as it were by a third hand, and that the hand of an attorney. The Countess Lovel learned through
Mr. Goffe,--who had heard the tale from other lawyers,--that her daughter Lady Anna Lovel had,
with her own mouth, told her noble lover that she was betrothed to a tailor! She felt at the
moment that she could have died,--cursing her child for this black ingratitude.

But there might still be hope. The trial was going on,--or the work which was progressing towards
the trial, and she was surrounded by those who could advise her. Doubtless what had happened
was a great misfortune. But there was room for hope;--room for most assured hope. The Earl
was not disposed to abandon the match, though he had, of course, been greatly annoyed,--nay,
disgusted and degraded by the girl's communication. But he had consented to see the matter
in the proper light. The young tailor had got an influence over the girl when she was a child,
was doubtless in pursuit of money, and must be paid. The folly of a child might be forgiven,
and the Earl would persevere. No one would know what had occurred, and the thing would be forgotten
as a freak of childhood. The Countess had succumbed to the policy of all this;--but she was
not deceived by the benevolent falsehood. Lady Anna had been over twenty when she had been
receiving lover's vows from this man, reeking from his tailor's board. And her girl, her daughter,
had deceived her. That the girl had deceived her, saying there was no other lover, was much;
but it was much more and worse and more damnable that there had been thorough deception as
to the girl's own appreciation of her rank. The sympathy tendered through so many years must
have been always pretended sympathy. With these feelings hot within her bosom, she could not
bring herself to speak one kindly word to Lady Anna after the return from Yoxham. The girl
was asked to abandon her odious lover with stern severity. It was demanded of her that she
should do so with cruel threats. She would never quite yield, though she had then no strength
of purpose sufficient to enable her to declare that she would not yield. We know how she was
banished to Bedford Square, and transferred from the ruthless persistency of her mother, to
the less stern but not less fixed manoeuvres of Mrs. Bluestone. At that moment of her existence
she was herself in doubt. In Wyndham Street and at Yoxham she had almost more than doubted.
The softness of the new Elysium had well nigh unnerved her. When that young man had caught
her from stone to stone as she passed over the ford at Bolton, she was almost ready to give
herself to him. But then had come upon her the sense of sickness, that faint, overdone flavour
of sugared sweetness, which arises when sweet things become too luscious to the eater. She
had struggled to be honest and strong, and had just not fallen into the pot of treacle.

But, notwithstanding all this, they who saw her and knew the story, were still sure that the
lord must at last win the day. There was not one who believed that such a girl could be true
to such a troth as she had made. Even the Solicitor-General, when he told the tale which the
amorous steward had remembered to his own encouragement, did not think but what the girl and
the girl's fortune would fall into the hands of his client. Human nature demanded that it should
be so. That it should be as he wished it was so absolutely consonant with all nature as he
had known it, that he had preferred trusting to this result, in his client's behalf, to leaving
the case in a jury's hands. At this moment he was sure he was right in his judgment. And indeed
he was right;--for no jury could have done anything for his client.

It went on till at last the wise men decided that the girl only wanted to be relieved by her
old lover, that she might take a new lover with his permission. The girl was no doubt peculiar;
but, as far as the wise ones could learn from her manner,--for with words she would say nothing,--that
was her state of mind. So the interview was planned,--to the infinite disgust of the Countess,
who, however, believed that it might avail; and we know what was the result. Lady Anna, who
long had doubted,--who had at last almost begun to doubt whether Daniel Thwaite was true to
her,--had renewed her pledges, strengthened her former promises, and was now more firmly betrothed
than ever to him whom the Countess hated as a very fiend upon earth. But there certainly should
be no marriage! Though she pistolled the man at the altar, there should be no marriage.

And then there came upon her the infinite disgust arising from the necessity of having to tell
her sorrows to others,--who could not sympathize with her, though their wishes were as hers.
It was hard upon her that no step could be taken by her in reference to her daughter without
the knowledge of Mr. Goffe and Serjeant Bluestone,--and the consequent knowledge of Mr. Flick
and the Solicitor-General. It was necessary, too, that Lord Lovel should know all. His conduct
in many things must depend on the reception which might probably be accorded to a renewal of
his suit. Of course he must be told. He had already been told that the tailor was to be admitted
to see his love, in order that she might be absolved by the tailor from her first vow. It had
not been pleasant,--but he had acceded. Mr. Flick had taken upon himself to say that he was
sure that everything would be made pleasant. The Earl had frowned, and had been very short
with Mr. Flick. These confidences with lawyers about his lovesuit, and his love's tone with
her low-born lover, had not been pleasant to Lord Lovel. But he had endured it,--and now he
must be told of the result. Oh, heavens;--what a hell of misery was this girl making for her
high-born relatives! But the story of the tailor's visit to Keppel Street did not reach the
unhappy ones at Yoxham till months had passed away.

Mr. Goffe was very injudicious in postponing the departure of the two ladies--as the Solicitor-General
told Mr. Flick afterwards very plainly, when he heard of what had been done. "Money; she might
have had any money. I would have advanced it. You would have advanced it!" "Oh certainly,"
said Mr. Flick, not, however, at all relishing the idea of advancing money to his client's
adversary. "I never heard of such folly," continued Sir William. "That comes of trusting people
who should not be trusted." But it was too late then. Lady Anna was lying ill in bed, in fever;
and three doctors doubted whether she would ever get up again. "Would it not be better that
she should die?" said her mother to herself, standing over her and looking at her. It would,--so
thought the mother then,--be better that she should die than get up to become the wife of Daniel
Thwaite. But how much better that she should live and become the Countess Lovel! She still
loved her child, as only a mother can love her only child,--as only a mother can love who has
no hope of joy in the world, but what is founded on her child. But the other passion had become
so strong in her bosom that it almost conquered her mother's yearnings. Was she to fight for
long years that she might be beaten at last when the prize was so near her,--when the cup was
almost at her lips? Were the girl now to be taken to her grave, there would be an end at any
rate of the fear which now most heavily oppressed her. But the three doctors were called in,
one after another; and Lady Anna was tended as though her life was as precious as that of any
other daughter.

These new tidings caused new perturbation among the lawyers. "They say that Clerke and Holland
have given her over," said Mr. Flick to Sir William.

"I am sorry to hear it," said Mr. Solicitor; "but girls do live sometimes in spite of the doctors."

"Yes; very true, Sir William; very true. But if it should go in that way it might not perhaps
be amiss for our client."

"God forbid that he should prosper by his cousin's death, Mr. Flick. But the Countess would
be the heir."

"The Countess is devoted to the Earl. We ought to do something, Sir William. I don't think
that we could claim above eight or ten thousand pounds at most as real property. He put his
money everywhere, did that old man. There are shares in iron mines in the Alleghanies, worth
ever so much."

"They are no good to us," said the Solicitor-General, alluding to his client's interests.

"Not worth a halfpenny to us, though they are paying twenty per cent. on the paid-up capital.
He seems to have determined that the real heir should get nothing, even if there were no will.
A wicked old man!"

"Very wicked, Mr. Flick."

"A horrible old man! But we really ought to do something, Mr. Solicitor. If the girl won't
marry him there should be some compromise, after all that we have done."

"How can the girl marry any one, Mr. Flick,--if she's going to die?"

A few days after this, Sir William called in Keppel Street and saw the Countess, not with any
idea of promoting a compromise,--for the doing which this would not have been the time, nor
would he have been the fitting medium,--but in order that he might ask after Lady Anna's health.
The whole matter was in truth now going very much against the Earl. Money had been allowed
to the Countess and her daughter; and in truth all the money was now their own, to do with
it as they listed, though there might be some delay before each was put into absolute possession
of her own proportion; but no money had been allowed, or could be allowed, to the Earl. And,
that the fact was so, was now becoming known to all men. Hitherto credit had at any rate been
easy with the young lord. When the old Earl died, and when the will was set aside, it was thought
that he would be the heir. When the lawsuit first came up, it was believed everywhere that
some generous compromise would be the worst that could befall him. After that the marriage
had been almost a certainty, and then it was known that he had something of his own, so that
tradesmen need not fear that their bills would be paid. It can hardly be said that he had been
extravagant; but a lord must live, and an earl can hardly live and maintain a house in the
country on a thousand a year, even though he has an uncle to keep his hunters for him. Some
prudent men in London were already beginning to ask for their money, and the young Earl was
in trouble. As Mr. Flick had said, it was quite time that something should be done. Sir William
still depended on the panacea of a marriage, if only the girl would live. The marriage might
be delayed; but, if the cards were played prudently, might still make everything comfortable.
Such girls do not marry tailors, and will always prefer lords to tradesmen!

"I hope that you do not think that my calling is intrusive," he said. The Countess, dressed
all in black, with that funereal frown upon her brow which she always now wore, with deep-sunk
eyes, and care legible in every feature of her handsome face, received him with a courtesy
that was as full of woe as it was graceful. She was very glad to make his acquaintance. There
was no intrusion. He would forgive her, she thought, if he perceived that circumstances had
almost overwhelmed her with sorrow. "I have come to ask after your daughter," said he.

"She has been very ill, Sir William."

"Is she better now?"

"I hardly know; I cannot say. They seemed to think this morning that the fever was less violent."

"Then she will recover, Lady Lovel."

"They do not say so. But indeed I did not ask them. It is all in God's hands. I sometimes think
that it would be better that she should die, and there be an end of it."

This was the first time that these two had been in each other's company, and the lawyer could
not altogether repress the feeling of horror with which he heard the mother speak in such a
way of her only child. "Oh, Lady Lovel, do not say that!"

"But I do say it. Why should I not say it to you, who know all? Of what good will her life
be to herself, or to any one else, if she pollute herself and her family by this marriage?
It would be better that she should be dead,--much better that she should be dead. She is all
that I have, Sir William. It is for her sake that I have been struggling from the first moment
in which I knew that I was to be a mother. The whole care of my life has been to prove her
to be her father's daughter in the eye of the law. I doubt whether you can know what it is
to pursue one object, and only one, through your whole life, with never-ending solicitude,--and
to do it all on behalf of another. If you did, you would understand my feeling now. It would
be better for her that she should die than become the wife of such a one as Daniel Thwaite."

"Lady Lovel, not only as a mother, but as a Christian, you should get the better of that feeling."

"Of course I should. No doubt every clergyman in England would tell me the same thing. It is
easy to say all that, sir. Wait till you are tried. Wait till all your ambition is to be betrayed,
every hope rolled in the dust, till all the honours you have won are to be soiled and degraded,
till you are made a mark for general scorn and public pity,--and then tell me how you love
the child by whom such evils are brought upon you!"

"I trust that I may never be so tried, Lady Lovel."

"I hope not; but think of all that before you preach to me. But I do love her; and it is because
I love her that I would fain see her removed from the reproaches which her own madness will
bring upon her. Let her die;--if it be God's will. I can follow her without one wish for a
prolonged life. Then will a noble family be again established, and her sorrowful tale will
be told among the Lovels with a tear and without a curse."

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

LADY ANNA'S BEDSIDE.

All December went by, and the neighbours in the houses round spent each his merry Christmas;
and the snow and frost of January passed over them, and February had come and nearly gone,
before the doctors dared to say that Lady Anna Lovel's life was not still in danger. During
this long period the world had known all about her illness,--as it did know, or pretended to
know, the whole history of her life. The world had been informed that she was dying, and had,
upon the whole, been really very sorry for her. She had interested the world, and the world
had heard much of her youth and beauty,--of the romance too of her story, of her fidelity to
the tailor, and of her persecutions. During these months of her illness the world was disposed
to think that the tailor was a fine fellow, and that he ought to be taken by the hand. He had
money now, and it was thought that it would be a good thing to bring him into some club. There
was a very strong feeling at the Beaufort that if he were properly proposed and seconded he
would be elected,--not because he was going to marry an heiress, but because he was losing
the heiress whom he was to have married. If the girl died, then Lord Lovel himself might bring
him forward at the Beaufort. Of all this Daniel himself knew nothing; but he heard, as all
the world heard, that Lady Anna was on her deathbed.

When the news first reached him,--after a fashion that seemed to him to be hardly worthy of
credit,--he called at the house in Keppel Street and asked the question. Yes; Lady Anna was
very ill; but, as it happened, Sarah the lady's-maid opened the door, and Sarah remembered
the tailor. She had seen him when he was admitted to her young mistress, and knew enough of
the story to be aware that he should be snubbed. Her first answer was given before she had
bethought herself; then she snubbed him, and told no one but the Countess of his visit. After
that Daniel went to one of the doctors, and waited at his door with patience till he could
be seen. The unhappy man told his story plainly. He was Daniel Thwaite, late a tailor, the
man from Keswick, to whom Lady Anna Lovel was engaged. In charity and loving kindness, would
the doctor tell him of the state of his beloved one? The doctor took him by the hand and asked
him in, and did tell him. His beloved one was then on the very point of death. Whereupon Daniel
wrote to the Countess in humble strains, himself taking the letter, and waiting without in
the street for any answer that might be vouchsafed. If it was, as he was told, that his beloved
was dying, might he be allowed to stand once at her bedside and kiss her hand? In about an
hour an answer was brought to him at the area gate. It consisted of his own letter, opened,
and returned to him without a word. He went away too sad to curse, but he declared to himself
that such cruelty in a woman's bosom could exist only in the bosom of a countess.

But as others heard early in February that Lady Anna was like to recover, so did Daniel Thwaite.
Indeed, his authority was better than that which reached the clubs, for the doctor still stood
his friend. Could the doctor take a message from him to Lady Anna;--but one word? No;--the
doctor could take no message. That he would not do. But he did not object to give to the lover
a bulletin of the health of his sweetheart. In this way Daniel knew sooner than most others
when the change took place in the condition of his beloved one.

Lady Anna would be of age in May, and the plan of her betrothed was as follows. He would do
nothing till that time, and then he would call upon her to allow their banns to be published
in Bloomsbury Church after the manner of the Church of England. He himself had taken lodgings
in Great Russell Street, thinking that his object might be aided by living in the same parish.
If, as was probable, he would not be allowed to approach Lady Anna either in person, or by
letter, then he would have recourse to the law, and would allege that the young lady was unduly
kept a prisoner in custody. He was told that such complaint would be as idle wind, coming from
him,--that no allegation of that kind could obtain any redress unless it came from the young
lady herself; but he flattered himself that he could so make it that the young lady would at
any rate obtain thereby the privilege of speaking for herself. Let some one ask her what were
her wishes and he would be prepared to abide by her expression of them.

In the meantime Lord Lovel also had been anxious;--but his anxiety had been met in a very different
fashion. For many days the Countess saw him daily, so that there grew up between them a close
intimacy. When it was believed that the girl would die,--believed with that sad assurance which
made those who were concerned speak of her death almost as a certainty, the Countess, sitting
alone with the young Earl, had told him that all would be his if the girl left them. He had
muttered something as to there being no reason for that. "Who else should have it?" said the
Countess. "Where should it go? Your people, Lovel, have not understood me. It is for the family
that I have been fighting, fighting, fighting,--and never ceasing. Though you have been my
adversary,--it has been all for the Lovels. If she goes,--it shall be yours at once. There
is no one knows how little I care for wealth myself." Then the girl had become better, and
the Countess again began her plots, and her plans, and her strategy. She would take the girl
abroad in May, in April if it might be possible. They would go,--not to Rome then, but to the
south of France, and, as the weather became too warm for them, on to Switzerland and the Tyrol.
Would he, Lord Lovel, follow them? Would he follow them and be constant in his suit, even though
the frantic girl should still talk of her tailor lover? If he would do so, as far as money
was concerned, all should be in common with them. For what was the money wanted but that the
Lovels might be great and noble and splendid? He said that he would do so. He also loved the
girl,--thought at least during the tenderness created by her illness that he loved her with
all his heart. He sat hour after hour with the Countess in Keppel Street,--sometimes seeing
the girl as she lay unconscious, or feigning that she was so; till at last he was daily at
her bedside. "You had better not talk to him, Anna," her mother would say, "but of course he
is anxious to see you." Then the Earl would kiss her hand, and in her mother's presence she
had not the courage,--perhaps she had not the strength,--to withdraw it. In these days the
Countess was not cruelly stern as she had been. Bedside nursing hardly admits of such cruelty
of manner. But she never spoke to her child with little tender endearing words, never embraced
her,--but was to her a careful nurse rather than a loving mother.

Then by degrees the girl got better, and was able to talk. "Mamma," she said one day, "won't
you sit by me?"

"No, my dear; you should not be encouraged to talk."

"Sit by me, and let me hold your hand." For a moment the Countess gave way, and sat by her
daughter, allowing her hand to remain pressed beneath the bedclothes;--but she rose abruptly,
remembering her grievance, remembering that it would be better that her child should die, should
die broken-hearted by unrelenting cruelty, than be encouraged to think it possible that she
should do as she desired. So she rose abruptly and left the bedside without a word.

"Mamma," said Lady Anna; "will Lord Lovel be here to-day?"

"I suppose he will be here."

"Will you let me speak to him for a minute?"

"Surely you may speak to him."

"I am strong now, mamma, and I think that I shall be well again some day. I have so often wished
that I might die."

"You had better not talk about it, my dear."

"But I should like to speak to him, mamma, without you."

"What to say,--Anna?"

"I hardly know;--but I should like to speak to him. I have something to say about money."

"Cannot I say it?"

"No, mamma. I must say it myself,--if you will let me." The Countess looked at her girl with
suspicion, but she gave the permission demanded. Of course it would be right that this lover
should see his love. The Countess was almost minded to require from Lady Anna an assurance
that no allusion should be made to Daniel Thwaite; but the man's name had not been mentioned
between them since the beginning of the illness, and she was loth to mention it now. Nor would
it have been possible to prevent for long such an interview as that now proposed.

"He shall come in if he pleases," said the Countess; "but I hope you will remember who you
are and to whom you are speaking."

"I will remember both, mamma," said Lady Anna. The Countess looked down on her daughter's face,
and could not help thinking that her child was different from what she had been. There had
been almost defiance in the words spoken, though they had been spoken with the voice of an invalid.

At three o'clock that afternoon, according to his custom, Lord Lovel came, and was at once
told that he was to be spoken to by his cousin. "She says it is about money," said the Countess.

"About money?"

"Yes;--and if she confines herself to that, do as she bids you. If she is ever to be your wife
it will be all right; and if not,--then it will be better in your hands than in hers. In three
months time she can do as she pleases with it all." He was then taken into Lady Anna's room.
"Here is your cousin," said the Countess. "You must not talk long or I shall interrupt you.
If you wish to speak to him about the property,--as the head of your family,--that will be
very right; but confine yourself to that for the present." Then the Countess left them and
closed the door.

"It is not only about money, Lord Lovel."

"You might call me Frederic now," said he tenderly.

"No;--not now. If I am ever well again and we are then friends I will do so. They tell me that
there is ever so much money,--hundreds of thousands of pounds. I forget how much."

"Do not trouble yourself about that."

"But I do trouble myself very much about it,--and I know that it ought to be yours. There is
one thing I want to tell you, which you must believe. If I am ever any man's wife, I shall
be the wife of Daniel Thwaite." That dark frown came upon his face which she had seen once
before. "Pray believe that it is so," she continued. "Mamma does not believe it,--will not
believe it; but it is so. I love him with all my heart. I think of him every minute. It is
very very cruel that I may not hear from him or send one word to tell him how I am. There!
My hand is on the Bible, and I swear to you that if I am ever the wife of any man, I will be
his wife."

He looked down at her and saw that she was wan and thin and weak, and he did not dare to preach
to her the old family sermon as to his rank and station. "But, Anna, why do you tell me this
now?" he said.

"That you may believe it and not trouble yourself with me any more. You must believe it when
I tell you so in this manner. I may perhaps never live to rise from my bed. If I get well,
I shall send to him, or go. I will not be hindered. He is true to me, and I will be true to
him. You may tell mamma if you think proper. She would not believe me, but perhaps she may
believe you. But, Lord Lovel, it is not fit that he should have all this money. He does not
want it, and he would not take it. Till I am married I may do what I please with it;--and it
shall be yours."

"That cannot be."

"Yes, it can. I know that I can make it yours if I please. They tell me that--that you are
not rich, as Lord Lovel should be, because all this has been taken from you. That was the reason
why you came to me."

"By heaven, Anna, I love you most truly."

"It could not have been so when you had not seen me. Will you take a message from me to Daniel
Thwaite?"

He thought awhile before he answered it. "No, I cannot do that."

"Then I must find another messenger. Mr. Goffe will do it perhaps. He shall tell me how much
he wants to keep, and the rest shall be yours. That is all. If you tell mamma, ask her not
to be hard to me." He stood over her and took her hand, but knew not how to speak a word to
her. He attempted to kiss her hand; but she raised herself on her elbow, and shook her head
and drew it from him. "It belongs to Daniel Thwaite," she said. Then he left her and did not
speak another word.

"What has she said?" asked the Countess, with an attempt at smiling.

"I do not know that I should tell you."

"Surely, Lovel, you are bound to tell me."

"She has offered me all her property,--or most of it."

"She is right," said the Countess.

"But she has sworn to me, on the Bible, that she will never be my wife."

"Tush!--it means nothing."

"Ah yes;--it means much. It means all. She never loved me,--not for an instant. That other
man has been before me, and she is too firm to be moved."

"Did she say so?"

He was silent for a moment and then replied, "Yes; she did say so."

"Then let her die!" said the Countess.

"Lady Lovel!"

"Let her die. It will be better. Oh, God! that I should be brought to this. And what will you
do, my lord? Do you mean to say that you will abandon her?"

"I cannot ask her to be my wife again."

"What;--because she has said this in her sickness,--when she is half delirious,--while she
is dreaming of the words that man spoke to her? Have you no more strength than that? Are you
so poor a creature?"

"I think I have been a poor creature to ask her a second time at all."

"No; not so. Your duty and mine are the same,--as should be hers. We must forget ourselves
while we save the family. Do not I bear all? Have not I borne everything--contumely, solitude,
ill words, poverty, and now this girl's unkindness? But even yet I will not give it up. Take
the property,--as it is offered."

"I could not touch it."

"If not for you, then for your children. Take it all, so that we may be the stronger. But do
not abandon us now, if you are a man."

He would not stay to hear her further exhortations, but hurried away from the house full of
doubt and unhappiness.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

LADY ANNA'S OFFER.

Early in March Lady Anna was convalescent, but had not yet left the house in Keppel Street,--and
the confusion and dismay of the Countess were greater than ever. Lady Anna had declared that
she would not leave England for the present. She was reminded that at any rate till the 10th
of May she was subject to her mother's control. But by this time her mother's harshness to
her had produced some corresponding hardness in her. "Yes, mamma;--but I will not go abroad.
Things must be settled, and I am not well enough to go yet." The Countess asserted that everything
could be arranged abroad, that papers could be sent after them, that Mr. Goffe could come out
to them, and with much show of authority persisted. She would do anything by which she might
be able to remove Lady Anna from the influence of Daniel Thwaite at the time at which the girl
would cease to be subject to her. But in truth the girl had ceased to be subject to her. "No,
mamma, I will not go. If you will ask Serjeant Bluestone, or Sir William Patterson, I am sure
they will say that I ought not to be made to go." There were some terrible scenes in which
the mother was driven almost to desperation. Lady Anna repeated to the Countess all that she
had said to Lord Lovel,--and swore to her mother with the Bible in hand that if ever she became
the wife of any man she would be the wife of Daniel Thwaite. Then the Countess with great violence
knocked the book out of her daughter's grasp, and it was thrown to the other side of the room.
"If this is to go on," said the Countess, "one of us must die."

"Mamma, I have done nothing to make you so unkind to me. You have not spoken one word of kindness
to me since I came from Yoxham."

"If this goes on I shall never speak a word of kindness to you again," said the mother.

But in the midst of all this there was one point on which they were agreed,--on which they
came sufficiently near together for action, though there was still a wide difference between
them. Some large proportion of the property at stake was to be made over to Lord Lovel on the
day that gave the girl the legal power of transferring her own possessions. The Countess began
by presuming that the whole of Lady Anna's wealth was to be so transferred,--not from any lack
of reverence for the great amount which was in question, but feeling that for all good purposes
it would be safer in the hands of the Earl than in those of her own child. If it could be arranged
that the tailor could get nothing with his bride, then it might still be possible that the
tailor might refuse the match. At any rate a quarrel might be fostered and the evil might be
staved off. But to this Lady Anna would not assent. If she might act in this business in concert
with Mr. Thwaite she would be able, she thought, to do better by her cousin than she proposed.
But as she was not allowed to learn what were Mr. Thwaite's wishes, she would halve her property
with her cousin. As much as this she was willing to do,--and was determined to do, acting on
her own judgment. More she would not do,--unless she could see Mr. Thwaite. As it stood, her
proposition was one which would, if carried out, bestow something like £10,000 a year upon
the Earl. Then Mr. Goffe was sent for, and Lady Anna was allowed to communicate her suggestion
to the lawyer. "That should require a great deal of thought," said Mr. Goffe with solemnity.
Lady Anna declared that she had been thinking of it all the time she had been ill. "But it
should not be done in a hurry," said Mr. Goffe. Then Lady Anna remarked that in the meantime,
her cousin, the Earl, the head of her family, would have nothing to support his title. Mr.
Goffe took his leave, promising to consult his partner, and to see Mr. Flick.

Mr. Goffe did consult his partner and did see Mr. Flick, and then Serjeant Bluestone was asked
his advice,--and the Solicitor-General. The Serjeant had become somewhat tired of the Lovels,
and did not care to give any strong advice either in one direction or in the other. The young
lady, he said, might of course do what she liked with her own when it was her own; but he thought
that she should not be hurried. He pointed it out as a fact that the Earl had not the slightest
claim upon any portion of the estate,--not more than he would have had if this money had come
to Lady Anna from her mother's instead of from her father's relatives. He was still of opinion
that the two cousins might ultimately become man and wife if matters were left tranquil and
the girl were taken abroad for a year or two. Lady Anna, however, would be of age in a few
weeks, and must of course do as she liked with her own.

But they all felt that everything would at last be ruled by what the Solicitor-General might
say. The Solicitor-General was going out of town for a week or ten days,--having the management
of a great case at the Spring Assizes. He would think over Lady Anna's proposition, and say
what he had to say when he returned. Lord Lovel, however, had been his client, and he had said
from first to last that more was to be done for his client by amicable arrangement than by
hostile opposition. If the Earl could get £10,000 a year by amicable arrangement, the Solicitor-General
would be shown to have been right in the eyes of all men, and it was probable,--as both Mr.
Goffe and Mr. Flick felt,--that he would not repudiate a settlement of the family affairs by
which he would be proved to have been a discreet counsellor.

In the meantime it behoved Lord Lovel himself to have an opinion. Mr. Flick of course had told
him of the offer,--which had in truth been made directly to himself by his cousin. At this
time his affairs were not in a happy condition. A young earl, handsome and well esteemed, may
generally marry an heiress,--if not one heiress then another. Though he be himself a poor man,
his rank and position will stand in lieu of wealth. And so would it have been with this young
earl,--who was very handsome and excellently well esteemed,--had it not been that all the world
knew that it was his especial business to marry one especial heiress. He could hardly go about
looking for other honey, having, as he had, one particular hive devoted by public opinion to
himself. After a year or two he might have looked elsewhere,--but what was he to do in the
meantime? He was well nigh penniless, and in debt. So he wrote a letter to his uncle, the parson.

It may be remembered that when the uncle and nephew last parted in London there was not much
love between them. From that day to this they had not seen each other, nor had there been any
communication between them. The horses had been taken away and sold. The rector had spoken
to the ladies of his household more than once with great bitterness of the young man's ingratitude;
and they more than once had spoken to the rector, with a woman's piteous tenderness, of the
young lord's poverty. But it was all sorrow and distress. For in truth the rector could not
be happy while he was on bad terms with the head of his family. Then the young lord wrote as
though there had been nothing amiss between them. It had in truth all passed away from his
mind. This very liberal offer had been made to him. It amounted to wealth in lieu of poverty,--to
what would be comfortable wealth even for an earl. Ten thousand a year was offered to him by
his cousin. Might he accept it? The rector took the letter in good part, and begged his nephew
to come at once to Yoxham. Whereupon the nephew went to Yoxham.

"What does Sir William say?" asked the rector, who, in spite of his disapproval of all that
Sir William had done, felt that the Solicitor-General was the man whose influence in the matter
would really prevail.

"He has said nothing as yet. He is out of town."

"Ten thousand a year! Who was it made the offer?"

"She made it herself."

"Lady Anna?"

"Yes;--Lady Anna. It is a noble offer."

"Yes, indeed. But then if she has no right to any of it, what does it amount to?"

"But she has a right to all of it;--she and her mother between them."

"I shall never believe it, Frederic--never; and not the less so because they now want to bind
you to them by such a compromise as this."

"I think you look at it in a wrong light, uncle Charles."

"Well;--well. I will say nothing more about it. I don't see why you shouldn't take it,--I don't
indeed. It ought all to have been yours. Everybody says that. You'll have to buy land, and
it won't give you nearly so much then. I hope you'll buy land all the same, and I do hope it
will be properly settled when you marry. As to marrying, you will be able to do much better
than what you used to think of."

"We won't talk about that, uncle Charles," said the Earl.

As far as the rector's opinion went, it was clear that the offer might be accepted; but yet
it was felt that very much must depend on what the Solicitor-General might say. Then Miss Lovel
gave her opinion on the matter, which did not altogether agree with that of her brother. She
believed in Lady Anna, whereas the rector professed that he did not. The rector and Lady Fitzwarren
were perhaps the only two persons who, after all that had been said and done, still maintained
that the Countess was an impostor, and that Lady Anna would only be Anna Murray, if everybody
had his due. Miss Lovel was quite as anxious on behalf of the Earl as was her brother, but
she clung to the hope of a marriage. "I still think it might all come right, if you would only
wait," said aunt Julia.

"It's all very well talking of waiting, but how am I to live?"

"You could live here, Frederic. There is nothing my brother would like so much. I thought he
would break his heart when the horses were taken away. It would only be for a year."

"What would come of it?"

"At the end of the year she would be your wife."

"Never!" said the Earl.

"Young men are so impatient."

"Never, under any circumstances, would I ask her again. You may make your mind up to that.
As sure as you stand there, she will marry Daniel Thwaite, if she lives another twelvemonth."

"You really think so, Frederic?"

"I am sure of it. After what she said to me, it would be impossible I should doubt it."

"And she will be Lady Anna Thwaite! Oh dear, how horrible. I wish she had died when she was
ill;--I do indeed. A journeyman tailor! But something will prevent it. I really think that
Providence will interfere to prevent it!" But in reference to the money she gave in her adhesion.
If the great lawyer said that it might be taken,--then it should be taken. At the end of a
week the Earl hurried back to London to see the great lawyer.

CHAPTER XL.

NO DISGRACE AT ALL.

Before the Solicitor-General returned to town things had come to a worse pass than ever. Lady
Lovel had ordered her daughter to be ready to start to Paris by a certain hour, on a certain
day,--giving her three days for preparation,--and Lady Anna had refused to go. Whereupon the
Countess had caused her own things to be packed up, and those of her daughter. Sarah was now
altogether in the confidence of the Countess, so that Lady Anna had not even dominion over
her own clothes. The things were stowed away, and all the arrangements were made for the journey;
but Lady Anna refused to go, and when the hour came could not be induced to get into the carriage.
The lodgings had been paid for to the day, and given up; so that the poor old woman in Keppel
Street was beside herself. Then the Countess, of necessity, postponed her journey for twenty-four
hours, telling her daughter that on the next day she would procure the assistance of magistrates
and force the rebel to obedience.

Hardly a word had been spoken between the mother and daughter during those three days. There
had been messages sent backwards and forwards, and once or twice the Countess had violently
entered Lady Anna's bedroom, demanding submission. Lady Anna was always on the bed when her
mother entered, and, there lying, would shake her head, and then with sobs accuse the Countess
of unkindness. Lady Lovel had become furious in her wrath, hardly knowing what she herself
did or said, always asserting her own authority, declaring her own power, and exclaiming against
the wicked ingratitude of her child. This she did till the young waiting-woman was so frightened
that she was almost determined to leave the house abruptly, though keenly alive to the profit
and glory of serving a violent and rich countess. And the old lady who let the lodgings was
intensely anxious to be rid of her lodgers, though her money was scrupulously paid, and no
questions asked as to extra charges. Lady Anna was silent and sullen. When left to herself
she spent her time at her writing-desk, of which she had managed to keep the key. What meals
she took were brought up to her bedroom, so that a household more uncomfortable could hardly
be gathered under a roof.

On the day fixed for that departure which did not take place, the Countess wrote to Mr. Goffe
for assistance,--and Lady Anna, by the aid of the mistress of the house, wrote to Serjeant
Bluestone. The letter to Mr. Goffe was the first step taken towards obtaining that assistance
from civil authorities to which the Countess thought herself to be entitled in order that her
legal dominion over her daughter might be enforced. Lady Anna wrote to the Serjeant, simply
begging that he would come to see her, putting her letter open into the hands of the landlady.
She implored him to come at once,--and, as it happened, he called in Keppel Street that night,
whereas Mr. Goffe's visit was not made till the next morning. He asked for the Countess, and
was shown into the drawing-room. The whole truth was soon made clear to him, for the Countess
attempted to conceal nothing. Her child was rebelling against authority, and she was sure that
the Serjeant would assist her in putting down and conquering such pernicious obstinacy. But
she found at once that the Serjeant would not help her. "But Lady Anna will be herself of age
in a day or two," he said.

"Not for nearly two months," said the Countess indignantly.

"My dear Lady Lovel, under such circumstances you can hardly put constraint upon her."

"Why not? She is of age, or she is not. Till she be of age she is bound to obey me."

"True;--she is bound to obey you after a fashion, and so indeed she would be had she been of
age a month since. But such obligations here in England go for very little, unless they are
supported by reason."

"The law is the law."

"Yes;--but the law would be all in her favour before you could get it to assist you,--even
if you could get its assistance. In her peculiar position, it is rational that she should choose
to wait till she be able to act for herself. Very great interests will be at her disposal,
and she will of course wish to be near those who can advise her."

"I am her only guardian. I can advise her." The Serjeant shook his head. "You will not help
me then?"

"I fear I cannot help you, Lady Lovel."

"Not though you know the reasons which induce me to take her away from England before she slips
entirely out of my hands and ruins all our hopes?" But still the Serjeant shook his head. "Every
one is leagued against me," said the Countess, throwing up her hands in despair.

Then the Serjeant asked permission to visit Lady Anna, but was told that he could not be allowed
to do so. She was in bed, and there was nothing to make it necessary that she should receive
a visit from a gentleman in her bedroom. "I am an old man," said the Serjeant, "and have endeavoured
to be a true and honest friend to the young lady. I think, Lady Lovel, that you will do wrong
to refuse my request. I tell you fairly that I shall be bound to interfere on her behalf. She
has applied to me as her friend, and I feel myself constrained to attend to her application."

"She has applied to you?"

"Yes, Lady Lovel. There is her letter."

"She has deceived me again," said the Countess, tearing the letter into atoms. But the Serjeant
so far frightened her that she was induced to promise that Mrs. Bluestone should see Lady Anna
on the following morning,--stipulating, however, that Mrs. Bluestone should see herself before
she went up-stairs.

On the following morning Mr. Goffe came early. But Mr. Goffe could give his client very little
comfort. He was, however, less uncomfortable than the Serjeant had been. He was of opinion
that Lady Anna certainly ought to go abroad, in obedience to her mother's instructions, and
was willing to go to her and tell her so, with what solemnity of legal authority he might be
able to assume; but he could not say that anything could be done absolutely to enforce obedience.
Mr. Goffe suggested that perhaps a few gentle words might be successful. "Gentle words!" said
the Countess, who had become quite unable to restrain herself. "The harshest words are only
too gentle for her. If I had known what she was, Mr. Goffe, I would never have stirred in this
business. They might have called me what they would, and it would have been better." When Mr.
Goffe came downstairs he had not a word to say more as to the efficacy of gentleness. He simply
remarked that he did not think the young lady could be induced to go, and suggested that everybody
had better wait till the Solicitor-General returned to town.

Then Mrs. Bluestone came, almost on the heels of the attorney;--poor Mrs. Bluestone, who now
felt that it was a dreadful grievance both to her and to her husband that they had had anything
to do with the Lovel family! She was very formal in her manner,--and, to tell the truth for
her, rather frightened. The Serjeant had asked her to call and see Lady Anna Lovel. Might she
be permitted to do so? Then the Countess burst forth with a long story of all her wrongs,--with
the history of her whole life. Not beginning with her marriage,--but working back to it from
the intense misery, and equally intense ambition of the present hour. She told it all; how
everybody had been against her,--how she had been all alone at the dreary Grange in Westmoreland,--how
she had been betrayed by her husband, and turned out to poverty and scorn;--how she had borne
it all for the sake of the one child who was, by God's laws and man's, the heiress to her father's
name; how she had persevered,--intermingling it all with a certain worship of high honours
and hereditary position with which Mrs. Bluestone was able in some degree to sympathise. She
was clever, and words came to her freely. It was almost impossible that any hearer should refuse
to sympathise with her,--any hearer who knew that her words were true. And all that she told
was true. The things which she narrated had been done;--the wrongs had been endured;--and the
end of it all which she feared, was imminent. And the hearer thought as did the speaker as
to the baseness of this marriage with the tailor,--thought as did the speaker of the excellence
of the marriage with the lord. But still there was something in the woman's eye,--something
in the tone of her voice, something in the very motion of her hands as she told her story,
which made Mrs. Bluestone feel that Lady Anna should not be left under her mother's control.
It would be very well that the Lovel family should be supported, and that Lady Anna should
be kept within the pale of her own rank. But there might be things worse than Lady Anna's defection,--and
worse even than the very downfall of the Lovels.

After sitting for nearly two hours with the Countess, Mrs. Bluestone was taken up-stairs. "Mrs.
Bluestone has come to see you," said the Countess, not entering the room, and retreating again
immediately as she closed the door.

"This is very kind of you, Mrs. Bluestone," said Lady Anna, who was sitting crouching in her
dressing-gown over the fire. "But I thought that perhaps the Serjeant would come." The lady,
taken off her guard, immediately said that the Serjeant had been there on the preceding evening.
"And mamma would not let me see him! But you will help me!"

In this interview, as in that below, a long history was told to the visitor, and was told with
an eloquent energy which she certainly had not expected. "They talk to me of ladies," said
Lady Anna. "I was not a lady. I knew nothing of ladies and their doings. I was a poor girl,
friendless but for my mother, sometimes almost without shoes to my feet, often ragged, solitary,
knowing nothing of ladies. Then there came one lad, who played with me;--and it was mamma who
brought us together. He was good to me, when all others were bad. He played with me, and gave
me things, and taught me,--and loved me. Then when he asked me to love him again, and to love
him always, was I to think that I could not,--because I was a lady! You despise him because
he is a tailor. A tailor was good to me, when no one else was good. How could I despise him
because he was a tailor? I did not despise him, but I loved him with all my heart."

"But when you came to know who you were, Lady Anna--"

"Yes;--yes. I came to know who I was, and they brought my cousin to me, and told me to love
him, and bade me be a lady indeed. I felt it too, for a time. I thought it would be pleasant
to be a Countess, and to go among great people; and he was pleasant, and I thought that I could
love him too, and do as they bade me. But when I thought of it much,--when I thought of it
alone,--I hated myself. In my heart of hearts I loved him who had always been my friend. And
when Lord Lovel came to me at Bolton, and said that I must give my answer then,--I told him
all the truth. I am glad I told him the truth. He should not have come again after that. If
Daniel is so poor a creature because he is a tailor,--must not I be poor who love him? And
what must he be when he comes to me again after that?"

When Mrs. Bluestone descended from the room she was quite sure that the girl would become Lady
Anna Thwaite, and told the Countess that such was her opinion. "By the God above me," said
the Countess rising from her chair;--"by the God above me, she never shall." But after that
the Countess gave up her project of forcing her daughter to go abroad. The old lady of the
house was told that the rooms would still be required for some weeks to come,--perhaps for
months; and having had a conference on the subject with Mrs. Bluestone, did not refuse her consent.

At last Sir William returned to town, and was besieged on all sides, as though in his hands
lay the power of deciding what should become of all the Lovel family. Mr. Goffe was as confidential
with him as Mr. Flick, and even Serjeant Bluestone condescended to appeal to him. The young
Earl was closeted with him on the day of his return, and he had found on his desk the following
note from the Countess;--

"The Countess Lovel presents her compliments to the Solicitor-General. The Countess is very
anxious to leave England with her daughter, but has hitherto been prevented by her child's
obstinacy. Sir William Patterson is so well aware of all the circumstances that he no doubt
can give the Countess advice as to the manner in which she should proceed to enforce the obedience
of her daughter. The Countess Lovel would feel herself unwarranted in thus trespassing on the
Solicitor-General, were it not that it is her chief anxiety to do everything for the good of
Earl Lovel and the family."

"Look at that, my lord," said the Solicitor-General, showing the Earl the letter. "I can do
nothing for her."

"What does she want to have done?"

"She wants to carry her daughter away beyond the reach of Mr. Thwaite. I am not a bit surprised;
but she can't do it. The days are gone by when a mother could lock her daughter up, or carry
her away,--at any rate in this country."

"It is very sad."

"It might have been much worse. Why should she not marry Mr. Thwaite? Let them make the settlement
as they propose, and then let the young lady have her way. She will have her way,--whether
her mother lets her or no."

"It will be a disgrace to the family, Sir William."

"No disgrace at all! How many peers' daughters marry commoners in England. It is not with us
as it is with some German countries in which noble blood is separated as by a barrier from
blood that is not noble. The man I am told is clever and honest. He will have great means at
his command, and I do not see why he should not make as good a gentleman as the best of us.
At any rate she must not be persecuted."

Sir William answered the Countess's letter as a matter of course, but there was no comfort
in his answer. "The Solicitor-General presents his compliments to the Countess Lovel. With
all the will in the world to be of service, he fears that he can do no good by interfering
between the Countess and Lady Anna Lovel. If, however, he may venture to give advice, he would
suggest to the Countess that as Lady Anna will be of age in a short time, no attempt should
now be made to exercise a control which must cease when that time shall arrive." "They are
all joined against me," said the Countess, when she read the letter;--"every one of them! But
still it shall never be. I will not live to see it."

Then there was a meeting between Mr. Flick and Sir William. Mr. Flick must inform the ladies
that nothing could be done till Lady Anna was of age;--that not even could any instructions
be taken from her before that time as to what should subsequently be done. If, when that time
came, she should still be of a mind to share with her cousin the property, she could then instruct
Mr. Goffe to make out the necessary deeds.

All this was communicated by letter to the Countess, but Mr. Goffe especially requested that
the letter might be shown to Lady Anna, and that he might receive a reply intimating that Lady
Anna understood its purport. If necessary he would call upon Lady Anna in Keppel Street. After
some delay and much consideration, the Countess sent the attorney's letter to her daughter,
and Lady Anna herself wrote a reply. She perfectly understood the purport of Mr. Goffe's letter,
and would thank Mr. Goffe to call upon her on the 10th of May, when the matter might, she hoped,
be settled.

CHAPTER XLI.

NEARER AND NEARER.

So they went on living in utter misery till the month of May had come round, and Lady Anna
was at last pronounced to be convalescent.

Late one night, long after midnight, the Countess crept into her daughter's room and sat down
by the bedside. Lady Anna was asleep, and the Countess sat there and watched. At this time
the girl had passed her birthday, and was of age. Mr. Goffe had been closeted with her and
with her mother for two mornings running, Sir William Patterson had also been with them, and
instructions had been given as to the property, upon which action was to be at once taken.
Of that proportion of the estate which fell to Lady Anna, one entire moiety was to be made
over to the Earl. While this was being arranged no word was said as to Daniel Thwaite, or as
to the marriage with the lord. The settlement was made as though it were a thing of itself;
and they all had been much surprised,--the mother, the Solicitor-General, and the attorney,--at
the determination of purpose and full comprehension of the whole affair which Lady Anna displayed.
When it came to the absolute doing of the matter,--the abandonment of all this money,--the
Countess became uneasy and discontented. She also had wished that Lord Lovel should have the
property,--but her wish had been founded on a certain object to be attained, which object was
now farther from her than ever. But the property in question was not hers, but her daughter's,
and she made no loud objection to the proceeding. The instructions were given, and the deeds
were to be forthcoming some time before the end of the month.

It was on the night of the 11th of May that the Countess sat at her child's bedside. She had
brought up a taper with her, and there she sat watching the sleeping girl. Thoughts wondrously
at variance with each other, and feelings thoroughly antagonistic, ran through her brain and
heart. This was her only child,--the one thing that there was for her to love,--the only tie
to the world that she possessed. But for her girl, it would be good that she should be dead.
And if her girl should do this thing, which would make her life a burden to her,--how good
it would be for her to die! She did not fear to die, and she feared nothing after death;--but
with a coward's dread she did fear the torment of her failure if this girl should become the
wife of Daniel Thwaite. In such case most certainly would she never see the girl again,--and
life then would be all a blank to her. But she understood that though she should separate herself
from the world altogether, men would know of her failure, and would know that she was devouring
her own heart in the depth of her misery. If the girl would but have done as her mother had
proposed, would have followed after her kind, and taken herself to those pleasant paths which
had been opened for her, with what a fond caressing worship, with what infinite kisses and
blessings, would she, the mother, have tended the young Countess and assisted in making the
world bright for the high-born bride. But a tailor! Foh! What a degraded creature was her child
to cling to so base a love!

She did, however, acknowledge to herself that the girl's clinging was of a kind she had no
power to lessen. The ivy to its standard tree is not more loyal than was her daughter to this
wretched man. But the girl might die,--or the tailor might die,--or she, the miserable mother,
might die; and so this misery might be at an end. Nothing but death could end it. Thoughts
and dreams of other violence had crossed her brain,--of carrying the girl away, of secluding
her, of frightening her from day to day into some childish, half-idiotic submission. But for
that the tame obedience of the girl would have been necessary,--or that external assistance
which she had sought, in vain, to obtain among the lawyers. Such hopes were now gone, and nothing
remained but death.

Why had not the girl gone when she was so like to go? Why had she not died when it had seemed
to be God's pleasure to take her? A little indifference, some slight absence of careful tending,
any chance accident would have made that natural which was now,--which was now so desirable
and yet beyond reach! Yes;--so desirable! For whose sake could it be wished that a life so
degraded should be prolonged? But there could be no such escape. With her eyes fixed on vacancy,
revolving it in her mind, she thought that she could kill herself;--but she knew that she could
not kill her child.

But, should she destroy herself, there would be no vengeance in that. Could she be alone, far
out at sea, in some small skiff with that low-born tailor, and then pull out the plug, and
let him know what he had done to her as they both went down together beneath the water, that
would be such a cure of the evil as would now best suit her wishes. But there was no such sea,
and no such boat. Death, however, might still be within her grasp.

Then she laid her hand on the girl's shoulder, and Lady Anna awoke. "Oh, mamma;--is that you?"

"It is I, my child."

"Mamma, mamma; is anything the matter? Oh, mamma, kiss me." Then the Countess stooped down
and kissed the girl passionately. "Dear mamma,--dearest mamma!"

"Anna, will you do one thing for me? If I never speak to you of Lord Lovel again, will you
forget Daniel Thwaite?" She paused, but Lady Anna had no answer ready. "Will you not say as
much as that for me? Say that you will forget him till I am gone."

"Gone, mamma? You are not going!"

"Till I am dead. I shall not live long, Anna. Say at least that you will not see him or mention
his name for twelve months. Surely, Anna, you will do as much as that for a mother who has
done so much for you." But Lady Anna would make no promise. She turned her face to the pillow
and was dumb. "Answer me, my child. I may at least demand an answer."

"I will answer you to-morrow, mamma." Then the Countess fell on her knees at the bedside and
uttered a long, incoherent prayer, addressed partly to the God of heaven, and partly to the
poor girl who was lying there in bed, supplicating with mad, passionate eagerness that this
evil thing might be turned away from her. Then she seized the girl in her embrace and nearly
smothered her with kisses. "My own, my darling, my beauty, my all; save your mother from worse
than death, if you can;--if you can!"

Had such tenderness come sooner it might have had deeper effect. As it was, though the daughter
was affected and harassed,--though she was left panting with sobs and drowned in tears,--she
could not but remember the treatment she had suffered from her mother during the last six months.
Had the request for a year's delay come sooner, it would have been granted; but now it was
made after all measures of cruelty had failed. Ten times during the night did she say that
she would yield,--and ten times again did she tell herself that were she to yield now, she
would be a slave all her life. She had resolved,--whether right or wrong,--still, with a strong
mind and a great purpose, that she would not be turned from her way, and when she arose in
the morning she was resolved again. She went into her mother's room and at once declared her
purpose. "Mamma, it cannot be. I am his, and I must not forget him or be ashamed of his name;--no,
not for a day."

"Then go from me, thou ungrateful one, hard of heart, unnatural child, base, cruel, and polluted.
Go from me, if it be possible, for ever!"

Then did they live for some days separated for a second time, each taking her meals in her
own room; and Mrs. Richards, the owner of the lodgings, went again to Mrs. Bluestone, declaring
that she was afraid of what might happen, and that she must pray to be relieved from the presence
of the ladies. Mrs. Bluestone had to explain that the lodgings had been taken for the quarter,
and that a mother and daughter could not be put out into the street merely because they lived
on bad terms with each other. The old woman, as was natural, increased her bills;--but that
had no effect.

On the 15th of May Lady Anna wrote a note to Daniel Thwaite, and sent a copy of it to her mother
before she had posted it. It was in two lines;--

   DEAR DANIEL,

   Pray come and see me here. If you get this soon enough,
   pray come on Tuesday about one.

   Yours affectionately,

   ANNA.

"Tell mamma," said she to Sarah, "that I intend to go out and put that in the post to-day."
The letter was addressed to Wyndham Street. Now the Countess knew that Daniel Thwaite had left
Wyndham Street.

"Tell her," said the Countess, "tell her--; but, of what use to tell her anything? Let the
door be closed upon her. She shall never return to me any more." The message was given to Lady
Anna as she went forth:--but she posted the letter, and then called in Bedford Square. Mrs.
Bluestone returned with her to Keppel Street; but as the door was opened by Mrs. Richards,
and as no difficulty was made as to Lady Anna's entrance, Mrs. Bluestone returned home without
asking to see the Countess.

This happened on a Saturday, but when Tuesday came Daniel Thwaite did not come to Keppel Street.
The note was delivered in course of post at his old abode, and was redirected from Wyndham
Street late on Monday evening,--having no doubt given cause there for much curiosity and inspection.
Late on the Tuesday it did reach Daniel Thwaite's residence in Great Russell Street, but he
was then out, wandering about the streets as was his wont, telling himself of all the horrors
of an idle life, and thinking what steps he should take next as to the gaining of his bride.
He had known to a day when she was of age, and had determined that he would allow her one month
from thence before he would call upon her to say what should be their mutual fate. She had
reached that age but a few days, and now she had written to him herself.

On returning home he received the girl's letter, and when the early morning had come,--the
Wednesday morning, the day after that fixed by Lady Anna,--he made up his mind as to his course
of action. He breakfasted at eight, knowing how useless it would be to stir early, and then
called in Keppel Street, leaving word with Mrs. Richards herself that he would be there again
at one o'clock to see Lady Anna. "You can tell Lady Anna that I only got her note last night
very late." Then he went off to the hotel in Albemarle Street at which he knew that Lord Lovel
was living. It was something after nine when he reached the house, and the Earl was not yet
out of his bedroom. Daniel, however, sent up his name, and the Earl begged that he would go
into the sitting-room and wait. "Tell Mr. Thwaite that I will not keep him above a quarter
of an hour." Then the tailor was shown into the room where the breakfast things were laid,
and there he waited.

Within the last few weeks very much had been said to the Earl about Daniel Thwaite by many
people, and especially by the Solicitor-General. "You may be sure that she will become his
wife," Sir William had said, "and I would advise you to accept him as her husband. She is not
a girl such as we at first conceived her to be. She is firm of purpose, and very honest. Obstinate,
if you will, and,--if you will,--obstinate to a bad end. But she is generous, and let her marry
whom she will, you cannot cast her out. You will owe everything to her high sense of honour;--and
I am much mistaken if you will not owe much to him. Accept them both, and make the best of
them. In five years he'll be in Parliament as likely as not. In ten years he'll be Sir Daniel
Thwaite,--if he cares for it. And in fifteen years Lady Anna will be supposed by everybody
to have made a very happy marriage." Lord Lovel was at this time inclined to be submissive
in everything to his great adviser, and was now ready to take Mr. Daniel Thwaite by the hand.

He did take him by the hand as he entered the sitting-room, radiant from his bath, clad in
a short bright-coloured dressing-gown such as young men then wore o' mornings, with embroidered
slippers on his feet, and a smile on his face. "I have heard much of you, Mr. Thwaite," he
said, "and am glad to meet you at last. Pray sit down. I hope you have not breakfasted."

Poor Daniel was hardly equal to the occasion. The young lord had been to him always an enemy,--an
enemy because the lord had been the adversary of the Countess and her daughter, an enemy because
the lord was an earl and idle, an enemy because the lord was his rival. Though he now was nearly
sure that this last ground of enmity was at an end, and though he had come to the Earl for
certain purposes of his own, he could not bring himself to feel that there should be good fellowship
between them. He took the hand that was offered to him, but took it awkwardly, and sat down
as he was bidden. "Thank your lordship, but I breakfasted long since. If it will suit you,
I will walk about and call again."

"Not at all. I can eat, and you can talk to me. Take a cup of tea at any rate." The Earl rang
for another teacup, and began to butter his toast.

"I believe your lordship knows that I have long been engaged to marry your lordship's cousin,--Lady
Anna Lovel."

"Indeed I have been told so."

"By herself."

"Well;--yes; by herself."

"I have been allowed to see her but once during the last eight or nine months."

"That has not been my fault, Mr. Thwaite."

"I want you to understand, my lord, that it is not for her money that I have sought her."

"I have not accused you, surely."

"But I have been accused. I am going to see her now,--if I can get admittance to her. I shall
press her to fix a day for our marriage, and if she will do so, I shall leave no stone unturned
to accomplish it. She has a right to do with herself as she pleases, and no consideration shall
stop me but her wishes."

"I shall not interfere."

"I am glad of that, my lord."

"But I will not answer for her mother. You cannot be surprised, Mr. Thwaite, that Lady Lovel
should be averse to such a marriage."

"She was not averse to my father's company nor to mine a few years since;--no nor twelve months
since. But I say nothing about that. Let her be averse. We cannot help it. I have come to you
to say that I hope something may be done about the money before she becomes my wife. People
say that you should have it."

"Who says so?"

"I cannot say who;--perhaps everybody. Should every shilling of it be yours I should marry
her as willingly to-morrow. They have given me what is my own, and that is enough for me. For
what is now hers and, perhaps, should be yours, I will not interfere with it. When she is my
wife, I will guard for her and for those who may come after her what belongs to her then; but
as to what may be done before that, I care nothing."

On hearing this the Earl told him the whole story of the arrangement which was then in progress;--how
the property would in fact be divided into three parts, of which the Countess would have one,
he one, and Lady Anna one. "There will be enough for us all," said the Earl.

"And much more than enough for me," said Daniel as he got up to take his leave. "And now I
am going to Keppel Street."

"You have all my good wishes," said the Earl. The two men again shook hands;--again the lord
was radiant and good humoured;--and again the tailor was ashamed and almost sullen. He knew
that the young nobleman had behaved well to him, and it was a disappointment to him that any
nobleman should behave well.

Nevertheless as he walked away slowly towards Keppel Street,--for the time still hung on his
hands,--he began to feel that the great prize of prizes was coming nearer within his grasp.

CHAPTER XLII.

DANIEL THWAITE COMES TO KEPPEL STREET.

Even the Bluestones were now convinced that Lady Anna Lovel must be allowed to marry the Keswick
tailor, and that it would be expedient that no further impediment should be thrown in her way.
Mrs. Bluestone had been told, while walking to Keppel Street with the young lady, of the purport
of the letter and of the invitation given to Daniel Thwaite. The Serjeant at once declared
that the girl must have her own way,--and the Solicitor-General, who also heard of it, expressed
himself very strongly. It was absurd to oppose her. She was her own mistress. She had shown
herself competent to manage her own affairs. The Countess must be made to understand that she
had better yield at once with what best grace she could. Then it was that he made that prophecy
to the Earl as to the future success of the fortunate tailor, and then too he wrote at great
length to the Countess, urging many reasons why her daughter should be allowed to receive Mr.
Daniel Thwaite. "Your ladyship has succeeded in very much," wrote the Solicitor-General, "and
even in respect of this marriage you will have the satisfaction of feeling that the man is
in every way respectable and well-behaved. I hear that he is an educated man, with culture
much higher than is generally found in the state of life which he has till lately filled, and
that he is a man of high feeling and noble purpose. The manner in which he has been persistent
in his attachment to your daughter is in itself evidence of this. And I think that your ladyship
is bound to remember that the sphere of life in which he has hitherto been a labourer, would
not have been so humble in its nature had not the means which should have started him in the
world been applied to support and succour your own cause. I am well aware of your feelings
of warm gratitude to the father; but I think you should bear in mind, on the son's behalf,
that he has been what he has been because his father was so staunch a friend to your ladyship."
There was very much more of it, all expressing the opinion of Sir William that the Countess
should at once open her doors to Daniel Thwaite.

The reader need hardly be told that this was wormwood to the Countess. It did not in the least
touch her heart and had but little effect on her purpose. Gratitude;--yes! But if the whole
result of the exertion for which the receiver is bound to be grateful, is to be neutralised
by the greed of the conferrer of the favour,--if all is to be taken that has been given, and
much more also,--what ground will there be left for gratitude? If I save a man's purse from
a thief, and then demand for my work twice what that purse contained, the man had better have
been left with the robbers. But she was told, not only that she ought to accept the tailor
as a son-in-law, but also that she could not help herself. They should see whether she could
not help herself. They should be made to acknowledge that she at any rate was in earnest in
her endeavours to preserve pure and unspotted the honour of the family.

But what should she do? That she should put on a gala dress and a smiling face and be carried
off to church with a troop of lawyers and their wives to see her daughter become the bride
of a low journeyman, was of course out of the question. By no act, by no word, by no sign would
she give aught of a mother's authority to nuptials so disgraceful. Should her daughter become
Lady Anna Thwaite, they two, mother and daughter, would never see each other again. Of so much
at any rate she was sure. But could she be sure of nothing beyond that? She could at any rate
make an effort.

Then there came upon her a mad idea,--an idea which was itself evidence of insanity,--of the
glory which would be hers if by any means she could prevent the marriage. There would be a
halo round her name were she to perish in such a cause, let the destruction come upon her in
what form it might. She sat for hours meditating,--and at every pause in her thoughts she assured
herself that she could still make an effort.

She received Sir William's letter late on the Tuesday,--and during that night she did not lie
down or once fall asleep. The man, as she knew, had been told to come at one on that day, and
she had been prepared; but he did not come, and she then thought that the letter, which had
been addressed to his late residence, had failed to reach him. During the night she wrote a
very long answer to Sir William pleading her own cause, expatiating on her own feelings, and
palliating any desperate deed which she might be tempted to perform. But, when the letter had
been copied and folded, and duly sealed with the Lovel arms, she locked it in her desk, and
did not send it on its way even on the following morning. When the morning came, shortly after
eight o'clock, Mrs. Richards brought up the message which Daniel had left at the door. "Be
we to let him in, my lady?" said Mrs. Richards with supplicating hands upraised. Her sympathies
were all with Lady Anna, but she feared the Countess, and did not dare in such a matter to
act without the mother's sanction. The Countess begged the woman to come to her in an hour
for further instructions, and at the time named Mrs. Richards, full of the importance of her
work, divided between terror and pleasurable excitement, again toddled up-stairs. "Be we to
let him in, my lady? God, he knows it's hard upon the likes of me, who for the last three months
doesn't know whether I'm on my head or heels." The Countess very quietly requested that when
Mr. Thwaite should call he might be shown into the parlour.

"I will see Mr. Thwaite myself, Mrs. Richards; but it will be better that my daughter should
not be disturbed by any intimation of his coming."

Then there was a consultation below stairs as to what should be done. There had been many such
consultations, but they had all ended in favour of the Countess. Mrs. Richards from fear, and
the lady's-maid from favour, were disposed to assist the elder lady. Poor Lady Anna throughout
had been forced to fight her battles with no friend near her. Now she had many friends,--many
who were anxious to support her, even the Bluestones, who had been so hard upon her while she
was along with them;--but they who were now her friends were never near her to assist her with
a word.

So it came to pass that when Daniel Thwaite called at the house exactly at one o'clock Lady
Anna was not expecting him. On the previous day at that hour she had sat waiting with anxious
ears for the knock at the door which might announce his coming. But she had waited in vain.
From one to two,--even till seven in the evening, she had waited. But he had not come, and
she had feared that some scheme had been used against her. The people at the Post Office had
been bribed,--or the women in Wyndham Street had been false. But she would not be hindered.
She would go out alone and find him,--if he were to be found in London.

When he did come, she was not thinking of his coming. He was shown into the dining-room, and
within a minute afterwards the Countess entered with stately step. She was well dressed, even
to the adjustment of her hair; and she was a woman so changed that he would hardly have known
her as that dear and valued friend whose slightest word used to be a law to his father,--but
who in those days never seemed to waste a thought upon her attire. She had been out that morning
walking through the streets, and the blood had mounted to her cheeks He acknowledged to himself
that she looked like a noble and high-born dame. There was a fire in her eye, and a look of
scorn about her mouth and nostrils, which had even for him a certain fascination,--odious to
him as were the pretensions of the so-called great. She was the first to speak. "You have called
to see my daughter," she said.

"Yes, Lady Lovel,--I have."

"You cannot see her."

"I came at her request."

"I know you did, but you cannot see her. You can be hardly so ignorant of the ways of the world,
Mr. Thwaite, as to suppose that a young lady can receive what visitors she pleases without
the sanction of her guardians."

"Lady Anna Lovel has no guardian, my lady. She is of age, and is at present her own guardian."

"I am her mother, and shall exercise the authority of a mother over her. You cannot see her.
You had better go."

"I shall not be stopped in this way, Lady Lovel."

"Do you mean that you will force your way up to her? To do so you will have to trample over
me;--and there are constables in the street. You cannot see her. You had better go."

"Is she a prisoner?"

"That is between her and me, and is no affair of yours. You are intruding here, Mr. Thwaite,
and cannot possibly gain anything by your intrusion." Then she strode out in the passage, and
motioned him to the front door. "Mr. Thwaite, I will beg you to leave this house, which for
the present is mine. If you have any proper feeling you will not stay after I have told you
that you are not welcome."

But Lady Anna, though she had not expected the coming of her lover, had heard the sound of
voices, and then became aware that the man was below. As her mother was speaking she rushed
down-stairs and threw herself into her lover's arms. "It shall never be so in my presence,"
said the Countess, trying to drag the girl from his embrace by the shoulders.

"Anna;--my own Anna," said Daniel in an ecstacy of bliss. It was not only that his sweetheart
was his own, but that her spirit was so high.

"Daniel!" she said, still struggling in his arms.

By this time they were all in the parlour, whither the Countess had been satisfied to retreat
to escape the eyes of the women who clustered at the top of the kitchen stairs. "Daniel Thwaite,"
said the Countess, "if you do not leave this, the blood which will be shed shall rest on your
head," and so saying, she drew nigh to the window and pulled down the blind. She then crossed
over and did the same to the other blind, and having done so, took her place close to a heavy
upright desk, which stood between the fireplace and the window. When the two ladies first came
to the house they had occupied only the first and second floors;--but, since the success of
their cause, the whole had been taken, including the parlour in which this scene was being
acted; and the Countess spent many hours daily sitting at the heavy desk in this dark gloomy
chamber.

"Whose blood shall be shed?" said Lady Anna, turning to her mother.

"It is the raving of madness," said Daniel.

"Whether it be madness or not, you shall find, sir, that it is true. Take your hands from her.
Would you disgrace the child in the presence of her mother?"

"There is no disgrace, mamma. He is my own, and I am his. Why should you try to part us?"

But now they were parted. He was not a man to linger much over the sweetness of a caress when
sterner work was in his hands to be done. "Lady Lovel," he said, "you must see that this opposition
is fruitless. Ask your cousin, Lord Lovel, and he will tell you that it is so."

"I care nothing for my cousin. If he be false, I am true. Though all the world be false, still
will I be true. I do not ask her to marry her cousin. I simply demand that she shall relinquish
one who is infinitely beneath her,--who is unfit to tie her very shoe-string."

"He is my equal in all things," said Lady Anna, "and he shall be my lord and husband."

"I know of no inequalities such as those you speak of, Lady Lovel," said the tailor. "The excellence
of your daughter's merits I admit, and am almost disposed to claim some goodness for myself,
finding that one so good can love me. But, Lady Lovel, I do not wish to remain here now. You
are disturbed."

"I am disturbed, and you had better go."

"I will go at once if you will let me name some early day on which I may be allowed to meet
Lady Anna,--alone. And I tell her here that if she be not permitted so to see me, it will be
her duty to leave her mother's house, and come to me. There is my address, dear." Then he handed
to her a paper on which he had written the name of the street and number at which he was now
living. "You are free to come and go as you list, and if you will send to me there, I will
find you here or elsewhere as you may command me. It is but a short five minutes' walk beyond
the house at which you were staying in Bedford Square."

The Countess stood silent for a moment or two, looking at them, during which neither the girl
spoke nor her lover. "You will not even allow her six months to think of it?" said the Countess.
"I will allow her six years if she says that she requires time to think of it."

"I do not want an hour,--not a minute," said Lady Anna.

The mother flashed round upon her daughter. "Poor vain, degraded wretch," she said.

"She is a true woman, honest to the heart's core," said the lover.

"You shall come to-morrow," said the Countess. "Do you hear me, Anna?--he shall come to-morrow.
There shall be an end of this in some way, and I am broken-hearted. My life is over for me,
and I may as well lay me down and die. I hope God in his mercy may never send upon another
woman,--upon another wife, or another mother,--trouble such as that with which I have been
afflicted. But I tell you this, Anna; that what evil a husband can do,--even let him be evil-minded
as was your father,--is nothing,--nothing,--nothing to the cruelty of a cruel child. Go now,
Mr. Thwaite; if you please. If you will return at the same hour to-morrow she shall speak with
you--alone. And then she must do as she pleases."

"Anna, I will come again to-morrow," said the tailor. But Lady Anna did not answer him. She
did not speak, but stayed looking at him till he was gone.

"To-morrow shall end it all. I can stand this no longer. I have prayed to you,--a mother to
her daughter; I have prayed to you for mercy, and you will show me none. I have knelt to you."

"Mamma!"

"I will kneel again if it may avail." And the Countess did kneel. "Will you not spare me?"

"Get up, mamma; get up. What am I doing,--what have I done that you should speak to me like this?"

"I ask you from my very soul,--lest I commit some terrible crime. I have sworn that I would
not see this marriage,--and I will not see it."

"If he will consent I will delay it," said the girl trembling.

"Must I beg to him then? Must I kneel to him? Must I ask him to save me from the wrath to come?
No, my child, I will not do that. If it must come, let it come. When you were a little thing
at my knees, the gentlest babe that ever mother kissed, I did not think that you would live
to be so hard to me. You have your mother's brow, my child, but you have your father's heart."

"I will ask him to delay it," said Anna.

"No;--if it be to come to that I will have no dealings with you. What; that he,--he who has
come between me and all my peace, he who with his pretended friendship has robbed me of my
all, that he is to be asked to grant me a few weeks' delay before this pollution comes upon
me,--during which the whole world will know that Lady Anna Lovel is to be the tailor's wife!
Leave me. When he comes to-morrow, you shall be sent for;--but I will see him first. Leave
me, now. I would be alone."

Lady Anna made an attempt to take her mother's hand, but the Countess repulsed her rudely.
"Oh, mamma!"

"We must be bitter enemies or loving friends, my child. As it is we are bitter enemies; yes,
the bitterest. Leave me now. There is no room for further words between us." Then Lady Anna
slunk up to her own room.

CHAPTER XLIII.

DANIEL THWAITE COMES AGAIN.

The Countess Lovel had prepared herself on that morning for the doing of a deed, but her heart
had failed her. How she might have carried herself through it had not her daughter came down
to them,--how far she might have been able to persevere, cannot be said now. But it was certain
that she had so far relented that even while the hated man was there in her presence, she determined
that she would once again submit herself to make entreaties to her child, once again to speak
of all that she had endured, and to pray at least for delay if nothing else could be accorded
to her. If her girl would but promise to remain with her for six months, then they might go
abroad,--and the chances afforded them by time and distance would be before her. In that case
she would lavish such love upon the girl, so many indulgences, such sweets of wealth and ease,
such store of caresses and soft luxury, that surely the young heart might thus be turned to
the things which were fit for rank, and high blood, and splendid possessions. It could not
be but that her own child,--the child who a few months since had been as gentle with her and
as obedient as an infant,--should give way to her as far as that. She tried it, and her daughter
had referred her prayer,--or had said that she would refer it,--to the decision of her hated
lover; and the mother had at once lost all command of her temper. She had become fierce,--nay,
ferocious; and had lacked the guile and the self-command necessary to carry out her purpose.
Had she persevered Lady Anna must have granted her the small boon that she then asked. But
she had given way to her wrath, and had declared that her daughter was her bitterest enemy.
As she seated herself at the old desk where Lady Anna left her, she swore within her own bosom
that the deed must be done.

Even at the moment when she was resolving that she would kneel once more at her daughter's
knees, she prepared herself for the work that she must do, should the daughter still be as
hard as stone to her. "Come again at one to-morrow," she said to the tailor; and the tailor
said that he would come.

When she was alone she seated herself on her accustomed chair and opened the old desk with
a key that had now become familiar to her hand. It was a huge piece of furniture,--such as
is never made in these days, but is found among every congregation of old household goods,--with
numberless drawers clustering below, with a vast body, full of receptacles for bills, wills,
deeds, and waste-paper, and a tower of shelves above, ascending almost to the ceiling. In the
centre of the centre body was a square compartment, but this had been left unlocked, so that
its contents might be ready to her hand. Now she opened it and took from it a pistol; and,
looking warily over her shoulder to see that the door was closed, and cautiously up at the
windows, lest some eye might be spying her action even through the thick blinds, she took the
weapon in her hand and held it up so that she might feel, if possible, how it would be with
her when she should attempt the deed. She looked very narrowly at the lock, of which the trigger
was already back at its place, so that no exertion of arrangement might be necessary for her
at the fatal moment. Never as yet had she fired a pistol;--never before had she held such a
weapon in her hand;--but she thought that she could do it when her passion ran high.

Then for the twentieth time she asked herself whether it would not be easier to turn it against
her own bosom,--against her own brain; so that all might be over at once. Ah, yes;--so much
easier! But how then would it be with this man who had driven her, by his subtle courage and
persistent audacity, to utter destruction? Could he and she be made to go down together in
that boat which her fancy had built for them, then indeed it might be well that she should
seek her own death. But were she now to destroy herself,--herself and only herself,--then would
her enemy be left to enjoy his rich prize, a prize only the richer because she would have disappeared
from the world! And of her, if such had been her last deed, men would only say that the mad
Countess had gone on in her madness. With looks of sad solemnity, but heartfelt satisfaction,
all the Lovels, and that wretched tailor, and her own daughter, would bestow some mock grief
on her funeral, and there would be an end for ever of Josephine Countess Lovel,--and no one
would remember her, or her deeds, or her sufferings. When she wandered out from the house on
that morning, after hearing that Daniel Thwaite would be there at one, and had walked nearly
into the mid city so that she might not be watched, and had bought her pistol and powder and
bullets, and had then with patience gone to work and taught herself how to prepare the weapon
for use, she certainly had not intended simply to make the triumph of her enemy more easy.

And yet she knew well what was the penalty of murder, and she knew also that there could be
no chance of escape. Very often had she turned it in her mind, whether she could not destroy
the man so that the hand of the destroyer might be hidden. But it could not be so. She could
not dog him in the streets. She could not get at him in his meals to poison him. She could
not creep to his bedside and strangle him in the silent watches of the night. And this woman's
heart, even while from day to day she was meditating murder,--while she was telling herself
that it would be a worthy deed to cut off from life one whose life was a bar to her own success,--even
then revolted from the shrinking stealthy step, from the low cowardice of the hidden murderer.
To look him in the face and then to slay him,--when no escape for herself would be possible,
that would have in it something that was almost noble; something at any rate bold,--something
that would not shame her. They would hang her for such a deed! Let them do so. It was not hanging
that she feared, but the tongues of those who should speak of her when she was gone. They should
not speak of her as one who had utterly failed. They should tell of a woman who, cruelly misused
throughout her life, maligned, scorned, and tortured, robbed of her own, neglected by her kindred,
deserted and damned by her husband, had still struggled through it all till she had proved
herself to be that which it was her right to call herself;--of a woman who, though thwarted
in her ambition by her own child, and cheated of her triumph at the very moment of her success,
had dared rather to face an ignominious death than see all her efforts frustrated by the maudlin
fancy of a girl. Yes! She would face it all. Let them do what they would with her. She hardly
knew what might be the mode of death adjudged to a Countess who had murdered. Let them kill
her as they would, they would kill a Countess;--and the whole world would know her story.

That day and night were very dreadful to her. She never asked a question about her daughter.
They had brought her food to her in that lonely parlour, and she hardly heeded them as they
laid the things before her, and then removed them. Again and again did she unlock the old desk,
and see that the weapon was ready to her hand. Then she opened that letter to Sir William Patterson,
and added a postscript to it. "What I have since done will explain everything." That was all
she added, and on the following morning, about noon, she put the letter on the mantelshelf.
Late at night she took herself to bed, and was surprised to find that she slept. The key of
the old desk was under her pillow, and she placed her hand on it the moment that she awoke.
On leaving her own room she stood for a moment at her daughter's door. It might be, if she
killed the man, that she would never see her child again. At that moment she was tempted to
rush into her daughter's room, to throw herself upon her daughter's bed, and once again to
beg for mercy and grace. She listened, and she knew that her daughter slept. Then she went
silently down to the dark room and the old desk. Of what use would it be to abase herself?
Her daughter was the only thing that she could love; but her daughter's heart was filled with
the image of that low-born artisan.

"Is Lady Anna up?" she asked the maid about ten o'clock.

"Yes, my lady; she is breakfasting now."

"Tell her that when--when Mr. Thwaite comes, I will send for her as soon as I wish to see her."

"I think Lady Anna understands that already, my lady."

"Tell her what I say."

"Yes, my lady. I will, my lady." Then the Countess spoke no further word till, punctually at
one o'clock, Daniel Thwaite was shown into the room. "You keep your time, Mr. Thwaite," she said.

"Working men should always do that, Lady Lovel," he replied, as though anxious to irritate
her by reminding her how humble was the man who could aspire to be the son-in-law of a Countess.

"All men should do so, I presume. I also am punctual. Well sir;--have you anything else to say?"

"Much to say,--to your daughter, Lady Lovel."

"I do not know that you will ever see my daughter again."

"Do you mean to say that she has been taken away from this?" The Countess was silent, but moved
away from the spot on which she stood to receive him towards the old desk, which stood open,--with
the door of the centre space just ajar. "If it be so, you have deceived me most grossly, Lady
Lovel. But it can avail you nothing, for I know that she will be true to me. Do you tell me
that she has been removed?"

"I have told you no such thing."

"Bid her come then,--as you promised me."

"I have a word to say to you first. What if she should refuse to come?"

"I do not believe that she will refuse. You yourself heard what she said yesterday. All earth
and all heaven should not make me doubt her, and certainly not your word, Lady Lovel. You know
how it is, and you know how it must be."

"Yes,--I do; I do; I do." She was facing him with her back to the window, and she put forth
her left hand upon the open desk, and thrust it forward as though to open the square door which
stood ajar;--but he did not notice her hand; he had his eye fixed upon her, and suspected only
deceit,--not violence. "Yes, I know how it must be," she said, while her fingers approached
nearer to the little door.

"Then let her come to me."

"Will nothing turn you from it?"

"Nothing will turn me from it."

Then suddenly she withdrew her hand and confronted him more closely. "Mine has been a hard
life, Mr. Thwaite;--no life could have been harder. But I have always had something before
me for which to long, and for which to hope;--something which I might reach if justice should
at length prevail."

"You have got money and rank."

"They are nothing--nothing. In all those many years, the thing that I have looked for has been
the splendour and glory of another, and the satisfaction I might feel in having bestowed upon
her all that she owned. Do you think that I will stand by, after such a struggle, and see you
rob me of it all,--you,--you, who were one of the tools which came to my hand to work with?
From what you know of me, do you think that my spirit could stoop so low? Answer me, if you
have ever thought of that. Let the eagles alone, and do not force yourself into our nest. You
will find, if you do, that you will be rent to pieces."

"This is nothing, Lady Lovel. I came here,--at your bidding, to see your daughter. Let me see her."

"You will not go?"

"Certainly I will not go."

She looked at him as she slowly receded to her former standing-ground, but he never for a moment
suspected the nature of her purpose. He began to think that some actual insanity had befallen
her, and was doubtful how he should act. But no fear of personal violence affected him. He
was merely questioning with himself whether it would not be well for him to walk up-stairs
into the upper room, and seek Lady Anna there, as he stood watching the motion of her eyes.

"You had better go," said she, as she again put her left hand on the flat board of the open desk.

"You trifle with me, Lady Lovel," he answered. "As you will not allow Lady Anna to come to
me here, I will go to her elsewhere. I do not doubt but that I shall find her in the house."
Then he turned to the door, intending to leave the room. He had been very near to her while
they were talking, so that he had some paces to traverse before he could put his hand upon
the lock,--but in doing so his back was turned on her. In one respect it was better for her
purpose that it should be so. She could open the door of the compartment and put her hand upon
the pistol without having his eye upon her. But, as it seemed to her at the moment, the chance
of bringing her purpose to its intended conclusion was less than it would have been had she
been able to fire at his face. She had let the moment go by,--the first moment,--when he was
close to her, and now there would be half the room between them. But she was very quick. She
seized the pistol, and, transferring it to her right hand, she rushed after him, and when the
door was already half open she pulled the trigger. In the agony of that moment she heard no
sound, though she saw the flash. She saw him shrink and pass the door, which he left unclosed,
and then she heard a scuffle in the passage, as though he had fallen against the wall. She
had provided herself especially with a second barrel,--but that was now absolutely useless
to her. There was no power left to her wherewith to follow him and complete the work which
she had begun. She did not think that she had killed him, though she was sure that he was struck.
She did not believe that she had accomplished anything of her wishes,--but had she held in
her hand a six-barrelled revolver, as of the present day, she could have done no more with
it. She was overwhelmed with so great a tremor at her own violence that she was almost incapable
of moving. She stood glaring at the door, listening for what should come, and the moments seemed
to be hours. But she heard no sound whatever. A minute passed away perhaps, and the man did
not move. She looked around as if seeking some way of escape,--as though, were it possible,
she would get to the street through the window. There was no mode of escape, unless she would
pass out through the door to the man who, as she knew, must still be there. Then she heard
him move. She heard him rise,--from what posture she knew not, and step towards the stairs.
She was still standing with the pistol in her hand, but was almost unconscious that she held
it. At last her eye glanced upon it, and she was aware that she was still armed. Should she
rush after him, and try what she could do with that other bullet? The thought crossed her mind,
but she knew that she could do nothing. Had all the Lovels depended upon it, she could not
have drawn that other trigger. She took the pistol, put it back into its former hiding-place,
mechanically locked the little door, and then seated herself in her chair.

CHAPTER XLIV.

THE ATTEMPT AND NOT THE DEED CONFOUNDS US.

The tailor's hand was on the lock of the door when he first saw the flash of the fire, and
then felt that he was wounded. Though his back was turned to the woman he distinctly saw the
flash, but he never could remember that he had heard the report. He knew nothing of the nature
of the injury he had received, and was hardly aware of the place in which he had been struck,
when he half closed the door behind him and then staggered against the opposite wall. For a
moment he was sick, almost to fainting, but yet he did not believe that he had been grievously
hurt. He was, however, disabled, weak, and almost incapable of any action. He seated himself
on the lowest stair, and began to think. The woman had intended to murder him! She had lured
him there with the premeditated intention of destroying him! And this was the mother of his
bride,--the woman whom he intended to call his mother-in-law! He was not dead, nor did he believe
that he was like to die; but had she killed him,--what must have been the fate of the murderess!
As it was, would it not be necessary that she should be handed over to the law, and dealt with
for the offence? He did not know that they might not even hang her for the attempt.

He said afterwards that he thought that he sat there for a quarter of an hour. Three minutes,
however, had not passed before Mrs. Richards, ascending from the kitchen, found him upon the
stairs. "What is it, Mr. Thwaite?" said she.

"Is anything the matter?" he asked with a faint smile.

"The place is full of smoke," she said, "and there is a smell of gunpowder."

"There is no harm done at any rate," he answered.

"I thought I heard a something go off," said Sarah, who was behind Mrs. Richards.

"Did you?" said he. "I heard nothing; but there certainly is a smoke," and he still smiled.

"What are you sitting there for, Mr. Thwaite?" asked Mrs. Richards.

"You ain't no business to sit there, Mr. Thwaite," said Sarah.

"You've been and done something to the Countess," said Mrs. Richards.

"The Countess is all right. I'm going up-stairs to see Lady Anna;--that's all. But I've hurt
myself a little. I'm bad in my left shoulder, and I sat down just to get a rest." As he spoke
he was still smiling.

Then the woman looked at him and saw that he was very pale. At that instant he was in great
pain, though he felt that as the sense of intense sickness was leaving him he would be able
to go up-stairs and say a word or two to his sweetheart, should he find her. "You ain't just
as you ought to be, Mr. Thwaite," said Mrs. Richards. He was very haggard, and perspiration
was on his brow, and she thought that he had been drinking.

"I am well enough," said he rising,--"only that I am much troubled by a hurt in my arm. At
any rate I will go up-stairs." Then he mounted slowly, leaving the two women standing in the
passage.

Mrs. Richards gently opened the parlour door, and entered the room, which was still reeking
with smoke and the smell of the powder, and there she found the Countess seated at the old
desk, but with her body and face turned round towards the door. "Is anything the matter, my
lady?" asked the woman.

"Where has he gone?"

"Mr. Thwaite has just stepped up-stairs,--this moment. He was very queer like, my lady."

"Is he hurt?"

"We think he's been drinking, my lady," said Sarah.

"He says that his shoulder is ever so bad," said Mrs. Richards.

Then for the first time it occurred to the Countess that perhaps the deed which she had done,--the
attempt in which she had failed,--might never be known. Instinctively she had hidden the pistol
and had locked the little door, and concealed the key within her bosom as soon as she was alone.
Then she thought that she would open the window; but she had been afraid to move, and she had
sat there waiting while she heard the sound of voices in the passage. "Oh,--his shoulder!"
said she. "No,--he has not been drinking. He never drinks. He has been very violent, but he
never drinks. Well,--why do you wait?"

"There is such a smell of something," said Mrs. Richards.

"Yes;--you had better open the windows. There was an accident. Thank you;--that will do."

"And is he to be alone,--with Lady Anna, up-stairs?" asked the maid.

"He is to be alone with her. How can I help it? If she chooses to be a scullion she must follow
her bent. I have done all I could. Why do you wait? I tell you that he is to be with her. Go
away, and leave me." Then they went and left her, wondering much, but guessing nothing of the
truth. She watched them till they had closed the door, and then instantly opened the other
window wide. It was now May, but the weather was still cold. There had been rain the night
before, and it had been showery all the morning. She had come in from her walk damp and chilled,
and there was a fire in the grate. But she cared nothing for the weather. Looking round the
room she saw a morsel of wadding near the floor, and she instantly burned it. She longed to
look at the pistol, but she did not dare to take it from its hiding-place lest she should be
discovered in the act. Every energy of her mind was now strained to the effort of avoiding
detection. Should he choose to tell what had been done, then, indeed, all would be over. But
had he not resolved to be silent he would hardly have borne the agony of the wound and gone
up-stairs without speaking of it. She almost forgot now the misery of the last year in the
intensity of her desire to escape the disgrace of punishment. A sudden nervousness, a desire
to do something by which she might help to preserve herself, seized upon her. But there was
nothing which she could do. She could not follow him lest he should accuse her to her face.
It would be vain for her to leave the house till he should have gone. Should she do so, she
knew that she would not dare return to it. So she sat, thinking, dreaming, plotting, crushed
by an agony of fear, looking anxiously at the door, listening for every footfall within the
house; and she watched too for the well-known click of the area gate, dreading lest any one
should go out to seek the intervention of the constables.

In the meantime Daniel Thwaite had gone up-stairs, and had knocked at the drawing-room door.
It was instantly opened by Lady Anna herself. "I heard you come;--what a time you have been
here!--I thought that I should never see you." As she spoke she stood close to him that he
might embrace her. But the pain of his wound affected his whole body, and he felt that he could
hardly raise even his right arm. He was aware now that the bullet had entered his back, somewhere
on his left shoulder. "Oh, Daniel;--are you ill?" she said, looking at him.

"Yes, dear;--I am ill;--not very ill. Did you hear nothing?"

"No!"

"Nor yet see anything?"

"No!"

"I will tell you all another time;--only do not ask me now." She had seated herself beside
him and wound her arm round his back as though to support him. "You must not touch me, dearest."

"You have been hurt."

"Yes;--I have been hurt. I am in pain, though I do not think that it signifies. I had better
go to a surgeon, and then you shall hear from me."

"Tell me, Daniel;--what is it, Daniel?"

"I will tell you,--but not now. You shall know all, but I should do harm were I to say it now.
Say not a word to any one, sweetheart,--unless your mother ask you."

"What shall I tell her?"

"That I am hurt,--but not seriously hurt;--and that the less said the sooner mended. Tell her
also that I shall expect no further interruption to my letters when I write to you,--or to
my visits when I can come. God bless you, dearest;--one kiss, and now I will go."

"You will send for me if you are ill, Daniel?"

"If I am really ill, I will send for you." So saying, he left her, went down-stairs, with great
difficulty opened for himself the front door, and departed.

Lady Anna, though she had been told nothing of what had happened, except that her lover was
hurt, at once surmised something of what had been done. Daniel Thwaite had suffered some hurt
from her mother's wrath. She sat for a while thinking what it might have been. She had seen
no sign of blood. Could it be that her mother had struck him in her anger with some chance
weapon that had come to hand? That there had been violence she was sure,--and sure also that
her mother had been in fault. When Daniel had been some few minutes gone she went down, that
she might deliver his message. At the foot of the stairs, and near the door of the parlour,
she met Mrs. Richards. "I suppose the young man has gone, my lady?" asked the woman.

"Mr. Thwaite has gone."

"And I make so bold, my lady, as to say that he ought not to come here. There has been a doing
of some kind, but I don't know what. He says as how he's been hurt, and I'm sure I don't know
how he should be hurt here,--unless he brought it with him. I never had nothing of the kind
here before, long as I've been here. Of course your title and that is all right, my lady; but
the young man isn't fit;--that's the truth of it. My belief is he'd been a drinking; and I
won't have it in my house."

Lady Anna passed by her without a word and went into her mother's room. The Countess was still
seated in her chair, and neither rose nor spoke when her daughter entered. "Mamma, Mr. Thwaite
is hurt."

"Well;--what of it? Is it much that ails him?"

"He is in pain. What has been done, mamma?" The Countess looked at her, striving to learn from
the girl's face and manner what had been told and what concealed. "Did you--strike him?"

"Has he said that I struck him?"

"No, mamma;--but something has been done that should not have been done. I know it. He has
sent you a message, mamma."

"What was it?" asked the Countess, in a hoarse voice.

"That he was hurt, but not seriously."

"Oh;--he said that."

"I fear he is hurt seriously."

"But he said that he was not?"

"Yes;--and that the less said the sooner mended."

"Did he say that too?"

"That was his message."

The Countess gave a long sigh, then sobbed, and at last broke out into hysteric tears. It was
evident to her now that the man was sparing her,--was endeavouring to spare her. He had told
no one as yet. "The least said the soonest mended." Oh yes;--if he would say never a word to
any one of what had occurred between them that day, that would be best for her. But how could
he not tell? When some doctor should ask him how he had come by that wound, surely he would
tell then! It could not be possible that such a deed should have been done there, in that little
room, and that no one should know it! And why should he not tell,--he who was her enemy? Had
she caught him at advantage, would she not have smote him, hip and thigh? And then she reflected
what it would be to owe perhaps her life to the mercy of Daniel Thwaite,--to the mercy of her
enemy, of him who knew,--if no one else should know,--that she had attempted to murder him.
It would be better for her, should she be spared to do so, to go away to some distant land,
where she might hide her head for ever.

"May I go to him, mamma, to see him?" Lady Anna asked. The Countess, full of her own thoughts,
sat silent, answering not a word. "I know where he lives, mamma, and I fear that he is much hurt."

"He will not--die," muttered the Countess.

"God forbid that he should die;--but I will go to him." Then she returned up-stairs without
a word of opposition from her mother, put on her bonnet, and sallied forth. No one stopped
her or said a word to her now, and she seemed to herself to be as free as air. She walked up
to the corner of Gower Street, and turned down into Bedford Square, passing the house of the
Serjeant. Then she asked her way into Great Russell Street, which she found to be hardly more
than a stone's throw from the Serjeant's door, and soon found the number at which her lover
lived. No;--Mr. Thwaite was not at home. Yes;--she might wait for him;--but he had no room
but his bedroom. Then she became very bold. "I am engaged to be his wife," she said. "Are you
the Lady Anna?" asked the woman, who had heard the story. Then she was received with great
distinction, and invited to sit down in a parlour on the ground-floor. There she sat for three
hours, motionless, alone,--waiting,--waiting,--waiting. When it was quite dark, at about six
o'clock, Daniel Thwaite entered the room with his left arm bound up. "My girl!" he said, with
so much joy in his tone that she could not but rejoice to hear him. "So you have found me out,
and have come to me!"

"Yes, I have come. Tell me what it is. I know that you are hurt."

"I have been hurt certainly. The doctor wanted me to go into a hospital, but I trust that I
may escape that. But I must take care of myself. I had to come back here in a coach, because
the man told me not to walk."

"How was it, Daniel? Oh, Daniel, you will tell me everything?"

Then she sat beside him as he lay upon the couch, and listened to him while he told her the
whole story. He hid nothing from her, but as he went on he made her understand that it was
his intention to conceal the whole deed, to say nothing of it, so that the perpetrator should
escape punishment, if it might be possible. She listened in awe-struck silence as she heard
the tale of her mother's guilt. And he, with wonderful skill, with hearty love for the girl,
and in true mercy to her feelings, palliated the crime of the would-be murderess. "She was
beside herself with grief and emotion," he said, "and has hardly surprised me by what she has
done. Had I thought of it, I should almost have expected it."

"She may do it again, Daniel."

"I think not. She will be cowed now, and quieter. She did not interfere when you told her that
you were coming to me? It will be a lesson to her, and so it may be good for us." Then he bade
her to tell her mother that he, as far as he was concerned, would hold his peace. If she would
forget all past injuries, so would he. If she would hold out her hand to him, he would take
it. If she could not bring herself to this,--could not bring herself as yet,--then let her
go apart. No notice should be taken of what she had done. "But she must not again stand between
us," he said.

"Nothing shall stand between us," said Lady Anna.

Then he told her, laughing as he did so, how hard it had been for him to keep the story of
his wound secret from the doctor, who had already extracted the ball, and who was to visit
him on the morrow. The practitioner to whom he had gone, knowing nothing of gunshot wounds,
had taken him to a first-class surgeon, and the surgeon had of course asked as to the cause
of the wound. Daniel had said that it was an accident as to which he could not explain the
cause. "You mean you will not tell," said the surgeon. "Exactly so. I will not tell. It is
my secret. That I did not do it myself you may judge from the spot in which I was shot." To
this the surgeon assented; and, though he pressed the question, and said something as to the
necessity for an investigation, he could get no satisfaction. However, he had learned Daniel's
name and address. He was to call on the morrow, and would then perhaps succeed in learning
something of the mystery. "In the meantime, my darling, I must go to bed, for it seems as though
every bone in my body was sore. I have brought an old woman with me who is to look after me."

Then she left him, promising that she would come on the morrow and would nurse him. "Unless
they lock me up, I will be here," she said. Daniel Thwaite thought that in the present circumstances
no further attempt would be made to constrain her actions.

CHAPTER XLV.

THE LAWYERS AGREE.

When a month had passed by a great many people knew how Mr. Daniel Thwaite had come by the
wound in his back, but nobody knew it "officially." There is a wide difference in the qualities
of knowledge regarding such matters. In affairs of public interest we often know, or fancy
that we know, down to every exact detail, how a thing has been done,--who have given the bribes
and who have taken them,--who has told the lie and who has pretended to believe it,--who has
peculated and how the public purse has suffered,--who was in love with such a one's wife and
how the matter was detected, then smothered up, and condoned; but there is no official knowledge,
and nothing can be done. The tailor and the Earl, the Countess and her daughter, had become
public property since the great trial had been commenced, and many eyes were on them. Before
a week had gone by it was known in every club and in every great drawing-room that the tailor
had been shot in the shoulder,--and it was almost known that the pistol had been fired by the
hands of the Countess. The very eminent surgeon into whose hands Daniel had luckily fallen
did not press his questions very far when his patient told him that it would be for the welfare
of many people that nothing further should be asked on the matter. "An accident has occurred,"
said Daniel, "as to which I do not intend to say anything further. I can assure you that no
injury has been done beyond that which I suffer." The eminent surgeon no doubt spoke of the
matter among his friends, but he always declared that he had no certain knowledge as to the
hand which fired the pistol.

The women in Keppel Street of course talked. There had certainly been a smoke and a smell of
gunpowder. Mrs. Richards had heard nothing. Sarah thought that she had heard a noise. They
both were sure that Daniel Thwaite had been much the worse for drink,--a statement which led
to considerable confusion. No pistol was ever seen,--though the weapon remained in the old
desk for some days, and was at last conveyed out of the house when the Countess left it with
all her belongings. She had been afraid to hide it more stealthily or even throw it away, lest
her doing so should be discovered. Had the law interfered,--had any search-warrant been granted,--the
pistol would, of course, have been found. As it was, no one asked the Countess a question on
the subject. The lawyers who had been her friends, and had endeavoured to guide her through
her difficulties, became afraid of her, and kept aloof from her. They had all gone over to
the opinion that Lady Anna should be allowed to marry the tailor, and had on that account become
her enemies. She was completely isolated, and was now spoken of mysteriously,--as a woman who
had suffered much, and was nearly mad with grief, as a violent, determined, dangerous being,
who was interesting as a subject for conversation, but one not at all desirable as an acquaintance.
During the whole of this month the Countess remained in Keppel Street, and was hardly ever
seen by any but the inmates of that house.

