 The present law,
as it now stood, had been instituted by the wisdom of their fathers, to check the alarming
progress of a dreadful crime; when it was found too severe for its purpose it would doubtless
be altered by the wisdom of the Legislature; at present it was the law of the land, the rule
of the Court, and, according to the oath which they had taken, it must be that of the jury.
This unhappy girl's situation could not be doubted; that she had borne a child, and that the
child had disappeared, were certain facts. The learned counsel had failed to show that she
had communicated her situation. All the requisites of the case required by the statute were
therefore before the jury. The learned gentleman had, indeed, desired them to throw out of
consideration the panel's own confession, which was the plea usually urged, in penury of all
others, by counsel in his situation, who usually felt that the declarations of their clients
bore hard on them. But that the Scottish law designed that a certain weight should be laid
on these declarations, which, he admitted, were quodammodo extrajudicial, was evident from
the universal practice by which they were always produced and read, as part of the prosecutor's
probation. In the present case, no person who had heard the witnesses describe the appearance
of the young woman before she left Saddletree's house, and contrasted it with that of her state
and condition at her return to her father's, could have any doubt that the fact of delivery
had taken place, as set forth in her own declaration, which was, therefore, not a solitary
piece of testimony, but adminiculated and supported by the strongest circumstantial proof.

"He did not," he said, "state the impression upon his own mind with the purpose of biassing
theirs. He had felt no less than they had done from the scene of domestic misery which had
been exhibited before them; and if they, having God and a good conscience, the sanctity of
their oath, and the regard due to the law of the country, before their eyes, could come to
a conclusion favourable to this unhappy prisoner, he should rejoice as much as anyone in Court;
for never had he found his duty more distressing than in discharging it that day, and glad
he would be to be relieved from the still more painful task which would otherwise remain for him."

The jury, having heard the Judge's address, bowed and retired, preceded by a macer of Court,
to the apartment destined for their deliberation.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THIRD.

             Law, take thy victim--May she find the mercy
             In yon mild heaven, which this hard world denies her!

It was an hour ere the jurors returned, and as they traversed the crowd with slow steps, as
men about to discharge themselves of a heavy and painful responsibility, the audience was hushed
into profound, earnest, and awful silence.

"Have you agreed on your chancellor, gentlemen?" was the first question of the Judge.

The foreman, called in Scotland the chancellor of the jury, usually the man of best rank and
estimation among the assizers, stepped forward, and with a low reverence, delivered to the
Court a sealed paper, containing the verdict, which, until of late years, that verbal returns
are in some instances permitted, was always couched in writing. The jury remained standing
while the Judge broke the seals, and having perused the paper, handed it with an air of mournful
gravity down to the clerk of Court, who proceeded to engross in the record the yet unknown
verdict, of which, however, all omened the tragical contents. A form still remained, trifling
and unimportant in itself, but to which imagination adds a sort of solemnity, from the awful
occasion upon which it is used. A lighted candle was placed on the table, the original paper
containing the verdict was enclosed in a sheet of paper, and, sealed with the Judge's own signet,
was transmitted to the Crown Office, to be preserved among other records of the same kind.
As all this is transacted in profound silence, the producing and extinguishing the candle seems
a type of the human spark which is shortly afterwards doomed to be quenched, and excites in
the spectators something of the same effect which in England is obtained by the Judge assuming
the fatal cap of judgment. When these preliminary forms had been gone through, the Judge required
Euphemia Deans to attend to the verdict to be read.

After the usual words of style, the verdict set forth, that the Jury having made choice of
John Kirk, Esq., to be their chancellor, and Thomas Moore, merchant, to be their clerk, did,
by a plurality of voices, find the said Euphemia Deans Guilty of the crime libelled; but, in
consideration of her extreme youth, and the cruel circumstances of her case, did earnestly
entreat that the Judge would recommend her to the mercy of the Crown.

"Gentlemen," said the Judge, "you have done your duty--and a painful one it must have been
to men of humanity like you. I will undoubtedly transmit your recommendation to the throne.
But it is my duty to tell all who now hear me, but especially to inform that unhappy young
woman, in order that her mind may be settled accordingly, that I have not the least hope of
a pardon being granted in the present case. You know the crime has been increasing in this
land, and I know farther, that this has been ascribed to the lenity in which the laws have
been exercised, and that there is therefore no hope whatever of obtaining a remission for this
offence." The jury bowed again, and, released from their painful office, dispersed themselves
among the mass of bystanders.

The Court then asked Mr. Fairbrother whether he had anything to say, why judgment should not
follow on the verdict? The counsel had spent some time in persuing and reperusing the verdict,
counting the letters in each juror's name, and weighing every phrase, nay, every syllable,
in the nicest scales of legal criticism. But the clerk of the jury had understood his business
too well. No flaw was to be found, and Fairbrother mournfully intimated, that he had nothing
to say in arrest of judgment.

The presiding Judge then addressed the unhappy prisoner:--"Euphemia Deans, attend to the sentence
of the Court now to be pronounced against you."

She rose from her seat, and with a composure far greater than could have been augured from
her demeanour during some parts of the trial, abode the conclusion of the awful scene. So nearly
does the mental portion of our feelings resemble those which are corporeal, that the first
severe blows which we receive bring with them a stunning apathy, which renders us indifferent
to those that follow them. Thus said Mandrin, when he was undergoing the punishment of the
wheel; and so have all felt, upon whom successive inflictions have descended with continuous
and reiterated violence.*

* [The notorious Mandrin was known as the Captain-General of French & smugglers. See a Tract
on his exploits, printed 1753.]

