He wuz jest a-countin' out his money prior to puttin' it away in his tin box, and I laid the
subject before him strong and eloquent, jest the wants and needs of the meetin' house, and
jest how hard we female sisters wuz a-workin', and jest how much we needed some money to buy
our ingregiencies with for the fair.

He set still, a-countin' out his money, but I know he heard me. There wuz four fifty dollar
bills, a ten, and a five, and I felt that at the very least calculation he would hand me out
the ten or the five, and mebby both on 'em.

But he laid 'em careful in the box, and then pulled out his old pocket-book out of his pocket,
and handed me a ten cent piece.

I wuz mad. And I hain't a-goin' to deny that we had some words. Or at least I said some words
to him, and gin him a middlin' clear idee of how I felt on the subject.

Why, the colt wuz more mine than his in the first place, and I didn't want a cent of money
for myself, but only wanted it for the good of the Methodist meetin' house, which he ort to
be full as interested in as I wuz.

Yes, I gin him a pretty lucid idee of what my feelin's wuz on the subject--and spozed mebby
I had convinced him. I wuz a-standin' with my back to him, a-ironin' a shirt for him, when
I finished up my piece of mind. And thought more'n as likely as not he'd break down and be
repentent, and hand me out a ten dollar bill.

But no, he spoke out as pert and cheerful as anything and sez he:

"Samantha, I don't think it is necessary for Christians to give such a awful sight. Jest look
at the widder's mit."

I turned right round and looked at him, holdin' my flat-iron in my right hand, and sez I:

"What do you mean, Josiah Allen? What are you talkin' about?"

"Why the widder's mit that is mentioned in Scripter, and is talked about so much by Christians
to this day. Most probable it wuz a odd one, I dare persume to say she had lost the mate to
it. It specilly mentions that there wuzn't but one on 'em. And jest see how much that is talked
over, and praised up clear down the ages, to this day. It couldn't have been worth more'n five
cents, if it wuz worth that."

"How do you spell mit, Josiah Allen?" sez I.

"Why m-i-t-e, mit."

"I should think," sez I, "that that spells mite."

"Oh well, when you are a-readin' the Bible, all the best commentaters agree that you must use
your own judgment. Mite! What sense is there in that? Widder's mite! There hain't any sense
in it, not a mite."

And Josiah kinder snickered here, as if he had made a dretful cute remark, bringin' the "mite"
in in that way. But I didn't snicker, no, there wuzn't a shadow, or trace of anything to be
heard in my linement, but solemn and bitter earnest. And I set the flat-iron down on the stove,
solemn, and took up another, solemn, and went to ironin' on his shirt collar agin with solemnety
and deep earnest. "No," Josiah Allen continued, "there hain't no sense in that--but mit! there
you have sense. All wimmen wear mits; they love 'em. She most probable had a good pair, and
lost one on 'em, and then give the other to the church. I tell you it takes men to translate
the Bible, they have such a realizin' sense of the weaknesses of wimmen, and how necessary
it is to translate it in such a way as to show up them weaknesses, and quell her down, and
make her know her place, make her know that man is her superior in every way, and it is her
duty as well as privilege to look up to him."

And Josiah Allen crossed his left leg over his right one, as haughty and over bearin' a-crossin'
as I ever see in my life, and looked up haughtily at the stove-pipe hole in the ceilin', and
resoomed,

"But, as I wuz sayin' about her mit, the widder's, you know. That is jest my idee of givin',
equinomical, savin', jest as it should be."

"Yes," sez I, in a very dry axent, most as dry as my flat-iron, and that wuz fairly hissin'
hot. "She most probable had some man to advise her, and to tell her what use the mit would
be to support a big meetin' house." Oh, how dry my axent wuz. It wuz the very dryest, and most
irony one I keep by me--and I keep dretful ironikle ones to use in cases of necessity.

"Most probable," sez Josiah, "most probable she did." He thought I wuz praisin' men up, and
he acted tickled most to death.

"Yes, some man without any doubt, advised her, told her that some other widder would lose one
of hern, and give hers to the meetin' house, jest the mate to hern. That is the way I look
at it," sez he "and I mean to mention that view of mine on this subject the very next time
they take up a subscription in the meetin' house and call on me."

But I turned and faced him then with the hot flat-iron in my hand, and burnin' indignation
in my eys, and sez I:

"If you mention that, Josiah Allen, in the meetin' house, or to any livin' soul on earth, I'll
part with you." And I would, if it wuz the last move I ever made.

But I gin up from that minute the idea of gettin' anything out of Josiah Allen for the fair.
But I had some money of my own that I had got by sellin' three pounds of geese feathers and
a bushel of dried apples, every feather picked by me, and every quarter of apple pared and
peeled and strung and dried by me. It all come to upwerds of seven dollars, and I took every
cent of it the next day out of my under bureau draw and carried it to the meetin' house and
gin it to the treasurer, and told 'em, at the request of the hull on 'em, jest how I got the money.

And so the hull of the female sisters did, as they handed in their money, told jest how they
come by it.

Sister Moss had seated three pairs of children's trouses for young Miss Gowdy, her children
are very hard on their trouses (slidin' down the banesters and such). And young Miss Gowdy
is onexperienced yet in mendin', so the patches won't show. And Sister Moss had got forty-seven
cents for the job, and brung it all, every cent of it, with the exception of three cents she
kep out to buy peppermint drops with. She has the colic fearful, and peppermint sometimes quells
it.

Young Miss Gowdy wuz kep at home by some new, important business (twins). But she sent thirty-two
cents, every cent of money she could rake and scrape, and that she had scrimped out of the
money her husband had gin her for a woosted dress. She had sot her heart on havin' a ruffle
round the bottom (he didn't give her enough for a overshirt), but she concluded to make it
plain, and sent the ruffle money.

And young Sister Serena Nott had picked geese for her sister, who married a farmer up in Zoar.
She had picked ten geese at two cents apiece, and Serena that tender-hearted that it wuz like
pickin' the feathers offen her own back.

And then she is very timid, and skairt easy, and she owned up that while the pickin' of the
geese almost broke her heart, the pickin' of the ganders almost skairt her to death. They wuz
very high headed and warlike, and though she put a stockin' over their heads, they would lift
'em right up, stockin' and all, and hiss, and act, and she said she picked 'em at what seemed
to her to be at the resk of her life. 

"Jack" had his forecastle well ventilated and lighted, and a turtle-back over his head when on
deck, with winches to haul for him, and a steam-engine to work the wheel; while the engineers
and firemen berthed as near their work as possible, never needing
to wet a jacket or miss a meal.

In short, for the first time perhaps, ocean-voyaging, even in the North Atlantic, was made not
only less tedious and dreadful to all, but was rendered enjoyable and even delightful to many.
Before the Oceanic, the pioneer of the new line, was even launched, rival companies had already
consigned her to the deepest place in the ocean. Her first appearance in Liverpool was therefore
regarded with much interest.

Mr. Ismay, during the construction of the vessel, took every pains to suggest improvements and
arrangements with a view to the comfort and convenience of the travelling
public.

He accompanied the vessel on her first voyage to New York in March,
1871, under command of Captain, now Sir Digby Murray, Brt.

Although severe weather was experienced, the ship made a splendid voyage, with a heavy cargo
of goods and passengers. The Oceanic thus started the Transatlantic traffic of the Company,
with the house-flag of the White Star proudly flying on the main.

It may be mentioned that the speed of the Oceanic was at least a knot faster per hour than had
been heretofore accomplished across the Atlantic. The motion of the vessel was easy, without
any indication of weakness or straining, even in the heaviest weather.

The only inducement to slow was when going head to it (which often
meant head through it), to avoid the inconvenience of shipping a heavy
body of "green sea" on deck forward.

A turtle-back was therefore provided to throw it off, which proved so satisfactory, as it had
done on the Holyhead and Kingstown boats, that all the subsequent
vessels were similarly constructed.

Thus, then, as with the machinery, so was the hull of the Oceanic, a type of the succeeding
vessels, which after intervals of a few months took up their stations on the Transatlantic line.

Having
often observed, when at sea in heavy weather, how the pitching of the vessel caused the weights
on the safety-valves to act irregularly, thus letting puffs of steam escape at every heave,
and as high pressure steam was too valuable a commodity to be so wasted, we determined to try
direct-acting spiral springs, similar to those used in locomotives,
in connection with the compound engine.

 She had
been and contoggled three days and a half for Miss Elder Minkley, and got fifty cents a day
for contogglin'.

She had fixed over the waists of two old dresses, and contoggled a old dress skirt so's it
looked most as well as new. Amelia is a good contoggler and a good Christian. And I shouldn't
be surprised any day to see her snatched away by some widower or bachelder of proper age. She
would be willin', so it is spozed.

Wall, Sister Henn kinder relented at the last, and brung two pairs of fowls, all picked, and
tied up by their legs. And we thought it wuz kinder funny and providential that one Henn should
bring four more of'em.

But we wuz tickled, for we knew we could sell 'em to the grocer man at Jonesville for upwerds
of a dollar bill.

And Submit Tewksbury, what should that good little creeter bring, and we couldn't any of us
hardly believe our eyes at first, and think she could part with it, but she did bring that
plate. That pink edged, chiny plate, with gilt sprigs, that she had used as a memorial of Samuel
Danker for so many years. Sot it up on the supper table and wept in front of it.

Wall, she knew old china like that would bring a fancy price, and she hadn't a cent of money
she could bring, and she wanted to do her full part towerds helpin' the meetin' house along--so
she tore up her memorial, a-weepin' on it for hours, so we spozed, and offered it up, a burnt
chiny offerin' to the Lord.

Wall, I am safe to say, that nothin' that had took place that day had begun to affect us like that.

To see that good little creeter lookin' pale and considerble wan, hand in that plate and never
groan over it, nor nothin', not out loud she didn't, but we spozed she kep up a silent groanin'
inside of her, for we all knew the feelin' she felt for the plate.

It affected all on us fearfully.

But the treasurer took it, and thanked her almost warmly, and Submit merely sez, when she wuz
thanked: "Oh, you are entirely welcome to it, and I hope it will fetch a good price, so's to
help the cause along."

And then she tried to smile a little mite. But I declare that smile wuz more pitiful than tears
would have been.

Everybody has seen smiles that seemed made up, more than half, of unshed tears, and withered
hopes, and disappointed dreams, etc., etc.

Submit's smile wuz of that variety, one of the very curiusest of 'em, too. Wall, she gin, I
guess, about two of 'em, and then she went and sot down.

CHAPTER XXVII.

And now I am goin' to relate the very singulerist thing that ever happened in Jonesville, or
the world--although it is eppisodin' to tell on it now, and also a-gettin' ahead of my story,
and hitchin', as you may say, my cart in front of my horse. But it has got to be told and I
don't know but I may as well tell it now as any time.

Mebby you won't believe it. I don't know as I should myself, if it wuz told to me, that is,
if it come through two or three. But any way it is the livin' truth.

That very night as Submit Tewksbury sat alone at her supper table, a-lookin' at that vacent
spot on the table-cloth opposite to her, where the plate laid for Samuel Danher had set for
over twenty years, she heard a knock at the door, and she got up hasty and wiped away her tears
and opened the door. A man stood there in the cold a-lookin' into the warm cosy little room.
He didn't say nothin', he acted strange. He gin Submit a look that pierced clear to her heart
(so they say). A look that had in it the crystallized love and longin' of twenty years of faithfulness
and heart hunger and homesickness. It wuz a strange look.

Submit's heart begun to flutter, and her face grew red and then white, and she sez in a little
fine tremblin' voice,

"Who be you?"

And he sez,

"I am Samuel Danker."

And then they say she fainted dead away, and fell over the rockin' chair, he not bein' near
enough to ketch her.

And he brung her to on a burnt feather that fell out of the chair cushion when she fell. There
wuz a small hole in it, so they say, and the feather oozed out.

I don't tell this for truth, I only say that they say thus and so.

But as to Samuel's return, that I can swear to, and so can Josiah. And that they wuz married
that  very night of his return, that too can be swore to. A old minister who lived next door
to Submit--superanuated, but life enough in him to marry 'em safe and sound, a-performin' the
ceremony.

It made a great stir in Jonesville, almost enormus.

But they wuz married safe enough, and happy as two gambolin' lambs, so they say. Any way Submit
looks ten years younger than she did, and I don't know but more. I don't know but she looks
eleven or twelve years younger, and Samuel, why they say it is a perfect sight to see how happy
he looks, and how he has renewed his age.

The hull affair wuz very pleasin' to the Jonesvillians. Why there wuzn't more'n one or two
villians but what wuz fairly delighted by it, and they wuz spozed to be envius.

And I drew severel morals from it, and drew 'em quite a good ways too, over both religous and
seckuler grounds.

One of the seekuler ones wuz drawed from her not settin' the table for him that night, for
the first time for twenty years, givin' away the plate, and settin' on (with tears) only a
stun chiny one for herself. How true it is that if a female woman keeps dressed up slick, piles
of extra good cookin' on hand, and her house oncommon clean, and she sets down in a rockin'
chair, lookin' down the road for company.

 They don't come!

But let her on a cold mornin' leave her dishes onwashed, and her floors onswept, and put on
her husband's old coat over her meanest dress, and go out (at his urgent request) to help him
pick up apples before the frost spiles 'em. She a-layin' out to cook up some vittles to put
on to her empty shelves when she goes into the house, she not a-dreamin' of company at that
time of day.

They come!

Another moral and a more religeus one. When folks set alone sheddin' tears on their empty hands,
that seem to 'em to be emptied of all hope and happiness forever. Like es not some Divine Compensation
is a-standin' right on the door steps, ready to enter in and dwell with 'em.

Also that when Submit Tewksbury thought she had gin away for conscience' sake, her dearest
treasure, she had a dearer one gin to her--Samuel Danker by name.

Also I drew other ones of various sizes, needless to recapitulate, for time is hastenin', and
I have eppisoded too fur, and to resoom, and take up agin on my finger the thread of my discourse,
that  I dropped in the Methodist meetin' house at Jonesville, in front of the treasurer.

Wall, Submit brought the plate.

Sister Nash brought twenty-three cents all in pennys, tied up in the corner of a old handkercif.
She is dretful poor, but she had picked up these here and there doin' little jobs for folks.

And we hadn't hardly the heart to take 'em, nor the heart to refuse takin' 'em, she wuz so
set on givin' 'em. And it wuz jest so with Mahala Crane, Joe Cranes'es widder.

She, too, is poor, but a Christian, if there ever wuz one. She had made five pair of overhawls
for the clothin' store in Loontown, for which she had received the princely revenue of fifty cents.

She handed the money over to the treasurer, and we wuz all on us extremely worked upon and
wrought up to see her do it, for she did it with such a cheerful air. And her poor old calico
dress she had on wuz so thin and wore out, and her dingy alpaca shawl wuz thin to mendin',
and all darned in spots. We all felt that Mahala had ort to took the money to get her a new dress.

But we dasted none on us to say so to her. I  wouldn't have been the one to tell her that for
a dollar bill, she seemed to be so happy a-givin' her part towerds the fair, and for the good
of the meetin' house she loved.

Wall, Sister Meachim had earned two dollars above her wages--she is a millinner by perswasion,
and works at a millinner's shop in Jonesville. She had earned the two dollars by stayin' and
workin' nights after the day's work wuz done.

And Sister Arvilly Lanfear had earned three dollars and twenty-eight cents by canvassin' for
a book. The name of the book wuz: "The Wild, Wicked, and Warlike Deeds of Man."

And Arvilly said she had took solid comfort a-sellin' it, though she had to wade through snow
and slush half way up to her knees some of the time, a-trailin' round from house to house a-takin'
orders fer it. She said she loved to sell a book that wuz full of truth from the front page
to the back bindin'.

As for me I wouldn't gin a cent for the book, and I remember we had some words when she come
to our house with it. I told her plain that I wouldn't buy no book that belittled my companion,
or tried to--sez I, "Arvilly, men are jest as good as wimmen and no better, not a mite better."

And Arvilly didn't like it, but I made it up to her in other ways. I gin her some lamb's wool
yarn for a pair of stockin's most immegictly afterwerds, and a half bushel of but'nuts. She
is dretful fond of but'nuts.

Wall, Sister Shelmadine had sold ten pounds of maple sugar, and brought the worth on it.

And Sister Henzy brung four dollars and a half, her husband had gin her for another purpose,
but she took it for this, and thought there wuzn't no harm in it, as she laid out to go without
the four dollars and a halt's worth. It was fine shoes he had gin the money for, and she calculated
to make the old ones do.

And Sister Henzy's mother, old Miss Balch, she is eighty-three years old, and has inflamatery
rheumatiz in her hands, which makes 'em all swelled up and painful. But Sister Henzy said her
mother had knit three pairs of fringed mittens (the hardest work for her hands she could have
laid holt of, and which must have hurt her fearful). But Miss Henzy said a neighbor had offered
her five dollars fer the three pairs, and so she felt it wuz her duty to knit 'em, to help
the fair along. She is a very strong Methodist, and loved to forwerd the interests of Zion.

She wuz goin' to give every cent of the money to the meetin' house, so Sister Henzy said, all
but ten cents, that she had to have to get Pond's Extract with, to bathe her hands. They wuz
in a fearful state. We all felt bad for old Miss Balch, and I don't believe there wuz a woman
there but what gin her some different receipt fer helpin' her hands, besides sympathy, lots
and lots of it, and pity.

Wall, Sister Sypher'ses husband is clost, very clost with her. She don't have anythin' to give,
only her labor, as well off as they be. And now he wuz so wrapped up in that buzz saw mill
business that she wouldn't have dasted to approach him any way, that is, to ask him for a cent.

Wall, what should that good little creeter do but gin all the money she had earned and saved
durin' the past year or two, and had laid by for emergincies or bunnets.

She had got over two dollars and seventy-five cents, which she handed right over to the treasurer
of the fair to get materials for fancy work. When they wuz got she proposed to knit three pairs
of men's socks out of zephyr woosted, and she said she was goin' to try to pick enough strawberrys
to buy a pair of the socks for Deacon Sypher. She said it would be a comfort for her to do
it, for they would be so soft for the Deacon's feet.

Wall, Sister Gowdy wuz the last one to gin in dress gin to her by her uncle out to the Ohio.
It wuz gin her to mourn for her mother-in-law in.

And what should that good, willin' creeter do but bring that dress and gin it to the fair to sell.

We hated to take it, we hated to like dogs, for we knew Sister Gowdy needed it.

But she would make us take it; she said "if her Mother Gowdy wuz alive, she would say to her,

"Sarah Ann, I'd ruther not be mourned for in bombazeen than to have the dear old meetin' house
in Jonesville go to destruction. Sell the dress and mourn fer me in a black calico."

That Sister Gowdy said would be, she knew, what Mother Gowdy would say to her if she wuz alive.

And we couldn't dispute Sarah Ann, for we all knew that old Miss Gowdy worked for the meetin'
house as long as she could work for anything. She loved the Methodist meetin' house better
than she loved husband or children, though she wuz a good wife and mother.

The quire all loved Mother Gowdy, and sung it accordin' to her wishes, and broke down, I well
remember, at the third verse--

  "For her my tears shall fall,
  For her my prayers ascend,
  For her my toil and life be given,
  Till life and toil shall end."

The quire broke down, and the minister himself shed tears to think how she had carried out
her belief all her life, and died with the thought of the church she loved on her heart and
its name on her lips.

Wall, the dress would sell at the least calculation for eight dollars; the storekeeper had
offered that, but Sarah Ann hoped it would bring ten to the fair.

It wuz a cross to Sarah Ann, so we could see, for she had loved Mother Gowdy dretful well,
and loved the uncle who had gin it to her, and she hadn't a nice black dress to her back. But
she said she hadn't lived with Mother Gowdy twenty years for nothin', and see how she would
always sacrifice anything and everything but principle for the good of the meetin' house.

Sister Gowdy is a good-hearted woman, and we all on us honored her for this act of hern, though
we felt it wuz almost too much for her to do it.

Wall, Sister Gowdy wuz the last one to gin in her testimony, and havin' got through relatin'
our experiences we proceeded to business and paperin'.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Sister Sylvester Bobbet and I had been voted on es the ones best qualified to lead off in the
arjeous and hazerdous enterprize.

And though we deeply felt the honor they wuz a-heapin' on to us, yet es it hes been, time and
agin, in other high places in the land, if it hadn't been fer duty that wuz a-grippin' holt
of us, we would gladly have shirked out of it and gin the honor to some humble but worthy constituent.

Fer the lengths of paper wuz extremely long, the ceilin' fearfully high, and oh! how lofty
and tottlin' the barells looked to us. And we both on us, Sister Sylvester Bobbet and I, had
giddy and dizzy spells right on the ground, let alone bein' perched up on barells, a-liftin'
our arms up fur, fur beyond the strength of their sockets.

But duty wuz a-callin' us, and the other wimmen  also, and it wuzn't for me, nor Sister Sylvester
Bobbet to wave her nor them off, or shirk out of hazerdous and dangerous jobs when the good
of the Methodist Meetin' House wuz at the Bay.

No, with as lofty looks as I ever see in my life (I couldn't see my own, but I felt 'em), and
with as resolute and martyrous feelin's as ever animated two wimmen's breasts, Sister Sylvester
Bobbet and I grasped holt of the length of paper, one on each end on it, Sister Arvilly Lanfear
and Miss Henzy a-holdin' it up in the middle like Aaron and Hur a-holdin' up Moses'ses arms.
We advanced and boldly mounted up onto our two barells, Miss Gowdy and Sister Sypher a-holdin'
two chairs stiddy for us to mount up on.

Every eye in the meetin' house wuz on us. We felt nerved up to do our best, even if we perished
in so doin', and I didn't know some of the time but we would fall at our two posts. The job
wuz so much more wearin' and awful than we had foreboded, and we had foreboded about it day
and night for weeks and weeks, every one on us.

The extreme hite of the ceilin'; the slipperyness and fragility of the lengths of paper; the
fearful hite and tottlin'ness of the barells; the dizzeness that swept over us at times, in
spite of our marble efforts to be calm. The dretful achin' and strainin' of our armpits, that
bid fair to loosen 'em from their four sockets. The tremenjous responsibility that laid onto
us to get the paper on smooth and onwrinkled.

It wuz, takin' it altogether, the most fearful and wearisome hour of my hull life.

Every female in the room held her breath in deathless anxiety (about thirty breaths). And every
eye in the room wuz on us (about fifty-nine eyes--Miss Shelmadine hain't got but one workin'
eye, the other is glass, though it hain't known, and must be kep).

Wall, it wuz a-goin' on smooth and onwrinkled--smiles broke out on every face, about thirty
smiles--a half a minute more and it would be done, and done well. When at that tryin' and decisive
moment when the fate of our meetin' house wuz, as you may say, at the stake, we heard the sound
of hurryin' feet, and the door suddenly opened, and in walked Josiah Allen, Deacon Sypher,
and Deacon Henzy followed by what seemed to me at the time to be the hull male part of the
meetin' house.

But we found out afterwerds that there wuz a few men in the meetin' house that thought wimmen
ort to set; they argued that when wimmen had been standin' so long they out to set down; they
wuz good dispositioned. But as I sez at the time, it looked to us as if every male Methodist
in the land wuz there and present.

They wuz in great spirits, and their means wuz triumphant and satisfied.

They had jest got the last news from the Conference in New York village, and had come down
in a body to disseminate it to us.

They said the Methodist Conference had decided that the seven wimmen that had been stood up
there in New York for the last week, couldn't set, that they wuz too weak and fraguile to set
on the Conference.

And then the hull crowd of men, with smiles and haughty linements, beset Josiah to read it
out to us.

So Josiah Allen, with his face nearly wreathed with a smile, a blissful smile, but as high
headed a one as I ever see, read it all out to us. But he should have to hurry, he said, for
he had got to carry the great and triumphant news all round, up as fur as Zoar, if he had time.

And so he read it out to us, and as we see that  that breadth wuz spilte, we stopped our work
for a minute and heard it.

And after he had finished it, they all said it wuz a masterly dockument, the decision wuz a
noble one, and it wuz jest what they had always said. They said they had always known that
wimmen wuz too weak, her frame wuz too tender, she was onfitted by Nater, in mind and in body
to contend with such hardship. And they all agreed that it would be puttin' the men in a bad
place, and takin' a good deal offen their dignity, if the fair sex had been allowed by them
to take such hardships onto 'em. And they sez, some on 'em, "Why! what are men in the Methodist
meetin' house for, if it hain't to guard the more weaker sect, and keep cares offen 'em?"

And one or two on 'em mentioned the words, "cooin' doves" and "sweet tender flowerets," as
is the way of men at such times. But they wuz in too big a hurry to spread themselves (as you
may say) in this direction. They had to hurry off to tell the great news to other places in
Jonesville and up as fer as Loontown and Zoar.

But Sister Arvilly Lanfear, who happened to be a-standin' in the door as they went off, she
said she heard 'em out as fer as the gate a-congratilatin' themselves and the Methodist Meetin'
House and the nation on the decesion, for, sez they,

"Them angels hain't strong enough to set, and I've known it all the time."

And Sister Sylvester Gowdy sez to me, a-rubbin' herachin' armpits--

"If they are as beet out as we be they'd be glad to set down on anything--a Conference or anything
else."

And I sez, a-wipin' the presperatin of hard labor from my forwerd,

"For the land's sake! Yes! I should think so."

And then with giddy heads and strainin' armpits we tackled the meetin' house agin.

PUBLISHERS' APPENDIX.

In view of the frequent reference, in this work, to the discussion in and preceding the General
Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church of 1888, in regard to the admission of women delegates,
the publishers have deemed it desirable to append the six following addresses delivered on
the floor of the Conference during the progress of that discussion.

The General Conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church is the highest legislative body of
that denomination. It is composed of delegates, both ministerial and lay, the former being
elected by the Annual Conferences, and the latter by Lay Electoral Conferences. The sessions
of the General Conference are held quadrennially.

Prior to the session held in May, 1888, in New York City, women delegates were elected, one
each, by the four following Lay Electoral Conferences--namely, The Kansas Conference, The Minnesota
Conference, The Pittsburgh Conference, and The Rock River Conference. Protest was made against
the admission of these delegates on the ground that the admission of women delegates was not
in accord with the constitutional provisions of the Church, embodied in what are termed the
Restrictive Rules. It surely is not proposed to leave these districts in the lurch! We must not only
consult our sentiments, but also our reason. And what does the voice of reason say? This--that
the continuation of the war is an impossibility. Should you decide now to continue the war,
you would have to start a fresh campaign; and you know that that is beyond our powers.

"A previous speaker has referred to the help of the Lord, but who is able to fathom His counsels?
Yet we can understand the answer God has given to our prayer--that prayer which we offered
with the Mausers in our hands when the war began.

And what was the answer we received ... I leave it to you to reply.

"Yes, we must use our reason. If we continue the struggle we give the death-blow to our existence
as a nation. We have been told that there are ten districts that cannot go on fighting. Are we
going to say, 'We will continue the struggle and leave these districts
to their fate'?

No! We must save what we can."

General Liebenberg then spoke. "I am able to give my support," he said, "to all that has fallen
from the lips of Messrs. Viljoen and De Clercq. It cannot be doubted that the future is very dark.
Yes, we can only trust in God, and use our reason to the best of our ability. I have been commissioned
by those whom I represent to retain our independence if possible, and if it be not possible
to make peace on the best terms that we can get."

Commandant Uijs was the next speaker. He explained that if the war were to be continued he would
have to leave his district and abandon the women and children to the mercy of the Kaffirs.
He could see a chance of saving the mounted men if only he could
feel certain that they would all follow him, but the case of the women
and children would be hopeless.

A serious difficulty confronted the delegates, and it was with them, and no longer with the Government,
that its solution rested. Never before had he been called upon to face so gigantic a task. It
was not the time now to criticize one another, but to practise mutual forbearance. The Bible
had been quoted by one of the speakers, but let them not forget the
text in which the king is spoken of who calculated whether he was
strong enough with ten thousand to encounter him who marched against
him with twenty thousand. Then there was the question as to the disposal
of the widows and orphans. What was to become of them if the burghers,
by refusing to come to terms with the enemy, should no longer be able
to act as their mutual protectors? That is the fundamental idea in the government
of the Methodist Episcopal Church, as we are enlisted in the support of that government as
ministers and members of the Church. Now under this system of ecclesiastical government a time
came in our history when we submitted a grave question to the membership of the Church. It
was not a question simply of petition, asking the membership to send petitions up to the General
Conference. On the contrary, it was submitting a constitutional question not simply to the
male members of the Church, for that grand and noble man of the Methodist Church, Dr. David
Sherman of the New England Conference, moved himself to strike out the word "male" from the
report of the Committee on Lay Delegation. It came to a vote, and it was stricken out, two
to one in the vote. When that was done, then the General Conference of our Church submitted
to the membership of the Church the question of lay delegation. But back of the question of
lay delegation was as grave a question, and that was granting the right of suffrage to the
women of the Church. The General Conference assumed the responsibility of giving to the women
the right to vote. It may be questioned this way; it may be explained that way; but the facts
abide that the General Conference granted to the women of the Church the right to vote on a
great and important question in ecclesiastical law. Now if you run a parallel along the line
of our government--and it has often been said that there are parallels in the government of
the United States corresponding to lines of legislation and legislative action in the government
of the Church--you will find that the right of suffrage in the country at the ballot-box has
been a gradual growth. One of the most sacred rights that a man, an American citizen, enjoys
is the right to cast a ballot for the man or men he would have legislate for him; and for no
trivial reason can that right, when once granted to the American citizen, be taken away from
him. Go to the State of Massachusetts, and trace the history of citizen suffrage, and you find
it commenced in this way: First, a man could vote under the government there who was a member
of the Church. Next, he could vote if he were a freeholder. A little later on he could vote
if he paid a poll-tax. In the government, and under the legislation of our Church, first the
women were granted the right to vote on the principle of lay delegation, not on the "plan"
of lay delegation, but on the "principle" of lay delegation. That was decided by Bishop Simpson
in the New Hampshire Conference, and by Bishop Janes afterward in one of the New York Conferences.
On the principle of lay delegation, the women of the Church were granted the right of suffrage;
presently they appeared in the Quarterly Conference, to vote as class-leaders, stewards, and
Sunday-school superintendents; and it created a little excitement, a feverish state of feeling
in the Church, and the General Conference simply passed a resolution or a rule interpreting
that action on the part of women claiming this privilege in the Quarterly Conference as being
a "right," and it was continued. Presently, as the right of suffrage of women passed on and
grew, they voted in the Electoral Conferences, and there was no outcry made against it. I have
yet to hear of any Bishop in the Church, or any presiding elder, or any minister challenging
the right of women to vote in Electoral Conferences or Quarterly Conferences; and yet for sixteen
years they have been voting in these bodies; voting to send laymen here to legislate; to send
laymen to the General Conference to elect Bishops and Editors and Book Agents and Secretaries.
They come to where votes count in making up this body; they have been voting sixteen years,
and only now, when the logical result of the right of suffrage that the General Conference
gave to women appears and confronts us by women coming here to vote as delegates, do we rise
up and protest. I believe that it is at the wrong time that the protest comes. It should have
come when the right to vote was granted to women in the Church. It is sixteen years too late,
and as was very wisely said by Dr. Potts, the objection comes not so much from the Constitution
of the Church as from the "constitution of the men," who challenge these women.

Now, sir, another parallel. You take the United States Government just after the war, when
the colored people of the South, the freedmen of our land, unable to take care of themselves,
their friends, that had fought the battles of the war, in Congress determined that they should
be protected, if no longer by bayonets and cannon, that they should be protected by placing
the ballot in their hands, and the ballot was placed in the hands of the freedman of the South
by the action of the National Congress, Congress submitting a constitutional amendment to the
legislatures of the States; and when enough of them had voted in favor of it, and the President
had signed the bill, it became an amendment to the Constitution of the United States, granting
to the people of the South, who had been disfranchised, the right of suffrage.

Now, what does the right of suffrage do? It carries with it the right to hold office. Where
women have the privileges of voting on the school question, they are granted the privilege
of being school directors, holding the office of superintendents, and the restriction on them
stops at that point under statute law. If you go a little further you will find that when the
freedmen were enfranchised, and they sent men of their own color to the House of Representatives,
did that body say "stop!" "we protest, you cannot come in because of illegality"? No. They
were admitted on the face of their credentials because they had first been granted the right
of suffrage. When men of their color went to the United States Senate and submitted their credentials,
they were not protested against, but they were admitted as members of the United States Senate
on the face of their credentials. And why? Because the right of suffrage granted to the freedmen
of the South under a constitutional amendment of the nation, carried with it the right of the
men whom we fought to free, and did free, in an awful war, to hold office in the nation. Now,
sir, you must interpret the law somewhat by the spirit of the times in which you live. That
is a mistaken notion to say that you must always go to the men that made the law to get the
interpretation of it. If that were true, would it not always be wise for legislators to give
their affidavits and place on file their interpretation of the law they had confirmed, and
placed on the statute books? There are legal gentlemen in this body who will tell you that
it goes for very little when you come to interpret law. And yet you will find this to be true,
that a law must be interpreted somewhat by the spirit of the time in which you live. Why, twenty
years ago, when the General Conference handed the question of lay delegation down to the Annual
Conferences, and the members of our Church, there was not a woman practising law in the Supreme
Court of the United States. Go back through the history of jurisprudence of this country and
in England, and you will find that it had never been known that a woman practised law in the
Supreme Court of this country or England. But to-day women have been admitted to practise law
in the Supreme Court of the United States. No amendment to the Constitution of the United States
had to be adopted in order to secure this privilege for them. But this is true, that the judges
of the Supreme Court, by a more liberal interpretation of the Constitution of the United States,
said, "Women may be officers of the Supreme Court, and may practise law there." The same kind
of a spirit, in interpreting the Discipline and the Restrictive Rules of the Discipline of
the Church, will place these women delegates in this body where they have been sent. The same
thing is true of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania and in the Courts of Philadelphia. There
is no way out, as my judgment sees, and as my conscience tells me, since before the government
of God man and woman are equally responsible. There is no way out of this dilemma for this
General Conference, but to say that these women delegates shall sit in this body, where they
have been sent, and where their names have been called.

Why, take the missionary operations. The Woman's Missionary Society is to-day raising more
money and doing more missionary work than the Parent Missionary Society did fifty years ago.
And yet men legislate concerning the missionary operations of women, and give them no voice
directly in this body.

We bring up the temperance question here against license and in favor of Prohibition, and we
pass our resolutions after we have given our discussions, and yet the Methodist Church has
the honor of having in the ranks of her membership--(Time called.)

ADDRESS OF REV. DR. JAMES M. BUCKLEY.

Mr. President, while the last speaker was on the floor, a modification of a passage of Scripture
occurred to me, "The enemy cometh in like a flood, but I will lift up a standard against him."
It is somewhat peculiar that he should begin by making a statement about one of the most honored
names in American Methodism, a statement that has been published in the papers, and that nine
tenths of this body knew as well as he did. It must have been intended as a part of his argument,
and I regard it as of as much force as anything he said after it. Unfortunately, seven burghers
from Heilbron were at a short distance from the others, having taken up their position in a
kliphok.[53] Fighting hard as they were, under a deafening gun-fire from the enemy, who had
approached to within a few paces of them, they did not observe that their comrades had left their
positions. Shortly afterwards, despairing of holding the kliphok any longer, they ran down
to the foot of the hill for their horses, and saw that the rest of the burghers were already
fleeing some eight or nine hundred paces in front of them, and that their own horses had joined
in the flight. There was now only one course open to them--to surrender to the English.[54]

I
ordered the burghers to retreat in the direction of Kroonstad, for by now they had all fled from
Roodepoort and Honingkopjes--a name which, since that day, has never sounded very sweet to me.[55]

During
the morning I received a report informing me that there were large stores at Kroonstad belonging
to the English Commissariat, and that there was only a handful of troops to protect them. I
had no thought, however, of attempting to destroy the provisions there, for I felt sure that
the British troops, who had but just now put us to flight, would
make for Kroonstad.

They would know that the stores stood in need of a stronger guard, and moreover they would
naturally think that we should be very likely to make an attack at a point where the defence
was so weak.

Obviously, under these circumstances, it would never do for us to go to Kroonstad.

Accordingly, as soon as darkness came on, I turned suddenly to the west, and arrived at Wonderheuve
late at night. I found there Veldtcornet De Vos with the prisoners of war.

Meanwhile, as I had anticipated, the vast English army marched up along thirty-four miles of railway
to Kroonstad. Lord Kitchener, as I heard later on, arrived there shortly after noon on the following
day.

We left Wonderheuve early in the morning, and advanced along Rietspruit until we reached the
farm of Vaalbank, where we remained until the evening of the next day, June the 13th. That night
I saw clearly that it was necessary for us to cross the line if we wanted to keep ourselves and
our prisoners out of the clutches of Lord Kitchener; he had failed to find us at Kroonstad,
and would be certain to look for us in the country to the west of the line.

I also felt myself bound to wreck this line, for it was the only railway which Lord Roberts could
now utilize for forwarding the enormous quantities of stores which
his vast forces required.[56] I resolved therefore to cross it at
Leeuwspruit, north of Rhenoster River bridge (which the English had
recently repaired), and then, in the morning, to attack the English
garrisons which had again occupied Roodewal and Rhenoster River bridge.

I

had given orders that all the cattle along the railway line should
be removed; General Louis Botha had made the same regulation in regard
to the country round Pretoria and Johannesburg.

If only our orders had been carried out a little more strictly, and if only the most elementary
rules of strategy had been observed in our efforts to break the English lines of communication,
Lord Roberts and his thousands of troops in Pretoria would have found themselves in the same
plight as the Samaritans in Samaria--they would have perished of hunger. It was not their Commander-in-Chief's
skill that saved them, not his habit of taking into account all possible eventualities--no, they had
to thank the disobedience of our burghers for the fact that they were not all starved to death in Pretoria.

I
arranged with General Froneman that he should cross the line at the point I had already selected,
that is to say, north of Rhenoster River bridge, and that in the morning he should attack,
from the eastern side, the English who were posted at Leeuwspruit Bridge. I, in the meanwhile, would
make my way with a Krupp to the west side of the line, and having found a place of concealment
near Roodepoort, would be ready to fall upon the English as soon as I heard that the other
party had opened fire on them from the east.

But my plan was to come to nothing.

For when, during the night, Froneman reached the line, a skirmish took place then and there with
the English outposts at Leeuwspruit railway bridge. At the same time a train arrived from the
south, on which the burghers opened such a fierce fire that it was speedily brought to a standstill.
General Froneman at once gave orders to storm the train, but his
men did not carry out his orders.

Had they done so, Lord Kitchener
would have fallen into our hands!

Nobody knew that he was in the
train, and it was only later that we heard how, when the train stopped,
he got a horse out of one of the waggons, mounted it, and disappeared
into the darkness of the night. That is not the
question, as I propose to show. I assert freely, here and now, if the women are in under the
Restrictive Rules, no power ought to put them out. If they are not in under the Restrictive
Rules, nothing has been done since, in my judgment, bearing upon it. I am astounded that these
brethren fancy that this question has no bearing at all on the meaning of that rule. That is
a wonderful thing. But we affirm that when the Church voted to introduce lay delegation, it
not only did not intend to introduce women, but it did intend to fill up the whole body with
men. That is what we affirm. If we can prove it, it is a tower of help to us. If we cannot
prove it, we cannot make out our case. But our contention is, that the Church did not undertake
to put women in, and it did undertake to fill up the capacities and relations of the body with
men. Now, look at it. No man goes to the dictionary to find the meaning of the word "layman."
There is not a man that can find out the meaning of our Restrictive Rules from the dictionary.
No living man can make out the meaning of a word in the Restrictive Rules from Webster's dictionary.
You must get it from the history of the Church. Who is the "General Superintendent" by Webster
or Worcester? The Methodist Episcopacy is the thing that is protected by the Restrictive Rules.
The dictionary does not tell how the Chartered Fund shall be taken care of. Now they talk about
laymen. They do not seem, I think, to understand the history of the thing. Some of them do
not appear to understand the history of the English language. Why was the word "layman" ever
introduced? Because there was a separate class of clergy men in the world, but there was not
a class of clergywomen in the world. If there had been, there would have been a term for laywomen
and for clergywomen. And the word was invented to distinguish the laymen from the clergymen.
Had there been clergywomen, there would have been laywomen. The "laity" means all the people,
men, women, and children. A woman is one of the laity, and so is every child in the country
or in the Church one of the laity. But when you speak of man acting as a unit he is a layman,
but you never say a laywoman. You say: a woman. Abraham Lincoln said, "All these things are
done and suffered, that government of the people, for the people, and by the people should
not perish from the earth." Now, people, the dictionary says, are men, women, and children.
Did Abraham Lincoln mean that any women or children can take any part in the government of
the nation? No, no, no! He meant this. When he stood up and delivered his inaugural speech,
he said this, "The intent of the lawmaker is the law."

I give them something from one of the greatest lawyers that ever lived to think of awhile--John
Selden: "The only honest meaning of any word is the intent of the man that wrote it." At the
time that the plan of lay delegation was adopted, there was not a single Conference of the
Church on this wide globe, not one that distinguished between the ministry and the laity that
allowed women to take any part in its law-making body. Some one will talk about the Quakers.
But they deny the existence of the Church, the sacraments of the Church, and make no distinction
between the ministry and the laity. Let them get up and show that there was ever one Church
in the world worthy of the name that allowed women to make its laws. There is not one to-day.
Let them name a Church, let them name one that has allowed women in its law-making body; and
yet such is the blinding power of gush that men will say that our fathers all understood it
and proposed to put women in. The fact is, that they only proposed to allow them to put us
in. As soon as the General Conference adjourned the women made an appeal in a public statement.
They were asked to vote for lay delegation, and were told that then they could set the Church
right. The opponents appealed to them to vote against it on the ground that it would not make
any difference to them. James Porter, Daniel Curry, Dr. Hodgson (Professor Little thinks he
was the greatest of them all) wrote a series of articles in the Advocate, and it never occurred
to them that the women could come into the General Conference. Lay delegation was only admitted
by 33 votes. Had there been a change of 33 votes they would not have come in. Every member
of the New York East Conference knows that Dr. Curry's influence was so powerful that he could
almost get a majority against it. And they know if any one had set up an opposition to it on
this ground, the whole Conference would have voted against the movement, and that if it had
not been for Bishop Ames and Bishop Janes, who went to the Wyoming Conference where the majority
was opposed to lay delegation, and by their influence there converted my friend Olin and others,
he knows that if this matter of the women had been in or understood, the whole Conference would
have been against it. It would not have been possible. Dr. Potts says that it is prejudice.
Nothing of the kind. Do you know there are 12,000 Methodist ministers that are ciphers all
the time except when they vote for delegates? Are you going to presume that when the Church
has a multitude of members, that it is going to sit here and change, by an interpretation,
a Restrictive Rule, or put in what was never in, and never understood to be in? The Restrictive
Rule fills up the ministerial delegates. Every time you put a woman in, you put a man out.
This subject has never come up here before. The question is this, Do those Restrictive Rules
mean anything? If they do, you cannot put in anything that the fathers did not put in. And
if you put in women as lawmakers; if you can read those Rules and put them in there, you can
change any one of the Restrictive Rules by a majority of one. And I want to say to you, that
if you do it, you will prove to the Methodist Episcopal Church that the sole protection we
have against the caprice of a majority of the General Conference is not worth the paper it
is written on. All you have to do is to get a majority of the Conference against the Episcopacy,
and then put any interpretation, and then you get a few women admitted, and this you call the
progress of the age. Mr. Chairman, I believe in progress, and when the Church progresses far
enough, it can change this law in a constitutional way. But it has not yet gone far enough.
These men believe that the Church has never done it, or that it is best. Dr. Flood said that
they must be brought in in the light of progress. I affirm that Dr. Flood's arguments all point
in that direction--they must be interpreted in the light of progress. When you do that you
have got a despotism. I want to go back to my constituents and say this: I exercise all the
power that our Charter gives me. But at the moment that anything is proposed, and we put in
what the fathers did not have before their eyes, at that moment I stop and say, Thus far, but
no farther. A despotism is a despotism, whether it is a despotism without restraint, the Czar
with his wife, the Czar without his wife. You will turn this house into a despotism, and you
will find it difficult to defend Methodism by its peculiar Constitution before the American people.

If you want women in, there is another way to bring them in. Send the question around as you
did for lay delegation. There was only a doubt in the General Conference of 1868, and yet they
had a sense of candor. John M'Clintock fought in favor of taking them in. But he said, "I think
it best to send the question around." True progress is not gained in any other way. Some prefer
a shorter cut. Let me say to you, "He that cometh in by the door," the same hath a right to
come in; but he that cometh in another way, is not as respectable as in the other case.

ADDRESS OF REV. DR. A.B. LEONARD.

Mr. Chairman, unfortunately for me, I have received no anonymous letters. And so I have nothing
either sensational or startling with which to introduce my speech. I shall not speak this morning
under any fear of being removed as an obstruction, or of having my future prospects blasted.
It is my privilege, therefore, to speak to you this morning upon this subject calmly and dispassionately,
having no motive to either suppress or exaggerate the truth. The party who wrote Dr. Buckley,
threatening to remove him as an obstruction, must be highly gratified to know that that obstruction
has already been removed. Brother Hughey removed the obstruction, extinguished the candle,
and destroyed the candlestick.

We are to approach this question this morning, to discuss it purely upon its merits. The ground
of constitutional law was traversed thoroughly yesterday morning in the opening speech by Dr.
Potts, a speech that, though he did not hear it himself, was heard by this body, and will be
heard through the length and breadth of the Church everywhere. It remains for us who follow
him simply to turn on a few side-lights here and there, or to give an opportunity of viewing
this question from a new point of view. And, first, there is a line of argument that may be
helpful to some that has already been presented in part touching the administration of our
law and the interpretation of terms that is worthy, I think, of still further consideration.

Dr. Buckley said in the New York Christian Advocate of March 15th, 1888:

"The question of eligibility turns, first, upon whether the persons claiming seats are laymen;
secondly, whether they have been members of the Church for five years consecutively, and are
at least twenty-five years of age; and, thirdly, upon whether they have been duly elected.
If women are found to be eligible under the law, they would stand upon the same plane with
men, in this particular, that they must be twenty-five years, etc."

Now, then, is a woman legally qualified to sit in the General Conference as a lay delegate?
Is she a layman in the sense of that word in the Discipline? If she be not in, she cannot be
introduced contrary to law by a mere majority vote of the General Conference. The Doctor sometimes
writes more clearly than he speaks, and it was so in the occasion of writing this article.
Over against this we have one of (as Dr. Hamilton would say) the "subtle insinuations" of the
Episcopal Address, which declares that no definition of "layman" settles the question of eligibility
as to any class of persons. For many are classed as laymen for the purposes of lay representation,
and have to do with it officially as laymen, yet themselves are ineligible as delegates. Well,
in this case, we have the Episcopal Board over against the editor. Both are right and both
are wrong. The editor is right when he said of a woman, if she be a lay member her right is
clear as that of any duly elected man. But he is wrong when he denies to her a right to a seat
in this body as a layman. The Episcopal Address is wrong when it says that "no definition of
the word 'layman' settles the question of eligibility." But it is right when it says, "Many
are classed as laymen for purposes of lay representation, and have to do with it officially
as lay members who are not themselves eligible as delegates."

In the practical work of the Church, and in the administration of its laws, women have been
regarded as laymen from the beginning until now. They pay quarterage. If they did not pay quarterage
some of our salaries would be very short. They contribute to our benevolent collections, and
if it were not for their contributions, we would not to-day be shouting over the "Million dollars
for Missions." They pray and testify in our class-meetings and prayer-meetings, and but for
their presence among us, many of those meetings would be as silent as the grave. They are amenable
to law, and must be tried by the very same process by which men are tried. They are subject
to the same penalty. They may be suspended; they may be expelled. In all these respects they
have been regarded as laymen from the beginning. Indeed, we have never recognized more than
two orders in our Church. We have laymen and ministers. Up to 1872 but one of these orders
was represented in this General Conference. This General Conference was strictly a clerical
organization. But in 1872 we marked a new epoch in Methodist history, and a new element came
into this body, and has been in all our sessions since that date. The first step, as has been
mentioned here before, was taken in 1868, when the question of lay delegation was sent down
to the members of the Church over twenty-one years of age, and to the Annual Conferences. Dr.
Queal, if I understood him, made what is, in my judgment, a fatal concession on this question.
He distinctly stated, if I understood him correctly, and I have not had time to refer to the
report of his speech (if I misinterpret him he will correct me), that when the motion to strike
out the word "male" was made, it was done for the purpose of putting a "rider" on the motion
and cause its defeat, and when that fact was made known to those in favor of lay delegation,
they said they would accept it then with that interpretation, and the interpretation was that
the amendment would let women into the General Conference.

Now, that being true, all this talk about the idea of the "women coming in" being never entertained
until very recently falls to the ground. It was present on that occasion. It was understood
by those that opposed lay delegation, and that favored it, that if they passed this amendment
and the laymen were allowed to come in, it would open the door to allow women to come in also.

L. C. Queal said:

I think I am entitled now to correct this putting of the case.

Bishop Foss:

Are you misrepresented?

L. C. Queal:

I am misrepresented in this, that while I stated that Dr. Sherman put that on as a "rider,"
with a view to defeating the bill, that immediately after thinking so I thought it might be
the occasion of securing the approval of the principle in the laity of the Church. That is
all I stated. All the rest of Dr. Leonard's statement is his own inference--a misconstruction
of the fact. A.B. Leonard:

I understood Dr. Queal as I stated. I have not had time to refer to the speech he made. I leave
his statement with you, and you have the privilege of consulting his speech as it is printed
this morning, in reference to this matter. It came to my thought very distinctly that the idea
of the possibility of women coming in was then lodged in the minds that were both in favor
of and opposed to lay delegation.

Now, then, this vote that was taken, in accordance with the order of 1868, laid the foundation
stone for the introduction of women into this body. That sent the question of lay delegation
down to be voted on by the laity of the Church. If the women were not to be recognized as laity
here, why allow them to vote on the question of the laity at all? And, having allowed them
to vote on the question of the laity, settling the very foundation principle itself, with what
consistency can we disallow them a place in this General Conference, when by their votes they
opened the way for the laymen coming into this General Conference? Do you not remember that
we had a vote previously, and the men only voted, and that the lay delegation scheme was defeated,
and the Methodist, that was published in this city, being the organ of the lay delegationists,
said that "votes ought to be weighed, not counted"? And then the question was sent back to
be voted upon by both the men and the women? And let the laymen of this General Conference
remember that they are in this body to-day by reason of the votes of the women of the Methodist
Episcopal Church. In 1880 we went still further. We went into the work of construing pronouns.
There had been women in the Quarterly Conferences previously to that date; but there was a
mist in the air with regard to their legality there. The General Conference by its action did
not propose to admit women to the Quarterly Conferences. It simply proposed to clear away the
mist and recognize their legal right to sit in the Quarterly Conference. Being in the Quarterly
Conference, and in the District Conference, they have the right to vote on every question that
comes before such bodies. They vote to license ministers, to recommend ministers to Annual
Conferences, to recommend local preachers for deacons' and elders' orders. And there are men
on this floor to-day that would not be in this at all if they had not received the support
of women in Lay Electoral Conferences. Now, brethren, let it be remembered that the votes of
the women to send delegates to the Lay Electoral Conferences were never challenged until they
came here asking for seats. They were good enough to elect laymen to this body, but not good
enough to take seats with laymen in this body. With what consistency can laymen accept seats
by the votes of the women and then deprive women of their seats? I am surprised at some of
the "subtle insinuations" of the Episcopacy concerning constitutional law. Allow me to say
at this point that, having introduced into the Quarterly Conference these women, and having
given them a right to vote there, and in the District Conferences, and in the Lay Electoral
Conferences, in all honesty we must do one of two things, if we would be consistent, we must
go back and take up that old foundation of lay delegation that we laid in 1868, or we must
go forward and allow these women to have their seats. In a word, we must either lay again the
"foundation of repentance from dead work, or go forward to perfection." And I am not in favor
of going back.

If it is true that the body of the Constitution is outside of the Restrictive Rules, and cannot
be changed except in the way prescribed for altering the Restrictive Rules, then I say that
this General Conference has again and again been both lawless and revolutionary. Every paragraph
of the chapter, known as the Constitution, beginning with §63, and closing with §69, was put
into that Constitution without any voice from an Annual Conference of this foot-stool. Not
one single one of them was ever submitted to an Annual Conference; §20, ¶183, stood for many
years in the Constitution of the Church, but was transferred bodily from that Constitution
by the General Conference to the position it now occupies. You come and tell us to-day that
we cannot change the Constitution outside of the Restrictive Rules without going down to the
Annual Conferences; it is too late in the day to say that. We have made too much history on
that point. The present plan of lay delegation was not submitted to the Annual Conferences.
Bishop Simpson definitely stated when he reported to the General Conference the result of the
vote ordered in 1868 that the question simply of the introduction of the laity into the General
Conference was presented to be voted upon by the laity and by the Annual Conferences, but the
"plan" was not submitted to either to be voted upon, and the "plan" for lay delegation by which
these lay brethren occupy their seats here this morning was made in every jot and tittle by
the General Conference without any reference to the Annual Conferences at all.

I want to know, then, by what propriety we come here in this General Conference to say that
there can be no change of Part I. of the Constitution outside of the Restrictive Rules. The
General Conference cannot alter our articles of faith, it cannot abolish our Episcopacy; it
cannot deprive our members of a right to trial and appeal. These come under the Restrictive
Rules, and cannot be touched by this body without the consent of the Annual Conferences; but
all else has been from beginning, and is now in the hands of the General Conference. Let it
be remembered that this General Conference is a unique body. It is at once a legislative and
a judicial body; in the former capacity it makes law; in the latter capacity it has the power
to construe law.

It is at once a Congress, if you please, to enact law, and a supreme court to interpret law.
Now, then, in admitting women to our General Conference, we are simply construing the Constitution,
and not changing the Constitution. The Supreme Court of the United States gives decisions on
the construing of the Constitution, and who ever heard of a decision of the Supreme Court being
sent down to be ratified by the State Legislatures? The Supreme Court of the United States
construes the Constitution, without any reference to the State Legislatures, and so we construe
law without any reference to the Annual Conferences. If we touch the law inside of the Restrictive
Rules, we must go down to the Annual Conferences. Outside we are free to legislate as we may.

What is the Constitution for? The Constitution is designed simply to limit the powers of the
Legislature. In my own State of Ohio, for illustration, we have an article in our Constitution
that forbids our Legislature to license the liquor traffic, but our legislators give a license
under the guise of taxing, but they cannot give us a license law in form. The Constitution
prevents it. There are States that have Constitutions that have no word to say about the liquor
traffic at all, while they may either tax, license, or prohibit.

This is a fact that is well settled, that the Constitution is a limitation of legislative power,
and where there is no such limitation there is no restriction.

ADDRESS OF REV. DR. ALFRED WHEELER.

Mr. President, it will be well for us, so far as we have progressed in this discussion, to
see how near and how far we agree. It is admitted by the friends of the report, or by the committee,
that this is a question of law, and to be decided exclusively upon principles of law. So far
as those who are opposed to the report have spoken, they conceive, as I understand it, that
the position taken by the committee is taken by those who are advocating its adoption. Then
we are agreed that it is not a matter of sentiment, it is not a matter of chivalry. There is
no place for knighthood, or any of its laws, or any other of the principles that dominated
the contests of the knights of old. If it were a matter of knighthood there is not a man on
this floor that would deem it necessary to bring a lance into this body. All would be peace
and quiet.

There are none that would hail with more joy and gladness the women of the Church to a seat
in this body than those of us who now, under the circumstances, oppose their coming in.

It is not either a matter of progressive legislation regarding the franchise of colored men,
or of anybody else in the country. It is a question of law, Methodist law, and Methodist law alone.

Now, so far as the intention is concerned of those who made the law, I do not see how those
who have kept themselves conversant with the history of lay delegation can for a moment claim
that it was even the most remote intention of those who introduced lay delegation into the
General Conference to bring in the women, and for us to transfer the field now toward women,
in view of their magnificent work in the last ten or fifteen years, back to twenty years, is
to commit an anachronism that would be fatal to all just interpretation of law.

I myself was in the very first meeting that was ever called to initiate the movement that at
last brought in lay delegation. I voted for it; I wrote for it; I spoke for it in the General
Conference and in the Annual Conferences. I was a member of the first lay committee, or Committee
on Lay Delegation, that was appointed here by the General Conference in 1868. And during all
these various processes of discussion, so far as I know, the thought was never suggested that
under it women would come in to represent the laity, nor was it ever suggested that it was
desirable that they should; so that the intention of the law-maker could never have embraced
this design--the design of bringing women into the General Conference. I leave that.

Now, I claim that the General Conference has no legal authority to admit them here. We are
not an omnipotent body. I know that the Supreme Court of the United States, in that contest
between the Northern Church, or the Methodist Episcopal Church, and the Church South, decided
that the General Conference was the Methodist Episcopal Church. I used that argument myself
upon the Conference floor in 1868, that the General Conference could, without any other process,
by mere legislation, introduce the laity into this body. I claimed there and then that, according
to that decision, the Methodist Episcopal Church was in the General Conference. The General
Conference refused to accept that endorsement of that Court, or that proposition concerning
the prerogatives of this body. And through all the processes that have been ordered concerning
the introduction of lay delegation that interpretation of the constitution of the Church has
been repudiated. And so I decided to remain at Lindley as long as possible, to give our horses
a chance of recovering their condition. It was impossible to provide them with forage, for the
amount the English had left behind was entirely insufficient as a supply for the large number
of horses we had with us.

For ten or twelve days we remained at Lindley, and so the horses had a short breathing time,
but not long enough to give the poor animals time fully to regain their strength. In addition
to being overworked, some of our horses were suffering from a skin
disease which we were quite unable to cure.

This disease had never before been known in the Republics.

When I was at Lindley I sent Commandant Johannes Meijer, one of my
staff, with forty men, to Cape Colony.

With him went that brave soldier, Captain Willem Pretorius, of whom I have made mention previously.
If Commandant Meijer had had sufficient time to collect a commando in the Colony, I am sure that
he would have proved that the younger generation of Free-Staters, to whom he and Willem Pretorius
belonged, possess qualities which were entirely unsuspected before the war began.

On the 8th of December three columns of the enemy appeared from Kroonstad.

It had been my plan to remain at Lindley and wait my chance of dealing with Colonel Baker, for he
had under him a certain National Scout, who constantly made raids
from Winburg with a band of four or five hundred Kaffirs.

A few months previously a division of Commandant Hasebroek's commando had been attacked at Doornberg
by this man's Kaffirs, and four burghers had been murdered in a horrible manner. More cases of
this nature had taken place, and I only mention this one in passing. I am not in a position
to give all the instances, but many of them were sworn to in affidavits, of which copies were sent
to Lord Kitchener. The original affidavits fell into the hands of the English; but fresh ones
shall be drawn up on my return to South Africa, so that I may be able to prove the statements
I have made. The narration of these brutalities I prefer to leave to persons more conversant
With the facts than myself. I have only alluded to the subject so as to make it clear why I like
to keep my eye on Colonel Baker's column.

I must now continue my story where I left it.

I took up my position to the north-west of Lindley, in front of the columns which approached from
Kroonstad. But after a few skirmishes with them, I returned to the east till darkness came on. When
night had fallen I went round to the south, behind Kaffirskop, expecting to receive the news
that Colonel Baker was coming up from Winburg, for he generally carried on his operations
in conjunction with the forces at Kroonstad.

On the following day the enemy marched to Liebenbergsvlei, between
Bethlehem and Reitz.

Thence they took the road between Lindley and Reitz to Kroonstad.

Piet de Wet, of the National Scouts, was with these columns.

After we had remained two days at Kaffirskop, we crossed the Valsch
River.

The news then came that a column with a convoy was on the march from Harrismith to Bethlehem.

I
felt that it was my duty to attack this column, but, although I advanced with all haste, I
was not in time to catch the enemy before they reached Bethlehem. When I saw this, I decided
to wait, at a distance of some fifteen miles to the north-east of Bethlehem, for I expected that
the column would return to Harrismith.

The troops remained in Bethlehem till the morning of the 18th of December;
they then marched out towards Harrismith.

I at once divided my commando
into two parts, each consisting of two hundred and fifty men. One
of these divisions I posted behind the eastern end of the Langberg,
about forty miles from Bethlehem; the other on the banks of the Tijgerkloofspruit,
at the point where the road to Harrismith crosses the stream.

I gave
strict orders to both divisions that as soon as I opened fire on the
English with the Maxim-Nordenfeldt, they were to charge down on them
from both sides at the same time.

The enemy, I may mention, were
about six or seven hundred men strong, and had two guns.

I myself,
with the Maxim-Nordenfeldt, was now on a high round hill, on the eastern
side of Tijgerkloof. I was very careful to be out of sight of the
English, so that they might get quite close to the burghers before
the gun disclosed my presence.

I succeeded in hiding my burghers
so successfully that the English did not observe them until they were
within about twelve hundred paces of my men in Tijgerkloof. The only safety of the Church
is the equipoise that is constituted by the relation the Annual Conferences sustain to the
General Conference, and far safer is it for us to bring these women of the Church, elect, honorable
women, into the General Conference of the Church by the same way that their husbands and brothers
are here.

There is another thought that I wish to suggest. What are the possibilities with regard to
lay delegation, supposing the design of those who wish to bring women in without further action
is successful? You make lay delegation a farce in this body. The presiding elders and pastors
of the Church may act in co-operation, and they can elect their own wives as delegates to this
General Conference, and thus lay delegation comes to be a farce. Some of you may laugh at this
suggestion, but it is an in posse, and it may easily be made an in esse. It is important to
us that the laity should hold the place they have by the regulations we have, and they should
be changed only to make them more perfect.

No body is safe without adherence to law. We may set lightly by law; we may regard it as a
thing to be laid aside at the command of excitement or passion, but the nation that does that
is a doomed nation, and the Church that does that has its history already written. The only
safe course for us to pursue is to pursue the wise, careful, judicious, and conservative--I
mean every word--and conservative course we have heretofore pursued through all our history.
When we boast of what Methodism has done, or what she is going to do, let us remember it is
because of her firm adherence to law.

It is with her as it is with the German nation and the Anglo-Saxon race--everywhere our glory
is in our adherence to wise laws, and if we pass unwise laws, in repealing them in the same wise.

ADDRESS OF GENERAL CLINTON B. FISK.

Mr. President and Brethren, to an onlooker of this remarkable scene, this great debate now
in the third day of its progress must be suggestive of some of the marvellous plays, woven
into song, which have made the hearts of the thronging multitudes who have crowded this place
of meeting in the past throb alternately with emotions of hope and fear as to the outcome of
the parties involved in plot and counterplot. The visitors to this General Conference, seated
in their boxes and in the family circle, Will say surely these honored men of God who have
been called as Superintendents of the affairs of our great conquering Church, these chosen
ministers of reconciliation and peace, these male laymen called by their brethren to their
high places in this General Conference, whose names at home are the synonym of chivalrous goodness--surely
all these of rank and talent and authority, whose able and eloquent words have been ringing
through the arches and dome of this temple of music on the wrong side of the question, are
but simply acting the parts assigned them. In the final scene they will join hands around the
eligible women elect, who, in obedience to the call of the laity in their several Conferences,
are in their seats with us, and say, "Whom God hath joined, let not male put asunder." My brothers,
let us briefly restate the case. Five noble women of the laymen of the Methodist Episcopal
Church have been chosen as delegates to this General Conference under the Constitution and
by the forms prescribed by the laws of the Church. As they enter, or attempt to enter, the
portals of this great assemblage they hear a voice from the platform, in words not to be misunderstood,
"Thou shalt not," and voices from all parts of the house take up the prohibitory words, and
supplement the voices of the Bishops, "Thou shalt not." And one would think, from the vehement
oratory of the resisting delegates of this General Conference, that the foundations of the
Church were in imminent peril by the presence of these "elect ladies" among us.

Let us turn back a moment, and review the history of the rise, progress, and triumph of the
cause of lay representation. I claim to know a little something about it, as I was on the skirmish
line in the conflict, and in all its battles fought until the day of victory.

In 1861, to the male members of the Church, was submitted the question of lay representation.
It failed of securing a majority vote. Had it carried, there would have been plausibility in
the argument this day made against the eligibility of women to seats in this General Conference.
The evolution of the succeeding eight years lifted woman to a higher appreciation of her position
in the Methodist Church, and her rights and privileges became the theme of discussion throughout
the bounds of the Church. Among the champions for woman was that magnificent man, that grand
old man, Dr. Daniel D. Whedon, who, in discussing this question, said:

"If it is rights they talk of, every competent member of the Church of Christ, of either sex
and of every shade of complexion, has equal original rights. Those rights, they may be assured,
when that question comes fairly up, will be firmly asserted and maintained."

And in answer to the expected fling, "But you are a woman's rights man," he replied:

"We are a human rights man. And our mother was a human being. And our wives, sisters, and daughters
are all human beings. And that these human beings are liable as any other human beings to be
oppressed by the stronger sex, and as truly need in self-defence a check upon oppression, the
history of all past governments and legislation does most terribly demonstrate. What is best
in the State is not indeed with us the question; but never, with our consent, shall the Church
of the living God disfranchise her who gave to the world its divine Redeemer. When that disfranchisement
comes to the debate, may the God of eternal righteousness give us strength equal to our will
to cleave it to the ground!"

The General Conference of 1868, after full discussion, submitted the question of Lay Representation
to a vote of all the members of the Church, male and female, thus recognizing the women as
laymen, as belonging to the great body of the laity, and as vitally interested in the government
of the Church, and having rights under that government. During the debate on the report of
the Committee on the plan for submitting the question as in 1861, to the male members, Dr.
Sherman moved to strike out the word "male." While that motion was under consideration, Dr.
Slicer, of Baltimore, said, "If it were the last moment I should spend, and the last articulate
sound I should utter, I should speak for the wives, mothers, and daughters of the Methodist
Episcopal Church.... I am for women's rights, sir, wherever church privileges are concerned."

Dr. Sherman's motion was carried by a vote of 142 to 70, and the question of lay representation
was submitted to all the members of the Church over twenty-one years of age. The General Conference
did not ask women to vote on a proposition that only male members of the Church should be represented
in the General Conference, and it did not then enter the thought of any clear-headed man that
women were to be deprived of their rights to a seat in the General Conference. There were a
few noisy, disorderly brethren who cried out from their seats, "No, no," but they were silenced
by the presiding Bishop and the indignation of the right thinking, orderly delegates.

What does the Rev. Dr. David Sherman, the mover of the motion to strike out the word "male,"
now say of the prevailing sentiment on that day of great debate? I have his freshly written
words in response to an inquiry made a few weeks ago. On March 21st he made this statement:

"Some of us believed that women were laymen, that the term 'men' in the Discipline, as elsewhere,
often designated not sex, but genus; and that those who constituted a main part of many of
our churches should have a voice in determining under what government they would live. We believed
in the rightful equality of the sexes before the law, and hence that women should have the
same right as men to vote and hold office. The Conference of 1868 was a reform body, and it
seemed possible to take these views on a stage; hence the amendment was offered, and carried
with a rush and heartiness even beyond my expectations....The latter interpretation of the
Conference making all not members of Conferences laymen, fully carried out these views, as
they were understood at the moment by the majority party. Some, to be sure, cried out against
it, but their voices were not heard amid the roar of victory. Who can go back of the interpretation
of the supreme court of the Church?"

It is amazing that brethren will stand here to-day and utterly ignore the decision of our Supreme
Court in defining who are laymen. Could the utterances of any Court be more definite and clear
than those of the General Conference when it said, "The General Conference holds that in all
matters connected with the election of lay delegates the word 'laymen' must be understood to
include all the members of the Church who are not members of the Annual Conferences"? This
decision must include women among the laity of the Church. I know it is said that this means
the classification of local preachers. We respond that that only appears from the debate. The
General Conference was settling a great principle in which the personal rights and privileges
of two thirds of the membership of our Church were involved. Surely, our Supreme Court would
have made a strange decision had they, in defining laymen, excepted women. We would have become
the laughing-stock of Christendom had we made such an utterance. The Church universal in all
ages has always divided its membership into two great classes, and two only, the clergy and
the laymen, using the terms laity and laymen synonymously and interchangeably. See Bingham's
"Antiquities," Blackstone's "Commentaries," Schaffs "History," and kindred authorities. It
is sheer trifling for sensible males to talk about a distinction between laymen and laywomen.

Women were made class-leaders, stewards, and Sunday-school superintendents, and employed in
these several capacities long before the specific interpretations of the pronouns were made.
They were so appointed and employed in Saint Paul's Church in this city during the pastorate
of that sainted man, John M'Clintock, in 1860, and could the voice of that great leader and
lover of the Church reach us to day from the skies it would be in protest against the views
presented in this debate by the supporters of the committee's report and its amendment.

It is a well-established and incontrovertible principle of law that any elector is eligible
to the office for which said elector votes, unless there be a specific enactment discriminating
against the elector. Our law says that a lay delegate shall be twenty-five years of age, and
five years a member of the Methodist Episcopal Church. It does not say that a delegate must
not be a woman, or must be a man.

Women are eligible to membership in this General Conference. Women have been chosen delegates
as provided by law. They are here in their seats ready for any duty on committees, or otherwise,
as they may be invited. We cannot turn them out and slam the door on their exit. It would be
revolutionary so to do by a simple vote of this body. It would be a violation of the guarantees
of personal liberty, a holding of the just rights of the laity of the Church. We cannot exclude
them from membership in the General Conference, except by directing the Annual Conferences
to vote on the question of their exclusion. Are we ready to send that question in that form
down to the Annual Conferences for their action? I trust that a large majority of this General
Conference will say with emphasis we are not ready for any such action. The women of our Methodism
have a place in the heart of the Church from which they cannot be dislodged. They are our chief
working members. They are at the very front of every great movement of the Church at home or
abroad. In the spirit of rejoicing consecration our matrons and maids uphold the banner of
our Lord in every conflict with the enemy of virtue and righteousness. Looking down upon us
from these galleries, tier upon tier, are the magnificent leaders of the Woman's Foreign and
the Woman's Home Missionary Societies. Our women are at the front of the battle now waging
against the liquor traffic in our fair land, and they will not cease their warfare until this
nation shall be redeemed from the curse of the saloon. God bless all these women of our great
conquering Church of the Redeemer.

Twenty years ago Bishop Hurst accompanied me on a leisurely tour of continental Europe. In
the old city of Nuremberg we wandered among the old churches and market-places, where may be
seen the marvellous productions of that evangel of art, Albert Durer. In an old schloss in
that city may be found the diary of Albert Durer, almost four centuries old. In it you may
read as follows: "Master Gebhart, of Antwerp, has a daughter seventeen years old, and she has
illuminated the head of a Saviour for which I gave a florin. It is a marvel that a woman could
do so much." Three and a half centuries later Rosa Bonheur hangs her master-piece in the chief
places of the galleries of the world, and Harriet Hosmer's studio contributes many of the best
marbles that adorn the parlors of Europe and America, and no one wonders that a woman can do
so much. From that day when Martin Luther, the protesting monk, and Catherine Von Bora, the
ex-nun, stood together at the altar and the twain became one, woman has by her own heroism,
by her faith in her sex and in God, who made her, fought a good fight against the organized
selfishness of those who would withhold from her any right or privilege to which she is entitled,
and has lifted herself from slavery and barbarism to a place by the side of man, where God
placed her in paradise, his equal in tact and talent, moving upon the world with her unseen
influences, and making our Christian civilization what it is to-day. Let not our Methodism
in this her chiefest council say or do ought that shall lead the world to conclude that we
are retreating from our advanced position of justice to the laity of the Church. Let us rather
strengthen our guarantee of loving protection of every right and privilege of every member
of our Church, without distinction of race, color, or sex. Amen and Amen.

ADDRESS OF JUDGE Z. P. TAYLOR.

Mr. President and Gentlemen, when elected a delegate I had no opinion on the constitutional
question here involved. But I had then, and I have now, a sympathy for the women, and a profound
admiration of their work. No man on this floor stands more ready and more willing to assist
them by all lawful and constitutional means to every right and and to every privilege enjoyed
by men.

But, sir, notwithstanding this admiration and sympathy, I cannot lose sight of the vital question
before the General Conference now and here.

That question is this: Under the Constitution and Restrictive Rules of the Methodist Episcopal
Church are women eligible as lay delegates in this General Conference? If they are, then this
substitute offered by Dr. Moore does them an injustice, because it puts a cloud upon their
right and title to seats upon this floor. If they are not, then this body would be in part
an unconstitutional body if they are admitted.

It follows that whoever supports this substitute either wrongs the elect ladies or violates
the Constitution. If they are constitutionally a part of this body, seat them; if they are
not, vote down this substitute, and adopt the report of the committee, with the amendment of
Dr. Neely, and then let them in four years hence in the constitutional way. After the most
careful study of the vital question in the light of history, ecclesiastical, common, and constitutional
law, it is my solemn and deliberate judgment that women are not eligible as lay delegates in
this body.

Facts, records, and testimonials conclusively prove that in 1868, when the General Conference
submitted the matter of lay delegation to the entire membership of the Church, the idea of
women being eligible was not the intent. The intent was to bring into the General Conference
a large number of men of business experience, who could render service by their knowledge and
experience touching the temporal affairs of the Church. When the principle of admitting lay
delegates was voted upon by the laity, this idea, and no other, was intended. When the Annual
Conferences voted for the principle and the plan, this and this only was their intent.

When the General Conference, by the constitutional majority, acted in favor of admitting the
lay delegates provisionally elected, this idea, and none other, actuated them. It was not the
intent then to admit women, but to admit men only, and the intent must govern in construing
a Constitution.

Dr. Fisk said Judge Cooley is a high authority on constitutional law. I admit it, and am happy
to say that I was a student of his over a quarter of a century ago, and ever since then have
studied and practised constitutional law, and I am not here to stultify my judgment by allowing
sentiment and impulse to influence my decision.

Those opposing the report of the committee, with few exceptions, admit that it was not the
intent and purpose, when the Constitution and Restrictive Rules were amended, to admit women
as lay delegates. They claim, however, that times have changed, and now propose to force a
construction upon the language not intended by the laity, the Annual Conferences, or the General
Conference at the time of the amendment. Can this be done without an utter violation of law?
I answer, No.

In the able address read by Bishop Merrill, containing the views of the Board of Bishops, he says:

"For the first time in our history several 'elect ladies' appear, regularly certified from
Electoral Conferences, as lay delegates to this body. In taking the action which necessitates
the consideration of the question of their eligibility, the Electoral Conferences did not consult
the Bishops as to the law in the case, nor do we understand it to be our duty to define the
law for these Conferences; neither does it appear that any one is authorized to decide questions
of law in them. The Electoral Conferences simply assumed the lawfulness of this action, being
guided, as we are informed, by a declarative resolution of the General Conference of 1872,
defining the scope of the word 'laymen," in answer to a question touching the classification
and rights of ordained local and located ministers. Of course, the language of that resolution
is carried beyond its original design when applied to a subject not before the body when it
was adopted, and not necessarily involved in the language itself. Even laymen who are confessedly
ineligible, who are not old enough to be delegates, or have not been members long enough, may
be stewards, class-leaders, trustees, local preachers and exhorters, and, as such, be members
of the Quarterly Conference, and vote for delegates to the Electoral Conference without themselves
being eligible.

"The constitutional qualifications for eligibility cannot be modified by a resolution of the
General Conference, however sweeping, nor can the original meaning of the language be enlarged.
If women were included in the original constitutional provision for lay delegates, they are
here by constitutional right. If they were not so included, it is beyond the power of this
body to give them membership lawfully, except by the formal amendment of the Constitution,
which cannot be effected without the consent of the Annual Conferences. In extending to women
the highest spiritual privileges, in recognizing their gifts, and in providing for them spheres
of Christian activity, as well as in advancing them to positions of official responsibility,
ours has been a leader of the Churches, and gratefully do we acknowledge the good results shown
in their enlarged usefulness, and in the wonderful developments of their power to work for
God, which we take as evidences of the divine approval of the high ground taken. In all reformatory
and benevolent enterprises, especially in the Temperance, Missionary, and Sunday-school departments
of Church-work, their success is marvellous, and challenges our highest admiration. Happily
no question of competency or worthiness is involved in the question of their eligibility as
delegates. Hitherto the assumption underlying the legislation of the Church has been that they
were ineligible to official positions, except by special provision of law. In harmony with
this assumption, they have been made eligible, by special enactment, of the offices of steward,
class-leader, and Sunday-school superintendent, and naturally the question arises as to whether
the necessity for special legislation, in order to their eligibility to those specified offices,
does not indicate similar necessity for special provision in order to their eligibility as
delegates, and if so it is further to be considered that the offices of steward, class-leader,
and Sunday-school superintendent may be created and filled by simple enactments of the General
Conference itself; but to enter the General Conference, and form part of the law-making body
of the Church, requires special provision in the Constitution, and, therefore, such provision
as the General Conference alone cannot make."

Now, sir, this language moves forward with a grasp of logic akin to that used by Chief Justice
Marshall, or that eminent jurist, Cooley, from whom I beg leave to quote. Cooley, in his great
work on "Constitutional Limitations," says:

"A Constitution is not made to mean one thing at one time, and another at some subsequent time,
when the circumstances may have changed as perhaps to make a different rule in the case seem
desirable. A principal share of the benefit expected from written Constitutions would be lost,
if the rules they establish were so flexible as to bend to circumstances, or be modified by
public opinion.

"The meaning of the Constitution is fixed when it is adopted, and is not different at any subsequent
time."

This same great author says:

"Intent governs. The object of construction applied to a written constitution is to give effect
to the intent of the people in adopting it. In the case of written laws it is the intent of
the lawgiver that is to be enforced.

"But it must not be forgotten in construing our constitutions that in many particulars they
are but the legitimate successors of the great charters of English liberty whose provisions
declaratory of the rights of the subject have acquired a well understood meaning which the
people must be supposed to have had in view in adopting them. We cannot understand these unless
we understand their history.

"It is also a very reasonable rule that a State Constitution shall be understood and construed
in the light, and by the assistance of the common law, and with the fact in view that its rules
are still in force.

"It is a maxim with the Courts that statutes in derogation of the common law shall be construed
strictly."

Here, sir, we have the language of Judge Cooley himself. It is as clear as the noonday's sun,
and he utterly repudiates the pernicious doctrine that the Constitution can grow and develop
so as to mean one thing when it is adopted, and something else at another time. You can never
inject anything into a Constitution by construction which was not in it when adopted. And you
are bound, according to all rules of construction, to give it the construction which was intended
when adopted. No man of common honesty and common sense dares to assert on this floor that
it was the intent when the Constitution was amended to admit women as lay delegates. It follows
inevitably that they are not constitutionally eligible, and to admit them is to violate the
Constitution of the Church, which, as a Court, we are in honor bound not to do.

It has been asserted with gravity that the right to vote for a person for office carries with
it the right to be voted for unless prohibited by positive enactment. This proposition is not
true, and never has been. We have seen, when the Constitution and Restrictive Rules were amended,
the intent was to admit men only as lay delegates. No General Conference can, by resolution
or decision, change the Constitution and Restrictive Rules. Grant, if you please, that the
General Conference, by its action in 1880, had power to make women eligible in the Quarterly
Conference as stewards and class-leaders, this could not qualify her to become a lay delegate
in the law-making body of the Church. The qualifications of lay delegates to this body must
inhere in the Constitution and Restrictive Rules, according to their intent and meaning when
adopted. It is fundamental law that where general disabilities exist, not simply by statute,
but by common law, the removal of lesser disabilities does not carry with it the removal of
the greater ones.

Legislation qualifying women to vote in Wyoming and elsewhere had to be coupled also with positive
enactments qualifying her to be voted for, otherwise she would have been ineligible to office.
This is so, and I defy any lawyer to show the contrary.

These and no other qualifications are worded or found in the Constitution of the United States
touching the qualification of Senators. Is there a layman on this floor who will dare assert
that under the Constitution of the United States women are eligible as Representatives or Senators?
Words of common gender are exclusively used as applied to the qualification of Senators. The
words persons and citizens include women the same as they include men. Nevertheless, in the
light of the past, I am bold to assert, that any man who would dare stand in the Senate of
the United States, and contend that women are eligible to the office of United States Senators,
would be regarded by the civilized world as a person of gush and void of judgment.

(Tax case and what was decided.) (Mrs. Minor vs. Judges of Election. 53 Mo. 68.)

The first case indicates that the word citizen when affecting property rights includes corporations.

The second, that the word person, when it relates to the woman claiming the right to vote,
does not confer upon her that right.

The language is: No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges
or immunities of any citizen of the United States. Nevertheless, a Republican Circuit Judge
held this language did not entitle Mrs. Minor to vote. A democratic Supreme Court of Missouri
held the same, and the Supreme Court of the United States, in an able opinion written by men
known as the friends of women, conclusively demonstrated that these constitutional guarantees
did not confer upon woman the right to vote. Why? Because, from time immemorial, this right
had not obtained in favor of woman, and these words of common gender should not be so construed
as to confer this right, since it was not intended when made to affect their status in this regard.

