After a moment Helen spoke, angrily, because she was astounded, and because, for the first
time in her life, she was frightened, beyond her depth, helpless in the waves of emotion that
lifted her like great encompassing billows. 'Gerald, don't. Gerald, it is absurd of you. Gerald,
don't cry.' She had never seen him cry.

He heard her dimly, and the words were the cruel ones he expected. The sense of her cruelty
filled him, and the dividing sense that she, who was so cruel, was still his only refuge, his
only consolation.

'What have I done, I'd like to know, that you should treat me like this? If you loved me before--all
those years--why should you stop now, because I love you? why should you stop because of telling
me?'

Again Helen's voice came to him after a pause, and it seemed now to grope, stupefied and uncertain,
for answers to his absurdity. 'How can one argue, Gerald, like this; perhaps it was because
I told you? Perhaps----'

He took her up, not waiting to hear her surmises. 'How can one get over a thing like that,
all in a moment? How can it die like that? You're not over it, not really. It is all pride,
and you are punishing me for what I couldn't help, and punishing yourself too, for no one will
ever love you as I do. O Helen--I can't believe it's dead. Don't you know that no one will
ever love you as I do? Can't you see how happy we could have been together? It's so silly of
you not to see. Yes, you are silly as well as cruel.' He shook her while he held her, while
he buried his face and cried--cried, literally, like a baby.

She stood still, enfolded but not enfolding, and now she said nothing for a long time, while
her eyes, with their strained look of pain, gazed widely, and as if in astonishment, before
her; and he, knowing only the silence, the unresponsive silence, continued to sob his protestation,
his reproach, with a helplessness and vehemence ridiculous and heart-rending.

Then, slowly, as if compelled, Helen put her arms around him, and, dully, like a creature hypnotised
to action strange to its whole nature, she said once more, and in a different voice: 'Don't
cry, Gerald.' But she, too, was crying. She tried to control her sobs; but they broke from
her, strange and difficult, like the sobs of the hypnotised creature waking from its trance
to confused and painful consciousness, and, resting her forehead on his shoulder, she repeated
dully, between her sobs: 'Don't cry.'

He was not crying any longer. Her weeping had stilled his in an instant, and she went on, between
her broken breaths: 'How absurd--oh, how absurd. Sit down here--yes--keep your head so, if
you must, you foolish, foolish child.'

He held her, hearing her sobs, feeling them lift her breast, and, in all his great astonishment,
like a smile, the memory of the other day stole over him, the stillness, the accomplishment,
the blissful peace, the lifting to a serene eternity of space. To remember it now was like
seeing the sky from a nest, and in the sweet darkness of sudden security he murmured: 'You
are the foolish child.'

'How can I believe you love me?' said Helen.

'How can you not?'

They sat side by side, her arms around him and his head upon her breast. 'It was only because
I told you----'

'Well--isn't that reason enough?'

'How can it be reason enough for me?'

'How can it not? You've spent your whole life hiding from me; when I saw you, why, of course,
I fell in love at once. O Helen--dear, dear Helen!'

'When you saw my love.'

'Wasn't that seeing you?'

They spoke in whispers, and their hearts were not in their words. He raised his head and looked
at her, and he smiled at her now with the smile of the beautiful necessity. 'How you've frightened
me,' he said. 'Don't be proud. Even if it did need your cleverness to show me that, too. I
mean--you've given me everything--always--and why shouldn't you have given me the chance to
see you--and to know what you are to me? How you frightened me. You are not proud any longer.
You love me.'

She was not proud any longer. She loved him. Vaguely, in the bewilderment of her strange, her
blissful humility, among the great billows of life that encompassed and lifted her, it seemed
with enormous heart-beats, Helen remembered Franklin's words. 'Let it melt--please let it melt,
dear Helen.' But it had needed the inarticulate, the instinctive, to pierce to the depths of
life. Gerald's tears, his head so boyishly pressed against her, his arms so childishly clinging,
had told her what her heart might have been dead to for ever if, with reason and self-command,
he had tried to put it into words.

She looked at him, through her tears, and she knew him dearer to her in this resurrection than
if her heart had never died to him; and, as he smiled at her, she, too, smiled back, tremblingly.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Althea had not seen Gerald after the day that they came up from Merriston together. The breaking
of their engagement was duly announced, and, with his little note to her, thanking her for
her frankness and wishing her every happiness, Gerald and all things connected with him seemed
to pass out of her life. She saw no more of the frivolous relations who were really serious,
nor of the serious ones who were really frivolous. She did not even see Helen. Helen's engagement
to Franklin had never been formally announced, and few, beyond her circle of nearest friends,
knew of it; the fact that Franklin had now returned to his first love was not one that could,
at the moment, be made appropriately public. But, of course, Helen had had to be told, not
only that Franklin had gone from her, but that he had come back to Althea, and Althea wondered
deeply how this news had been imparted. She had not felt strength to impart it herself. When
she asked Franklin, very tentatively, about it, he said: 'That's all right, dear. I've explained.
Helen perfectly understands.'

That it was all right seemed demonstrated by the little note, kind and sympathetic, that Helen
wrote to her, saying that she did understand, perfectly, and was so glad for her and for Franklin,
and that it was such a good thing when people found out mistakes in time. There was not a trace
of grievance; Helen seemed to relinquish a good which, she recognised, had only been hers because
Althea hadn't wanted it. And this was natural; how could one show one's grievance in such a
case? Helen, above all, would never show it; and Althea was at once oppressed, and at the same
time oddly sustained by the thought that she had, all inevitably, done her friend an injury.
She lay awake at night, turning over in her mind Helen's present plight and framing loving
plans for the future. She took refuge in such plans from a sense of having come to an end of
things. To think of Helen, and of what, with their wealth, she and Franklin could do for Helen,
seemed, really, her strongest hold on life. It was the brightest thing that she had to look
forward to, and she looked forward to it with complete self-effacement. She saw the beautiful
Italian villa where Helen should be the fitting centre, the English house where Helen, rather
than she, should entertain. She felt that she asked nothing more for herself. She was safe,
if one liked to put it so, and in that safety she felt not only her ambitions, but even any
personal desires, extinguished. Her desire, now, was to unite with Franklin in making the proper
background for Helen. But at the moment these projects were unrealisable; taste, as well as
circumstance, required a pause, a lull. It was a relief--so many things were a relief, so few
things more than merely that--to know that Helen was in the country somewhere, and would not
be back for ten days or a fortnight.

Meanwhile, Miss Harriet Robinson, very grave but very staunch, sustained Althea through all
the outward difficulties of her volte-face. Miss Robinson, of course, had had to be told of
the reason for the volte-face, the fact that Althea had found, after all, that she cared more
for Franklin Winslow Kane. It was in regard to the breaking of her engagement that Miss Robinson
was staunch and grave; in regard to the new engagement, Althea saw that, though still staunch,
she was much disturbed. Miss Robinson found Franklin hard to place, and found it hard to understand
why Althea had turned from Gerald Digby to him. Franklin's millions didn't count for much with
Miss Robinson, nor could she suspect them of counting for anything, where marriage was concerned,
with her friend. She had not, indeed, a high opinion of the millionaire type of her compatriots.
Her standards were birth and fashion, and poor Franklin could not be said to embody either
of these claims. His mitigating qualities could hardly shine for Miss Robinson, who, accustomed
to continually seeing and frequently evading the drab, dry, utilitarian species of her country-people,
could not be expected to find in him the flavour of oddity and significance that his English
acquaintance prized. Franklin didn't make any effort to place himself more favourably. He was
very gentle and very attentive, and he followed all Althea's directions as to clothes and behaviour
with careful literalness; but even barbered and tailored by the best that London had to offer,
he seemed to sink inevitably into the discreetly effaced position that the American husband
so often assumes behind his more brilliant mate, and Althea might have been more aware of this
had she not been so sunken in an encompassing consciousness of her own obliteration. She felt
herself nearer Franklin there, and the sense of relief and safety came most to her when she
could feel herself near Franklin. It didn't disturb her, standing by him in the background,
that Miss Robinson should not appreciate him. After all, deeper than anything, was the knowledge
that Helen had appreciated him. Recede as far as he would from the gross foreground places,
Helen's choice of him, Helen's love--for after a fashion, Helen must have loved him--gave him
a final and unquestionable value. It was in this assurance of Helen's choice that she found
a refuge when questionings and wonders came to drag her down to suffering again. There were
many things that menaced the lull of safety, things she could not bear yet to look at. The
sense of her own abandonment to weak and disingenuous impulses was one; another shadowed her
unstable peace more darkly. Had Helen really minded losing Franklin--apart from his money?
What had his value really been to her? What was she feeling and doing now? What was Gerald
doing and feeling, and what did they both think or suspect of her? The answer to some of these
questionings came to her from an unsuspected quarter. It was on a morning of chill mists and
pale sunlight that Althea, free of Miss Robinson, walked down Grosvenor Street towards the
park. She liked to go into the park on such mornings, when Miss Robinson left her free, and
sit on a bench and abandon herself to remote, impersonal dreams. It was just as she entered
Berkeley Square that she met Mrs. Mallison, that aunt of Gerald's who had struck her, some
weeks ago, as so disconcerting, with her skilfully preserved prettiness and her ethical and
metaphysical aspirations. This lady, furred to her ears, was taking out two small black pomeranians
for an airing. She wore long pearl ear-rings, and her narrow, melancholy face was delicately
rouged and powdered. Althea's colour rose painfully; she had seen none of Gerald's relatives
since the severance. Mrs. Mallison, however, showed no embarrassment. She stopped at once and
took Althea's hand and gazed tenderly upon her. Her manner had always afflicted Althea, with
its intimations of some deep, mystical understanding.

'My dear, I'm so glad--to meet you, you know. How nice, how right you've been.' Mrs. Mallison
murmured her words rather than spoke them and could pronounce none of her r's. 'I'm so glad
to be able to tell you so. You're walking? Come with me, then; I'm just taking the dogs round
the square. Do you love dogs too? I am sure you must. You have the eyes of the dog-lover. I
don't know how I could live without mine; they understand when no one else does. I didn't write,
because I think letters are such soulless things, don't you? They are the tombs of the spirit--little
tombs for failed things--too often. I've thought of you, and felt for you--so much; but I couldn't
write. And now I must tell you that I agree with you with all my heart. Love's the only thing
in life, isn't it?' Mrs. Mallison smiled, pressing Althea's arm affectionately. Althea remembered
to have heard that Mrs. Mallison had made a most determined mariage de convenance and had sought
love in other directions; but, summoning what good grace she could, she answered that she,
too, considered love the only thing.

'You didn't love him enough, and you found it out in time, and you told him. How brave; how
right. And then--am I too indiscreet? but I know you feel we are friends--you found you loved
some one else; the reality came and showed you the unreality. That enchanting Mr. Kane--oh,
I felt it the moment I looked at him--there was an affinity between us, our souls understood
each other. And so deliciously rich you'll be, not that money makes any difference, does it?
but it is nice to be able to do things for the people one loves.'

Althea struggled in a maze of discomfort. Behind Mrs. Mallison's caressing intonations was
something that perplexed her. What did Mrs. Mallison know, and what did she guess? She was
aware, evidently, of her own engagement to Franklin and, no doubt, of Franklin's engagement
to Helen and its breaking off. What did she know about the cause of that breaking off? Her
troubled cogitations got no further, for Mrs. Mallison went on:

'And how happily it has all turned out--all round--hasn't it? How horrid for you and Mr. Kane,
if it hadn't; not that you'd have had anything to reproach yourselves with--really--I know--because
love is the only thing; but if Helen and Gerald had just been left plantés là, it would have
been harder, wouldn't it? I've been staying with them at the same house in the country and
it's quite obvious what's happened. You knew from the first, no doubt; but of course they are
saying nothing, just as you and Mr. Kane are saying nothing. They didn't tell me, but I guessed
at once. And the first thing I thought was: Oh--how happy--how perfect this makes it for Miss
Jakes and Mr. Kane. They've all found out in time.'

Althea grew cold. She commanded her voice. 'Helen? Gerald?' she said. 'Haven't you mistaken?
They've always been the nearest friends.'

'Oh no--no,' smiled Mrs. Mallison, with even greater brightness and gentleness, 'I never mistake
these things; an affair of the heart is the one thing that I always see. Helen, perhaps, could
hide it from me; she is a woman and can hide things--Helen is cold too--I am never very sure
of Helen's heart--of course I love her dearly, every one must who knows her; but she is cold,
unawakened, the type that holds out the cheek, not the type that kisses. I confess that I love
most the reckless, loving type; and I believe that you and I are unlike Helen there--we kiss,
we don't hold out the cheek. But, no, I never would have guessed from Helen. It was Gerald
who gave them both away. Poor, dear Gerald, never have I beheld such a transfigured being--he
is radiantly in love, quite radiantly; it's too pretty to see him.'

The vision of Gerald, radiantly in love, flashed horridly for Althea. It was dim, yet bright,
scintillating darkly; she could only imagine it in similes; she had never seen anything that
could visualise it for her. The insufferable dogs, like tethered bubbles, bounded before them,
constantly impeding their progress. Althea was thankful for the excuse afforded her by the
tangling of her feet in the string to pause and stoop; she felt that her rigid face must betray
her. She stooped for a long moment and hoped that her flush would cover her rigidity. It was
when she raised herself that she saw suddenly in Mrs. Mallison's face something that gave her
more than a suspicion. She didn't suspect her of cruelty or vulgar vengeance--Gerald's aunt
was quite without rancour on the score of her jilting of him; but she did suspect, and more
than suspect her--it was like the unendurable probing of a wound to feel it--of idle yet implacable
curiosity, and of a curiosity edged, perhaps, with idle malice. She summoned all her strength.
She smiled and shook her head a little. 'Faithless Gerald! So soon,' she said. 'He is consoled
quickly. No, I never guessed anything at all.'

Mrs. Mallison had again passed her arm through hers and again pressed it. 'It is soon, isn't
it? A sort of chassé-croisé. But how strange and fortunate that it should be soon--I know you
feel that too.'

'Oh yes, of course, I feel it; it is an immense relief. But they ought to have told me,' Althea
smiled.

'I wonder at that too,' said Mrs. Mallison. 'It is rather bad of them, I think, when they must
know what it would mean to you of joy. When did it happen, do you suppose?'

Althea wondered. Wonders were devouring her.

'It happened with you quite suddenly, didn't it?' said Mrs. Mallison, who breathed the soft
fragrance of her solicitude into Althea's face as she leaned her head near and pressed her
arm closely.

'Quite suddenly,' Althea replied, 'that is, with me it was sudden. Franklin, of course, has
loved me for a great many years.'

'So he was faithless too, for his little time?'

Althea's brain whirled. 'Faithless? Franklin?'

'I mean, while he made his mistake--while he thought he was in love with Helen.'

'It wasn't a question of that. It was to be a match of reason, and friendship--everybody knew,'
Althea stammered.

'Was it?' said Mrs. Mallison with deep interest. 'I see, like yours and Gerald's.'

'Oh----' Althea was not able in her headlong course to do more than glance at the implications
that whizzed past. 'Gerald and I made the mistake, I think; we believed ourselves in love.'

'Did you?' Mrs. Mallison repeated her tone of affectionate and brooding interest. 'What a strange
thing the human heart is, isn't it?'

'Very, very strange.'

'How dear and frank of you to see it all as you do. And there are no more mistakes now,' said
Mrs. Mallison. 'No one is reasonable and every one is radiant.'

'Every one is radiant and reasonable too, I hope,' said Althea. Her head still whirled as she
heard herself analysing for Mrs. Mallison's correction these sanctities of her life. Odious,
intolerable, insolent woman! She could have burst into tears as she walked beside her, held
by her, while her hateful dogs, shrilly barking, bounded buoyantly around them.

'It's dear of you too, to tell me all about it,' said Mrs. Mallison. 'Have you seen Helen yet?
She is just back.'

'No, I've not seen her.'

'You will meet? I am sure you will still be friends--two such real people as you are.'

'Of course we shall meet. Helen is one of my dearest friends.'

'I see. It is so beautiful when people can rise above things. You make me very happy. Don't
tell Helen what I've told you,' Mrs. Mallison with gentle gaiety warned her. 'I knew--in case
you hadn't heard--that it would relieve you so intensely to hear that she and Gerald were happy,
in spite of what you had to do to them. But it would make Helen cross with me if she knew I'd
told you when she hadn't. I'm rather afraid of Helen, aren't you? I'm sure she'll give Gerald
dreadful scoldings sometimes. Poor, dear Gerald!' Mrs. Mallison laughed reminiscently. 'Never
have I beheld such a transfigured being. I didn't think he had it in him to be in love to such
an extent. Oh, it was all in his face--his eyes--when he looked at her.'

Yes, malicious, malicious to the point of vulgarity; that was Althea's thought as, like an
arrow released from long tension, she sped away, the turn of the square once made and Mrs.
Mallison and her dogs once more received into the small house in an adjacent street. Tears
were in Althea's eyes, hot tears, of fury, of humiliation, and--oh, it flooded over her--of
bitterest sorrow and yearning. Gerald, radiant Gerald--lost to her for ever; not even lost;
never possessed. And into the sorrow and humiliation, poisonous suspicions crept. When did
it happen? Where was she? What had been done to her? She must see; she must know. She hailed
a hansom and was driven to old Miss Buchanan's house in Belgravia.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

Helen was sitting at her writing-table before the window, and the morning light fell on her
gracefully disordered hair and gracefully shabby shoulders. The aspect of her back struck on
Althea's bitter, breathless mood. There was no effort made for anything with Helen. She was
the sort of person who would get things without seeking for them and be things without caring
to be them. She had taken what she wanted, when she wanted it; first Franklin, and then--and
perhaps it had been before Franklin had failed her, perhaps it had been before she, Althea,
had failed Gerald--she had taken Gerald. Althea's mind, reeling, yet strangely lucid after
the shock of the last great injury, was also aware, in the moment of her entrance, of many
other injuries, old ones, small ones, yet, in their summing up--and everything seemed to be
summed up now in the cruel revelation--as intolerable as the new and great one. More strongly
than ever before she was aware that Helen was hard, that there was nothing in her soft or tentative
or afraid; and the realisation, though it was not new, came with an added bitterness this morning.
It did not weaken her, however; on the contrary, it nerved her to self-protection. If Helen
was hard, she would not, to-day, show herself soft. It was she who must assume the air of success,
and of rueful yet helpless possessorship. These impressions and resolutions occupied but an
instant. Helen rose and came to her, and what Althea saw in her face armed her resolutions
with hostility. Helen's face confirmed what Mrs. Mallison had said. It was not resentful, not
ironically calm. A solicitous interest, even a sort of benignity, was in her bright gaze. Helen
was hard; she did not really care at all; but she was kind, kinder than ever before; and Althea
found this kindness intolerable.

'Dear Helen,' she said, 'I'm so glad to see you. I had to come at once when I heard that you
were back. You don't mind seeing me?'

'Not a bit,' said Helen, who had taken her hand. 'Why should I?'

'I was afraid that perhaps you might not want to--for a long time.'

'We aren't so foolish as that,' said Helen smiling.

'No, that is what I hoped you would feel too. We have been in the hands of fate, haven't we,
Helen? I've seemed weak and disloyal, I know--to you and to Gerald; but I think it was only
seeming. When I found out my mistake I couldn't go on. And then the rest all followed--inevitably.'

Helen had continued to hold her hand while she spoke, and she continued to gaze at her for
another moment before, pressing it, she let it fall and said: 'Of course you couldn't go on.'

Helen was as resolved--Althea saw that clearly--to act her part of unresentful kindness as
she to act hers of innocent remorse. And the swordthrust in the sight was to suspect that had
Helen been in reality the dispossessed and not the secretly triumphant, she might have been
as kind and as unresentful.

'It's all been a dreadful mistake,' Althea said, going to a chair and loosening her furs. 'From
the very beginning I felt doubt. From the very beginning I felt that Gerald and I did not really
make each other happy. And I believe that you wondered about it too.'

Helen had resumed her seat at the writing-table, sitting turned from it, her hand hanging over
the back of the chair, her long legs crossed, and she faced her friend with that bright yet
softened gaze, interested, alert, but too benign, too contented, to search or question closely.
She was evidently quite willing that Althea should think what she chose, and, this was becoming
evident, she intended to help her to think it. So after a little pause she answered, 'I did
wonder, rather; it didn't seem to me that you and Gerald were really suited.'

'And you felt, didn't you,' Althea urged, 'that it was only because I had been so blind, and
had not seen where my heart really was, you know, that your engagement was possible? I was
so afraid you'd think we'd been faithless to you--Franklin and I; but, when I stopped being
blind----'

'Of course,' Helen helped her on, nodding and smiling gravely, 'of course you took him back.
I don't think you were either of you faithless, and you mustn't have me a bit on your minds;
it was startling, of course; but I'm not heart-broken,' Helen assured her.

Oh, there was no malice here; it was something far worse to bear, this wish to lift every shadow
and smooth every path. Althea's eyes fixed themselves hard on her friend. Her head swam a little
and some of her sustaining lucidity left her.

'I was so afraid,' she said, 'that you, perhaps, cared for Franklin--had come to care so much,
I mean--that it might have been hard for you to forgive. I can't tell you the relief it is----'

'To see that I didn't care so much as that?' Helen smiled brightly, though with a brightness,
now, slightly wary, as though with all her efforts to slide and not to press, she felt the
ice cracking a little under her feet, and as though some care might be necessary if she were
to skate safely away. 'Don't have that in the least on your mind, it was what you always disapproved
of, you know, an arrangement of convenience. Franklin and I both understood perfectly. You
know how mercenary I am--though I told you, I remember, that I couldn't think of marrying anybody
I didn't like. I liked Franklin, more than I can say; but it was never a question of love.'

In Althea's ears, also, the ice seemed now to crack ominously. 'You mean,' she said, 'that
you wouldn't have thought of marrying Franklin if it hadn't been for his money?'

There was nothing for Helen but to skate straight ahead. 'No, I don't suppose I should.'

'But you had become the greatest friends.'

She was aware that she must seem to be trying, strangely, incredibly, to prove to Helen that
she had been in love with Franklin; to prove to her that she had no right not to resent anything;
no right to find forgiveness so easy. But there was no time now to stop.

'Of course we became the greatest friends,' Helen said, and it was as if with relief for the
outlet. She was bewildered, and did not know where they were going. 'I don't need to tell you
what I think of Franklin. He is the dearest and best of men, and you are the luckiest of women
to have won him.'

'Ah,' uncontrollably Althea rose to her feet with almost the cry, 'I see; you think me lucky
to have won a man who, in himself, without money, wasn't good enough for you. Thank you.'

For a long moment--and in it they both recognised that the crash had come, and that they were
struggling in dark, cold water--Helen was silent. She kept her eyes on Althea and she did not
move. Then, while she still looked steadily upon her, a slow colour rose in her cheeks. It
was helplessly, burningly, that she blushed, and Althea saw that she blushed as much for anger
as for shame, and that the shame was for her.

She did not need Helen's blush to show her what she had done, what desecration she had wrought.
Her own blood beat upwards in hot surges and tears rushed into her eyes. She covered her face
with her hands and dropped again into her chair, sobbing.

Helen did not help her out. She got up and went to the mantelpiece and looked down at the fire
for some moments. And at last she spoke, 'I didn't mean that either. I think that Franklin
is too good for either of us.'

'Good!' wept Althea. 'He is an angel. Do you suppose I don't see that? But why should I pretend
when you don't. I'm not in love with Franklin. I'm unworthy of him--more unworthy of him than
you were--but I'm not in love with him, even though he is an angel. So don't tell me that I
am lucky. I am a most miserable woman.' And she wept on, indifferent now to any revelations.

Presently she heard Helen's voice. It was harder than she had ever known it. 'May I say something?
It's for his sake--more than for yours. What I advise you to do is not to bother so much about
love. You couldn't stick to Gerald because you weren't loved enough; and you're doubting your
feeling for Franklin, now, because you can't love him enough. Give it all up. Follow my second-rate
example. Be glad that you're marrying an angel and that he has all that money. And do remember
that though you're not getting what you want, you are getting a good deal and he is getting
nothing, so try to play the game and to see if you can't make it up to him; see if you can't
make him happy.'

Althea's sobbing had now ceased, though she kept her face still covered. Bitter sadness, too
deep now for resentment, was in her silence, a silence in which she accepted what Helen's words
had of truth. The sadness was to see at last to the full, that she had no place in Helen's
life. There was no love, there was hardly liking, behind Helen's words. And so it had been
from the very first, ever since she had loved and Helen accepted; ever since she had gone forth
carrying gifts, and Helen had stood still and been vaguely aware that homage was being offered.
It had, from the very beginning, been this; Helen, hard, self-centred, insensible, so that
anything appealing or uncertain was bound to be shattered against her. And was not this indifference
to offered love a wrong done to it, something that all life cried out against? Had not weakness
and fear and the clinging appeal of immaturity their rights, so that the strong heart that
was closed to them, that did not go out to them in tenderness and succour, was the dull, the
lesser heart? Dimly she knew, not exculpating herself, not judging her beautiful Helen, that
though she had, in her efforts towards happiness, pitifully failed, there was failure too in
being blind, in being unconscious of any effort to be made. The more trivial, the meaner aspect
of her grief was merged in a fundamental sincerity.

'What you say is true,' she said, 'for I know that I am a poor creature. I know that I give
Franklin nothing, and take everything from him. But it is easy for you to talk of what is wise
and strong, Helen, and to tell me what I ought to do and feel. You have everything. You have
the man who loves you and the man you love. It is easy for you to be clear and hard and see
other people's faults. I know--I know about you and Gerald.'

Helen turned to her. Althea had dropped her hands. She did not look at her friend, but, with
tear-disfigured eyes, out of the window; and there was a desolate dignity in her aspect. For
the first time in their unequal intercourse they were on an equal footing. Helen was aware
of Althea, and, in a vague flash, for self-contemplation was difficult to her, she was aware
of some of the things that Althea saw: the lack of tenderness; the lack of imagination; the
indifference to all that did not come within the circle of her own tastes and affections. It
was just as Franklin had said, and Gerald, and now Althea; her heart was hard. And she was
sorry, though she did not know what she was to do; for though she was sorry for Althea her
heart did not soften for her as it had softened for Franklin, and for the thought of Franklin--too
good for them all, sacrificed to them all. It was the thought of the cruelty of nature, making
of Franklin, with all his wealth of love, a creature never to be desired, that gave to her
vision of life, and of all this strange predicament in which life had involved them, an ironic
colour incompatible with the warmth of trust and tenderness which Franklin had felt lacking
in her. She was ironic, she was hard, and she must make the best of it. But it was in a gentle
voice that, looking at her friend's melancholy head, she asked: 'Who told you that?'

'Mrs. Mallison,' said Althea. 'I've been a hypocrite to you all the morning.'

'And I have been an odious prig to you. That ass of a Kitty Mallison. I had not intended any
one to know for months.' Even in her discomfiture Helen retained her tact. She did not say 'we.'

'For my sake, I suppose?'

'Oh no! why for yours?' Helen was determined that Althea should be hurt no further. If pity
for Franklin had edged her voice, pity for Althea must keep from her the blighting knowledge
of Franklin's sacrifice.

'It was we who were left, wasn't it--Gerald and I? I don't want us to appear before people's
eyes at once as consolation prizes to each other.'

Althea now turned a sombre gaze upon her. 'He couldn't be that to you, since you've never loved
Franklin; and I know that you are not that to him; Gerald didn't need to be consoled for losing
me. He did need to be consoled when he heard that you were marrying Franklin. I remember the
day that your letter came--the letter that said you were engaged. That really ended things
for us.' Her lip trembled. 'It is easy for you to say that I didn't stick to Gerald because
he didn't love me enough. How could I have stuck to some one who, I see it well enough now,
was beginning to love some one else?'

Helen contemplated her and the truths she put before her. 'Try to forgive me,' she said.

'There's nothing to forgive,' said Althea, rising. 'You told me the truth, and what I had said
was so despicable that I deserved to have it told to me. All the mistakes are mine. I've wanted
things that I've no right to; I suppose it's that. You and I weren't made for each other, just
as Gerald and I weren't, and it's all only my mistake and my misfortune--for wanting and loving
people who couldn't want or love me. I see it all at last, and it's all over. Good-bye, Helen.'
She put out her hand.

'Oh, but don't--don't----' Helen clasped her hand, strangely shaken by impulses of pity and
self-reproach that yet left her helpless before her friend's sincerity. 'Don't say you are
going to give me up,' she finished, and tears stood in her eyes.

'I'm afraid I must give up all sorts of things,' said Althea, smiling desolately. 'If we hadn't
got so near, we might have gone on. I'm afraid when people aren't made for each other they
can't get so near without its breaking them. Good-bye. I shall try to be worthy of Franklin.
I shall try to make him happy.'

CHAPTER XXXV.

She drove back to her hotel. She felt very tired. The world she gazed at seemed vast and alien,
a world in which she had no place. The truth had come to her and she looked at it curiously,
almost indifferently. London flowed past her, long tides of purpose to right and left. The
trees in Green Park were softly blurred on the chill, white sky. She looked at the trees and
sky and at the far lift of Piccadilly, blackened with traffic, and, at the faces that went
by, as if it were all a vast cinematograph and she the idlest of spectators. And it was here
that love had first come to her, and here that despair had come. Now both were over and she
accepted her defeat.

She thought, when the hotel was reached, and as she went upstairs, that she would go to bed
and try to sleep. But when she entered her little sitting-room she found Franklin there waiting
for her. He had been reading the newspapers before the fire and had risen quickly on hearing
her step. It was as if she had forgotten Franklin all this time.

She stood by the door that she had closed, and gazed at him. It was without will, or hope,
or feeling that she gazed, as if he were a part only of that alien world she had looked at,
and this outward seeing was relentless. A meagre, commonplace, almost comic little man. She
saw behind him his trite and colourless antecedents; she saw before him--and her--the future,
trite and colourless too, but for the extraneous glitter of the millions that surrounded him
as incongruously as a halo would have done. He was an angel, of course; he was good; but he
was only that; there were no varieties, no graces, no mysteries. His very interests were as
meagre as his personality; he had hardly a taste, except the taste for doing his best. Books,
music, pictures--all the great world of beauty and intellect that the world of goodness and
workaday virtues existed, perhaps, only to make possible--its finer, more ethereal superstructure--only
counted for Franklin as recreations, relaxations, things half humorously accepted as one accepts
a glass of lemonade on a hot day. Not only was he without charm, but he was unaware of charm;
he didn't see it or feel it or need it. And she, who had seen and felt, she who had known Gerald
and Helen, must be satisfied with this. It was this that she must strive to be worthy of. She
was unworthy, and she knew it; but that acceptation was only part of the horror of defeat.
And the soulless gaze with which she looked at him oddly chiselled her pallid face. She was
like a dumb, classic mask, too impersonal for tragedy. Her lips were parted in their speechlessness
and her eyes vacant of thought.

Then, after that soulless seeing, she realised that she had frightened Franklin. He came to
her. 'Dear--what is the matter?' he asked.

He came so near that she looked into his eyes. She looked deeply, for a long time, in silence.
And while she looked, while Franklin's hands gently found and held hers, life came to her with
dreadful pain again. She felt, rather than knew--and with a long shudder--that the world was
vast; she felt and feared it as vast and alien. She felt that she was alone, and the loneliness
was a terror, beating upon her. And she felt--no longer seeing anything but the deeps of Franklin's
eyes--that he was her only refuge; and closing her own eyes she stumbled towards him and he
received her in his arms.

They sat on the sofa, and Franklin clasped her while she wept, and she seemed to re-enter childhood
where all that she wanted was to cry her heart out and have gentle arms around her while she
confessed every wrong-doing that had made a barrier between herself and her mother's heart.
'O Franklin,' she sobbed, 'I'm so unhappy!'

He said nothing, soothing her as a mother might have done.

'Franklin, I loved him!' she sobbed. 'It was real: it was the reallest thing that ever happened
to me. I only sent for you because I knew that he didn't love me. I loved him too much to go
on if he didn't love me. What I have suffered, Franklin. And now he is going to marry Helen.
He loves Helen. And I am not worthy of you.'

'Poor child,' said Franklin. He pressed his lips to her hair.

'You know, Franklin?'

'Yes, I know, dear.'

'I am not worthy of you,' Althea repeated. 'I have been weak and selfish. I've used you--to
hide from myself--because I was too frightened to stand alone and give up things.'

'Well, you shan't stand alone any more,' said Franklin.

'But, Franklin--dear--kind Franklin--why should you marry me? I don't love you--not as I loved
him. I only wanted you because I was afraid. I must tell you all the truth. I only want you
now, and cling to you like this, because I am afraid, because I can't go on alone and have
nothing to live for.'

'You'll have me now, dear,' said Franklin. 'You'll try that, won't you, and perhaps you'll
find it more worth while than you think.'

Something more now than fear and loneliness and penitence was piercing her. His voice: poor
Franklin's voice. What had she done to him? What had they all done to him among them? And dimly,
like the memory of a dream, yet sharply, too, as such memory may be sharp, there drifted for
Althea the formless fear that hovered--formless yet urgent--when Franklin had come to her in
her desperate need. It hovered, and it seemed to shape itself, as if through delicate curves
of smoke, into Helen's face--Helen's eyes and smile. Helen, charm embodied; Helen, all the
things that Franklin could never be; all the things she had believed till now, Franklin could
never feel or need. What did she know of Franklin? so the fear whispered softly. What had Helen
done to Franklin? What had it meant to Franklin, that strange mingling with magic?

She could never ask. She could never know. It would hover and whisper always, the fear that
had yet its beauty. It humbled her and it lifted Franklin. He was more than she had believed.
She had believed him all hers, to take; but it was he who had given himself to her, and there
was an inmost shrine--ah, was there not?--that was not his to give. And pity, deep pity, and
sadness immeasurable for a loss not hers alone, was in her as she sobbed: 'Ah, it is only because
you are sorry for me. I have killed all the rest. You are not in love with me any longer--poor--poor
Franklin--and everything is spoiled.'

But Franklin could show her that he had seen the fear, and yet that life was not spoiled by
shrines in each heart from which the other was shut out. It was difficult to know how to say
it; difficult to tell her that some truth she saw and yet that there was more truth for them
both--plenty of truth, as he would have said, for them both to live on. And though it took
him a little while to find the words, he did find them at last, completely, for her and for
himself, saying gently, while he held her, 'No, it isn't, dear. It's not spoiled. It's not
the same--for either of us--is it?--but it isn't spoiled. We've taken nothing from each other;
some things weren't ours, that's all. And even if you don't much want to marry me, you must
please have me, now; because I want to marry you. I want to live for you so much that by degrees,
I feel sure of it, you'll want to live for me, too. We must live for each other; we've got
each other. Isn't that enough, Althea?'

'Is it--is it enough?' she sobbed.

'I guess it is,' said Franklin.

His voice was sane and sweet, even if it was sad. It seemed the voice of life. Althea closed
her eyes and let it fold her round. Only with Franklin could she find consolation in her defeat,
or strength to live without the happiness that had failed her. Only Franklin could console
her for having to take Franklin. Was that really all that it came to? No, she felt it growing,
as they sat in silence, her sobs quieting, her head on his shoulder; it came to more. But she
saw nothing clearly after the hateful, soulless seeing. The only clear thing was that it was
good to be with Franklin.

THE END.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN.

  FORTHCOMING VOLUMES.

MANALIVE. G. K. Chesterton.

Mr. Chesterton is avowedly the maker of fantasies, half allegorical in motive; but like all
true allegories, they touch ordinary life at many points. This story will be found as daring
and subtle in conception, and as brilliant in presentation as his best work. (May 19.)

WHITE WINGS. William Black.

William Black's famous novel may be described as a classic of yachting. No sunnier tale of
the seas has ever been written. (June 2.)

SCARLET RUNNER. C. N. and A. M. Williamson.

In this book Mr. and Mrs. Williamson describe the various doings of a young gentleman whose
sole worldly possession is a large touring car. Adventures are to the adventurous, and Christopher
Race found them in full. (June 16.)

  Already Published.

TRENT'S LAST CASE. E. C. Bentley.

This has been by far the most successful detective novel of recent years. Mr. Lewis Hind in
The Daily Chronicle described it as the best detective story of the century.

THE OPEN QUESTION. Elizabeth Robins.

This was the book with which Miss Robins first won her great reputation as a novelist. The
scene is laid in America, and the story is described by the author as a "study of two temperaments."

THE MONEY MARKET. E. F. Benson.

A brilliant study of London society and of the strife between love and the power of purse.

THE LUCK OF THE VAILS. E. F. Benson.

In this story of modern country-house life Mr. Benson mingles mystery, intrigue, and comedy
with the skill of which he alone has the secret.

THE POTTER'S THUMB. Flora Annie Steel.

"Sometimes the potter's thumb slips in the moulding, so in the firing the pot cracks." Mrs.
Steel's brilliant study of Anglo-Indian life is based upon this text. It is one of the most
dramatic and moving of her Indian novels.

ON THE FACE OF THE WATERS. Flora Annie Steel.

This book is generally regarded as Mrs. Steel's masterpiece. It is a story of the Indian Mutiny,
and contains a wonderful picture of the heroism of English men and women in that time of terror.

THE HOUSE OF THE WOLF. Stanley J. Weyman.

This, one of the first of Mr. Weyman's famous novels, deals with France in the time of the
Huguenot wars, and contains a brilliant picture of the massacre of St. Bartholomew.

MIGHTIER THAN THE SWORD. A. Courlander.

This realistic story of life on a great London newspaper is probably the best novel of journalism
ever written.

A WALKING GENTLEMAN. James Prior.

In this delightful fantasia a young peer, on the eve of his marriage, walks out of his park
into the world of common folk, and in the adventures which follow finds that zest for life
which he had hitherto found wanting.

BROTHERS. H. A. Vachell.

The publishers are happy to be able to add to the Nelson Library Mr. Vachell's most famous
novel, one of the most successful of recent years. It is a brilliant study of character, full
of drama and profound humanity.

THE EXPLOITS OF BRIGADIER GERARD. A. Conan Doyle.

The doings of this soldier of Napoleon have long been among Sir A. Conan Doyle's most popular
achievements in the art of fiction. As Mr. Merriman's Barlasch represents the graver type of
French veteran, so Brigadier Gerard represents the dash and braggadocio of the Grande Armée.

WHITE HEATHER. William Black.

This charming love story is one of the most popular of Mr. Black's romances of Highland life
and sport.

SIMON DALE. Anthony Hope.

This is Mr. Anthony Hope's only historical novel. It deals with the Court of Charles II., and
gives a brilliant picture of that complex age, relieved by a charming love story.

A GENTLEMAN OF FRANCE. Stanley J. Weyman.

This is the first novel by which Mr. Weyman won his great reputation. It is a tale of France
during the religious wars of the sixteenth century, and has long ranked as one of the most
brilliant historical romances of our day.

THE WAR IN THE AIR. H. G. Wells.

"The War in the Air" is a story of the awful devastation following a conflict between two first-class
powers with the resources of the air at their command. It is one of the most brilliant and
successful of Mr. Wells's studies in futurity.

RUPERT OF HENTZAU. Anthony Hope.

This is a sequel to the famous "Prisoner of Zenda," already published in the Nelson Library.
It tells of the end of the long vendetta between young Rupert of Hentzau and the Englishman,
Rudolph Rassendyll. It is needless to praise a book which, with its predecessor, has been recognized
as one of the greatest of modern romances.

SALT OF THE SEA. Morley Roberts.

This is a collection of Mr. Morley Roberts's best sea stories selected from half a dozen of
his former volumes. "The Promotion of the Admiral" and its sequel have been ranked by good
critics as among the best modern short stories. Mr. Roberts is scarcely less fine in his eerie
tales, as in the wonderful tale of  "Billy be-damned."

THE MEMOIRS OF SHERLOCK HOLMES. A. Conan Doyle.

The publishers are happy to be able to add to their Nelson Library the first collection of
those stories which have made the name of Sherlock Holmes a household word throughout the world.

THE PALADIN. H. A. Vachell.

Mr. Vachell's gift of sympathetic understanding has rarely appeared to better advantage than
in this story. It is a fascinating study of quixotry and idealism.

THE OSBORNES. E. F. Benson.

In this book Mr. Benson has provided a careful and sympathetic study of a middle-class family
who rise to affluence. It is full of brilliant humour and wide human sympathy.

THE RETURN OF THE EMIGRANT. Lydia M. Mackay.

This is a story of modern Highland life, full of carefully studied types, and lit with all
the glamour of the Western Highlands. It is the most important recent contribution to Scottish
fiction.

PRINCESS PRISCILLA'S FORTNIGHT.

By the Author of "Elizabeth and her German Garden." This tale, famous both as a book and as
a play, tells how a young and beautiful German princess, growing weary of Court restrictions,
flies from her home, and with her maid seeks refuge in an English village. Her royal generosity
soon leads her into financial straits, and she is rescued and restored to her family by her
lover. The humour and piquancy of the situations are not less great than the charm of the heroine.

LADY GOOD-FOR-NOTHING. "Q" (Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch).

Sir Oliver Vyell, the British Collector of Customs at Boston, rescues a poor girl from the
stocks, educates her, and makes her mistress of his household. The scene moves to Lisbon, and
there is a wonderful picture of the earthquake.

HETTY WESLEY. "Q."

This love story of one of the members of the Wesley family is perhaps "Q's" most brilliant
novel, as distinct from those romances with which his name is chiefly associated.

HURRISH. Hon. Emily Lawless.

This is a tale of peasant life in Ireland which has few rivals in Irish literature. It is done
with the dignity and restraint of a Greek tragedy.

JEMMY ABERCRAW. Bernard Capes.

In this brilliant romance the chief figure is a highwayman who conducts his profession in a
spirit of light-hearted chivalry. The last of the Jacobite plots in England is introduced into
the narrative.

RULES OF THE GAME. Stewart Edward White.

Mr. S. E. White is one of the best of those younger American novelists who deal with man in
his conflicts with nature. This is a story of the Californian Sierras and the great duel between
the financial trusts and the Government for the preservation of the forests. Like all Mr. White's
books it is full of swift incident and the magic of the wilds.

WHEN VALMOND CAME TO PONTIAC. Sir Gilbert Parker.

In this charming story Sir Gilbert Parker tells of the fortunes of a young adventurer in Canada
in the early nineteenth century who claimed to be the son of the great Napoleon. The mystery
of his life and his tragic death make up one of the most original and moving of recent romances.
The author does for Quebec what in other works he has done for the Western and Northern wilds--he
interprets to the world its essential romance.

THE GENTLEMAN FROM INDIANA. Booth Tarkington.

In this book the author of "Monsieur Beaucaire" tells a story of his own country. "The Gentleman
from Indiana" is a tale of a young university graduate who becomes a newspaper owner and editor
in a Western town, and wages war against "graft" and corruption. His crusade brings him into
relations with the girl who had captured his heart at college, and their love story is subtly
interwoven with his political campaign. It is one of the best of modern American novels, and
readers will delight not only in the stirring drama of the plot, but in the fresh and sympathetic
pictures given of the young townships of the West.

THE INVIOLABLE SANCTUARY. George A. Birmingham.

Mr. Birmingham's novel takes us to the west of Ireland. The heroine is a young lady of fifteen,
who, with the help of a boy cousin, discovers a mystery in the bay, and lands the whole parish
in a bog of intrigue. It is in every way as amusing and delightful as "Spanish Gold" and "The
Simpkins Plot."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE NELSON LIBRARY.

  Uniform with this Volume and same Price.

   CONDENSED LIST.

  Arranged alphabetically under Authors' Names.

  BAILEY, H. C.
    Springtime.
    Beaujeu.

  BECKE, LOUIS.
    Edward Barry, South Sea Pearler.

  BELLOC, HILAIRE.
    Mr. Clutterbuck's Election.
    The Girondin.

  BENSON, E. F.
    Daisy's Aunt.
    The Luck of the Vails.
    The Money Market.
    The Osbornes.
    The Princess Sophia.

  BENTLEY, E. C.
    Trent's Last Case.

  BIRMINGHAM, GEORGE A.
    The Simpkins Plot.
    The Inviolable Sanctuary.

  BLACK, WILLIAM.
    White Heather.

  BRADDON, Miss.
    Lady Audley's Secret.
    Vixen.

  BRAMAH, ERNEST.
    The Secret of the League.

  BUCHAN, JOHN.
    Prester John.

  BURNETT, MRS. F. H.
    The Making of a Marchioness.

  By The Author of "Elizabeth and
  her German Garden."
    Princess Priscilla's Fortnight.

  CAINE, HALL.
    A Son of Hagar.

  CAPES, BERNARD.
    Jemmy Abercraw.

  CARR, M. E.
    The Poison of Tongues.

  CASTLE, A. and E.
    If Youth but Knew.
    Incomparable Bellairs.
    French Nan.
    The Rose of the World.
    The Panther's Cub.

  CHILDERS, ERSKINE.
    The Riddle of the Sands.

  CHOLMONDELEY, MARY.
    Red Pottage.

  CLIFFORD, MRS. W. K.
    Woodside Farm.

  CONRAD, JOSEPH.
    Romance.

  COPPING, A.
    Gotty and the Guv'nor.

  COURLANDER, A.
    Mightier than the Sword.

  DOUGLAS, GEORGE.
    The House with the Green Shutters.

  DOYLE, A. CONAN.
    The Refugees.
    The Great Shadow.
    Micah Clarke.
    The Sign of Four.
    Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.
    The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.
    The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard.
    The Hound of the Baskervilles.

  DUNCAN, SARA JEANETTE.
    Set in Authority.

  FALKNER, J. MEADE.
    Moonfleet.

  FINDLATER, MARY AND JANE.
    Crossriggs.

  FORREST, R. E.
    Eight Days.

  FUTRELLE, JACQUES.
    The Lady in the Case.

  GARNETT, MRS.
    The Infamous John Friend.

  GISSING, GEORGE.
    Odd Women.
    Born in Exile.

  GRIER, SYDNEY.
    The Warden of the Marches.

  HARLAND, HENRY.
    The Cardinal's Snuff-Box.
    My Friend Prospero.

  HARRADEN, BEATRICE.
    Katharine Frensham.
    Interplay.
    Out of the Wreck I Rise.

  HOBBES, JOHN OLIVER.
    Love and the Soul-hunters.

  HOPE, ANTHONY.
    The Intrusions of Peggy.
    Quisanté.
    The King's Mirror.
    The God in the Car.
    Count Antonio.
    The Dolly Dialogues.
    The Prisoner of Zenda.
    A Man of Mark.
    Rupert of Hentzau.
    Sophy of Kravonia.
    Tristram of Blent.
    The Great Miss Driver.
    Simon Dale.
    Tales of Two People.

  HORNUNG, E. W.
    Raffles.
    Mr. Justice Raffles.
    A Thief in the Night: the Last Chronicles of Raffles.
    Stingaree.

  HYNE, C. J. CUTCLIFFE.
    Thompson's Progress.
    Mr. Horrocks, Purser.

  JACOB, VIOLET.
    The Interloper.

  JACOBS, W. W.
    The Lady of the Barge.
    The Skipper's Wooing.

  JAMES, HENRY.
    The American.

  LAWLESS, Hon. EMILY.
    Hurrish.

  LONDON, JACK.
    White Fang.
    Adventure.
    A Daughter of the Snows.

  LORIMER, G. H.
    Old Gorgon Graham.

  MACNAUGHTAN, S.
    The Fortune of Christina M'Nab.
    A Lame Dog's Diary.
    Selah Harrison.
    The Expensive Miss Du Cane.
    The Gift.

  MACKAY, L. MILLER.
    Return of the Emigrant.

  MALET, LUCAS.
    The Wages of Sin.
    The Gateless Barrier.

  MARSHALL, ARCHIBALD.
    Exton Manor.

  MASEFIELD, JOHN.
    Captain Margaret.
    Multitude and Solitude.

  MASON, A. E. W.
    Clementina.
    The Four Feathers.
    The Broken Road.

  MERRICK, LEONARD.
    The House of Lynch.
    The Call from the Past.

  MERRIMAN, H. SETON.
    The Last Hope.
    The Isle of Unrest.
    The Vultures.
    In Kedar's Tents.
    Roden's Corner.
    Barlasch of the Guard.
    The Velvet Glove.

  MORRISON, ARTHUR.
    A Child of the Jago.

  NICHOLSON, MEREDITH.
    The War of the Carolinas.
    The House of a Thousand Candles.

  NORRIS, FRANK.
    The Octopus.
    The Pit.
    Shanghaied.

  OLLIVANT, ALFRED.
    Owd Bob.

  PAIN, BARRY.
    The One Before.

  PARKER, SIR GILBERT.
    The Battle of the Strong.
    The Translation of a Savage.
    An Adventurer of the North.
    When Valmond came to Pontiac.
    The Right of Way.
    Donovan Pasha.
    The Seats of the Mighty.

  PASTURE, Mrs. H. De La.
    The Man from America.
    The Lonely Lady of Grosvenor Square.
    The Grey Knight.

  PHILLPOTTS, EDEN.
    The American Prisoner.
    The Farm of the Dagger.

  PRIOR, JAMES.
    Forest Folk.
    A Walking Gentleman.

  "Q."
    Sir John Constantine.
    Major Vigoureux.
    Shining Ferry.
    True Tilda.
    Lady Good-for-Nothing.
    Hetty Wesley.

  RIDGE, W. PETT.
    Mrs. Galer's Business.

  ROBERTS, MORLEY.
    Salt of the Sea.

  ROBINS, E.
    Come and Find Me.
    The Open Question.

  SAVILE, FRANK.
    The Road.

  SEDGWICK, Miss A. D.
    Valerie Upton.

  SIDGWICK, Mrs. A.
    Cynthia's Way.
    Cousin Ivo.

  SILBERRAD, UNA L.
    The Good Comrade.
    John Bolsover.
    Ordinary People.

  SNAITH, J. C.
    Fortune.

  STEEL, FLORA ANNIE.
    The Potter's Thumb.
    On the Face of the Waters.

  TARKINGTON, BOOTH.
    Monsieur Beaucaire, and The Beautiful Lady.
    The Gentleman from Indiana.

  TWAIN, MARK.
    Tom Sawyer.
    Huckleberry Finn.

  VACHELL, H. A.
    John Charity.
    The Waters of Jordan.
    The Other Side.
    The Paladin.
    Brothers.

  VERNEDE, R. E.
    The Pursuit of Mr. Faviel.

  WARD, MRS. HUMPHRY.
    The Marriage of William Ashe.
    Robert Elsmere.
    Marcella.
    Lady Rose's Daughter.
    Sir George Tressady.
    Helbeck of Bannisdale.
    Eleanor.

  WELLS, H. G.
    Kipps.
    The Food of the Gods.
    Love and Mr. Lewisham.
    The First Men in the Moon.
    The Sleeper Awakes.
    The Invisible Man.
    The History of Mr. Polly.
    The Country of the Blind.
    The War in the Air.

  WEYMAN, STANLEY J.
    The House of the Wolf.
    A Gentleman of France.
    Sophia.

  WHITE, STEWART E.
    The Blazed Trail.
    Rules of the Game.

  WHITEING, RICHARD.
    No. 5 John Street.

  WILLIAMSON, C. N. and A. M.
    The Princess Passes.
    Love and the Spy.
    The Lightning Conductor.

T. NELSON & SONS, London, Edinburgh, Dublin, and New York.