Quick as sound she had seen, had realized, had spun on her apology for a tail, and had gone,
leaving a little trail of foam behind her to prove her speed and her coyness.  But, quick as
light, the magnificent male seal had sunk from sight, leaving a little chain of bursting bubbles
behind to mark his speed.  And the last that was seen of that lady seal was a speck far on
the horizon, going like a masterless torpedo, alternately leaping forward through the air and
shooting along on, or just under, the surface--switchbacking, they call it; and that, I dare
to fancy, if it proves anything, proves that the coyness was only make-believe, and that she
had allowed the daring admirer to catch her up and force her to act as if she were already
vanquished and using the last arts of swift swimming she knew.

It left the skua, however; left him still floating, floating, floating up one long breaker's
side, and sliding down its other side to its fellow behind, towards the shore--always towards
the shore.  It is true that the tide was falling offshore, but that made no difference to the
currents of those parts, which were independent currents and of a great force.  They were shouldering
the skua steadily to land, and if you had dropped a line overboard there, with an ordinary
lead on, you would have felt them pulling at it, and taking the lead along like a live thing.
And the currents were Fate, so far as that bird was concerned.

There was a little inlet, and a little bay in the inlet no larger than a good-sized dining-table,
and seaweed, green and red, upon the rock-bowlders that encircled it, and old-gold patches
of sand between the rock-bowlders, and green grass behind the rock-bowlders, and brown-plush
furze behind the green grass, and a patch of blue sky over all.  And in the middle of the little
bay in the inlet, bob-bobbing on the lap-lapping of the littlest waves, that--sifted out by
then, as it were--had found their way so far, floated the skua, the Richardson's or Arctic
skua, dead, to all appearances, as the proverbial door-nail. But that was not the rub.  The
rub was in the--ah!

"He-oh!" pealed down the clear, ringing bugle-cry from above, and a shadow floated upon the
reflections a-dance on the surface in the little bay in the little inlet--floated and hung,
so that it exactly covered the skua like a funeral pall; floated, and hung, and came down.
As its claws scraped a bowlder, and it furled its long, narrow vans, it was revealed as the
big herring-gull--him we left out upon the face of the waters, watching and waiting on chance.

His spotless expanse of head and neck alone marked him, gave him away, a speck you could see
for a mile.  His size--just on two feet--proved what his snowy hood proclaimed, in case there
were any doubts.  A smaller gull, an uncommon common gull--of eighteen inches--came and looked,
to make quite sure--and went away again.  The herring-gull, in spite of his silly name, has
a reputation, and a "plug ugly" one.

And the herring-gull, he--did nothing.  That is the strength of the herring-gull--doing nothing.
He can do it for an hour, half a morning, or most of a day.  His battle-cry might well have
been, "Wait and see," but he must be one of the few living, breathing things on this earth
who have made the game pay, and--lived.  He might have been a lump of chalk, or a marble carving,
or a stuffed specimen, or asleep, or dead, for all the signs of living that he gave.  One began
to wonder if he ever would move again.  He had been a bird, but was now the life-size model
of one cut in alabaster, with clear pebbles for eyes--they were quite as hard and cold as that,
his eyes.

And all the time the body of the skua floated, and danced, and drifted, and lifted in, making
an inch on one wavelet, to lose three-quarters of it on the next, but still, unnoticeably perhaps,
but undoubtedly, gradually, surely, for all that, drifting in.

Somebody has written somewhere that gulls never touch a carcass on land.  Sometimes they touch
things on land which were not carcasses before they touched them.  This gull, however, did
not wait for any landing.  Perhaps he knew that, once stranded, the gray crows might come to
assist him in their own peculiar way, or a raven, who would not assist him at all, except into
the next world, if he did not relinquish all claim to the feast.  Anyway, whatever we poor
mortals may kid ourselves into thinking he did or did not know, or what we may think he ought
to have known, he began operations as soon as the skua came alongside, so to speak--that is,
drifted against the particular bowlder upon which the sphinx-like herring-gull happened by
chance--always by chance, of course--to be standing.

Now, there is no particular joy in having your eyes hammered at by a blunted sharp instrument,
like a herring-gull's beak, for instance, even if those eyes happen to be shut, as I think
the skua's were, and the instrument wielded with the extreme clumsiness of the half-trained,
as I know the herring-gull's beak was.  But, all the same, it was the kindest thing that could
have happened, for, had it not been for that, the skua was like to have drifted in that fashion
from that little inlet out upon another sea; not the one connected with the inlet, but one
where you can drift forever, and whose name is Death.  The physical pain, however, brought
him round.  He was only stunned, and the agony of the eyes, or eye, rather, was acute.

He opened the other eye--a wonderful, piercing, fierce orb.  He contracted his feathers.  The
world grew from a mist in that eye to a little bay in a little inlet, with the seaweed-covered
bowlder-rocks, the old-gold sand, the green grass, the brown-plush furze, and the patch of
wonderful blue sky over-top.  Then it took in the spotless, gaunt form of the herring-gull,
and--he remembered that he was a skua, only some twenty-one inches long, 'tis true, but still
a skua, to be treated and respected as such.

Wherefore, who so surprised as that big father of herring-gulls when the bedraggled, smoky-hued
thing under his bill, which he may, or may not, have taken for a corpse, woke up, returned
to life suddenly, and erupted into his very face, with the yells of a fiend, the weapons of
a fury, and the rage of several devils?  He yelled, too, that herring-gull, not entirely with
rage, and did his best to get under way as quickly as might be, but became, before he knew
where he was, altogether too busy even for that.

Not being in the habit of performing optical operations upon Arctic skuas as a rule, he had
nothing in his memory to warn him of what followed, nothing to put him up to the absolutely
diabolical fury of the onslaught he had to meet in the next few seconds.  He certainly did
his level best with such weapons as Nature had given him, but his blunt, hooked beak and the
claws he had not got seemed suddenly meager against the hammering, tearing, stabbing, rending
dagger weapons of his--"meal."

The skua saw red, and the herring-gull saw mainly red skua, as he was hurled back and down
under the first rush, and instantly, without a second to recover, was hurled, equally helplessly,
the other way, shrieking for his very life, and decorating the air and the old-gold sand with
a pretty little cloud of his spotless feathers.

He fought with the desperation of almost all the wild-people, when there is no help for it;
hammering, too, but wildly and clumsily.  The skua fought with the cunning and precision of
the professional, plus such a rage as can only be described as berserk.

It was not a long fight.  Perhaps the skua felt that, after his collision at sea, his bolt
would be soon shot, and he had better do what he was going to do as quickly and thoroughly
as possible. Certainly he did appear to do so; and when at length he drew back, rocking and
gasping like a drunken creature, the famed purity of that herring-gull's uniform was a thing
of beauty no longer.  That part of him, indeed, which was not red was mud, or sand, or green
slime, and in his eyes was the most worried and tired look you ever saw.

He rocked, too, in his gait, as he ran and blundered, and he gasped with his beak open.  When
he rose, which he did without any sort of procrastination, he rocked worse than ever, and twice
nearly fell, and once hit the water, before finally slowly dragging himself away upward, flapping
low and heavily across the little waves.

With the one available eye--the eye left him in working condition by the herring-gull's clumsy
efforts--flaming like a live-coal, that implacable skua watched him go.  He may or may not
have known it, of course, but I feel pretty certain that he would a few thousand times rather
have been standing there upon the old-gold sand, with only one eye doing duty and an unspeakable
agony in the other eye, than be that herring-gull in the condition he was then, going back
to the bosom of his tribe.  It is not a thing to dwell upon in polite society, but I tell you
that the gull-folk do not always treat their wounded well, and there would be no chance, no
earthly chance at all, of his finding a place in all that vast horizon of sea and sky and island
where they, the ceaseless, never-resting "White Patrol," would not eventually find him.

Then the skua lay down, and thereafter surrendered himself to that utter reaction which birds,
who live more intensely in action than almost any other creatures, have brought to an apparently
exaggerated pitch.  He did not sleep, but he did not move, and every muscle in him, every fiber,
every nerve, faculty, organ, was surrendered utterly to rest.

Night came fluttering her sable wings across the scene, breathing and sighing audibly in the
first silence that wild landscape of storms and squalls had known throughout the day, and the
skua moved.  His neck went up straight, and his head turned, looking sharply this way and that,
fierce apprehension written upon him.

There was nothing one could see to give cause for this.  A flock of curlew were passing, wailing
one to the other, across the sunset; a string of late gulls trailed athwart the sky; and a
wedge of those beautiful little wild-duck known as wigeon was letting itself down to the shores
of the inlet.  Far out to sea a black line, which might have been a sea-serpent if it hadn't
been scoter ducks, trailed undulating over the waves, and a single great white gannet plunged
from aloft into the deep at intervals with a report like a sunset gun.  But they were all innocent,
except in the opinion of the fish and shell-fish, and no manner of folk to trouble the pirate
skua.  Set a thief to catch a thief, however.  And, besides, there was blood on the bird and
around him, or the taint of it, and blood is the devil and all in the wild. There was nothing
to be seen.  No.  That was the worst part of it. It was what was unseen that the skua was thinking
about.

Wherefore, then, our friend of the pirate rig rose and walked stiffly to the summit of one
of the bowlder-rocks right at the water's edge. He was by no means recovered yet, or in any
condition for a fight in that desolate scene, and had to select the most strategic position
he could crawl to.  He did, and awaited Fate's reply.

The day died, and the moon came out to wink and dodge and play a foolish game of hide-and-seek
in and out among the clouds.  She showed the skua, a black knob atop of the black blob of his
bowlder, apparently fast asleep, invisible if we did not know he was there.  She showed black
dots bobbing upon silver lanes, which were sea-duck of various kinds--scaup, long tail, scoter,
and the rest.  She showed a line of old, rotten posts, broken off short by the waves, along
a sand-ridge, which were wild-geese; and she showed three big, white swans--wild-swans, wilder
even than the geese--floating like ghosts in the enchanted light.

But she also showed other things, indistinctly, 'tis true; but enough--quite enough.  She revealed
for an instant, as she shone on the spot on the sand where the skua had sat, the fact that
the sand seemed to be alive, horribly alive, as if the pebbles had taken legs and ran about.
It was a sudden, ghastly flashlight, hidden as soon as seen, and it gave one the shudders.
Those pebbles were crabs mad with hunger, as crabs always seem to he.

They had arrived there as if by magic--been creeping in ever since dusk, probably (one of the
things that were unseen); but whether blood, or feathers, or taint of blood, or what horrible,
ghoulish system of espionage drew them, is not for me to say.  They were there, anyway, and--and--well,
and then they were not there.  The next flashlight of the moon showed that some others had
taken their place.  This was ghastly, for the others were bigger than any shore crabs, and
they hopped, and they sat up hunched, like hobgoblins, and--they scratched! This last identified
them, for the soulless, shelled crab-people are not given to scratch much--at least, not in
that way.  They were rats--shore rats.  The last designation is necessary, for there are rats
and rats, all bad, but the shore rat is the worst.  How many sleeping birds, wounded, tired,
or unalert, die at his hands, or, rather, his teeth, in the course of a year would amaze anybody
if known, and the shell-fish he relieves of life are legion.

The hard, horny carapace of a retreating crab scraped, in the dead silence, against the rock-bowlder
on which the skua sat.  He made no move at the sound, the suggestive sound; but his feathers
were shut down quite tight, and he looked far smaller than usual.  When birds shut down their
feathers in that fashion they put on an armor coat, as it were, through which very little can
pierce.  It showed that he was ready.

And you think that the mere shore crabs could be nothing to him.  But a few hundred ravening
shore crabs, with their lives for sale--all digging pieces out of you in the dark--are not
so easy a proposition to dispose of as people may think.  Try it.

One of the rats turned suddenly and faced towards him.  The skua could see its little, cruel
eyes gleaming like gimlet-holes in the wall of a lighted room.  Then another, and another,
and another did the same.

The skua was scarcely bleeding at all now, but he had left enough of a trail for them--they
who make a specialty of the job.  And they followed it. On such a basis, the Constitution might stand
any blast.

In absence of Mr. G., who still dallies with the sunshine of Riviera, SQUIRE OF MALWOOD, fresh from
hunting in the New Forest, more than fills the place of Leader of Opposition. A favourable opportunity
for distinguishing himself marred by accidental prevalence of funereal associations.

"The Squire," said PLUNKET--watching him as, with legs reverently crossed, and elbow sympathisingly
resting on box, carefully suggestive of life-sized figure of tombstone-mourner, he intoned
his lamentation--"is not fitted for the part, and consequently overdoes it. L'Allegro is his
line. Il Penseroso does not suit him."

Everyone glad when, sermon over, and the black-edged folios put aside, the Squire began business.
Happy enough in his attack on JOKIM, always a telling subject in present House of Commons.

"He is," says SAGE OF QUEEN ANNE'S GATE, drawing upon his theatrical
experiences, "like the Policeman in the Pantomime; always safe for
a roar of laughter if you bonnet him or trip him up over the doorstep."

For

the rest, as Prince ARTHUR pointed out when he came to reply, Squire's speech had very little to
do with the Address, on which it was ostensibly based. Couldn't resist temptation of enlarging
on financial science for the edification of the unhappy JOKIM.

"Finance," observed DICKY TEMPLE, "is HARCOURT's foible."

"Yes," said JENNINGS, whom everyone is glad to see back in better health, "and funeral sermons are
his forte."

Through nearly hour and half the Squire mourned and jibed, Prince
ARTHUR listening attentively, all unconscious of the Shades hovering
about the historic seat in which he lounged, as nearly as possible,
at full length--OLD MORALITY, kindly generous, pleased in another's
prosperity; STAFFORD NORTHCOTE, marvelling at the madness of a world
he has not been loth to quit; DIZZY tickled with the whole situation,
though perhaps a little shocked to see a Leader of the House resting
apparently on his shoulder-blades in the seat where from 1874 to 1876
there posed an upright statuesque figure with folded arms and mask-like
face, lit up now and then by the gleam of eyes that saw everything
whilst they seemed to be looking no whither.

PAM was there, too, with slightly raised eyebrows as they fell on the youthful form already
installed in a place he had not reached till he was almost twice the age of the newcomer. JOHNNY
RUSSELL, scowled at the intruder under a hat a-size-and-half too big for his legs. CANNING looked
on, and thought of his brief tenure of the same place whilst the century was young. Still further
in the shade PITT joined the group.

"Well at least he was even younger when he came to our place," PAM whispered in DIZZY's ear,
startling him as he inadvertently touched his cheek with the straw he still seems to hold in his
teeth, as he did when JOHN LEECH was alive.

Prince ARTHUR, facing the crowded Opposition Benches, of course saw nothing of this; lounged and
listened smilingly as the Squire, having shaken up JOKIM and his
one-pound notes, went oft to Exeter to pummel the MARKISS.

Business done.--Address moved.

Wednesday.--Evidently going to be
an Agricultural Labourer's Session. Small Holdings Bill put in forefront
of Programme. District Councils hinted at. In this situation it was
stroke of genius, due I believe to the MARKISS, that such happy selection
was made of Mover of Address.

Thus it happened that the beast, unable to stop, found himself with his head and eyes being
dug at by a hooked beak, and his jaws closed upon a skinny leg instead of upon the skua's spinal
column, as he had intended, which would have put the skua out of life like turning out a gas-jet.

And it was then, in that instant, that the moon chose to dodge from behind a cloud and reveal
the beast as a big, long, lean, and hungry dog-stoat.  Probably he had thought that the skua
was a gull, and a wounded one.  There is a difference, however, between the skuas and the gulls,
though they bear a family likeness.  He discovered the difference now, and for the next few
minutes was not overjoyed at the knowledge.

One cannot do much blood-sucking to weaken one's prey out of a scrawny leg that resembles a
twig wrapped round with leather.  And the stoat found this out, too, and he would have shifted
his hold to the bird's body like a flash, if he had been given a chance, but he never was.

Before he knew what was happening, he was blinded by the beating of vast wings, his claws began
to slip and slide, and--oh, horror!--still slipping and sliding, he found the bowlder going
from him.  It went from him, receding downwards with terrifying rapidity, and the dancing,
silvery, sparkling water was sliding below, too.

Being a stoat, he hung on with V.C. doggedness and courage; but it was the worst thing he could
have done.  Moreover, as it was, he forced the bird to attempt reprisals in mid-air--a terrible
proceeding.

Now, this was difficult, might almost seem impossible; but the skua is one of the most wonderful
flyers that haunt the seas even--and most of the best are there--and what he could not execute
in the air was scarcely worth mentioning.  It included in this case a perfectly diabolical
scraping of the foe's head with his available claw, and after that, since the dogged stoat
did not leave go, and the pain was excruciating, a wonderful bend forward, and, at a pronounced
and dangerous angle, a fiendish stabbing at the stoat's head with his murderous beak.  This
last involved a drop of nearly a hundred feet, but it did the trick.

Blinded, dazed, shaken, and maddened by the agony of blows upon his sensitive nose, the stoat
opened his jaws to grip higher up the leg; and in an instant he was gone, turning over and
over, down, down, down to the hungry waves below.

Ten minutes later the skua was calmly and safely asleep upon the top of a frowning black stack
of rock, untroubled, I think, even by dreams of the terrible things he had gone through.

      *      *      *      *      *      *

Next morning, an apparition of wonder and fierce beauty, the skua, quite recovered except that
he had a lameness in one leg and a weakness in one wonderful eye that would last him a lifetime,
came racing down-shore out of a stormcloud into the full gold of the sun at some seventy miles
an hour.  He was in pursuit of a common gull who, with more luck than judgment, had caught a fish.

The gull held on for a few minutes, on and in and around the horizon, going like the wind up
and down and around, as for his life, with friend skua ever close to his tail, before a wild
yell, which he could not mistake, sounded in his ear, and he dropped the prize.  The skua executed
his wonderful dive, and caught the gleaming silver thing before it reached the waves, and shooting
up again, was just about to continue his course, when a constant and peculiar flickering above
the beach caught his telescopic eye.

He checked, flung up, came round beautifully effortless, and headed towards the sight.  Probably
he knew what it was, had fathomed it even from that distance.  It was a gang of gulls flying
round and mobbing a hapless wounded gull on the beach.

It was a foul thing to do, a horrible, blundering, clumsy murder, done slowly; but even so,
it was all over before, with a scream that rang like the battle-cry of a Highland chief, and
set the murderous heads up in wild alarm, the skua came shooting, twisting, turning, diving,
and darting right into the heart of the crowd.

And they went circling, and wheeling, and hurling down-wind like sheets of paper, those murderous
sea-birds, dispersed and scattered over the face of the waters, and were gone almost without
a word.

Then the skua came lightly down, rocking on the wind, and settled beside the poor, draggled,
white body, no longer white, upon the shingle, which had been so foully done to death by gulls
of various clans.  He may, or may not, have known it, but I can tell you that the gull was
the self-same herring-gull who had tried to kill him the day before.  Now he--but we will draw
a curtain here.

Next day the skua went away, and the fishing wild-folk breathed a sigh of relief as they watched
him go, and for three days peace brooded over the winged fishers of those parts, so that birds
could feed upon what they caught, nor be in fear of getting hunted for it.  But upon the fourth
day the skua came back.  And he was not alone.  A dusky, nearly brown--for they vary much in
color--female skua came with him.  And in due course they built them a home on the ground among
the heather, and they guarded their treasured eggs and reared with amazing fierce devotion
their beloved young.

Before his advent that strip of wild sea-coast had been, mercifully, without its skuas.  Our
bold buccaneer, however, having won his footing, took care to see that, so far as one bird
could accomplish the great task, it never should be again.

A snipe rose suddenly, and began to call out; a capercailzie lofted all at once, with a great
rush of winged bulk, above the snow-bound forest; and a white hare slid, like a wraith of the
winter, down a silent forest aisle.

Then came the White Wolf of the Frozen Wastes, the terror of the blizzard, ghost-like, enormous,
and swift.  In dead, grim silence came he, loping his loose, tireless wolf's lope, and stopped
at a windfall, where two forest giants, their decaying strength discovered by the extra weight
of snow, lay prone, one across the other.

For a moment he paused, nose up, testing the still, cold air; then he leapt upon the upper
fallen tree.  He had, seen up there and clearly, an enormously thick and woolly coat, that
magnified his already record size.  You see him trotting along the tree-trunk.  Then he stopped
and stared down into the dark hollow under the upper tree.  Then he sniffed--audibly.  Then
he licked his nose--and very red was his tongue.  Then--but this he couldn't help, I verily
believe, as he balanced there with his pricked ears and bright eyes--he whined.

And instantly his little, impatient, dog-like whine was answered by a deep, deep growl, that
seemed to come out of the bowels of the earth.

He was just in time, as he leapt lightly off the windfall, to avoid the rush of a vast brown
bulk, reeking of carrion, furry, terrible, with live-coals for eyes, and threshing the air
with claws Heaven knows how long, which hurled itself like an avalanche out of the hollow at
him. And that thing was a bear.

Now, bears do not, as a rule, without extraordinary reason, in that land, rouse themselves
out of their winter sleep for the mere whine of a wolf.  They are impregnable where they are,
and know it.  The extraordinary reason, however, was present.  The white wolf was sniffing
at it now--the bear's blood-trail to the windfall.  Bruin had been roused once before that
day--by beaters.  He had then been driven forward, shot at by hunters, wounded, escaped, and
returned to his den. But--but, I give you my word, if those beaters, those peasants, had known
the White Wolf of the Frozen Waste was out, nothing in the wide world would have induced them
to beat for bears or anything else in that vicinity.

The white wolf stretched himself to a canter, and slid away through the forest, dropping the
trees past him like telegraph-poles past a railway-carriage window.  He looked like the very
spirit of winter, the demon of the snows, and stood for that in the ignorant minds of the sparsely
scattered people--perhaps because at a short distance he was nearly invisible.  His white coat,
which was simply a conspicuous curse to him when there was no snow--which was one reason, maybe,
why he retired from the limelight to some lonely fastness during summer--was an incalculable
asset to him in winter, and he knew it.

He ran, with his smooth, loose, effortless lope, perhaps a quarter of a mile, then stopped,
and putting up his head, howled a howl so full of hopeless, cruel yearning, so vibrant with
desolation, that it sounded like the cry of a soul doomed forever to seek something it could
never find.  It was a lugubrious yowl there, in that setting, and it made one's scalp creep
all over one's cranium.

And instantly almost, even as the last, long, horrible echoes died, sobbing adown the blue-haze
perspective of the forest glades, the answer came--a far-away, fluttering, wandering howl,
like the moan of the wind in its sleep.

The white wolf waited a moment, then howled again, and the ghastly sound came back to him,
louder and nearer this time.

A third time he howled, and the forest cringed under the reply.

Then at last the shadows between the ranked tree-trunks took unto themselves life, and eyes,
eyes in pairs, horribly hungry, cruel port-holes of brains, with a glary, stary, green light
behind them, suddenly appeared everywhere, like swiftly-turned-on electric lamps. There was
a whispering rush, as if giants were swiftly dealing cards in the silence, and--the White Wolf
of the Frozen Waste was away, racing like a cloud-shadow, rapid and impetuous as a greyhound,
at the head of a pack of one hundred and twenty-nine empty-stomached wolves.

They made no sound as they tore, compact as a Zulu impi, over the spotless white, because they
had no trail to follow, only this huge devil of a leader; and they had their work cut out to
follow him, for he was the longest-legged male wolf any of them had ever set eyes upon.

Straight as a twelve-inch shell the white wolf headed back to the fallen trees and the bear's
den.  When he reached them, he stopped so abruptly that the wolves behind him almost sat on
their haunches in the effort to pull up.  Those that failed fell sideways under a rain of wicked
snaps from him, that followed one another quick as the stutter of a machine-gun.

The pack did not stop--at least, not the flanks of it.  They swept on without a pause, out
and round, like flood-water round a knoll, joined at the far side, and--were still.  As a maneuver,
a military maneuver, swift, unexpected, faultless, and silent, it was perfect.

For as long as a man takes to light a pipe there was dead silence, broken only by the quick
motor-like panting of the pack.  And one hundred and twenty-nine pairs of eyes regarded the
fallen trees.

Then the white wolf, all alone, with hackles up, stepped forward and leaped upon the trunk
of the tree that was poised upon its fellow.  He ran lightly up it till he was exactly above
the hollow formed by the junction of the two trees, then stopped, looking down.

Half-a-dozen of the older and more cunning wolves followed him; the pack surged forward until
both trees became lined with a row of wolves, without breaking the circle of the main pack
outside, and then stopped. All this in silence.

Then--but you could almost hear the trees breathe while he did it--the white wolf yawned very
deliberately, and whined, insolently and very audibly.

The answer was instant.

Something rumbled within the den, deep down, like a geyser.

The white wolf whined again, and sprang aside just as the bear, maddened with the pain of a
.450-caliber rifle bullet in his stomach, and seeking a sacrifice, hurled out of the dark and
up over the tree-trunk, striking, with appalling nail-strokes, right and left; and the quickness
of those strokes was only a less astonishment than the agility of the wolves getting out of
the way of them.  But--but he had come out to abolish one wolf, that bear; not one hundred
and twenty-nine.

The white wolf dropped without a sound upon the bear's great, broad back.  The half-dozen old
wolves followed him like figures moved by a single lever.  The pack sucked in with the rush
of a waterspout.  The bear vanished under a wave of fangs and tails, as a sinking boat vanishes
beneath the billows.  And the rest was the most diabolical devils' riot that ears ever heard.

The bear unwounded, even if he had been induced to come out at all, might have fought his way
home again; but the bear wounded and cut off was a different matter.  He battled as only a
cornered bear can battle; but the exertion of it gave the .450 bullet its chance, and he died--horribly--as
they die who are pulled down by the starving wolf-pack, and that is not printable at all.

He took three wolves--smashed-in-heads and chests--with him to the other world, that bear,
and left three others well on the road there. All six followed him by the path he had gone
when the pack had done with him; but the losses might not improve the temper of the pack, though
they partially stayed the hunger of a few.  And the white wolf seemed to know that.  Full devilish
indeed was the cunning of that brute.

Scarcely was the last bone cracked, scarcely the last wisp of skin snapped up, than the white
wolf, wet, and red and wringing over the head, was away again, at full speed--and his full
speed was a thing to gasp over--with a wild and rousing howl that gave the pack no time to
ponder on its casualties.

This time also there was no trail, so the pack had full leisure to concentrate all its energies
upon the job in hand, or paw, I should say--namely, galloping.  No, racing would be the only
word; for the white wolf, knowing his kind, perhaps, gave the pack no leisure to grow dangerous
over its losses or its hunger.  Only idleness gives time for questions to be asked about leadership,
and he kept them busy; and if they wanted to keep up with him at all, they must needs extend
themselves to the full.

Soon he led them to a clearing running, straight as a railway cutting, through the forest.
Out in the clearing, he dropped his head, howled, flung half round, and began to follow tracks;
but the scent was enough for him without the tracks.  They were the footprints, the sleigh-trail,
and the hoofprints of the beaters, the hunters, and the pack-horses, loaded with game from
the hunt of the day that had just gone.

For a moment the pack, even that pack, his pack, the pack of the White Wolf of the Frozen Wastes,
checked a little, shied, and were dumb.  They were used to his leading them upon some hectic
murder-raids, but never one quite so blatant as this.

Quickly, however, the real pain in their empty stomachs got the better of them, and they swept
round and began to follow--half-a-dozen here and there--with whimpers.  And then, the excitement
spreading, they all rushed in, and breaking out, with a blood-curdling rush, into the full-throated
chorus, "Yi-yi-i-ki-yi!" of the wolf-pack in full cry--an M.F.H. who had never heard wolves
might have mistaken it for the music of a pack of hounds if he had listened to it from a distance--they
swept on after the vanishing white brush of their leader, like some great, hurrying, dark cloud-shadow,
up the trail.

Anon, going always at their tireless wolf-lope that no beast in the world can outdistance in
the end, they came to a village.  Some of the beaters lived at this village, and had remained
there.  The wolves swept on and round the miserable place--some actually raced through the
snowed-up street--and took up the continued trail on the other side.

Anon they came to an open plain, where the trail split, many of the beaters that were left
striking away to another village where they lived; but the white wolf tore straight on along
the main trail, the trail of the hunters, the attendants, and the pack-horses.  And the shadows
of the wolves in the moonlight kept pace with them all that terrible way.

The plain looked flat, but was gently undulating, like some gigantic ocean petrified; so that,
in due time, the pack, still giving tongue wildly and terribly, saw before them, far, far ahead,
a procession of dots straggling along over the endless, unbroken white.  And instantly their
music shut off as if at the wave of an invisible hand.

Then, as the quarry ran from scent to view, they raced.  All their long, loose, nickel-steel-limbed,
tireless gallop before had been nothing to their flying speed now.  The taint of the blood
of the slaughtered game from the chase was in their sensitive nostrils.  It was like the sight
of rare wines to a drunkard.  Shift!  Say, but the way those long-legged demons ate up the
distance between them and their prey was awe-inspiring.  It was uncanny.  It was almost magic.
It was awful.

Then things happened, as you might say, with some rapidity.

Three shots rang out in the silence--three shots in quick succession. They were fired at the
wolves by the only man in the group who had an efficient rifle, but were really meant to recall
the sleighs with the sportsmen and the rifles, which had gone on.

The wolves spread out into a long line; the ends of the line crept forward swiftly on either
hand, and the whole pack raced to the attack in the formation of a Zulu impi--in the shape
of a pair of horns, that is.  When the points of the horns got on the far side of their "prey,"
they rushed together, and turned inwards, still at full gallop.

At this juncture the sleighs came back--at the gallop, too. Four .450-caliber Express rifle
bullets, one .375-caliber magazine and one .315-caliber magazine bullet, arriving among the
wolves in quick succession produced no confusion.  Not a wolf stopped.  Each beast continued
its tireless gallop, swerving and dispersing as it raced, and without uttering a sound, till,
almost before you could realize what had happened at all, there was a dwindling crescent of
gray specks in the background, and four or five other gray shapes--two kicking--lying about
in the foreground.

But--and this is where we come in--neither there in the distant snow-haze nor close in by the
crowding hunting-party was the white wolf.

He had been last on view far in advance of, and heading, the point of the right-hand horn of
the swiftly encircling pack--his usual place, by the way--but from the moment the returning
sleighs hove in sight, and the bar-like gleam of the moonlight could be seen upon the ready
rifle-barrels--he had seen that, too, and knew its meaning--he had been--nowhere.

Now, before the encircling horns of the pack closed round, one of the pack-horses, maddened
with fear, had stampeded and got clear away. That horse was galloping now madly across the
plain, hidden from view by a gentle swell of ground, and--the white wolf was racing alongside
of it; and away behind--for few could keep up with the tremendous speed of the white wolf--another,
and an ordinary gray wolf was gliding in their tracks.  That was a female wolf, who more than
once before had found it a profitable investment to keep her eye upon the doings of the great
white leader.

She saw the white wolf leap, beheld his wrenching side-stroke at the terrified horse's throat,
heard the horse scream, and watched it bound forward.  Followed another leap of the relentless
giant white shape; the horse seemed to stumble in full gallop, and next instant came down headlong.
The rest was a whirl of snow, flying hoofs, and a horrible worrying sound.  Then all settled
down, and as she tore up she found the white wolf feeding ravenously against time, bolting
his meal as only the wild members of the dog tribe, hyenas, and vultures can.  She was starving,
that she-wolf, but she halted upon her hams, such was the reputation of the white leader; but
when he failed to snarl at her, she, too, fell to, and bolted her meal like a crazy thing.

Directly he had fed enough the white wolf flung round upon his heels, and, with a single quick
whimper, was gone, streaking over the plain away from the hunters, away from the scattered,
discomfited pack; away, away, as he had never galloped before.  But, then, before he had always
been the hunter.  This time, if he knew anything of "Pack Law" and the temper of the pack over
this bad defeat and heavy loss, coming on top of the bad bear "break"--this time, I say, it
was he who was, or, at any rate, might be, the hunted.  And he had reasons--very sound and
private reasons--why he must not meet even one wolf of the pack in combat.  Wherefore he streaked,
stretched flat, and doubled into a bow, his shadow chasing him, and the she-wolf--afraid to
be left alone--chasing his shadow.

Very often before the white wolf had caused the pack to run into dangerous and decimating trouble,
but always with a feed at the end. He had never before sold them a pup, as the saying is, like
this one. Moreover, he felt that his slaying of the horse secretly--and they were bound to
scent out and read that--would not improve matters.  Wherefore he guessed that, after years
of restless rule, it was about time to quit, and he quitted.  But unfortunately there is only
one thing harder than becoming leader of a big wolf-pack, and that is, ceasing to be leader
and--live.

Five miles over the desolate waste of white--and what is five miles, or ten, or fifteen, to
a desperate wolf?--the two beasts ran into a river--literally into a river.  Ice stretched
far out from the bank, yet the river was so wide that they could scarce see the opposite bank.
They could see the grinding, growling ice-blocks floating all round them which they plunged
in, however, and they could feel the icy bite of the water--water that would stop the action
of a man's heart.

But the white wolf did not attempt to swim to the opposite bank, or mean to.  He made a detour,
and landed upon the same side he had started from.  He did that three times, the she-wolf always
following faithfully, because she had now become too frightened to stay alone and do anything
else; and then he started upon another mad gallop of miles, but this time along the bank of
the great river.

Finally he stopped and stared out over the ice, the thick water, and the gnashing pack-ice.
Far away, it seemed, through the snow-haze, he could see a wooded height, an immense island,
round which the river looped in two great arms.

He knew the spot--trust him.

No beast in its senses would try to swim the long distance across to that island, but from
time to time a hunted deer had made the attempt, and a few of those that tried it had survived
the ordeal and populated the island.  More than once, in heavy snow, the white wolf himself,
at the head of his pack, had hunted a deer down to that very spot, and had watched its head
fade across the water into the distance.  Once he had started to follow; but the pack had turned
back, and he at length after them, snarling at their heels.  Now he knew how long the swim
looked from the deer's point of view.

It was an ugly proposition.  But--he turned his head in the stillness, broken only by the multitudinous
voices of the ice, and heard a far, far distant multitudinous murmur, and that was no ice,
and it settled him.  It was the united voice of the pack on his trail!

He paused, ran up and down, gave an odd, little, deeply expressive whine, like a puppy afraid
to take its first bath, plunged in with a rush, and struck out.  Soon he was out upon a piece
of drift ice, shaking himself, and began leaping from one lump of floating ice to another.
It was tricky, slippery, slidy work, and a fall might mean a broken leg or a crushed skull;
but anything was better than dissolving like mincemeat in the jaws of the slavering pack.

Once, when a long way out, he looked back, and beheld the she-wolf, whining piteously as if
she were being thrashed--and wolves are dumb beasts when "up against it"--following him.

She, too, had heard that wild, terrifying, implacable music of the wolf-pack following them;
and although I, personally, doubt if they would have touched her--unless it was the other she-wolves
that did it--she seemed to have been smitten by panic, and to prefer the deep sea, or the river,
rather, to that pack of maddened devils.

And so, slipping, sliding, splashing, swimming, scrambling, the white wolf, after the most
appalling struggle of his life, managed somehow, blindly in the end, with sobbing breath and
pounding sides, to make that terrible passage, and collapse as he landed in a stiff white heap,
the water frozen in icicles upon his body as he landed.

For a long time he did not move, and it began to seem as if he had burst his heart.  But at
last he dragged himself to his feet and turned drunkenly--to find the she-wolf lying at his side.

Thoughts came back slowly; but at length he shook himself, and stood erect at his full, immense
height.  He had given the wolf-pack something tricky in the way of trails to unravel, but he
knew what he had taught them too well to build too much on that.  And he was right, for presently,
from far, far across the water, came the unutterably terrible baying clamor of the pack, moving
swiftly along--then it stopped.

For a long while he waited after that, straining ears and eyes out over the moving ice, and
the water, and the night that was there; but nothing could he see, and nothing more he heard
except at last, far away, one last, long, lonely, ghastlily lonesome howl--the howl of defeat.

Then it seemed--but truly it may only have been a trick of the moonlight as he snarled, revealing
his white fangs under his wickedly-curled-back lip--it seemed, I say, that the White Wolf of
the Frozen Waste grinned.  And good reason had he to grin, for the life of the white wolf had
been nothing more nor less than one long, bad, bold, blustering, bullying bluff!  What's that?
Yes, sirs--bluff!  And in this wise.

Firstly, his extraordinarily long legs gave him a height out of all proportion to his real
hulk; secondly, his abnormally long and woolly coat gave him an apparent bulk which was out
of all proportion to fact; thirdly, his actual bulk was really scarcely larger than that of
any very large wolf; and, fourthly--but this concerned him only now--he was really quite an
old wolf; one long past his prime, one quite unable to face any really full-grown fine young
wolf, one retaining only his matchless speed by reason of his abnormally long legs, and his
leadership by terrific and cleverly acted ferocity on the strength of his apparent giant dimensions.
That was all, but it was enough; wasn't it, boys?  Would you care to have changed places with
the old rascal, and played that bluff out against those odds, in that company, for years as
he had done?  I don't think.  No, nor I, either.  It was some gamble, that.  What?

At last the White Wolf of the Frozen Waste turned, with an insolent flourish of his brush,
and trotted up the bank on the heels of the she-wolf, who had come to life again and preceded
him into the dense tangle of the woods, which swallowed him up, him and his darned bluff, utterly.

XV

FATE AND THE FEARFUL

  We are the little folks--we!
  Too little to love or to hate.--RUDYABD KIPLING.

No one ever accused him of not being all there.  The job was to see what was there.

A tiny alderman of the red bank-vole people, whose tunnels marched with the road through the
wood, taking the afternoon sun--a slanting copper net, it was--at his own front-door under
the root of the Scots fir, was aware of a flicker at a hole's mouth.  He looked again, and
saw the mouth of that hole was empty.  He blinked his star-bright eyes in his fat, furry, little
square head, after the manner of one who thought he had been dreaming.  But catch a bank-vole
dreaming!  Besides, how about the squirrel overhead?  He was hanging over a branch where the
flicker had been, swearing fit to slit his lungs, and old squirrel wasn't much given to make
mistakes, as a rule.

The bank vole turned back into his hole, knowing the law against taking chances in the wild,
and the first stride fetched him up short in violent collision with another bank-vole--otherwise
red-backed field-mouse, if you like--coming the other way.

The blow, full on the forehead, did not break his neck; but it ought to have done.  It cast
him clean over backwards out of his own front-door, where he fell down the bank, and was received,
all his little short paws scrambling for a hold, by a thistle, and would have told all the
world, with a thin, high squeak, what he had sat on, if the squeak had not frozen between his
chisel teeth.

There had shot out of the hole, and back, a Thing.  It might have been the thick end of a whip-lash
or a spring, and, like a spring, as it recoiled it coiled, and was still.

The bank-vole saw.  Most entirely did he see, and felt no joy in the seeing, either.  Indeed,
there was no room for mistake in the zigzag black chain down the back, in the unspeakably cruel,
fixed stare of the glassy, lidless eyes, in the short head and flat cranium of the true viper--viper,
adder, or whatever you like to call the calamity without legs, whose other name is death.

Now, bank-voles know all about vipers.  They have to; they die, else. They die anyway; but
no matter, for they are small and very many. Also, vipers know all about voles, field and bank;
they specialize in 'em!

But our bank-vole knew all about the "freezing" game, too, and he "froze."  My word, how that
little beggar was still, so utterly bereft of movement that a fly settled upon him--about the
first and the last that would, I should judge!  And if a learned native had come along the
road at that moment--on tiptoe, of course--he would have said the viper had hypnotized friend
vole with fear.  Hypnotize your grandmother!  But you may take it from me that serpent thing
was playing his game, too. He was "freezing" to induce the quarry to move and give himself
away, because, since the vole was motionless, he had no idea where the little fellow was, although
he seemed to be looking straight at him--in that execrable way snakes have of seeming to look
straight at everything.

You think it was a battle of patience?  W-e-ll, maybe.  Maybe, too, it was a battle of nerves.
I like to think so, anyway, for that snake-servant of the Devil had none, and the bank-vole
had; and the bank-voices broke under the awful tension--or seemed to--and the bank-vole broke
the terrifying spell.  Also, he broke the silence.

Away down the ditch he went, bouncing like a tiny ball of dark thistle-down, all in and out
among the vegetation, which, worse luck for him, the ditch being under the accursed shadow
of the firs, was scanty.  And as he galloped he squeaked three times--like a little needle
stabbing the late afternoon silence, it was.

His removal was one kind of quick dodge in the art of quitting; that of the viper another,
and a very beastly one.  The crawling thing was not much more than one-tenth of a second after
the poor bank-vole in getting under way, and the rest was a--was a--oh, anything you please!
I call it a sliding flicker that you rather "felt" than saw.  Also, the thing rustled horribly,
and Fact can say what she likes.  I swear it shot along quite flat, crawling, not undulating;
but, ough! what a lightning, footless, legless crawl!  No wonder the poor little devil of a
bank-vole squeaked!  The wonder was he didn't faint on the spot, for he knew what was coming.

Up the bank he pattered, and into that, to him, great subterranean highway which seems to be
conjointly kept up and used by all the mysterious little four-footed tribes of the field, and
which runs the length of practically every bank and hedgerow.  The place was dark and cool
and echoing, and bare as the palm of your hand, and far cleaner than many palms.  It might
have been cleaned out that very day by a fairy vacuum-cleaner; but it hadn't.  It was always
like that, clean as the proverbial new pin.  Heaven alone knows who did the "charing" there,
but those little furry tribes might have given lessons on health in trench warfare, I reckon,
at a guinea a time--and cheap at that. They had found out that dirt meant disease, you bet.

Down that tunnel drummed the bank-vole, seeking to foul his trail with just any other creature;
and, the highway being, as I have said, a sort of public affair, he met first a mouse gone
astray, then a mole asleep, then a long-tailed wood-mouse, then a short-tailed field-vole,
then a shrew about as big as your little finger.  But they must have heard the scrape of the
snake's scales down that echoing tunnel following hard behind, for they avoided our bank-vole
like the plague, and dived up one or other of the thousand and one side-tunnels, which opened
on to the main one, too quickly for the viper to catch them.

Then the poor, little, panting bank-vole found himself once more in the open.  His beady eyes
shone like microscopic stars as lie paused in a copper bar of setting sunlight and looked about
for a refuge.  It seemed, by the piston-like throb of the whole body, that his heart would
burst and slay him out of hand before the hated snake could, if he did not jolly soon find one.

Then a hedge caught his eye, and he climbed it, being a good acrobat in his spare time.  Beyond,
however, bringing down upon himself the pecks of several birds, he did no good, for it seemed
that, whithersoever he could go, the snake could follow, and--help!--the flat, terrible head
was not a yard from him now.

Worse was to follow, though.  He dropped to earth again, already a beaten beast; and, to complete
the catastrophe, by a miracle he had landed where there was not a mouse or mole or vole hole,
or any other cover, within reach.  Only one big clod of earth there was, and round that he
flung himself, with that stub, scaly snout weaving at his very tail, and rolled over and over
and over--done, too utterly spent even to squeak.

Then Fate lifted her finger, and things happened.  All that had gone before didn't count, it
seemed.

The little bank-vole was dimly aware of rolling under a big, warm, live shape.  He was also
aware of a funny little fussy grunt in his ear, and that a set of very white and business-like
teeth flashed for an instant in the sun, as they chopped surprisedly at him going under them,
and missed.  Thereafter the shape sat down, nearly stifling him; and in the same instant the
whole air seemed to fill with the sudden, long-drawn, venomous, terrifying hiss of the viper
close at hand.  Evidently the limbless death had come round the corner too quickly, and had
all but rammed the shape that grunted.

I can give you my word, though, that the vole was not happy one bit. He appeared to be between
the Devil and the deep sea.  He had no confidence in the deep sea, or any other thing that
he could think of in his world.  Moreover, the deep sea, besides keeping all the air off, was
most horribly bristly, even on the belly.  Wherefore that vole made haste to quit station,
so to speak.  But in a second, it seemed, before he could clear himself, that unspeakable serpent's
hiss appeared to sound in his very ear, and the deep sea, folding upon itself, made the poor
vole yell as if he had touched off a live-wire.  He had not, of course; but it was like being
struck with a dozen pins at once.  He would have got out if he could, but to move was to discover
more pins, and he just had to keep where he was, squealing fit to burst.

And that saved the vole, probably.

Not that there was any magic or rubbish of that kind, of course.  It was simply that the viper,
shooting his every inch round the corner in the effort to grab the vole's hindlegs then or
never, had hit, full pelt and nose first, the nice little array of pointed arguments carried
on the back of the neck of a hedgehog, snuffing under the clod, pig-fashion, for spiders. 
The hedgehog, whose phlegmatic disposition and special armament allowed him the luxury of never
being surprised at anything, promptly and literally shut up, so that long before the viper
thing had unhooked his nose and was waving his forward part about over the hedgehog, with murder
in his eye and death behind his flickering tongue, looking for a place to strike home, old
hedgehog was rolled up, and snuffling and snoring away inside there, like an old man chuckling
when he has just cried "Mate!" at chess.

This trying position continued for perhaps five minutes.  It seemed like five days to the wretched
bank-vole.

Then the slow temper of the funny old hedgepig smoldered gradually alight.  His eyes grew red
in the foxy head of him, his snout "worked," and he snuffled and grunted faster and faster.
He made up his mind to fight.  And the extraordinary combat began.  Lit by the blood rays of
a setting sun, from a sky all raw and red, backed by the blue-gray haze of the watching woods,
the silence broken only by the ghostly whisper of the snake's scales and the tiny pig-like
grunting of the hundred-spiked hedgehog, that duel started.

Peering out of a peep-hole in himself, the hedgehog waited for an opening.  It was no blunderer's
game, this.  Death was the price of a slip.  He knew, however, and accepted the risks deliberately--a
plucky enough act, when you come to think of it, for a beast no more than a foot long and one
and a half pounds heavy.

The opening came.  Quicker than you could realize, the hedgehog half unrolled, and side-chopped
with his glistening teeth.  Quick, too, and quicker, the venomous, flat serpent head writhed
aloft and back-lashed, swift as a released spring; but the hedgehog had ducked, or tucked if
you like, more than instantly back into himself.  Followed an infernal, ghastly writhing and
squirming of the long, unprotected mottled serpent body as it struck--too late to stop itself--simply
spines, spines only, that tore and lacerated maddeningly.  Whip, whip, whip! flashed the deadly
reptilian head, pecking, quicker than light flickers, at the impassive round cheval-de-frise
that was the hedgehog, in a blind access of fury terrible to see; and each time the soft throat
of the horror only tore and tore worse, in a ghastly manner, on those spines that showed no
life and said no word, and defied all.  It was a siege of the wild, and a terrible one.

Probably this was the first time in his life that anything had dared to stand up to that viper.
He acted as if it was, anyway.  Usually his malignant hiss, so full of hateful cruelty, was
enough of a warning. And those who ignored that did not generally live to repeat the omission.
He seemed utterly unable to understand that anything could face his fangs of concentrated death
and not go out in contortions. And there were no contortions about this prickly foe, only an
impassable front, or, if you love exactness, back.

Wild things, unlike man, are rarely given to lose their tempers.  It isn't healthy--in the
wild.  But if ever a creature appeared to human eyes to do so, it was that snake.  He struck
and he struck and he struck, impaling himself ghastlily each time, and using up his small immediate
magazineful of venom uselessly on--uncompromising spikes!

At last he drew back, a horrible affront to the fairy scene, and, in the snap of a finger,
the hedgehog had unpacked himself, run forward--a funny little patter it was, much faster than
you would expect--slashed with his dagger fangs, and repacked himself again in an instant.

The snake, writhing afresh under the punishment, threw himself once more upon the impassive
"monkey-puzzle" on four legs, but beyond tearing himself into an even more ghastly apparition
than before, he accomplished nothing.  Finally he broke away, and slid off, a rustling, half-guessed,
fleeting vision, and there was fear at last in those awful eyes, that could never close, as
he went.

Then it was that the quiet, unobstrusive, retiring, self-effacing hedgehog threw off the mask,
and hoisted his true colors.  And yet, if one came to think of it, there was no cause for surprise,
for was he not a member of the strange, the mysterious, the great Order of Insectivora, which
includes among its members probably the most pugnacious, the most implacable, the most furiously
passionate fighters in all the wild?  He fairly flung himself, unrolled, and running with an
absurdly clock work-toy-like gait, whose speed checked the laugh that it caused, was after
that viper in considerably less than half-a-second, his eyes red as the sun they glinted in,
his fangs bared for action, his swinish snout uplifted at the tip in a wicked grin.  No beast
to bandy words with, this.  It was a fight to a finish, with no surrender save to death.

The bank-vole had already fled; but it was in the direction that the fight finally veered that
he had gone, and so, peeping from between the weed-stems at the mouth of a hole, he saw all.
He saw the viper, his head swaying to and fro, come sliding along, making for that very hole;
he heard the sudden quick rustle in the grass behind that followed, beheld the dusky, squat
form that it heralded pounce.  He watched the snake's head whip round, and drive with all its
power in one last desperate stroke; watched it straighten out suddenly, and recoil in an awful
quivering spasm, like a severed telegraph-wire, as the hedgehog's razor-sharp teeth cut through
skin and flesh and backbone; and, trembling from head to foot, he witnessed, half-fascinated,
I think, the awful last threshing flurry of the viper that followed.

Later, when the moon peeped out of a hole in the clouds, and the bank-vole peeped out of one
in the bank, together--and his beady eyes were not much behind the moon for brightness--when
the tiny, long-eared bats were imitating black lightning overhead, and a single owl was hooting
like a lost soul seeking a home, away in the black heart of the woods, the bank-vole witnessed
the burial of that hated viper.  It was not a big affair.  Only one person--the hedgehog--took
part in it, and he was singularly unhurried, for he ate that poisonous fiend all up, beginning
at the tail, and thoughtfully chewing on from side to side to the head--twenty inches of snake--as
if he, the hedgehog, had been inoculated in infancy, and was poison-proof.

Then, still grunting, he went away, slowly, nosing here and there, rustling loudly in that
stillness, an odd, squat figure in the moonlight; and the bank-vole thought he had seen the
last of him, and came out to pass about his "lawful occasions," as per custom.

Now, if you or I had taken our meals after the fashion of that "wee, timorous beastie," we
should probably have departed this life from indigestion or nervous prostration inside a month.

He came very cautiously from his hole, and the first thing his fine long whiskers telegraphed
him the presence of was an oak-gall--one of those round knobs that grow upon twigs like nuts,
you know, but have a fat grub inside instead of a kernel.  At the same instant a leaf rustled,
and--flp!--there was no bank-vole.

Allowing one minute for the passing of whoever rustled that leaf, and a cloud-shadow, and there
he was again, back at the gall, his shining eyes, that mirrored the moon, being the only visible
part of him.  He rolled the gall over and sniffed, and--that was quite enough, thank you. 
No nut there, and he knew it--by scent, I fancy.  In that moment something trod softly, ever
so softly, somewhere, and a spray of laced bracken swayed one quarter of an inch, and--the
bank-vole was not.

Again about a minute's pause, and three bank-voles came out together. Our friend was the last,
and another was the first, to discover a little hoard of seeds that some other tiny beastie--not
a bank-vole--must have collected and forgotten all about, or been killed in the interval.

In the wild, it is the law that "they should take who have the power, and they should keep
who can."  It isn't a bad law, because it has much to do with that other law called the "survival
of the fittest," but it is apt to come expensive if persisted in.

Our vole hopped promptly towards the other vole, and made out that the seeds were his; but
before any kind of ultimatum could be delivered, a twig fell, as twigs will sometimes, for
no special reason that one can see.  The noise it made in that stilly wood was astonishing,
and ere the twig had reached the earth there wasn't a bank-vole above ground. And yet so astonishingly
quick and evasive are these little creatures that in less than thirty seconds there were the
two disputants, each erect upon his haunches, with little hand-like forepaws held up and joined
under the chin--as if they were actresses having their photographs taken--fighting, like little
blunt-headed furies, for possession of those seeds--so it seemed.  I say "so it seemed" advisedly,
since close by, and almost invisible because sitting quite still, was another bank-vole, who
looked as if she were waiting for something; which she probably was--a lover.

It was, however, death that came, and he is a too attentive lover.  The battle had been going
on some seconds without apparent result, possibly because the voles had to bite upwards, shark-fashion,
owing to the fact that their fighting-teeth are wedge-shaped incisors, instead of stabbing
fangs, when there was a hrrr!  That is all, just like that--hrrr!

Then there were no voles; but there seemed to have been no going of the voles, either.  They
just were, fighting and watching the fight--then they just were not.  Instead of them, on the
very spot where they had been, a sheeted ghost, with wings that flapped and flapped, and never
made any noise, with the face of a cat, and big round eyes that gleamed, and a snore most horrible,
had simply been evolved from nowhere, and under its claws was the little red-backed lady who
waited for a lover.

Now, the coming of that apparition, whose wings did not say "Hough-hough!" or "Whew-whew!"
like other birds' wings do when they fly, thus proving itself, or rather herself, to be an
owl, and the fight of Mr. Hedgehog and the poisoned death, had a direct connection with, and
a bearing upon, the little bank-vole's life, although they may not have seemed to have at first.
If the snake had not run amok against the hedgehog, the latter slow personage would have been
well out in the meadow by that time, reducing the worm population, instead of hanging about
and coming up the ditch at that moment, with the hot and worried air of one who is late.

What he saw was the owl on the ground, flapping her great, soft wings about, within a foot
of the nicely, neatly, nattily roofed-in nest where he and his lifelong wedded wife thought
they had hidden cunningly their four soft-bristled, helpless babies.  What he thought he saw
was the owl engaged in turning one of those same babies into nourishing infant owls' food,
or "words to that effect."  And the hedgehog, like most of the order Insectivora, is cursed
with the temper of Eblis, too. Naturally, therefore, things happened, and happened the more
hectically, perhaps, because Mrs. Hedgehog chanced at that moment to be away--attending to
the last rites--shall we say?--over the form of an expiring young rat.

The little pig's eyes of him went red in his funny, bristle-crowned head, and just as a clockwork
toy charges, so he charged, with a quick, grunting rustle and far greater speed than any one
who knew only his usual deliberate movements would have given him credit for.

The owl had only time to turn her cat-like face and--hiss.  But though that hiss would have
been good enough as a bluff to frighten creatures who wouldn't upset a snake for anything,
she was out of her reckoning upon this occasion.  The hedgehog, who dealt in snakes as a game-warden
deals in tigers, had no nerves that way.  He just sailed in under the baffling, great, flapping
wing, and, ere ever the bird of the night could spring aloft, had struck.  It was a ghastly
form of warfare, this low running in and wrenching snap.  It landed right under the armpit,
so to speak, and left a nasty round hole.  And it is worth noting, by the way, that precisely
the same sort of hole, and in the same spot almost, but lower and farther back, was to be seen
upon the body of the deceased young rat that Mrs. Hedgehog was even then attending to--the
trademark of the hedgehogs, that hole.

All the immediate world of the night wild, watching from grass-tuft and root and burrow, heard
the rasping tap of the owl's beak hammering helplessly at the spines on the back of the hedgehog,
now beside himself with rage.  Not one of them, too, that did not jump with terror--engrained
by the bitter experience of hundreds of generations--at her fiendish scream.  Then, in a flash,
that owl was upon her back, wielding hooked beak and stiletto talons, as only she knew how
to use them; and the hedgehog, who had, in the blindness of his rage, run in to finish the
job, shot up clean on his hind-legs, taking the clinging, flapping owl with him, while, for
the first time that night, he uttered a cry other than a grunt--an odd, piercing little cry,
vibrant with rage, or fear, or both.  This was rather odd, because ordinarily the hedgehog
is a dumb beast, who suffers "frightfulness" in grim silence.

The tables were turned now.  The shoe was on the other foot, or, to be precise, the foot was
on the underside.  That is, the owl had got the foe where he lived, below water-line, if I
may so put it, where, like a battleship, his armor did not run, and he was soft and vulnerable
as any other beast.  Moreover, he had not trained himself in the art of throwing himself upon
his back, as the owl, who was like a cat in this particular also, had apparently done, and
since he could not prance on his hindlegs, unicorn-fashion, forever, he had to come down again,
belly and throat first, on that infernal battery of talons and beak.

And he got it all right enough.  I give you my word that spiny one got it; but, save for that
one first little cry, he took his punishment in grim and terrible silence, fighting with a
blind fury that was awful to behold.  What happened to him underneath there in those few brief,
terrible seconds no one will ever know--and that, we may guess, is as well perhaps, for there
is no sense in dwelling upon horrors.  What he did, in the short time he was given by Fate,
is a little more clear. Butting madly down, oblivious of all things, even that unspeakable
fish-hook beak, grappling like a thing demented--and I think he was nearly that--he bit deep,
deep down, through feathers and skin and flesh, home--once, twice, and again.

Then, blindly, brokenly, smothered in blood, red-visaged and horrible, he half-rolled, half
blundered free of that frightful clinch, and instantly rolled up!  'Twas his habit, the one
refuge of his life, so long as he breathed; his last, and usually, but not always, his first, hope.

The owl struggled somehow, in a cloud of her own feathers, to her feet. The beautiful, fan-like,
exquisitely soft wings flapped and beat frantically.  There came a peculiar musky sort of smell
into the air. She rose, all lopsidedly, perhaps two yards, flapping, flapping, flapping with
frenzied desperation, before toppling suddenly, helplessly, pathetically, as the big pinions
stopped, and she collapsed sideways back to earth again, where, blood-smeared and glaring,
lit by the merciless, cynical moon, she crouched and coughed--as I live, coughed and coughed
and coughed, a ghastly cough like a baby's, till it seemed as if she would cough her heart up.

Then silence--that wonderful, mysterious, waiting, echoing, listening silence of the woods
at night--shut down, and darkness swept over all.

When dawn came stealing westward silently over the still canopy of leaves, both combatants
were still there; and they were still here, too, when the sun, silting in through a rift in
the foliage, found and bathed them.  The owl was crouched as she had been when the moon left
her--crouched, and with her wings just a little open, like a bird about to take flight; but
she had already taken wing on the longest flight of all.  The hedgehog was, too, just as the
moon had left him, rolled up in a spiky ball, apparently asleep; but his sleep, also, was the
longest sleep of all.  And over them both, in the heavy silence, could be distinctly heard
that horrible "brr-brr-brr" of flies that told its own story.

Now, that was in the morning, soon after sunrise; but long before that, indeed the moment the
hedgehog had first attacked the owl and forced her to turn her attention to him, the little
female bank-vole, who by some mischance or miscalculation, had evaded the first terrible handshake
of the owl which spells death, had rolled clear of the fight, and dashed for her life to the
nearest tussock of grass that offered shelter; and the first thing she fell over there was
our bank-vole, "frozen" motionless.  He was there because the scene of the fight was between
him and the holes in the bank, and for the life of him he could not muster up courage to run
the gauntlet past those dread, struggling forms.

In the end, there being scarcely sufficient room in the tussock for both to hide effectually,
and there seeming to be some danger of the combatants trampling them flat where they lay, he
led the way up a tree, whose gnarled bole took the ground barely six inches away.  It was one
of those great-great-great-grandfather oaks, which, if it had been in a more public spot, would
certainly have been raised to the dignity of one of the few hundred trees that hid Prince Charlie.
It was not, however; but it had another peculiarity, as the voles found out later on.

Scared out of their little wits by the fury of their enemies below, and afraid to go down and
bolt across the open, even after the cessation of hostilities, past those appallingly still,
crouched bodies, who, for all they had guarantee to the contrary, might be in fiendish, alliance
crouched there, waiting for them to descend, the two voles explored gradually, in their own
dainty, little, deprecating, creeping way, branch after branch of the great spreading patriarch,
till suddenly, at the very tip of the longest and biggest limb of all, they vanished--into
ivy.  What had happened was quite simple, however. There was no trick in it.  It was all above-board.
It was simply that the mighty tree at this spot grew close to one of those outcrops of cliff
that formed, as it were, broken-off pieces from the main cliffs which bordered the river and
the valley on one side farther up, and one of the oak boughs had gradually been annexed by
the ivy--itself of great age--that clothed the face of the cliff.

Climbing steadily upwards through the network of ivy-stems--he had no wish to go down now,
for he could hear the river talking to itself directly underneath him, and a false step meant
a clean drop into the swirling black depths thirty feet or so below--the bank-vole, with his
companion in close and trusting attendance, presently came out on top of the cliff.  He found
himself upon a space all clothed with vegetation, bushes, and stunted trees, some hundred yards
long. Beneath him, as he peered over, he could see the roof of the wood, all laid out like
a green tablecloth, and here and there, through gaps, the river, now shrunk to no more than
a stream, by reason of the fact that men, for their own purposes, had dammed its waters about
a mile farther up the valley, and constructed a reservoir there.

