I would also suggest another mode of employing the probationers. They might be dispersed through
the islands in Bass Strait, and engaged in constructing the lighthouses which are so much wanted
there. Six years ago his Excellency Sir John Franklin drew the attention of the Government
of New South Wales to the necessity existing for these lighthouses. On this occasion a mass
of evidence was given before the Legislative Council as to which would be the most eligible
sites; but up to this period only two have been founded, both by the Tasmanian Government,
one on the Chappell Isles, another in Banks Strait. The important ones for the eastern and
western entrances of the Strait have been neglected, although the fullest information was obtained
on the subject. Opinions concur in representing Kent Group as the best position for a light
at the eastern entrance, where certainly one is most required, the Strait being there so much
impeded with rocks and islands. I gave my opinion to this effect before the Legislative Council,
in September, 1842. At the same time, for the western entrance, I recommended Cape Otway in
preference to the north end of King Island, for reasons already assigned.* The melancholy wrecks
that have of late occurred in Bass Strait will, it is to be hoped, direct immediate attention
to the construction of these lighthouses, and I think that the collateral benefits to be derived
from the dispersion of the convicts ought to be given their due weight. The expense would,
in consequence of the ample supply of labour, be small; some of the islands afford stone in
abundance; and the convicts might raise part of their food in the vicinity of the proposed
buildings. I cannot but think that this, in the end, will prove a lucrative undertaking for
Government; as on the number of vessels that pass, light-dues of about a penny a ton might
be levied.

(*Footnote. The following is the Report of the Committee of the Legislative Council of New
South Wales, on lighthouses proposed to be erected in Bass Strait: Your Committee have the
honour to report, that having been favoured with the attendance of Captain Stokes, of her Majesty's
ship Beagle, lately returned from a survey of Bass Strait, and ascertained his ideas as to
the best position for placing a lighthouse at the western entrance thereof, they are induced
to change their opinion as set forth in their Report of the 1st September, 1841, and to coincide
with him in thinking that Cape Otway would be a better site for a lighthouse than King Island,
as being equally advantageous to the trade at large, and much more so to that of Port Phillip.

It would appear, too, that no danger could accrue to vessels endeavouring to make the former,
while much mischief might arise in trying to sight the latter, should there be any error in
their reckoning; and that it is therefore desirable to keep them as far as possible to the
northward of King Island, instead of inducing them to risk the danger of approaching it, to
ascertain their true position.

Captain Stokes perfectly coincides with the Committee, in the opinion formerly expressed by
them, that the eastern island of Kent Group, is the best position for a light at the eastern
entrance of Bass Strait; and they beg leave respectfully to recommend to your Excellency and
honourable Council, that immediate steps may be taken for commencing so desirable an undertaking
as the erection of a lighthouse on that spot.

(Signed) J. GIBBES, Chairman. Council Chamber, 6th September, 1842.)

In another part of this work I have adverted to the desirability of forming other convict establishments
than those at present existing, particularly on the north-west and north-east coasts; and I
would especially recommend the neighbourhood of Hanover Bay on the former, and Halifax Bay
on the latter.* By these means many hitherto untrodden lands may speedily be adapted to the
purposes of colonization, and reclaimed from their present unprofitable state. In a country
like Australia, where the proportion of bad land predominates, it is almost necessary, in the
first instance, to force settlements by means of convict labour. A number of buildings is always
a cheering sight to a settler on his first arrival, and gives him encouragement to exertion;
whereas, if the country wears its natural arid, desolate, uninviting appearance, dejection
and despondency ensue.

(*Footnote. We have just learned that it is the intention of Government to form a settlement
of the kind mentioned in the text on the north-east coast; and that the province is to be called
North Australia, the southern boundary of which is to be the 26th parallel. I have already
expressed my opinion, that convicts should not be sent to Port Essington, as the proximity
of the islands would afford them facilities of escape.)

COMET.

During our stay in the Derwent, perhaps one of the most splendid comets that has ever appeared,
illuminated the southern hemisphere for several nights. We did not see it until the evening
of the 5th of March; but it was observed on the 2nd at Launceston; and by a ship at sea, off
Cape Leeuwin, on the 27th of February. Several observations were made with it, when the nucleus,
which was of a deep red colour, somewhat resembling the planet Mars, was visible.* The length
of the tail (on the 5th) measured forty degrees; but was afterwards ten degrees longer. Towards
its centre it showed great intensity of light, becoming visible in the crepusculum before stars
of the second magnitude. Through its more attenuated extremity, the stars were plainly seen,
the coma seeming to be much less dense, showing the sky through the centre like a dark line.

(*Footnote. On the evening of the 5th its right ascension was found to be about 0 hours 13
minutes 0 seconds, and declination about 13 degrees 0 minutes South. The following evening
it was observed to have had a motion of above three degrees and a half in the direction of
the constellation Orion; the right ascension being 0 hours 26 minutes 0 seconds, and the declination
12 degrees 50 minutes South. On the following night it was found to have had a further motion
in the same direction, and with much the same velocity. Its position, shortly before setting,
was as follows: right ascension 0 hours 41 minutes 0 seconds, declination 12 degrees 30 minutes
South.)

COLONIAL CORN.

Whilst we were in the Derwent, a ship was loading with corn for England; and I could not help
regretting that, although grain from these colonies, on account of its dry nature, is well
adapted for a long voyage, the heavy duty almost shut it out from the English market. It was
impossible not to feel, that justice as well as policy should have dictated the admission of
Australian wheat on the same terms as Canadian. The injury inflicted by the exclusive system
pursued, is, that less land is put under cultivation, and fewer people are encouraged to go
there; both the colony and the mother country are sufferers thereby.

The barometer, which had been rising gradually within the last three days, now standing at
30.20, showed that the opportunity of getting round the South-West Cape, had at length arrived.
We therefore left Sullivan Cove on the morning of the 15th; and by the following midnight passed
the above-mentioned storm-beaten headland with a fine northerly wind. Previous, however, to
so doing, we had soundings in 84 fathoms, six miles South-West of the Mew Stone. From the result
of others we had obtained at different times off the south coast of Tasmania, it appears that
soundings of a moderate depth extend out only a short distance, and that a ship in 60 fathoms
will be within ten miles of the land.

MONUMENT TO FLINDERS.

It had been my intention, on our passage to the westward, to have examined the south and west
sides of Kangaroo Island, with the rocks lying off the former. I was also anxious to visit
South Australia for another meridian distance, those already obtained not being satisfactory,
I wished, moreover, to comply with Sir John Franklin's desire, that we should set up a monument,
dedicated to the memory of poor Flinders, which he had sent to Port Lincoln, the centre of
his honoured commander's most important discoveries on the south coast of Australia.* The performance
of such a task would have constituted an appropriate conclusion to our labours on the shores
of this great continent; and certainly nothing could have been more agreeable to our feelings
than to be instrumental in paying a tribute of respect to our distinguished predecessor in
the career of discovery. I shall always regret that we were prevented from doing so. At the
same time I must say, that it will reflect great discredit on the colony of South Australia,
if some portion of its wealth be not devoted to the erection of a suitable monument to the
memory of Flinders in one of the squares of Adelaide.

(*Footnote. Sir John Franklin was a midshipman with Captain Flinders when he discovered this
part of Australia.)

Strong northerly winds prevented us, as I have above hinted, from closing with the land, we
consequently continued our course to the westward; and on the twenty-third day arrived at King
George's Sound, whence, after completing our wooding and watering, we sailed on the morning
of the 21st of April. At noon we passed between Bald Head and Vancouver Reef.*

(*Footnote. See plate.)

ROTTNEST LIGHTHOUSE.

In the forenoon of the 23rd we saw the lighthouse of Rottnest; and regarded it with great interest,
as the work of the aborigines imprisoned on the island. I could not avoid indulging in melancholy
reflections as I gazed upon this building, erected by the hands of a people which seemed destined
to perish from the face of the earth without being able to leave any durable monuments of their
existence, except such fabrics as this, constructed under the control of a conquering race.
The time indeed, if we may judge from past experience, seems not far distant when the stranger,
on approaching the shores of Western Australia, and asking who erected that lighthouse to guide
him in safety to the shore, will be told it was the work of a people that once were and are
now no longer.

Passing over the foul ground extending off the Stragglers, we ran into Owen's anchorage during
the first watch. Whilst waiting to rate the chronometers several soundings were added to our
plan of this place, and a three-fathom patch, about a quarter of a mile in extent, was discovered,
with nine on either side of it, lying nearly two miles and a quarter North 39 degrees West
from Fremantle gaol.

PENAL ESTABLISHMENT.

We also visited Rottnest to inspect the establishment. It had now been a penal settlement for
four years; besides erecting the buildings, the aboriginal labourers had cleared thirty-four
acres of land, chiefly in detached valleys. These grew thirty-five bushels of wheat to the
acre (in the Port Phillip district the return is about five more to the acre) and from thirty-four
to forty bushels of barley. There are about two thousand acres of available land in the whole
island. The average number of native convicts is about seventeen, and the expense of the whole
establishment to Government is about 200 pounds per annum; but, under the good management of
superintendent Vincent, it has realized 1500 pounds by the sale of corn and salt, and allowing
for the value of the buildings erected.

His Excellency Governor Hutt had done a great deal for the improvement of the natives; the
schools established for their instruction work exceedingly well; and I am happy to see that
a most important step towards civilizing them has since been made, a white having taken a native
woman as his wife. This may be regarded as in a great measure the result of the notice bestowed
on them.

No opportunity occurred during our stay of adding to the observations I had previously made
for the longitude of Fremantle (Scott's Jetty); which, however, is the only part of the continent
absolutely determined during the Beagle's voyage. It is considered to be in longitude 115 degrees
47 minutes 50 seconds East.

Before leaving we received a letter of thanks from his Excellency and the members of the Legislative
Council for the services we had rendered the colony. My friend Lieutenant Roe presented me,
also, with two specimens of the Spined Lizard Moloch horridus, which I intended to present
to Her Majesty; but, unfortunately, I did not succeed in bringing either of them alive to England;
one, however, lived beyond the Western Islands.

DEPARTURE FROM WESTERN AUSTRALIA.

We left Swan River on the evening of the 6th of May, 1843, running out with a moderate North-East
breeze. Everything seemed auspicious. The water was smooth, and the sails, as they slept in
the breeze, echoed back the sounds of the well-known song, We are homeward bound, that was
sung with an earnestness that could not be mistaken. I fancied I could discern, in the rough
tones of the crew under my command, the existence of the same emotions that swelled in my own
breast at this moment. For seamen, high and low, though content to pass the greater portion
of their lives upon the world of waters, can never entirely suppress that yearning for home,
which, perhaps, after all, is one of the finest traits in human nature. And now that it might
be legitimately indulged, I was not sorry to see such strong evidences of its existence.

Ere the last vestige of day had passed, the coast of Australia had faded from our sight, though
not from our memory; for, however much thoughts of the land to which we were returning crowded
on our minds, they could not as yet entirely obliterate the recollection of that we were quitting.
The Swan River colony--its history, its state, its prospects--naturally occupied much of our
mind. What a change had come over it even since our visit! From a happy little family, if I
may use the expression, it had grown into a populous colony, in which all the passions, the
rivalries, the loves and the hates of the mother country were in some sort represented. And
yet there remained still much of that old English hospitality, which rendered our first stay
so pleasant, and which almost made us desire to prolong our last. The alteration that had taken
place was rather to be referred to the increasing number of settlers, which rendered inevitable
the formation of circles more or less exclusive, and which, with the forms of European society,
promised to introduce many of its defects.

But our thoughts wandered, from time to time, over the whole of this extraordinary continent,
which we saw for the first time in November 1837, at the point from which we took our departure,
in May, 1843. The strange contrasts to the rest of the world which it affords were enumerated
and commented upon--its cherries with their stones growing outside--its trees, which shed their
bark instead of their leaves--its strange animals--its still stranger population--its mushroom
cities--and, finally, the fact that the approach to human habitations is not announced by the
barking of dogs, but by the barking of trees!*

(*Footnote. The trees in the vicinity of houses are generally barked to obtain a covering for
the roofs.)

Westerly winds carried us into the South-East trade by the 13th, in latitude 22 degrees 30
minutes South four hundred miles from the North-west Cape, when our course was directed for
the Mauritius. We found the trade very squally, and on one or two occasions managed to screw
as much as eleven knots out of the old craft.

RODRIGUE ISLAND.

A little after noon on the 27th we saw Rodrigue Island sooner than we expected, in consequence
of our finding it placed seven miles to the westward of its true position, even with reference
to the meridian of the Mauritius. Our observations, in passing to southward, made the eastern
end of it 5 degrees 59 minutes East of Port Louis, and 63 degrees 31 3/4 East of Greenwich,
latitude 19 degrees 42 minutes South. I was rather surprised to find this error in the position
of Rodrigue, as it is quite a finger-post for ships on their voyage from India to Great Britain.
It trends east and west for seventeen miles, and is in width about six. For a volcanic island
its features are not very remarkable; the highest part is a peak or excrescence, 1700 feet
high, rising towards the eastern end out of a rather level ridge.

On the morning of the 29th, the high land of the Mauritius was seen breaking through the mass
of clouds. Passing round the north end of the island, in the evening we reached Port Louis,
where we found a French man-of-war that had just brought in the crew of a vessel foundered
at sea. Their escape had been one of the most remarkable on record. The ship was from Liverpool,
and was rounding the south-eastern point of Africa with a strong north-west wind, when she
sprang a leak, which increased so fast, that the crew were ultimately obliged to abandon her
and take to the boats. The sea was so great that they were compelled to run before the wind,
with the prospect only of prolonging their lives for a brief space, no land lying in that direction.

PROVIDENTIAL ESCAPE.

Providentially, the morning following they found themselves alongside a French frigate; but
the boats were so low in the water that for some time they escaped observation, and were nearly
passed. At length, by waving a lady's shawl in the air, they attracted the attention of the
Frenchmen, and were taken on board, and treated with an attentive kindness, which entitled
their preservers to the thanks of all who would wish to be so received under such circumstances.
I regret that the name of the captain of the ship has escaped me; though I remember it being
said, that he had himself been saved on a previous occasion by a Liverpool ship in the China Sea.

Not long before the arrival of the Beagle in Port Louis, a fleet of crippled vessels, the victims
of a recent hurricane, might have been seen making their way into the harbour, some dismasted,
others kept afloat with difficulty, firing guns of distress, or giving other signs of their
helpless condition. The monotony of colonial life was suddenly disturbed, by no means disagreeably
to some, as the telegraph told off a succession of lame ducks, as they were jocularly called,
such as seldom or ever had been witnessed, even at that place. It required but a visit to the
bell buoy, to see at a glance the destructive effects of the storm on the unfortunate ships.

EFFECTS OF HURRICANE AT MAURITIUS.

On the tranquil surface of the harbour lay a group of shattered vessels, presenting the appearance
of floating wrecks. In almost all, the bulwarks, boats, and everything on deck had been swept
away; some, that were towed in, had lost all their masts, others more or less of their spars;
one had her poop and all its cabins swept away; many had four or five feet water in the hold,
and the clank of the pumps was still kept up by the weary crew.

Such was the description given me of the circumstances under which the crowd of vessels that
lay at anchor in Port Louis had arrived. I had anticipated that I should here be enabled to
make some important additions to the notices of hurricanes that have occasionally appeared
in this work; and certainly ample opportunity now presented itself. But I found that this interesting
subject was in more able hands, those, namely, of Mr. Alexander Thom, of H.M. 86th Regiment,
whose valuable observations have been laid before the public, in a work called, An Inquiry
into the Nature and Course of Storms; a volume that embraces many important considerations
for seamen, to whom, indeed, and to the ship-owner, Mr. Thom, by his scientific investigations,
has proved himself a true friend.

It is curious that military men should have been the first to study the causes of hurricanes,
and to tell sailors how to avoid their effects; but that such is the case, the works of Colonel
Reid and of my friend Mr. Thom will testify.

I had the pleasure of making the acquaintance of the latter gentleman in Port Louis. What he
considered to be the grand sources of rotatory storms--winds charged with opposite kinds of
electricity and blowing in opposite directions--appeared to account satisfactorily for the
occurrence of hurricanes in the Pacific, where there are no continents or chains of mountains
to produce them and guide their courses.

As so much has been already written about this interesting island, the Mauritius, and as, moreover,
space forbids, I do not here make use of the mass of information with which Mr. Thom has kindly
furnished me, respecting its history and resources, and the subject of Coolie labour; but on
some future occasion I may be able to lay it before the public.

During my stay at Port Louis I received much hospitality, particularly from the family of Colonel
Staveley, Commander of the Forces, which I take this opportunity of acknowledging.

We sailed from the Mauritius on the 10th of June, and on the following day passed about 20
miles south-east of the Island of Bourbon. It resembles a large cone emerging from the water;
and its features are strikingly different from those of the Mauritius; the outline is not softened
by luxuriant vegetation, but is sudden and steep and massive.

MADAGASCAR.

Southerly and westerly winds brought us in sight of Madagascar on the 16th, and on the same
evening, aided by a southerly current of 2 knots an hour, we were just able to weather its
South-East extreme. The features of this great island that were presented to our view approached
the Alpine, and from a passing glimpse of the small hills near the shore, it appeared to be
a fertile country. This portion of the globe is one of great interest to the world at large,
especially when we know that, if considered as a naval or military station, it is scarcely
equalled by any in the Indian Ocean; besides having a soil of the best description, and abounding
also in mineral wealth, with timber fit for any purposes, and thousands of cattle running wild
in its valleys. On the afternoon of the 27th we were within seven or eight miles of the land,
near the great Fish River, on the south-eastern coast of Africa, having apparently got within
the eddy of the westerly current, which sweeps round that part of the coast at the distance
of thirty miles with a velocity of from two to five miles an hour, which we entirely lost after
passing Algoa Bay. Within thirty miles of the latter place we had a strong gale from the southward
of twenty-four hours duration; and on the morning of the 1st of July arrived at Simon's Bay,
in company with Her Majesty's ship Belleisle, which sailed two days before us from the Mauritius.
Nearly six years had elapsed since our last visit, and little improvement had taken place in
colonial affairs.

(*Footnote. The little difficulty that strangers found in recognizing this anchorage at night,
is now overcome by a light-vessel being placed near the Roman Rocks; but the streaks of sand,
resembling snow, down the sides of the hills over Simons Bay, and the remarkable break in the
high land over another bay, just to the northward, are sufficient guides of themselves in clear
weather.)

On the 9th we were again on our way homeward. Touching at St. Helena* and Ascension, we crossed
the equator on the forenoon of the 15th, in longitude 19 degrees 45 minutes West, where we
endeavoured to obtain soundings with 2000 fathoms of line, which parted at 1600 fathoms. Respecting
deep-sea soundings, there are some sceptical persons who, in consequence of the bottom not
being brought up from the great depths reported to have been found, are inclined to doubt that
soundings were actually obtained on those occasions.

(*Footnote. This place is famed for its large flying-fish, of which some are from 18 to 24
inches in length: and not a little so, for those monsters of the finny tribe called sharks.
In the Admiralty book of directions, the fact is related of an artillery-man being found fully
accoutred in the stomach of one taken there.)

ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND.

On the 24th a continuation of westerly winds* brought us in sight of St. Jago and Bravo, of
the Cape de Verd Group; on passing which we got the North-East trade, and, after staying a
part of the 10th and 11th at Fayal, where we met Her Majesty's Steamer Styx, Captain Vidal,
who, on parting, gave us three hearty farewell cheers, we did not, in consequence of easterly
winds, arrive at Spithead until the 30th day of September, after an absence of upwards of six
years. During this period we only lost two men, and preserved throughout almost the same spars**
and boats,*** we left Plymouth with in 1831. From Portsmouth we proceeded round to Woolwich,
where the ship was paid off on the 18th of October, 1843.

(*Footnote. Ships availing themselves of these winds, when, also, the westerly current ceases
near the equator, might, by running away to the eastward in them, shorten the passage to either
Ascension or St. Helena.)

(**Footnote. I have already mentioned that the Beagle was fitted with Mr. Snow Harris's lightning
conductors; the fact mentioned in the text is ample proof that they do not weaken even the
smallest spars.)

(***Footnote. It is in justice due to say, that the boats were chiefly built by Mr. Johns,
of Plymouth Dockyard.)

TAKE LEAVE OF THE BEAGLE.

After giving the men their certificates, I loitered a short time to indulge in those feelings
that naturally arose on taking a final leave of the poor old Beagle at the same place where
I first joined her in 1825. Many events have occurred since my first trip to sea in her: I
have seen her under every variety of circumstances, placed in peculiar situations and fearful
positions, from nearly the antarctic to the tropic, cooled by the frigid clime of the extreme
of South America, or parched by the heats of North Australia; under every vicissitude, from
the grave to the gay, I have struggled along with her; and after wandering together for eighteen
years, a fact unprecedented in the service, I naturally parted from her with regret. Her movements,
latterly, have been anxiously watched, and the chances are that her ribs will separate, and
that she will perish in the river* where she was first put together. She has made herself as
notorious as during the war did her namesake, that reaped golden opinions from her success
in prize-making; while my old friend has extensively contributed to our geographical knowledge.

(*Footnote. The Beagle, now employed in the Preventive Service, is moored in Crouch Creek,
near South End.)

THE SURVEYING SERVICE. CONCLUSION.

There was only one drawback to the pleasure I experienced on arriving in England--namely, that
Lieutenant G. Gore did not obtain his promotion, but was compelled to seek it by a second voyage
to the North Pole. All the mates were, in the course of a short time, promoted, and the ship's
company received the favour of having half of their slop bill deducted, an indulgence which
the Lords of the Admiralty, from the kindest and most considerate motives, have in some instances
bestowed upon the crews of surveying vessels, on their return from distant voyages. This boon,
however, in some instances, operates unfairly. In the first place, it often happens, in spite
of the strictest surveillance, that the worst characters will, if they can, take up the greatest
quantity of slops, which they convert either into money or grog, whenever an opportunity presents
itself. The really steady men generally look clean and neat as long as possible, without much
assistance from the purser. Then again, the boats' crews of all surveying vessels are necessarily
so much more exposed, that they not only the sooner wear out their ordinary clothing, but absolutely
require additional comforts in that way. I am therefore strongly of opinion that, in this department
(and I speak from experience) the Captain should be allowed a certain portion of slops, to
be placed at his disposal, and distributed under his sole authority; or might not he be enabled
to recommend a certain number of the best men for a small increase upon their regular pay?
This judicious exercise of discretion would be the means of retaining in this important branch
of the service, a class of men who would become most valuable to their officers when engaged
in the arduous and responsible duties of a survey.

As in the Royal Engineers, a great deal of the superior talent of the officers might be better
bestowed, by abandoning to the petty officers the rougher part of the surveying work, in which
calculation is not required. For this purpose, a kind of instruction might be imparted, which
that class of men, if encouraged by extra pay, is capable of receiving, particularly those
who have had the advantage of a Greenwich education.

To strengthen the suggestions I have made regarding the surveying service, I cannot refrain
from alluding--and I do so with honest pride--both to the actions in China, and the very recent
gallant destruction of the Argentine batteries in the River Parana, as instances of the importance
of this branch of the profession in time of war. During peace the new countries that are explored,
and the new fields of commerce that are opened to the world, will speak for themselves.

During the summer, or from the early part of October to the beginning of April, they are almost
constant from this quarter; but in the winter their regularity is broken in upon by occasional
winds between north and west that at times blow with great violence, and are accompanied by
heavy rain, and thick dirty weather.

Near the shore, land and seabreezes appear to be regular, the former generally dying away towards
the middle of the day, after having reached as far as East from about South-East at sunrise;
then follows a short interval of calm, after which, the seabreeze sets in, mostly at South-South-West,
and draws to the eastward of south in the evening.

At times the land wind veers round the compass, and is then generally stronger than usual;
blowing fresh for a short time from North-East, and bringing a parching heat from the land;
upon these occasions the seabreeze comes in from a more western point, and is lighter.

At Swan River, in the months of December, January, and February, the seabreezes are very strong,
for intervals of from three to five days; during which time they blow fresh throughout the
night--drawing to the southward after midnight, and towards sunrise to South-South-East and
South-East, but more moderate. In the middle of the day, they back again to the southward,
and soon to South-South-West, from which quarter they blow very fresh until midnight.

Intervals of such weather are from three to five days' duration, and are followed by the like
number of days of moderate weather, with winds mostly off the land; sometimes strong gusts
from the east, for a few hours, with oppressively hot weather.

