]

[Footnote 13: Edgebucklin, near Musselburgh.]

The pertinacious opposition of Angus to his doom irritated to the extreme the fiery temper
of James, and he swore, in his wrath, that a Douglas should never serve him; an oath which
he kept in circumstances under which the spirit of chivalry, which he worshipped[14], should
have taught him other feelings.

[Footnote 14: I allude to the affecting story of Douglas of Kilspindie, uncle to the Earl of
Angus. This gentleman had been placed by Angus about the king's person, who, when a boy, loved
him much, on account of his singular activity of body, and was wont to call him his Graysteil,
after a champion of chivalry, in the romance of Sir Eger and Sir Grime. He shared, however,
the fate of his chief, and, for many years, served in France. Weary, at length, of exile, the
aged warrior, recollecting the king's personal attachment to him, resolved to throw himself
on his clemency. As James returned from hunting in the park at Stirling, he saw a person at
a distance, and, turning to his nobles, exclaimed, "Yonder is my Graysteil, Archibald of Kilspindie!"
As he approached, Douglas threw himself on his knees, and implored permission to lead an obscure
life in his native land. But the name of Douglas was an amulet, which steeled the king's heart
against the influence of compassion and juvenile recollection. He passed the suppliant without
an answer, and rode briskly up the steep hill, towards the castle. Kilspindie, though loaded
with a hauberk under his cloaths, kept pace with the horse, in vain endeavouring to catch a
glance from the implacable monarch. He sat down at the gate, weary and exhausted, and asked
for a draught of water. Even this was refused by the royal attendants. The king afterwards
blamed their discourtesy; but Kilspindie was obliged to return to France, where he died of
a broken heart; the same disease which afterwards brought to the grave his unrelenting sovereign.
Even the stern Henry VIII. blamed his nephew's conduct, quoting the generous saying "A king's
face should give grace."--Godscroft, Vol. II. P. 107.]

While these transactions, by which the fate of Scotland was influenced, were passing upon the
eastern border, the Lord Maxwell seems to have exercised a most uncontrouled domination in
Dumfries-shire. Even the power of the Earl of Angus was exerted in vain, against the banditti
of Liddesdale, protected and bucklered by this mighty chief. Repeated complaints are made by
the English residents, of the devastation occasioned by the depredations of the Elliots, Scotts,
and Armstrongs, connived at, and encouraged, by Maxwell, [Sidenote: 1528] Buccleuch, and Fairnihirst.
At a convention of border commissioners, it was agreed, that the king of England, in case the
excesses of the Liddesdale freebooters were not duly redressed, should be at liberty to issue
letters of reprisal to his injured subjects, granting "power to invade the said inhabitants
of Liddesdale, to their slaughters, burning, heirships, robbing, reifing, despoiling and destruction,
and so to continue the same at his grace's pleasure," till the attempts of the inhabitants
were fully atoned for. This impolitic expedient, by which the Scottish prince, unable to execute
justice on his turbulent subjects, committed to a rival sovereign the power of unlimited chastisement,
was a principal cause of the savage state of the borders. For the inhabitants, finding that
the sword of revenge was substituted for that of justice, were loosened from their attachment
to Scotland, and boldly threatened to carry on their depredations, in spite of the efforts
of both kingdoms.

James V., however, was not backward in using more honourable expedients to quell the banditti
[Sidenote: 1529] on the borders. The imprisonment of their chiefs, and a noted expedition,
in which many of the principal thieves were executed (see introduction to the ballad, called
Johnie Armstrong), produced such good effects, that, according to an ancient picturesque history,
"thereafter there was great peace and rest a long time, where through the king had great profit;
for he had ten thousand sheep going in the Ettrick forest, in keeping by Andrew Bell, who made
the king so good count of them, as they had gone in the hounds of Fife." Pitscottie, p. 153.

A breach with England interrupted the tranquillity [Sidenote: 1532] of the borders. The Earl
of Northumberland, a formidable name to Scotland, ravaged the middle marches, and burned Branxholm,
the abode of Buccleuch, the hereditary enemy of the English name. Buccleuch, with the barons
of Cessford and Fairnihirst, retaliated by a raid into England, [Sidenote: 1533] where they
acquired much spoil. On the east march, Fowberry was destroyed by the Scots, and Dunglass castle
by D'Arcey, and the banished Angus.

A short peace was quickly followed by another war, which proved fatal to Scotland, and to her
king. In the battle of Haddenrig, the English, and the exiled Douglasses, were defeated by
the Lords Huntly and Home; but this was a transient gleam of success. Kelso was burned, and
the borders [Sidenote: 1542] ravaged, by the Duke of Norfolk; and finally, the rout of Solway
moss, in which ten thousand men, the flower of the Scottish army, were dispersed and defeated
by a band of five hundred English cavalry, or rather by their own dissentions, broke the proud
heart of James; a death, more painful a hundred fold than was met by his father in the field
of Flodden.

When the strength of the Scottish army had sunk, without wounds, and without renown, the principal
chiefs were led captive into England.--Among these was the Lord Maxwell, who was compelled,
by the menaces of Henry, to swear allegiance to the English monarch. There is still in existence
the spirited instrument of vindication, by which he renounces his connection with England,
and the honours and estates which had been proffered him, as the price of treason to his infant
sovereign. From various bonds of manrent, it appears, that all the western marches were swayed
[Sidenote: 1543] by this powerful chieftain. With Maxwell, and the other captives, returned
to Scotland the banished Earl of Angus, and his brother, Sir George Douglas, after a banishment
of fifteen years. This powerful family regained at least a part of their influence upon the
borders; and, grateful to the kingdom which had afforded them protection during their exile,
became chiefs of the English faction in Scotland, whose object it was to urge a contract of
marriage betwixt the young queen and the heir apparent of England. The impetuosity of Henry,
the ancient hatred betwixt the nations, and the wavering temper of the governor, Arran, prevented
the success of this measure. The wrath of the disappointed monarch discharged itself in a wide-wasting
and furious invasion of the east marches, conducted by the Earl of Hertford. Seton, Home, and
Buccleuch, hanging on the mountains of Lammermoor, saw, with ineffectual regret, the fertile
plains of Merse and Lothian, and the metropolis itself, reduced to a smoking desert. Hertford
had scarcely retreated with the main army, when Evers and Latoun laid waste the whole vale
of Tiviot, with a ferocity of devastation, hitherto unheard of[15]. The same "lion mode of
wooing," being pursued during the minority of Edward VI., totally alienated the affections
even of those Scots who were most attached to the English interest. The Earl of Angus, in particular,
united himself to the governor, and gave the English a sharp defeat at Ancram moor, [Sidenote:
1545] a particular account of which action is subjoined to the ballad, entituled, "The Eve
of St. John." Even the fatal defeat at Pinky, which at once renewed the carnage of Flodden,
and the disgrace of Solway, served to prejudice the cause of the victors. The borders saw,
with dread and detestation, the ruinous fortress of Roxburgh once more receive an English garrison,
and the widow of Lord Home driven from his baronial castle, to [Sidenote: 1547] make room for
the "Southern Reivers." Many of the barons made a reluctant submission to Somerset; but those
of the higher part of the marches remained among their mountains, meditating revenge. A similar
incursion was made on the west borders by Lord Wharton, who, with five thousand men, ravaged
and overran Annandale, Nithsdale, and Galloway, compelling the inhabitants to receive the yoke
of England[16].

[Footnote 15: In Haynes' State Papers, from p. 43 to p. 64, is an account of these destructive
forays. One list of the places burned and destroyed enumerates--

    Monasteries and Freehouses .... 7
    Castles, towres, and piles .... 16
    Market townes ................. 5
    Villages ...................... 243
    Mylnes ........................ 13
    Spytells and hospitals ........ 3

See also official accounts of these expeditions, in Dalyell's Fragments.]

[Footnote 16: Patten gives us a list of those east border chiefs who did homage to the Duke
of Somerset, on the 24th of September, 1547; namely, the lairds of Cessfoorth, Fernyherst,
Grenehed, Hunthill, Hundely, Makerstone, Bymerside, Bounjedworth, Ormeston, Mellestains, Warmesay,
Synton, Egerston, Merton, Mowe, Rydell, Beamerside. Of gentlemen, he enumerates George Tromboul,
Jhon Haliburton, Robert Car, Robert Car of Greyden, Adam Kirton, Andrew Mether, Saunders Purvose
of Erleston, Mark Car of Littledean, George Car of Faldenside, Alexander Mackdowal, Charles
Rutherford, Thomas Car of the Yere, Jhon Car of Meynthorn (Nenthorn), Walter Holiburton, Richard
Hangansyde, Andrew Car, James Douglas of Cavers, James Car of Mersington, George Hoppringle,
William Ormeston of Edmerden, John Grymslowe.--Patten, in Dalyell's Fragments, p. 87.

On the west border, the following barons and clans submitted and gave pledges to Lord Wharton,
that they would serve the king of England, with the number of followers annexed to their names.

          ANNERDALE.                     NITHSDALE.

Laird of Kirkmighel .......... 222   Mr Maxwell and more ........ 1000
         Rose ................ 165   Laird of Closeburn .........  403
         Hempsfield .......... 163            Lag ...............  202
         Home Ends ........... 162            Cransfield ........   27
         Wamfrey ............. 102   Mr Ed. Creighton ...........   10
         Dunwoddy ............  44   Laird of Cowhill ...........   91
 Laird of Newby and Gratney .. 122   Maxwells of Brackenside,
         Tinnel (Tinwald) .... 102    and vicar of Carlaverick ..  310
 Patrick Murray .............. 203   ANNERDALE AND GALWAY.
 Christie Urwin (Irving) of          Lord Carlisle ..............  101
        Coveshawe ............ 102   ANNERDALE AND CLIDSDALE
 Cuthbert Urwen of Robbgill ..  34   Laird of Applegirth ........  242
 Urwens of Sennersack ......... 40   LIDDESDALE AND DEBATEABLE
 Wat Urwen .................... 20   LAND.
 Jeffrey Urwen ................ 93   Armstrongs .................  300
 T. Johnston of Crackburn ....  64   Elwoods (Elliots) ..........   74
 James Johnston of Coites .... 162   Nixons .....................   32
 Johnstons of Graggyland .....  37             GALLOWAY
 Johnstons of Driesdell ......  46   Laird of Dawbaylie .........   41
 Johnstons of Malinshaw ......  65   Orcherton ..................  111
 Gawen Johnston ..............  31   Carlisle ...................  206
 Will Johnston, the laird's          Loughenwar .................   45
   brother ................... 110   Tutor of Bumbie ............  140
Robin Johnston of                    Abbot of Newabbey ..........  141
   Lochmaben .................. 67   Town of Dumfries ...........  201
Lard of Gillersbie ............ 30   Town of Kircubrie ..........   36
Moffits ....................... 24            TIVIDALE.
Bells of Tostints ............ 142   Laird of Drumlire ..........  364
Bells of Tindills ............ 222   Caruthers ..................   71
Sir John Lawson ............... 32   Trumbells ..................   12
Town of Annan ................  33             ESKDALE.
Roomes of Tordephe ...........  32   Battisons and Thomsons .....  166

                   Total 7008 men under English assurance.

Nicolson, from Bell's MS. Introduction to History of Cumberland, p. 65.]

The arrival of French auxiliaries, and of French gold, rendered vain the splendid successes
of the English. One by one, the fortresses which they occupied were recovered by force, or
by stratagem; and the vindictive cruelty of the Scottish borderers made dreadful retaliation
for the, injuries they had sustained. An idea may be conceived of this horrible warfare, from
the memoirs of Beaugé, a French officer, serving in Scotland.

The castle of Fairnihirst, situated about three miles above Jedburgh, had been taken and garrisoned
by the English. The commander and his followers are accused of such excesses of lust and cruelty
"as would," says Beaugé, "have made to tremble the most savage moor in Africa." A band of Frenchmen,
with the laird of Fairnihirst, and [Sidenote: 1549] his borderers, assaulted this fortress.
The English archers showered their arrows down the steep ascent, leading to the castle, and
from the outer wall by which it was surrounded. A vigorous escalade, however, gained the base
court, and the sharp fire of the French arquebusiers drove the bowmen into the square keep,
or dungeon, of the fortress. Here the English defended themselves, till a breach in the wall
was made by mining. Through this hole the commandant creeped forth; and, surrendering himself
to De la Mothe-rouge, implored protection from the vengeance of the borderers. But a Scottish
marc-hman, eyeing in the captive the ravisher of his wife, approached him ere the French officer
could guess his intention, and, at one blow, carried his head four paces from the trunk. Above
a hundred Scots rushed to wash their hands in the blood of their oppressor, bandied about the
severed head, and expressed their joy in such shouts, as if they had stormed the city of London.
The prisoners, who fell into their merciless hands, were put to death, after their eyes had
been torn out; the victors contending who should display the greatest address in severing their
legs and arms, before inflicting a mortal wound. When their own prisoners were slain, the Scottish,
with an unextinguishable thirst for blood, purchased those of the French; parting willingly
with their very arms, in exchange for an English captive. "I myself," says Beaugé, with military
sang-froid, "I myself sold them a prisoner for a small horse. They laid him down upon the ground,
galloped over him with their lances in rest, and wounded him as they passed. When slain, they
cut his body in pieces, and bore the mangled gobbets, in triumph, on the points of their spears.
I cannot greatly praise the Scottish for this practice. But the truth is, that the English
tyrannized over the borders in a most barbarous manner; and I think it was but fair to repay
them, according to the proverb, in their own coin."--

Campagnes de Beaugé.

A peace, in 1551, put an end to this war; the most destructive which, for a length of time,
had ravaged Scotland. Some attention was paid by the governor and queen-mother, to the administration
of justice on the border; and the chieftains, who had distinguished themselves during the late
troubles, received the honour of knighthood[17]. [Sidenote: 1522] At this time, also, the Debateable
Land, a tract of country, situated betwixt the Esk and Sarke, claimed by both kingdoms, was
divided by royal commissioners, appointed by the two crowns.--By their award, this land of
contention was separated by a line, drawn from east to west, betwixt the rivers. The upper
half was adjudged to Scotland, and the more eastern part to England. Yet the Debateable Land
continued long after to be the residence of the thieves and banditti, to whom its dubious state
had afforded a desirable refuge[18].

[Footnote 17: These were the lairds of Buccleuch, Cessford, and Fairnihirst, Littleden, Grenehed,
and Coldingknows. Buccleuch, whose gallant exploits we have noticed, did not long enjoy his
new honours. He was murdered, in the streets of Edinburgh, by his hereditary enemies, the Kerrs,
anno 1552.]

[Footnote 18: The jest of James VI. is well known, who, when a favourite cow had found her
way from London, back to her native country of Fife, observed, "that nothing surprised him
so much as her passing uninterrupted through the Debateable Land!"]

In 1557, a new war broke out, in which rencounters on the borders were, as usual, numerous,
and with varied success. In some of these, the too famous Bothwell is said to have given proofs
of his courage, which was at other times very questionable[19]. About this time the Scottish
borderers seem to have acquired some ascendency over their southern neighbours.--Strype, Vol.
III. p. 437--In 1559, peace was again restored.

[Footnote 19: He was lord of Liddesdale, and keeper of the Hermitage castle. But he had little
effective power over that country, and was twice defeated by the Armstrongs, its lawless inhabitants.--Border
History, p. 584. Yet the unfortunate Mary, in her famous Apology, says, "that in the weiris
againis Ingland, he gaif proof of his vailyentnes, courage, and gude conduct;" and praises
him especially for subjugating "the rebellious subjectis inhabiting the cuntreis lying ewest
the marches of Ingland."--Keith, p. 388. He appears actually to have defeated Sir Henry Percy,
in a skirmish, called the Raid of Haltweilswire.]

The flame of reformation, long stifled in Scotland, now burst forth, with the violence of a
volcanic eruption. The siege of Leith was commenced, by the combined forces of the Congregation
and of England. The borderers cared little about speculative points of religion; but they shewed
themselves much interested in the treasures which passed through their country, for payment
of the English forces at Edinburgh. Much alarm was excited, lest the marchers should intercept
these weighty protestant arguments; and it was, probably, by voluntarily imparting a share
in them to Lord Home, that he became a sudden convert to the new faith[20].

[Footnote 20: This nobleman had, shortly before, threatened to spoil the English east march;
"but," says the Duke of Norfolk, "we have provided such sauce for him, that I think he will
not deal in such matter; but, if he do fire but one hay-goff, he shall not go to Home again
without torch-light, and, peradventure, may find a lanthorn at his own house."]

Upon the arrival of the ill-fated Mary in her native country, she found the borders in a state
of great disorder. The exertions of her natural brother (afterwards the famous regent, Murray)
were necessary to restore some degree of tranquillity. He marched to Jedburgh, executed twenty
or thirty of the transgressors, burned many houses, and brought a number of prisoners to Edinburgh.
The chieftains of the principal clans were also obliged to grant pledges for their future obedience.
A noted convention (for the particulars of which, see Border Laws, p. 84.) adopted various
regulations, which were attended with great advantage to the marches[21].

[Footnote 21: The commissioners on the English side were, the elder Lord Scroope of Bolton,
Sir John Foster, Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Dr. Rookby. On the Scottish side appeared, Sir John
Maxwell of Terreagles, and Sir John Ballenden.]

The unhappy match, betwixt Henry Darnley and his sovereign, led to new dissentions on the border.
The Homes, Kerrs, and other east marchers, hastened to support the queen, against Murray, Chatelherault,
and other nobles, whom her marriage had offended. For the same purpose the Johnstones, Jardines,
and clans of Annandale entered into bonds of confederacy. But Liddesdale was under the influence
of England; in so much, that Randolph, the English minister, proposed to hire a band of strapping
Elliots, to find Home business at home, in looking after his corn and cattle.--Keith, p. 265.
App. 133.

This storm was hardly overblown, when Bothwell received the commission of lieutenant upon the
borders; but, as void of parts as of principle, he could not even recover to the queen's allegiance
his own domains in Liddesdale.--Keith, App. 165. The queen herself advanced to the borders,
to remedy this evil, and to hold courts at Jedburgh. Bothwell was already in Liddesdale, where
he had been severely wounded, in an attempt to seize John Elliot, of the Parke, a desperate
freebooter; and happy had it been for Mary, had the dagger of the moss-trooper struck more
home. Bothwell being transported to his castle of Hermitage, the queen, upon hearing the tidings,
hastened thither, A dangerous morass, still called the Queen's Mire[22], is pointed out by
tradition as the spot where the lovely Mary, and her white palfrey, were in danger of perishing.
The distance betwixt Hermitage and Jedburgh, by the way of Hawick, is nearly twenty-four English
miles. The queen went and returned the same day. Whether she visited a wounded subject, or
a lover in danger, has been warmly disputed in our latter days.

[Footnote 22: The Queen's Mire is still a pass of danger, exhibiting, in many places, the bones
of the horses which have been entangled in it. For what reason the queen chose to enter Liddesdale
by the circuitous route of Hawick, does not appear. There are two other passes from Jedburgh
to Hermitage castle; the one by the Note of the Gate, the other over the mountain, called Winburgh.
Either of these, but especially the latter, is several miles shorter than that by Hawick, and
the Queen's Mire. But, by the circuitous way of Hawick, the queen could traverse the districts
of more friendly clans, than by going directly into the disorderly province of Liddesdale.]

To the death of Henry Darnley, it is said, some of the border lords were privy. But the subsequent
marriage, betwixt the queen and Bothwell, alienated from her the affections of the chieftains
of the marches, most of whom aided the association of the insurgent barons. A few gentlemen
of the Merse, however, joined the army which Mary brought to Carberry-hill. But no one was
willing to fight for the detested Bothwell, nor did Bothwell himself shew any inclination to
put his person in jeopardy. The result to Mary was a rigorous captivity in Lochleven castle;
and the name of Bothwell scarcely again pollutes the page of Scottish history.

The distress of a beautiful and afflicted princess softened the hearts of her subjects; and,
when she escaped from her severe captivity, the most powerful barons in Scotland crowded around
her standard. Among these were many of the west border men, under the lords Maxwell and Herries[23].
But the defeat at Langside was a death-blow to her interest in Scotland.

[Footnote 23: The followers of these barons are said to have stolen the horses of their friends,
while they were engaged in the battle.]

The death of the regent Murray, in 1569, excited the party of Mary to hope and to exertion.
It seems, that the design of Bothwelhaugh, who slew him, was well known upon the borders; for,
the very day on which the slaughter happened, Buccleuch and Fairnihirst, with their clans,
broke into England, and spread devastation along the frontiers, with unusual ferocity. It is
probable they well knew that the controuling hand of the regent was that day palsied by death.
Buchanan exclaims loudly against this breach of truce with Elizabeth, charging Queen Mary's
party with having "houndit furth proude and uncircumspecte young men, to hery, burne, and slay,
and tak prisoneris, in her realme, and use all misordour and crueltie, not only usit in weir,
but detestabil to all barbar and wild Tartaris, in slaying of prisoneris, and contrair to all
humanitie and justice, keeping na promeis to miserabil catives resavit anis to thair mercy
"--Admonitioun to the trew lordis, Striveling, 1571. He numbers, among these insurgents, highlanders
as well as borderers, Buccleuch and Fairnihirst, the Johnstons and Armstrongs, the Grants,
and the clan Chattan. Besides these powerful clans, Mary numbered among her adherents, the
Maxwells, and almost all the west border leaders, excepting Drumlanrig, and Jardine of Applegirth.
On the eastern border, the faction of the infant king was more powerful; for, although deserted
by Lord Home, the greater part of his clan, under the influence of Wedderburn, remained attached
to that party. The laird of Cessford wished them well, and the Earl of Angus naturally followed
the steps of his uncle Morton. A sharp and bloody invasion of the middle march, under the command
of the Earl of Sussex, avenged with interest the raids of Buccleuch and Fairnihirst. The domains
of these chiefs were laid waste, their castles burned and destroyed. The narrow vales of Beaumont
and Kale, belonging to Buccleuch, were treated with peculiar severity; and the forrays of Hertford
were equalled by that of Sussex. In vain did the chiefs request assistance from the government
to defend their fortresses. Through the predominating interest of Elizabeth in the Scottish
councils, this was refused to all but Home, whose castle, nevertheless, again received an English
garrison; while Buccleuch and Fairnihirst complained bitterly that those, who had instigated
their invasion, durst not even come so far as Lauder, to shew countenance to their defence
against the English. The bickerings, which followed, distracted the whole kingdom. One celebrated
exploit may be selected, as an illustration of the border fashion of war.

The Earl of Lennox, who had succeeded Murray in the regency, held a parliament at Stirling,
in 1571. The young king was exhibited to the great council of his nation. He had been tutored
to repeat a set speech, composed for the occasion; but, observing that the roof of the building
was a little decayed, he interrupted his recitation, and exclaimed, with childish levity, "that
there was a hole in the parliament,"--words which, in these days, were held to presage the
deadly breach shortly to be made in that body, by the death of him in whose name it was convoked.

Amid the most undisturbed security of confidence, the lords, who composed this parliament,
were roused at day-break, by the shouts of their enemies in the heart of the town. God and
the Queen! resounded from every quarter, and, in a few minutes, the regent, with the astonished
nobles of his party, were prisoners to a band of two hundred border cavalry, led by Scott of
Buccleuch, and to the Lord Claud Hamilton, at the head of three hundred infantry. These enterprising
chiefs, by a rapid and well concerted manoeuvre, had reached Stirling in a night march from
Edinburgh, and, without so much as being bayed at by a watch-dog had seized the principal street
of the town.--The fortunate obstinacy of Morton saved his party. Stubborn and undaunted, he
defended his house till the assailants set it in flames, and then yielded with reluctance to
his kinsman, Buccleuch. But the time, which he had gained, effectually served his cause. The
borderers had dispersed to plunder the stables of the nobility; the infantry thronged tumultuously
together on the main street, when the Earl of Mar, issuing from the castle, placed one or two
small pieces of ordnance in his own half-built house[24], which commands the market place.
Hardly had the artillery begun to scour the street, when the assailants, surprised in their
turn, fled with precipitation. Their alarm was increased by the townsmen thronging to arms.
Those, who had been so lately triumphant, were now, in many instances, asking the protection
of their own prisoners. In all probability, not a man would have escaped death, or captivity,
but for the characteristic rapacity of Buccleuch's marauders, who, having seized and carried
off all the horses in the town, left the victors no means of following the chace. The regent
was slain by an officer, named Caulder, in order to prevent his being rescued. Spens of Ormeston,
to whom he had surrendered, lost his life in a generous attempt to protect him[25]. Hardly
does our history present another enterprise, so well planned, so happily commenced, and so
strangely disconcerted. To the licence of the marchmen the failure was attributed; but the
same cause ensured a safe retreat.--Spottiswoode, Godscroft, Robertson, Melville.

[Footnote 24: This building still remains, in the unfinished state which it then presented.]

[Footnote 25: Birrel says, that "the regent was shot by an unhappy fellow, while sitting on
horseback behind the laird of Buccleuch."--The following curious account of the whole transaction
is extracted from a journal of principal events, in the years 1570, 1571, 1572, and part of
1573, kept by Richard Bannatyne, amanuensis to John Knox. The fourt of September, they of Edinburgh,
horsemen and futmen (and, as was reported, the most part of Clidisdaill, that perteinit to
the Hamiltons), come to Striveling, the number of iii or iiii c men, in hors bak, guydit be
ane George Bell, their hacbutteris being all horsed, enterit in Striveling, be fyve houris
in the morning (whair thair was never one to mak watche), crying this slogane, 'God and the
quene! ane Hamiltoun think on the bishop of St. Androis, all is owres;' and so a certaine come
to everie grit manis ludgene, and apprehendit the Lordis Mortoun and Glencarne; but Mortounis
hous they set on fyre, wha randerit him to the laird of Balcleuch. Wormestoun being appointed
to the regentes hous, desyred him to cum furth, which he had no will to doe, yet, be perswasione
of Garleys and otheris, with him, tho't it best to come in will, nor to byde the extremitie,
becaus they supposed there was no resistance, and swa the regent come furth, and was randered
to Wormestoun, under promeis to save his lyfe. Captane Crawfurde, being in the town, gat sum
men out of the castell, and uther gentlemen being in the town, come as they my't best to the
geat, chased them out of the town. The regent was schot be ane Captain Cader, wha confessed,
that he did it at comande of George Bell, wha was comandit so to doe be the Lord Huntlie and
Claud Hamilton. Some sayis, that Wormestoun was schot by the same schot that slew the regent,
but alwayis he was slane, notwithstanding the regent cryed to save him, but it culd not be,
the furie was so grit of the presewaris, who, following so fast, the lord of Mortone said to
Balcleuch, 'I sall save you as ye savit me,' and so he was tane. Garleys, and sindrie otheris,
war slane at the port, in the persute of thame. Thair war ten or twelve gentlemen slane of
the kingis folk, and als mony of theiris, or mea, as was said, and a dosone or xvi tane. Twa
especiall servantis of the Lord Argyle's were slane also. This Cader, that schot the regent,
was once turned bak off the toune, and was send again (as is said), be the Lord Huntlie, to
cause Wormistoun retire; but, before he come agane, he was dispatched, and had gottin deidis
woundis.

The regent being schot (as said is), was brought to the castell, whair he callit for ane phisitione,
one for his soule, ane uther for his bodie. But all hope of life was past, for he was schot
in his entreallis; and swa, after sumthingis spokin to the lordis, which I know not, he departed,
in the feare of God, and made a blessed end; whilk the rest of the lordis, that tho't thame
to his hiert, and lytle reguardit him, shall not mak so blised ane end, unles they mend thair
maneris.

This curious manuscript has been lately published, under the inspection of John Graham Dalyell,
Esq.]

The wily Earl of Morton, who, after the short intervening regency of Mar, succeeded to the
supreme authority, contrived, by force or artifice, to render the party of the king every where
superior. Even on the middle borders, he had the address to engage in his cause the powerful,
though savage and licentious, clans of Rutherford and Turnbull, as well as the citizens of
Jedburgh. He was thus enabled to counterpoise his powerful opponents, Buccleuch and Fairnihirst,
in their own country; and, after an unsuccessful attempt to surprise Jedburgh even these warm
adherents of Mary relinquished her cause in despair.

While Morton swayed the state, his attachment to Elizabeth, and the humiliation which many
of the border chiefs had undergone, contributed to maintain good order on the marches, till
James VI. himself assumed the reigns of government.--The intervening skirmish of the Reidswire
(see the ballad under that title) was but a sudden explosion of the rivalry and suppressed
hatred of the borderers of both kingdoms. In truth, the stern rule of Morton, and of his delegates,
men unconnected with the borders by birth, maintained in that country more strict discipline
than had ever been there exercised. Perhaps this hastened his fall.

The unpopularity of Morton, acquired partly by the strict administration of justice, and partly
by avarice and severity, forced him from the regency. In 1578, he retired, apparently, from
state affairs, to his castle of Dalkeith; which the populace, emphatically expressing their
awe and dread of his person, termed the Lion's Den. But Morton could not live in retirement;
and, early in the same year, the aged lion again rushed from his cavern. By a mixture of policy
and violence, he possessed himself of the fortress of Stirling, and of the person of James.
His nephew, Angus, hastened to his assistance. Against him appeared his follower Cessford,
with many of the Homes, and the citizens of Edinburgh. Alluding to the restraint of the king's
person, they bore his effigy on their banners, with a rude rhyme, demanding liberty or death.--Birrel's
Diary, ad annum, 1578. The Earl of Morton marched against his foes as far as Falkirk, and a
desperate action must have ensued, but for the persuasions of Bowes, the English ambassador.
The only blood, then spilt, was in a duel betwixt Tait, a follower of Cessford, and Johnstone,
a west border man, attending upon Angus. They fought with lances, and on horseback, according
to the fashion of the borders.--The former was unhorsed and slain, the latter desperately wounded.--Godscroft,
Vol. II. p. 261. The prudence of the late regent appears to have abandoned him, when he was
decoyed into a treaty upon this occasion. It was not long before Morton the veteran warrior,
and the crafty statesman, was forced bend his neck to an engine of death[26], the use of which
he himself had introduced into Scotland.

[Footnote 26: A rude sort of guillotine, called the maiden. The implement is now in possession
of the Society of Scottish Antiquaries.]

