A judgment, rash or otherwise, is not a. doubt, neither is it a suspicion. Everybody knows
what a doubt is. When I doubt if another is doing or has done wrong, the idea of his or her
guilt simply enters my mind, occurs to me and I turn it over and around, from one side to another,
without being satisfied to accept or reject it. I do not say: yes, it is true; neither do I
say: no, it is not true. I say nothing, I pass no judgment; I suspend for the moment all judgment,
I doubt.

A doubt is not evil unless there be absolutely no reason for doubting, and then the doubt is
born of passion and malice. And the evil, whatever there is of it, is not in the doubt's entering
our mind-- something beyond our control; but in our entertaining the doubt, in our making the
doubt personal, which supposes an act of the will.

Stronger than doubt is suspicion. When I suspect one, I do not keep the balance perfectly even
between yes and no, as in the case of doubt; I lean mentally to one side, but do not go so
far as to assent one way or the other. Having before me a person who excites my suspicion,
I am inclined to think him guilty on certain evidence, but I fear to judge lest I should be
in error, because there is evidence also of innocence. If my suspicion is based on good grounds,
it is natural and lawful; otherwise it is rash and sinful; it is uncharitable and unjust to
the person suspected. A suspicion often hurts more than an accusation.

Doubt and suspicion, when rash, are sinful; but the malice thereof is not grave unless they
are so utterly unfounded as to betoken deep-seated antipathy and aversion and a perverse will;
or unless in peculiar circumstances the position of the person is such as to make the suspicion
gravely injurious and not easily condoned. There is guilt in keeping that suspicion to oneself;
to give it out in words is calumny, whether it be true or not, simply because it is unfounded.

In a judgment there is neither doubt nor suspicion; I make my own the idea presented to my
mind. The balance of assent, in which is weighed, the evidence for and against, is not kept
even, nor is it partially inclined; It goes down with its full weight, and the party under
consideration stands convicted before the tribunal of my judgment. I do not say, I wonder if
he is guilty; nor he most likely is guilty; but: he is guilty--here is a deliberate judgment.
Henceforth my esteem ceases for such a person. Translated in words such a judgment is not calumny
because it is supposedly founded in reason; but it is detraction, because it is injurious.

Such a judgment, without any exterior expression, is sinful if it is rash. And what makes it
rash? The insufficiency of motive on which it is based. And whence comes the knowledge of such
sufficiency or insufficiency of motive? From the intelligence, but mostly from the conscience.
That is why many unintelligent people judge rashly and sin not, because they know no better.
But conscience nearly always supplies intelligence in such matters and ignorance does not always
save us from guilt. An instinct, the wee voice of God in the soul, tells us to withhold our
judgment even when the intelligence fails to weigh the motives aright. To contemn this voice
is to sin and be guilty of rash judgment.

In the language of ordinary folks, not always precise and exact in their terms, an opinion
is frequently a judgment, to think this or that of another is often to judge him accordingly.
The suspicions of suspicious people are at times more than suspicions and are clearly characterized
judgments. To render a verdict on the neighbor's character is a judgment, by whatever other
name it is called; all that is necessary is to come to a definite conclusion and to give the
assent of the will to that conclusion.

When the conduct of the neighbor is plainly open to interpretation, if we may not judge immediately
against him, neither are we bound to give him the benefit of the doubt; we may simply suspend
all judgment and await further evidence. In our exterior dealings this suspicion should not
affect our conduct, for every man has a right to be treated as an honest man and does not forfeit
that right on the ground of a mere probability. This, however, does not prevent us from taking
a cue from our suspicion and acting guardedly towards him. This does not mean that we adjudge
him dishonest, but that we deem him capable of being dishonest, which is true and in accordance
with the laws of prudence.

Neither are we bound to overlook all evidence that points to a man's guilt through fear of
judging him unfavorably. It is not wrong to judge a man according to his merits, to have a
right opinion of him, even when that opinion is not to his credit. All that is necessary is
that we have good reason on Which to base that opinion. If a neighbor does evil in our presence
or to our knowledge he forfeits, and justly, our good opinion; he is to blame, and not we.
We are not obliged to close our eyes to the truth of facts, and it is on facts that our judgments
are formed.

CHAPTER XCII. MENDACITY.

TO lie is to utter an untruth, with full knowledge that it is an untruth. The untruth may be
expressed by any conventional sign, by word, deed, gesture, or even by silence. Its malice
and disorder consists in the opposition that exists between our idea and the expression we
give to it; our words convey a meaning contrary to what is in our mind; we say one thing and
mean another. If we unwittingly utter what is contrary to fact, that is error; if we so clumsily
translate our thoughts as to give a false impression of what we mean, and we do the best we
can, that is a blunder; if in a moment of listlessness and inattention we speak in a manner
that conflicts with our state of mind, that is temporary mental aberration. But if we knowingly
give out as truth what we know is not the truth, we lie purely and simply.

In misrepresentations of this kind it is not required that there be a plainly formulated purpose
of deceiving another; an implicit intention, a disposition to allow our words to run their
natural course, is sufficient to give such utterances a character of mendacity. For, independently
of our mental attitude, it is in the nature of a lie to deceive; an intention, or rather a
pretense to the contrary, does not affect that nature. The fact of lying presupposes that we
intend in some manner to practise deception; if we did not have such a purpose we would not
resort to lying. If you stick a knife into a man, you may pretend what you like, but you did
certainly intend to hurt him and make him feel badly.

Nor has any ulterior motive we may have in telling an untruth the power to change its nature;
a lie is a lie, no matter what prompted it. Whether it serves the purpose of amusement, as
a jocose lie; or helps to gain us an advantage or get us out of trouble, as an officious lie;
or injures another in any way, as a pernicious lie: mendacity is the character of our utterances,
the guilt of willful falsehood is on our soul. A restriction should, however, be made in favor
of the jocose lie; it ceases to be a lie when the mind of the speaker is open to all who listen
and his narration or statement may be likened to those fables and myths and fairy tales in
which is exemplified the charm of figurative language. When a person says what is false and
is convinced that all who hear him know it is false, the contradiction between his mind and
its expression is said to be material, and not formal; and in this the essence of a lie does
not consist.

A lie is always a sin; it is what is called an intrinsic evil and is therefore always wrong.
And why is this? Because speech was given us to express our thoughts; to use this faculty therefore
for a contrary purpose is against its nature, against a law of our being, and this is evil.
The obnoxious consequences of falsehood, as it is patent to all, constitute an evil for which
falsehood is responsible. But deception, one of those consequences, is not in itself and essentially,
a moral fault. Deception, if not practised by lying and therefore not intended but simply suffered
to occur, and if there be grave reason for resorting to this means of defense, cannot be put
down as a thing offensive to God or unjustly prejudicial to the neighbor. But when deception
is the effect of mendacity, it assumes a character of malice that deserves the reprobation
of man as it is condemned by God. And this is another reason why lying is essentially an evil
thing, and can never, under any circumstances be allowed or justified.

This does not mean that lying is always a mortal sin. In fact, it is oftener venial than mortal.
It becomes a serious fault only in the event of another malice being added to it. Thus, if
I lie to one who has a right to know the truth and for grave reasons; if the mendacious information
I impart is of a nature to mislead one into injury or loss, and this thing I do maliciously;
or if my lying is directly disparaging to another; in these cases there is grave malice and
serious guilt. But if there is no injustice resulting from a lie, I prevaricate against right
in lying, but my sin is not a serious offense.

This is a vice that certainly deserves to be fought against and punished always and in all
places, especially in the young who are so prone thereto, first because it is a sin; and again,
because of the social evils that it gives rise to. There is no gainsaying the fact that in
the code of purely human morals, lying is considered a very heinous offense that ostracizes
a man when robbery on a large scale, adultery and other first-degree misdemeanors leave him
perfectly honorable. This recalls an instance of a recent courtroom. A young miscreant thoroughly
imbued with pharisaic morals met with a bold face, without a blush or a flinch, accusations
of misconduct, robbery and murder; but when charged with being a liar, he sprang at his accuser
in open court and tried to throttle him. His fine indignation got the best of him; he could
not stand that.

Among pious-minded people two extreme errors are not infrequently met with. The one is that
a lie is not wrong unless the neighbor suffers thereby; the falsity of this we have already
shown. According to the other, a lie is such an evil that it should not be tolerated, not one
lie, even if all the souls in hell were thereby to be liberated. To this we answer that we
would like to get such a chance once; we fear we would tell a whopper. It would be wicked,
of course; but we might expect leniency from the just Judge under the circumstances.

CHAPTER XCIII. CONCEALING THE TRUTH.

THE duty always to tell the truth does not imply the obligation always to tell all you know;
and falsehood does not always follow as a result of not revealing your mind to the first inquisitive
person that chooses to put embarrassing questions. Alongside, but not contrary to, the duty
of veracity is the right every man has to personal and professional secrets. For a man's mind
is not public property; there may arise at times circumstances in which he not only may, but
is in duty bound to withhold information that concerns himself intimately or touches a third
person; and there must be a means to protect the sacredness of such secrets against undue curiosity
and inquisitiveness, without recourse to the unlawful method of lying. Silence is not an effective
resource, for it not infrequently gives consent one or the other way; the question may be put
in such a manner that affirmation or negation will betray the truth. To what then shall one
have recourse?

Let us remark in the first place that God has endowed human intelligence with a native wit,
sharpness and cunning that has its legitimate uses, the exercise of this faculty is evil only
when its methods and ends are evil. Used along the lines of moral rectitude strategy and tact
for profiting by circumstances are perfectly in order, especially when one acts in the defense
of his natural rights. And if this talent is employed without injustice to the neighbor or
violence to the law of God, it is no more immoral than the plain telling of truth; in fact
it is sometimes better than telling the truth.

But it must be understood that such practices must be justified by the circumstances. They
suppose in him who resorts thereto a right to withhold information that overrides the right
of his interrogator. If the right of the latter to know is superior, then the hiding of truth
would constitute an injustice, which is sinful, and this is considered tantamount to lying.
And if the means to which we resort is not lying, as we have defined it, that is, does not
show a contradiction between what we say and what we mean, then there can be no fear of evil
on any side.

Now, suppose that instead of using a term whose signification is contrary to what my mind conceives,
which would be falsehood, I employ a word that has a natural double meaning, one of which is
conform to my mind, the other at variance. In the first place, I do not speak against my mind;
I say what I think; the word I use means what I mean. But the other fellow! that is another
matter. He may take his choice of the two meanings. If he guesses aright, my artifice has failed;
if he is deceived, that is his loss. I do him no injustice, for he had no right to question
me. If my answer embarrasses him, that is just what I intended, and I am guilty of no evil
for that; if it deceives him, that I did not intend but willingly suffer; I am not obliged
to enter into explanations when I am not even bound to answer him. Of the deception, he alone
is the cause; I am the occasion, if you will, but the circumstances of his inquisitiveness
made that occasion necessary, and I am not responsible.

This artifice is called equivocation or amphibology; it consists in the use of words that have
a natural double meaning; it supposes in him who resorts to it the right to conceal the truth,
a right superior to that of the tormentor who questions him. When these conditions are fulfilled,
recourse to this method is perfectly legitimate, but the conditions must be fulfilled. This
is not a weapon for convenience, but for necessity. It is easy to deceive oneself when it is
painful to tell the truth. Therefore it should be used sparingly: it is not for every-day use,
only emergencies of a serious nature can justify its employ. Another artifice, still more delicate
and dangerous, but just as legitimate when certain conditions are fulfilled, is what is known
as mental restriction. This too consists in the employ of words of double meaning; but whereas
in the former case, both meanings are naturally contained in the word, here the term employed
has but one natural signification, the other being furnished by circumstances. Its legitimate
use supposes that he to whom the term is directed should either in fact know the circumstances
of the case that have this peculiar significance, or that he could and should know them. If
the information drawn from the answer received is insufficient, so much the better; if he is
misinformed, the fault is his own, since neither genuine falsehood nor evident injustice can
be attributed to the other.

An example will illustrate this better than anything else. Take a physician or lawyer, the
custodian of a professional secret, or a priest with knowledge safeguarded by the seal of the
confessional. These men either may not or should not reveal to others unconcerned in the matter
the knowledge they, possess. There is no one but should be aware of this, but should know that
when they are questioned, they will answer as laymen, and not as professionals. They will answer
according to outside information, yes or no, whether on not such conclusion agree with the
facts they obtained under promise of secrecy. They simply put out of their mind as unserviceable
all professional knowledge, and respond as a man to a man. Their standing as professional men
puts every questioner on his guard and admonishes him that no private information need be expected,
that he must take the answer given as the conclusion of outside evidence, then if he is deceived
he has no one to blame but himself, since he was warned and took no heed of the warning.

Again we repeat, the margin between mental restriction and falsehood is a safe, but narrow
one, the least bungling may merge one into the other. It requires tact and judgment to know
when it is permissible to have recourse to this artifice and how to practise it safely. It
is not a thing to be trifled with. In only rare circumstances can it be employed, and only
few persons have the right to employ it.

CHAPTER XCIV. RESTITUTION.

A PECULIAR feature attaches to the sins we have recently treated, against the Fifth, Sixth,
Seventh, and Eighth commandments. These offenses differ from others in that they involve an
injury, an injustice to our fellow-man. Now, the condition of pardon for sin is contrition;
this contrition contains essentially a firm purpose that looks to the future, and removes in
a measure, the liability to fall again. But with the sins here in question that firm purpose
not only looks forward, but backward as well, not only guarantees against future ill-doing,
but also repairs the wrong criminally effected in the past. This is called restitution, the
undoing of wrong suffered by our neighbor through our own fault. The firm purpose to make restitution
is just as essential to contrition as the firm purpose to sin no more; in fact, the former
is only a form of the latter. It means that we will not sin any more by prolonging a culpable
injustice. And the person who overlooks this feature when he seeks pardon has a moral constitution
and make-up that is sadly in need of repairs; and of such persons there are not a few.

Justice that has failed to protect a man's right becomes restitution when the deed of wrong
is done. Restitution therefore that is based on the natural right every man has to have and
to hold what is his, to recover it, its value or equivalent, when unduly dispossessed, supposes
an act of injustice, that is, the violation of a strict right. This injustice, in turn, implies
a moral fault, a moral responsibility, direct or indirect; and the fault must be grievous in
order to induce a grave obligation. Now, it matters not in the least what we do, or how we
do it, if the neighbor suffer through a fault of ours. If any human creature sustains a loss
to life or limb, damage to his or her social or financial standing, and such injury can be
traced to a moral delinquency on our part, we are in conscience bound to make good the loss
and repair the damage done. To do evil is bad; to perpetuate it is immeasurably worse. To refuse
to remove the evil is to refuse to remove one's guilt; and as long as one persists in such
a refusal, that one remains under the wrath of God.

Restitution concerns itself with things done or left undone, things said or left unsaid; it
does not enter the domain of thought. Consequently, just as an accident does not entail the
necessity of repairing the injury that another sustains, neither does the deliberate thought
or desire to perpetrate an injustice entail such a consequence. Even if a person does all in
his power to effect an evil purpose, and fails, he is not held to reparation, for there is
nothing to repair. As we have said more than once, the will is the source of all malice in
the sight of God; but injustice to man requires material as well as formal malice; sin must
have its complement of exterior deed before it can be called human injustice.

We deem it unnecessary to dwell upon the gravity of the obligation to make restitution. The
balance of justice must be maintained exact and impartial in this world, or the Almighty will
see that it is done in the next. The idea that God does not stand for justice destroys the
idea that God exists. And if the precept not to commit injustice leaves the guilty one free
to repair or not to repair, that precept is self-contradictory and has no meaning at all. If
a right is a right, it is not extinguished by being violated and if justice, is something more
than a mere sound, it must protect all rights whether sinned against or not.

It might be convenient for some people to force upon their conscience the lie that restitution
is of counsel rather than of precept, under the plea that it is enough to shoulder the responsibility
of sin without being burdened with the obligation of repairing it, but it is only a soul well
steeped in malice that will take seriously such a contention. Neither is restitution a penance
imposed upon us in order to atone for our faults; it is no more penitential in its nature than
are the efforts we make to avoid the faults we have fallen into in the past. It atones for
nothing; it is simply a desisting from evil. When this is done and forgiveness obtained, then,
and not till then, is it time to think of satisfying for the temporal punishment due to sin.

Naturally it is much more easy to abstain from committing injustice than to repair it after
it is done. It is often very difficult and very painful to face the consequences of our evil
ways, especially when all satisfaction is gone and nothing remains but the hard exigencies
of duty. And duty is a thing that it costs very little to shirk when one is already hardened
by a habit of injustice. That is why restitution is so little heard of in the world. It is
a fact to be noted that the Catholic Church is the only religious body that dares to enforce
strictly the law of reparation. Others vaguely hold it, but rarely teach it, and then only
in flagrant cases of fraud. But she allows none of her children to approach the sacraments
who has not already repaired, or who does not promise in all sincerity to repair, whatever
wrong he may have done to the neighbor. Employers of Catholic help sometimes feel the effects
of this uncompromising attitude of the Church; they are astonished, edified and grateful.

We recall with pleasure an incident of an apostate going about warning people against the turpitudes
of Rome and especially against the extortions of her priests through the confessional. He explained
how the benighted papist was obliged under pain of eternal damnation to confess his sins to
the priest, and then was charged so much for each fault he had been guilty of. An incredulous
listener wanted to know if he, the speaker, while in the toils of Rome had ever been obliged
thus to disgorge in the confessional, and was answered with a triumphant affirmation. At which
the wag hinted that it would be a good thing not to be too outspoken in announcing the fact
as his reputation for honesty would be likely to suffer thereby, for he knew, and all Catholics
knew, who were those whose purse the confessor pries open.

CHAPTER XCV. UNDOING THE EVIL.

WHENEVER a person, through a spirit of Police or grossly culpable negligence, becomes responsible
for serious bodily injury sustained by another, he is bound, as far as in him lies, to undo
the wrong and repair the injustice committed. The law of personal rights that forbade him to
lay violent hands on another, now commands that the evil be removed by him who placed it. True,
physical pain and tortures cannot be repaired in kind; physical injury and disability are not
always susceptible of adequate reparation. But there is the loss incurred as a result of such
disability, and this loss may affect, not one alone, but many.

Death, too, is of course absolutely irreparable. But the killing of the victim in nowise extinguishes
the obligation of reparation. The principal object is removed; but there remain the loss of
wages, the expenses necessitated by illness and death; there may be a family dependent on the
daily toil of the unfortunate and made destitute by his removal. One must be blind indeed not
to see that all these losses are laid at the door of the criminal, a direct result of his crime,
foreseen, too, at least confusedly, since there is a moral fault; and these must be made good,
as far as the thing is possible, otherwise the sin will not be forgiven.

Slander must be retracted. If you have lied about another and thereby done him an injury, you
are bound in conscience to correct your false statement, to correct it in such a manner as
to undeceive all whom you may have misled. This retraction must really retract, and not do
just the contrary, make the last state of things worse than the first, which is sometimes the
case. Prudence and tact should suggest means to do this effectively: when, how and to what
extent it should be done, in order that the best results of reparation may be obtained. But
in one way or another, justice demands that the slanderer contradict his lying imputations
and remove by so doing the stain that besmirches the character of his victim.

Of course, if it was by truth and not falsehood, by detraction and not calumny, that you assailed
and injured the reputation of another, there is no gainsaying the truth; you are not justified
in lying in order to make truth less damaging. The harm done here is well nigh irreparable.
But there is such a thing as trying to counteract the influence of evil speech by good words,
by mentioning qualities that offset defects, by setting merit against demerit; by attenuating
as far as truth will allow the circumstances of the case, etc. This will place your victim
in the least unfavorable light, and will, in some measure, repair the evil of detraction.

Scandal must be repaired, a mightily difficult task; to reclaim a soul lost to evil through
fatal inducements to sin is paramount, almost, to raising from the dead. It is hard, desperately
hard, to have yourself accepted as an angel of light by those for whom you have long been a
demon of iniquity. Good example! Yes, that is about the only argument you have. You are handicapped,
but if you wield that argument for good with as much strength and intensity as you did for
evil, you will have done all that can be expected of you, and something may come of it.

The wrong of bodily contamination is a deep one. It is a wrong, and therefore unjust, when
it is effected through undue influence that either annuls consent, or wrings it from the victim
by cajolery, threat, or false promise. It becomes immeasurably aggravated when the victim is
abandoned to bear alone the shame and burdensome consequences of such injustice.

