 The obstacles that opposed served only to give a decree of vivacity
to their affection, and the young lover, not being able to obtain
his mistress, was overwhelmed with sorrow and despair.

She advised him to travel--to forget her.

  WHAT DREAMS MAY COME

     SUMMER

     VIII. THE JOINER'S SHOP
     IX.   CEPHAS SPEAKS
     X.    ON TORY HILL
     XI.   A JUNE SUNDAY
     XII.  THE GREEN-EYED MONSTER
     XIII. HAYING TIME
     XIV.  UNCLE BART DISCOURSES
     XV.   IVORY'S MOTHER
     XVI.  LOCKED OUT

     AUTUMN

     XVII.  A BRACE OF LOVERS
     XVIII. A STATE O' MAINE PROPHET
     XIX.   AT THE BRICK STORE
     XX.    THE ROD THAT BLOSSOMED
     XXI.   LOIS BURIES HER DEAD
     XXII.  HARVEST-TIME
     XXIII. AUNT ABBY'S WINDOW
     XXIV.  PHOEBE TRIUMPHS
     XXV.   LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM

     WINTER

     XXVI.  A WEDDING-RING
     XXVII. THE CONFESSIONAL
     XXVIII.PATTY IS SHOWN THE DOOR
     XXIX.  WAITSTILL SPEAKS HER MIND
     XXX.   A CLASH OF WILLS
     XXXI.  SENTRY DUTY
     XXXII. THE HOUSE OF AARON
     XXXIII.AARON'S ROD
     XXXIV. THE DEACON'S WATERLOO
     XXXV.  TWO HEAVENS

THE STORY OF WAITSTILL BAXTER

SPRING

I. SACO WATER

FAR, far up, in the bosom of New Hampshire's granite hills, the Saco has its birth. As the
mountain rill gathers strength it takes

     "Through Bartlett's vales its tuneful way,
     Or hides in Conway's fragrant brakes,
     Retreating from the glare of day."

Now it leaves the mountains and flows through "green Fryeburg's woods and farms." In the course
of its frequent turns and twists and bends, it meets with many another stream, and sends it,
fuller and stronger, along its rejoicing way. When it has journeyed more than a hundred miles
and is nearing the ocean, it greets the Great Ossipee River and accepts its crystal tribute.
Then, in its turn, the Little Ossipee joins forces, and the river, now a splendid stream, flows
onward to Bonny Eagle, to Moderation and to Salmon Falls, where it dashes over the dam like
a young Niagara and hurtles, in a foamy torrent, through the ragged defile cut between lofty
banks of solid rock.

Widening out placidly for a moment's rest in the sunny reaches near Pleasant Point, it gathers
itself for a new plunge at Union Falls, after which it speedily merges itself in the bay and
is fresh water no more.

At one of the falls on the Saco, the two little hamlets of Edgewood and Riverboro nestle together
at the bridge and make one village. The stream is a wonder of beauty just here; a mirror of
placid loveliness above the dam, a tawny, roaring wonder at the fall, and a mad, white-flecked
torrent as it dashes on its way to the ocean.

The river has seen strange sights in its time, though the history of these two tiny villages
is quite unknown to the great world outside. They have been born, waxed strong, and fallen
almost to decay while Saco Water has tumbled over the rocks and spent itself in its impetuous
journey to the sea.

It remembers the yellow-moccasined Sokokis as they issued from the Indian Cellar and carried
their birchen canoes along the wooded shore. It was in those years that the silver-skinned
salmon leaped in its crystal depths; the otter and the beaver crept with sleek wet skins upon
its shore; and the brown deer came down to quench his thirst at its brink while at twilight
the stealthy forms of bear and panther and wolf were mirrored in its glassy surface.

Time sped; men chained the river's turbulent forces and ordered it to grind at the mill. Then
houses and barns appeared along its banks, bridges were built, orchards planted, forests changed
into farms, white-painted meetinghouses gleamed through the trees and distant bells rang from
their steeples on quiet Sunday mornings.

All at once myriads of great hewn logs vexed its downward course, slender logs linked together
in long rafts, and huge logs drifting down singly or in pairs. Men appeared, running hither
and thither like ants, and going through mysterious operations the reason for which the river
could never guess: but the mill-wheels turned, the great saws buzzed, the smoke from tavern
chimneys rose in the air, and the rattle and clatter of stage-coaches resounded along the road.

Now children paddled with bare feet in the river's sandy coves and shallows, and lovers sat
on its alder-shaded banks and exchanged their vows just where the shuffling bear was wont to
come down and drink.

The Saco could remember the "cold year," when there was a black frost every month of the twelve,
and though almost all the corn along its shores shrivelled on the stalk, there were two farms
where the vapor from the river saved the crops, and all the seed for the next season came from
the favored spot, to be known as "Egypt" from that day henceforward.

Strange, complex things now began to happen, and the river played its own part in some of these,
for there were disastrous freshets, the sudden breaking-up of great jams of logs, and the drowning
of men who were engulfed in the dark whirlpool below the rapids.

Caravans, with menageries of wild beasts, crossed the bridge now every year. An infuriated
elephant lifted the side of the old Edgewood Tavern barn, and the wild laughter of the roistering
rum-drinkers who were tantalizing the animals floated down to the river's edge. The roar of
a lion, tearing and chewing the arm of one of the bystanders, and the cheers of the throng
when a plucky captain of the local militia thrust a stake down the beast's throat,--these sounds
displaced the former war-whoop of the Indians and the ring of the axe in the virgin forests
along the shores.

There were days, and moonlight nights, too, when strange sights and sounds of quite another
nature could have been noted by the river as it flowed under the bridge that united the two
little villages.

Issuing from the door of the Riverboro Town House, and winding down the hill, through the long
row of teams and carriages that lined the roadside, came a procession of singing men and singing
women. Convinced of sin, but entranced with promised pardon; spiritually intoxicated by the
glowing eloquence of the latter-day prophet they were worshipping, the band of "Cochranites"
marched down the dusty road and across the bridge, dancing, swaying, waving handkerchiefs,
and shouting hosannas.

God watched, and listened, knowing that there would be other prophets, true and false, in the
days to come, and other processions following them; and the river watched and listened too,
as it hurried on towards the sea with its story of the present that was sometime to be the
history of the past.

When Jacob Cochrane was leading his overwrought, ecstatic band across the river, Waitstill
Baxter, then a child, was watching the strange, noisy company from the window of a little brick
dwelling on the top of the Town-House Hill.

Her stepmother stood beside her with a young baby in her arms, but when she saw what held the
gaze of the child she drew her away, saying: "We mustn't look, Waitstill; your father don't
like it!"

"Who was the big man at the head, mother?"

"His name is Jacob Cochrane, but you mustn't think or talk about him; he is very wicked."

"He doesn't look any wickeder than the others," said the child. "Who was the man that fell
down in the road, mother, and the woman that knelt and prayed over him? Why did he fall, and
why did she pray, mother?"

"That was Master Aaron Boynton, the schoolmaster, and his wife. He only made believe to fall
down, as the Cochranites do; the way they carry on is a disgrace to the village, and that's
the reason your father won't let us look at them."

"I played with a nice boy over to Boynton's," mused the child.

"That was Ivory, their only child. He is a good little fellow, but his mother and father will
spoil him with their crazy ways."

"I hope nothing will happen to him, for I love him," said the child gravely. "He showed me
a humming-bird's nest, the first ever I saw, and the littlest!"

"Don't talk about loving him," chided the woman. "If your father should hear you, he'd send
you to bed without your porridge."

"Father couldn't hear me, for I never speak when he's at home," said grave little Waitstill.
"And I'm used to going to bed without my porridge."

II. THE SISTERS

THE river was still running under the bridge, but the current of time had swept Jacob Cochrane
out of sight, though not out of mind, for he had left here and there a disciple to preach his
strange and uncertain doctrine. Waitstill, the child who never spoke in her father's presence,
was a young woman now, the mistress of the house; the stepmother was dead, and the baby a girl
of seventeen.

The brick cottage on the hilltop had grown only a little shabbier. Deacon Foxwell Baxter still
slammed its door behind him every morning at seven o'clock and, without any such cheerful conventions
as good-byes to his girls, walked down to the bridge to open his store.

The day, properly speaking, had opened when Waitstill and Patience had left their beds at dawn,
built the fire, fed the hens and turkeys, and prepared the breakfast, while the Deacon was
graining the horse and milking the cows. Such minor "chores" as carrying water from the well,
splitting kindling, chopping pine, or bringing wood into the kitchen, were left to Waitstill,
who had a strong back, or, if she had not, had never been unwise enough to mention the fact
in her father's presence. The almanac day, however, which opened with sunrise, had nothing
to do with the real human day, which always began when Mr. Baxter slammed the door behind him,
and reached its high noon of delight when he disappeared from view.

"He's opening the store shutters!" chanted Patience from the heights of a kitchen chair by
the window. "Now he's taken his cane and beaten off the Boynton puppy that was sitting on the
steps as usual,--I don't mean Ivory's dog" (here the girl gave a quick glance at her sister),
"but Rodman's little yellow cur. Rodman must have come down to the bridge on some errand for
Ivory. Isn't it odd, when that dog has all the other store steps to sit upon, he should choose
father's, when every bone in his body must tell him how father hates him and the whole Boynton
family."

"Father has no real cause that I ever heard of; but some dogs never know when they've had enough
beating, nor some people either." said Waitstill, speaking from the pantry.

"Don't be gloomy when it's my birthday, Sis!--Now he's opened the door and kicked the cat!
All is ready for business at the Baxter store."

"I wish you weren't quite so free with your tongue, Patty."

"Somebody must talk," retorted the girl, jumping down from the chair and shaking back her mop
of red-gold curls. "I'll put this hateful, childish, round comb in and out just once more,
then it will disappear forever. This very after-noon up goes my hair!"

"You know it will be of no use unless you braid it very plainly and neatly. Father will take
notice and make you smooth it down."

"Father hasn't looked me square in the face for years; besides, my hair won't braid, and nothing
can make it quite plain and neat, thank goodness! Let us be thankful for small mercies, as
Jed Morrill said when the lightning struck his mother-in-law and skipped his wife."

"Patty, I will not permit you to repeat those tavern stories; they are not seemly on the lips
of a girl!" And Waitstill came out of the pantry with a shadow of disapproval in her eyes and
in her voice.

Patty flung her arms round her sister tempestuously, and pulled out the waves of her hair so
that it softened her face.--"I'll be good," she said, "and oh, Waity! let's invent some sort
of cheap happiness for to-day! I shall never be seventeen again and we have so many troubles!
Let's put one of the cows in the horse's stall and see what will happen! Or let's spread up
our beds with the head at the foot and put the chest of drawers on the other side of the room,
or let's make candy! Do you think father would miss the molasses if we only use a cupful? Couldn't
we strain the milk, but leave the churning and the dishes for an hour or two, just once? If
you say 'yes' I can think of something wonderful to do!"

"What is it?" asked Waitstill, relenting at the sight of the girl's eager, roguish face.

"PIERCE MY EARS!" cried Patty. "Say you will!"

"Oh! Patty, Patty, I am afraid you are given over to vanity! I daren't let you wear eardrops
without father's permission."

"Why not? Lots of church members wear them, so it can't be a mortal sin. Father is against
all adornments, but that's because he doesn't want to buy them. You've always said I should
have your mother's coral pendants when I was old enough. Here I am, seventeen today, and Dr.
Perry says I am already a well-favored young woman. I can pull my hair over my ears for a few
days and when the holes are all made and healed, even father cannot make me fill them up again.
Besides, I'll never wear the earrings at home!"

"Oh! my dear, my dear!" sighed Waitstill, with a half-sob in her voice. "If only I was wise
enough to know how we could keep from these little deceits, yet have any liberty or comfort
in life!"

"We can't! The Lord couldn't expect us to bear all that we bear," exclaimed Patty, "without
our trying once in a while to have a good time in our own way. We never do a thing that we
are ashamed of, or that other girls don't do every day in the week; only our pleasures always
have to be taken behind father's back. It's only me that's ever wrong, anyway, for you are
always an angel. It's a burning shame and you only twenty-one yourself. I'll pierce your ears
if you say so, and let you wear your own coral drops!"

"No, Patty; I've outgrown those longings years ago. When your mother died and left father and
you and the house to me, my girlhood died, too, though I was only thirteen."

"It was only your inside girlhood that died," insisted Patty stoutly, "The outside is as fresh
as the paint on Uncle Barty's new ell. You've got the loveliest eyes and hair in Riverboro,
and you know it; besides, Ivory Boynton would tell you so if you didn't. Come and bore my ears,
there's a darling!"

"Ivory Boynton never speaks a word of my looks, nor a word that father and all the world mightn't
hear." And Waitstill flushed.

"Then it's because he's shy and silent and has so many troubles of his own that he doesn't
dare say anything. When my hair is once up and the coral pendants are swinging in my ears,
I shall expect to hear something about MY looks, I can tell you. Waity, after all, though we
never have what we want to eat, and never a decent dress to our backs, nor a young man to cross
the threshold, I wouldn't change places with Ivory Boynton, would you?" Here Patty swept the
hearth vigorously with a turkey wing and added a few corncobs to the fire.

Waitstill paused a moment in her task of bread-kneading. "Well," she answered critically, "at
least we know where our father is."

"We do, indeed! We also know that he is thoroughly alive!"

"And though people do talk about him, they can't say the things they say of Master Aaron Boynton.
I don't believe father would ever run away and desert us."

"I fear not," said Patty. "I wish the angels would put the idea into his head, though, of course,
it wouldn't be the angels; they'd be above it. It would have to be the 'Old Driver,' as Jed
Morrill calls the Evil One; but whoever did it, the result would be the same: we should be
deserted, and live happily ever after. Oh! to be deserted, and left with you alone on this
hilltop, what joy it would be!"

Waitstill frowned, but did not interfere further with Patty's intemperate speech. She knew
that she was simply serving as an escape-valve, and that after the steam was "let off" she
would be more rational.

"Of course, we are motherless," continued Patty wistfully, "but poor Ivory is worse than motherless."

"No, not worse, Patty," said Waitstill, taking the bread-board and moving towards the closet.
"Ivory loves his mother and she loves him, with all the mind she has left! She has the best
blood of New England flowing in her veins, and I suppose it was a great come down for her to
marry Aaron Boynton, clever and gifted though he was. Now Ivory has to protect her, poor, daft,
innocent creature, and hide her away from the gossip of the village. He is surely the best
of sons, Ivory Boynton!"

"She is a terrible care for him, and like to spoil his life," said Patty.

"There are cares that swell the heart and make it bigger and warmer, Patty, just as there are
cares that shrivel it and leave it tired and cold. Love lightens Ivory's afflictions but that
is something you and I have to do without, so it seems."

"I suppose little Rodman is some comfort to the Boyntons, even if he is only ten." Patty suggested.

"No doubt. He's a good little fellow, and though it's rather hard for Ivory to be burdened
for these last five years with the support of a child who's no nearer kin than a cousin, still
he's of use, minding Mrs. Boynton and the house when Ivory's away. The school-teacher says
he is wonderful at his books and likely to be a great credit to the Boyntons some day or other."

"You've forgot to name our one great blessing, Waity, and I believe, anyway, you're talking
to keep my mind off the earrings!"

"You mean we've each other? No, Patty, I never forget that, day or night. 'Tis that makes me
willing to bear any burden father chooses to put upon us.--Now the bread is set, but I don't
believe I have the courage to put a needle into your tender flesh, Patty; I really don't."

"Nonsense! I've got the waxed silk all ready and chosen the right-sized needle and I'll promise
not to jump or screech more than I can help. We'll make a tiny lead-pencil dot right in the
middle of the lobe, then you place the needle on it, shut your eyes, and JAB HARD! I expect
to faint, but when I 'come to,' we can decide which of us will pull the needle through to the
other side. Probably it will be you, I'm such a coward. If it hurts dreadfully, I'll have only
one pierced to-day and take the other to-morrow; and if it hurts very dreadfully, perhaps I'll
go through life with one ear-ring. Aunt Abby Cole will say it's just odd enough to suit me!"

"You'll never go through life with one tongue at the rate you use it now," chided Waitstill,
"for it will never last you. Come, we'll take the work-basket and go out in the barn where
no one will see or hear us."

"Goody, goody! Come along!" and Patty clapped her hands in triumph. "Have you got the pencil
and the needle and the waxed silk? Then bring the camphor bottle to revive me, and the coral
pendants, too, just to give me courage. Hurry up! It's ten o'clock. I was born at sun-rise,
so I'm 'going on' eighteen and can't waste any time!"

III. DEACON BAXTER'S WIVES

FOXWELL BAXTER was ordinarily called "Old Foxy" by the boys of the district, and also, it is
to be feared, by the men gathered for evening conference at the various taverns, or at one
of the rival village stores.

He had a small farm of fifteen or twenty acres, with a pasture, a wood lot, and a hay-field,
but the principal source of his income came from trading. His sign bore the usual legend: "WEST
INDIA GOODS AND GROCERIES," and probably the most profitable articles in his stock were rum,
molasses, sugar, and tobacco; but there were chests of rice, tea, coffee, and spices, barrels
of pork in brine, as well as piles of cotton and woolen cloth on the shelves above the counters.
His shop window, seldom dusted or set in order, held a few clay pipes, some glass jars of peppermint
or sassafras lozenges, black licorice, stick-candy, and sugar gooseberries. These dainties
were seldom renewed, for it was only a very bold child, or one with an ungovernable appetite
for sweets, who would have spent his penny at Foxy Baxter's store.

He was thought a sharp and shrewd trader, but his honesty was never questioned; indeed, the
only trait in his character that ever came up for general discussion was his extraordinary,
unbelievable, colossal meanness. This so eclipsed every other passion in the man, and loomed
so bulkily and insistently in the foreground, that had he cherished a second vice no one would
have observed it, and if he really did possess a casual virtue, it could scarcely have reared
its head in such ugly company.

It might be said, to defend the fair name of the Church, that Mr. Baxter's deaconhood did not
include very active service in the courts of the Lord. He had "experienced religion" at fifteen
and made profession of his faith, but all well-brought-up boys and girls did the same in those
days; their parents saw to that! If change of conviction or backsliding occurred later on,
that was not their business! At the ripe age of twenty-five he was selected to fill a vacancy
and became a deacon, thinking it might be good for trade, as it was, for some years. He was
very active at the time of the "Cochrane craze," since any defence of the creed that included
lively detective work and incessant spying on his neighbors was particularly in his line; but
for many years now, though he had been regular in attendance at church, he had never officiated
at communion, and his diaconal services had gradually lapsed into the passing of the contribution-box,
a task of which he never wearied; it was such a keen pleasure to make other people yield their
pennies for a good cause, without adding any of his own!

Deacon Baxter had now been a widower for some years and the community had almost relinquished
the idea of his seeking a fourth wife. This was a matter of some regret, for there was a general
feeling that it would be a good thing for the Baxter girls to have some one to help with the
housework and act as a buffer between them and their grim and irascible parent. As for the
women of the village, they were mortified that the Deacon had been able to secure three wives,
and refused to believe that the universe held anywhere a creature benighted enough to become
his fourth.

The first, be it said, was a mere ignorant girl, and he a beardless youth of twenty, who may
not have shown his true qualities so early in life. She bore him two sons, and it was a matter
of comment at the time that she called them, respectively, Job and Moses, hoping that the endurance
and meekness connected with these names might somehow help them in their future relations with
their father. Pneumonia, coupled with profound discouragement, carried her off in a few years
to make room for the second wife, Waitstill's mother, who was of different fibre and greatly
his superior. She was a fine, handsome girl, the orphan daughter of up-country gentle-folks,
who had died when she was eighteen, leaving her alone in the world and penniless.

Baxter, after a few days' acquaintance, drove into the dooryard of the house where she was
a visitor and, showing her his two curly-headed boys, suddenly asked her to come and be their
stepmother. She assented, partly because she had nothing else to do with her existence, so
far as she could see, and also because she fell in love with the children at first sight and
forgot, as girls will, that it was their father whom she was marrying.

She was as plucky and clever and spirited as she was handsome, and she made a brave fight of
it with Foxy; long enough to bring a daughter into the world, to name her Waitstill, and start
her a little way on her life journey,--then she, too, gave up the struggle and died. Typhoid
fever it was, combined with complete loss of illusions, and a kind of despairing rage at having
made so complete a failure of her existence.

The next year, Mr. Baxter, being unusually busy, offered a man a good young heifer if he would
jog about the country a little and pick him up a housekeeper; a likely woman who would, if
she proved energetic, economical, and amiable, be eventually raised to the proud position of
his wife. If she was young, healthy, smart, tidy, capable, and a good manager, able to milk
the cows, harness the horse, and make good butter, he would give a dollar and a half a week.
The woman was found, and, incredible as it may seem, she said "yes" when the Deacon (whose
ardor was kindled at having paid three months' wages) proposed a speedy marriage. The two boys
by this time had reached the age of discretion, and one of them evinced the fact by promptly
running away to parts unknown, never to be heard from afterwards; while the other, a reckless
and unhappy lad, was drowned while running on the logs in the river. Old Foxy showed little
outward sign of his loss, though he had brought the boys into the world solely with the view
of having one of them work on the farm and the other in the store.

His third wife, the one originally secured for a housekeeper, bore him a girl, very much to
his disgust, a girl named Patience, and great was Waitstill's delight at this addition to the
dull household. The mother was a timid, colorless, docile creature, but Patience nevertheless
was a sparkling, bright-eyed baby, who speedily became the very centre of the universe to the
older child. So the months and years wore on, drearily enough, until, when Patience was nine,
the third Mrs. Baxter succumbed after the manner of her predecessors, and slipped away from
a life that had grown intolerable. The trouble was diagnosed as "liver complaint," but scarcity
of proper food, no new frocks or kind words, hard work, and continual bullying may possibly
have been contributory causes. Dr. Perry thought so, for he had witnessed three most contented
deaths in the Baxter house. The ladies were all members of the church and had presumably made
their peace with God, but the good doctor fancied that their pleasure in joining the angels
was mild compared with their relief at parting with the Deacon.

"I know I hadn't ought to put the care on you, Waitstill, and you only thirteen," poor Mrs.
Baxter sighed, as the young girl was watching with her one night when the end seemed drawing
near. "I've made out to live till now when Patience is old enough to dress herself and help
round, but I'm all beat out and can't try any more."

"Do you mean I'm to take your place, be a mother to Patience, and keep house, and everything?"
asked Waitstill quaveringly.

"I don't see but you'll have to, unless your father marries again. He'll never hire help, you
know that!"

"I won't have another mother in this house," flashed the girl. "There's been three here and
that's enough! If he brings anybody home, I'll take Patience and run away, as Job did; or if
he leaves me alone, I'll wash and iron and scrub and cook till Patience grows up, and then
we'll go off together and hide somewhere. I'm fourteen; oh, mother, how soon could I be married
and take Patience to live with me? Do you think anybody will ever want me?"

"Don't marry for a home, Waitstill! Your own mother did that, and so did I, and we were both
punished for it! You've been a great help and I've had a sight of comfort out of the baby,
but I wouldn't go through it again, not even for her! You're real smart and capable for your
age and you've done your full share of the work every day, even when you were at school. You
can get along all right."

"I don't know how I'm going to do everything alone," said the girl, forcing back her tears.
"You've always made the brown bread, and mine will never suit father. I suppose I can wash,
but don't know how to iron starched clothes, nor make pickles, and oh! I can never kill a rooster,
mother, it's no use to ask me to! I'm not big enough to be the head of the family." 

All such irons as waffle-irons had far longer handles than are seen
on any cooking-utensils in these days of stoves and ranges, where
the flames are covered and the housewife shielded.

Gridirons had long handles of wood or iron, which could be fastened to the shorter stationary
handles. The two gridirons in the accompanying illustration are a
century old.

The circular one was the oldest form.

The oblong ones, with groove to collect the gravy, did not vary in shape till our own day. Both have
indications of fittings for long handles, but the handles have vanished. A long-handled frying-pan
is seen hanging by the side of the slave-kitchen fireplace.

An accompaniment of the kitchen fireplace, found, not in farmhouses,
but among luxury-loving town-folk, was the plate-warmer.

They are seldom named in inventories, and I know of but one of Revolutionary
days, and it is here shown.

Similar ones are manufactured to-day; the legs, perhaps, are shorter, but the general outline
is the same.

An important furnishing of every fireplace was the andirons. In kitchen fireplaces these were
usually of iron, and the shape known as goose-neck were common. Cob irons were the simplest
form, and merely supported the spit; sometimes they had hooks to hold a dripping-pan. A common
name for the kitchen andirons was fire-dogs; and creepers were low,
small andirons, usually used with the tall fire-dogs.

The kitchen andirons were simply for use to help hold the logs and cooking-utensils. But other
fireplaces had handsome fire-dogs of copper, brass, or cut steel, cast or wrought in handsome
devices. These were a pride and delight to the housewife.

A primitive method of roasting a joint of meat or a fowl was by suspending it in front of the fire
by a strong hempen string tied to a peg in the ceiling, while some one--usually an unwilling
child--occasionally turned the roast around. Sometimes the sole turnspit was the housewife,
who, every time she basted the roast, gave the string a good twist, and thereafter it would
untwist, and then twist a little again, and so on until the vibration
ceased, when she again basted and started it.

As the juices sometimes ran down in the roast and left the upper part too dry, a "double string-roaster"
was invented, by which the equilibrium of the joint could be shifted. A jack was a convenient
and magnified edition of the primitive string, being a metal suspensory
machine.

A still further glorification was the addition of a revolving power
which ran by clockwork and turned the roast with regularity; this
was known as a clock-jack.

The one here shown hangs in the fireplace in Deerfield Memorial Hall. A smoke-jack was run somewhat
irregularly by the pressure of smoke and the current of hot air in
the chimney.

These were noisy and creaking and not regarded with favor by old-fashioned cooks.

We are apt to think of the turnspit dog as a creature of European
life, but we had them here in America--little low, bow-legged, patient
souls, trained to run in a revolving cylinder and keep the roasting
joint a-turn before the fire.

Mine host Clark of the State House Inn in Philadelphia in the first half of the eighteenth century
advertised in Benjamin Franklin's Pennsylvania Gazette that he had
for sale "several dogs and wheels, much preferable to any jacks for
roasting any joints of meat."

I hope neither he nor any one else had many of these little canine slaves.

A frequent accompaniment of the kitchen fireplace in the eighteenth century, and a domestic luxury
seen in well-to-do homes, was the various forms of the "roasting-kitchen,"
or Dutch oven.

These succeeded the jacks; they were a box-like arrangement open on one side which when in use
was turned to the fire. Like other utensils of the day, they often stood up on legs, to bring
the open side before the blaze. A little door at the back could be
opened for convenience in basting the roast.

These kitchens came in various sizes for roasting birds or joints, and in them bread was occasionally
baked. The bake-kettle, which in some communities was also called a Dutch oven, was preferred
for baking bread. It was a strong kettle, standing, of course, on stout, stumpy legs, and when
in use was placed among the hot coals and closely covered with a
strong metal, convex cover, on which coals were also closely heaped.

Such perfect rolls, such biscuit, such shortcake, as issued from the heaped-up bake-kettle can
never be equalled by other methods of cooking.

When the great stone chimney was built, there was usually placed on one side of the kitchen fireplace
a brick oven which had a smoke uptake into the chimney--and-an ash-pit below. The great door
was of iron. This oven was usually heated once a week.

A great fire of dry wood, called oven wood, was kindled within it and kept burning fiercely
for some hours. This thoroughly heated all the bricks. The coals and ashes were then swept out,
the chimney draught closed, and the oven filled with brown bread, pies, pots of beans, etc.
Sometimes the bread was baked in pans, sometimes it was baked in a great mass set on cabbage
leaves or oak leaves.
 I advised
them to walk up the Town-House Hill if they ever expected to get the horse home."

"Town-House Hill!" said Ivory's mother, dropping her knitting. "That was where we had such
wonderful meetings! Truly the Lord was present in our midst, and oh, Ivory! the visions we
saw in that place when Jacob Cochrane first unfolded his gospel to us. Was ever such a man!"

"Probably not, mother," remarked Ivory dryly.

"You were speaking of the Baxters. I remember their home, and the little girl who used to stand
in the gateway and watch when we came out of meeting. There was a baby, too; isn't there a
Baxter baby, Ivory?"

"She didn't stay a baby; she is seventeen years old to-day, mother."

"You surprise me, but children do grow very fast. She had a strange name, but I cannot recall it."

"Her name is Patience, but nobody but her father calls her anything but Patty, which suits
her much better."

"No, the name wasn't Patience, not the one I mean."

"The older sister is Waitstill, perhaps you mean her?"--and Ivory sat down by the fire with
his book and his pipe.

"Waitstill! Waitstill! that is it! Such a beautiful name!"

"She's a beautiful girl."

"Waitstill! 'They also serve who only stand and wait.' 'Wait, I say, on the Lord and He will
give thee the desires of thy heart.'--Those were wonderful days, when we were caught up out
of the body and mingled freely in the spirit world." Mrs. Boynton was now fully started on
the topic that absorbed her mind and Ivory could do nothing but let her tell the story that
she had told him a hundred times.

"I remember when first we heard Jacob Cochrane speak." (This was her usual way of beginning.)
"Your father was a preacher, as you know, Ivory, but you will never know what a wonderful preacher
he was. My grandfather, being a fine gentleman, and a governor, would not give his consent
to my marriage, but I never regretted it, never! Your father saw Elder Cochrane at a revival
meeting of the Free Will Baptists in Scarboro', and was much impressed with him. A few days
later we went to the funeral of a child in the same neighborhood. No one who was there could
ever forget it. The minister had made his long prayer when a man suddenly entered the room,
came towards the coffin, and placed his hand on the child's forehead. The room, in an instant,
was as still as the death that had called us together. The stranger was tall and of commanding
presence; his eyes pierced our very hearts, and his marvellous voice penetrated to depths in
our souls that had never been reached before."

"Was he a better speaker than my father?" asked Ivory, who dreaded his mother's hours of complete
silence even more than her periods of reminiscence.

"He spoke as if the Lord of Hosts had given him inspiration; as if the angels were pouring
words into his mouth just for him to utter," replied Mrs. Boynton. "Your father was spell-bound,
and I only less so. When he ceased speaking, the child's mother crossed the room, and swaying
to and fro, fell at his feet, sobbing and wailing and imploring God to forgive her sins. They
carried her upstairs, and when we looked about after the confusion and excitement the stranger
had vanished. But we found him again! As Elder Cochrane said: 'The prophet of the Lord can
never be hid; no darkness is thick enough to cover him!' There was a six weeks' revival meeting
in North Saco where three hundred souls were converted, and your father and I were among them.
We had fancied ourselves true believers for years, but Jacob Cochrane unstopped our ears so
that we could hear the truths revealed to him by the Almighty!--It was all so simple and easy
at the beginning, but it grew hard and grievous afterward; hard to keep the path, I mean. I
never quite knew whether God was angry with me for backsliding at the end, but I could not
always accept the revelations that Elder Cochrane and your father had!"

Lois Boynton's hands were now quietly folded over the knitting that lay forgotten in her lap,
but her low, thrilling voice had a note in it that did not belong wholly to earth.

There was a long silence; one of many long silences at the Boynton fireside, broken only by
the ticking of the clock, the purring of the cat, and the clicking of Mrs. Boynton's needles,
as, her paroxysm of reminiscence over, she knitted ceaselessly, with her eyes on the window
or the door.

"It's about time for Rod to be coming back, isn't it?" asked Ivory.

"He ought to be here soon, but perhaps he is gone for good; it may be that he thinks he has
made us a long enough visit. I don't know whether your father will like the boy when he comes
home. He never did fancy company in the house."

Ivory looked up in astonishment from his Greek grammar. This was an entirely new turn of his
mother's mind. Often when she was more than usually confused he would try to clear the cobwebs
from her brain by gently questioning her until she brought herself back to a clearer understanding
of her own thought. Thus far her vagaries had never made her unjust to any human creature;
she was uniformly sweet and gentle in speech and demeanor.

"Why do you talk of Rod's visiting us when he is one of the family?" Ivory asked quietly.

"Is he one of the family? I didn't know it," replied his mother absently.

"Look at me, mother, straight in the eye; that's right: now listen, dear, to what I say."

Mrs. Boynton's hair that had been in her youth like an aureole of corn-silk was now a strange
yellow-white, and her blue eyes looked out from her pale face with a helpless appeal.

"You and I were living alone here after father went away," Ivory began. "I was a little boy,
you know. You and father had saved something, there was the farm, you worked like a slave,
I helped, and we lived, somehow, do you remember?"

"I do, indeed! It was cold and the neighbors were cruel. Jacob Cochrane had gone away and his
disciples were not always true to him. When the magnetism of his presence was withdrawn, they
could not follow all his revelations, and they forgot how he had awakened their spiritual life
at the first of his preaching. Your father was always a stanch believer, but when he started
on his mission and went to Parsonsfield to help Elder Cochrane in his meetings, the neighbors
began to criticize him. They doubted him. You were too young to realize it, but I did, and
it almost broke my heart."

"I was nearly twelve years old; do you think I escaped all the gossip, mother?"

"You never spoke of it to me, Ivory."

"No, there is much that I never spoke of to you, mother, but sometime when you grow stronger
and your memory is better we will talk together.--Do you remember the winter, long after father
went away, that Parson Lane sent me to Fairfield Academy to get enough Greek and Latin to make
me a schoolmaster?"

"Yes," she answered uncertainly.

"Don't you remember I got a free ride down-river one Friday and came home for Sunday, just
to surprise you? And when I got here I found you ill in bed, with Mrs. Mason and Dr. Perry
taking care of you. You could not speak, you were so ill, but they told me you had been up
in New Hampshire to see your sister, that she had died, and that you had brought back her boy,
who was only four years old. That was Rod. I took him into bed with me that night, poor, homesick
little fellow, and, as you know, mother, he's never left us since."

"I didn't remember I had a sister. Is she dead, Ivory?" asked Mrs. Boynton vaguely.

"If she were not dead, do you suppose you would have kept Rodman with us when we hadn't bread
enough for our own two mouths, mother?" questioned Ivory patiently.

"No, of course not. I can't think how I can be so forgetful. It's worse sometimes than others.
It 's worse to-day because I knew the Mayflowers were blooming and that reminded me it was
time for your father to come home; you must forgive me, dear, and will you excuse me if I sit
in the kitchen awhile? The window by the side door looks out towards the road, and if I put
a candle on the sill it shines quite a distance. The lane is such a long one, and your father
was always a sad stumbler in the dark! I shouldn't like him to think I wasn't looking for him
when he's been gone since January."

Ivory's pipe went out, and his book slipped from his knee unnoticed.

His mother was more confused than usual, but she always was when spring came to remind her
of her husband's promise. Somehow, well used as he was to her mental wanderings, they made
him uneasy to-night. His father had left home on a fancied mission, a duty he believed to be
a revelation given by God through Jacob Cochrane. The farm did not miss him much at first,
Ivory reflected bitterly, for since his fanatical espousal of Cochranism his father's interest
in such mundane matters as household expenses had diminished month by month until they had
no meaning for him at all. Letters to wife and boy had come at first, but after six months--during
which he had written from many places, continually deferring the date of his return-they had
ceased altogether. The rest was silence. Rumors of his presence here or there came from time
to time, but though Parson Lane and Dr. Perry did their best, none of them were ever substantiated.

Where had those years of wandering been passed, and had they all been given even to an imaginary
and fantastic service of God? Was his father dead? If he were alive, what could keep him from
writing? Nothing but a very strong reason, or a very wrong one, so his son thought, at times.

Since Ivory had grown to man's estate, he understood that in the later days of Cochrane's preaching,
his "visions," "inspirations," and "revelations" concerning the marriage bond were a trifle
startling from the old-fashioned, orthodox point of view. His most advanced disciples were
to hold themselves in readiness to renounce their former vows and seek "spiritual consorts,"
sometimes according to his advice, sometimes as their inclinations prompted.

Had Aaron Boynton forsaken, willingly, the wife of his youth, the mother of his boy? If so,
he must have realized to what straits he was subjecting them. Ivory had not forgotten those
first few years of grinding poverty, anxiety, and suspense. His mother's mind had stood the
strain bravely, but it gave way at last; not, however, until that fatal winter journey to New
Hampshire, when cold, exposure, and fatigue did their worst for her weak body. Religious enthusiast,
exalted and impressionable, a natural mystic, she had probably always been, far more so in
temperament, indeed, than her husband; but although she left home on that journey a frail and
heartsick woman, she returned a different creature altogether, blurred and confused in mind,
with clouded memory and irrational fancies.

She must have given up hope, just then, Ivory thought, and her love was so deep that when it
was uprooted the soil came with it. Now hope had returned because the cruel memory had faded
altogether. She sat by the kitchen window in gentle expectation, watching, always watching.

And this is the way many of Ivory Boynton's evenings were spent, while the heart of him, the
five-and-twenty-year-old heart of him, was longing to feel the beat of another heart, a girl's
heart only a mile or more away. The ice in Saco Water had broken up and the white blocks sailed
majestically down towards the sea; sap was mounting and the elm trees were budding; the trailing
arbutus was blossoming in the woods; the robins had come;-everything was announcing the spring,
yet Ivory saw no changing seasons in his future; nothing but winter, eternal winter there!

V. PATIENCE AND IMPATIENCE

PATTY had been searching for eggs in the barn chamber, and coming down the ladder from the
haymow spied her father washing the wagon by the well-side near the shed door. Cephas Cole
kept store for him at meal hours and whenever trade was unusually brisk, and the Baxter yard
was so happily situated that Old Foxy could watch both house and store.

There never was a good time to ask Deacon Baxter a favor, therefore this moment would serve
as well as any other, so, approaching him near enough to be heard through the rubbing and splashing,
but no nearer than was necessary Patty said:--

"Father, can I go up to Ellen Wilson's this afternoon and stay to tea? I won't start till I've
done a good day's work and I'll come home early."

"What do you want to go gallivantin' to the neighbors for? I never saw anything like the girls
nowadays; highty-tighty, flauntin', traipsin', triflin' trollops, ev'ry one of 'em, that's
what they are, and Ellen Wilson's one of the triflin'est. You're old enough now to stay to
home where you belong and make an effort to earn your board and clothes, which you can't, even
if you try."

Spunk, real, Simon-pure spunk, started somewhere in Patty and coursed through her blood like wine.

"If a girl's old enough to stay at home and work, I should think she was old enough to go out
and play once in a while." Patty was still too timid to make this remark more than a courteous
suggestion, so far as its tone was concerned.

"Don't answer me back; you're full of new tricks, and you've got to stop 'em, right where you
are, or there'll be trouble. You were whistlin' just now up in the barn chamber; that's one
of the things I won't have round my premises,--a whistlin' girl."

"'T was a Sabbath-School hymn that I was whistling!" This with a creditable imitation of defiance.

"That don't make it any better. Sing your hymns if you must make a noise while you're workin'."

"It's the same mouth that makes the whistle and sings the song, so I don't see why one's any
wickeder than the other."

"You don't have to see," replied the Deacon grimly; "all you have to do is to mind when you're
spoken to. Now run 'long 'bout your work."

"Can't I go up to Ellen's, then?"

"What's goin' on up there?"

"Just a frolic. There's always a good time at Ellen's, and I would so like the sight of a big,
rich house now and then!"

"'Just a frolic.' Land o' Goshen, hear the girl! 'Sight of a big, rich house,' indeed!--Will
there be any boys at the party?"

"I s'pose so, or 't wouldn't be a frolic," said Patty with awful daring; "but there won't be
many; only a few of Mark's friends."

"Well, there ain't goin' to be no more argyfyin'! I won't have any girl o' mine frolickin'
with boys, so that's the end of it. You're kind o' crazy lately, riggin' yourself out with
a ribbon here and a flower there, and pullin' your hair down over your ears. Why do you want
to cover your ears up? What are they for?"

"To hear you with, father," Patty replied, with honey-sweet voice and eyes that blazed.

"Well, I hope they'll never hear anything worse," replied her father, flinging a bucket of
water over the last of the wagon wheels.

"THEY COULDN'T!" These words were never spoken aloud, but oh! how Patty longed to shout them
with a clarion voice as she walked away in perfect silence, her majestic gait showing, she
hoped, how she resented the outcome of the interview.

"I've stood up to father!" she exclaimed triumphantly as she entered the kitchen and set down
her yellow bowl of eggs on the table. "I stood up to him, and answered him back three times!"

Waitstill was busy with her Saturday morning cooking, but she turned in alarm.

"Patty, what have you said and done? Tell me quickly!"

"I 'argyfied,' but it didn't do any good; he won't let me go to Ellen's party."

Waitstill wiped her floury hands and put them on her sister's shoulders.

"Hear what I say, Patty: you must not argue with father, whatever he says. We don't love him
and so there isn't the right respect in our hearts, but at least there can be respect in our
manners."

"I don't believe I can go on for years, holding in, Waitstill!" Patty whimpered.

"Yes, you can. I have!"

"You're different, Waitstill."

"I wasn't so different at sixteen, but that's five years ago, and I've got control of my tongue
and my temper since then. Sometime, perhaps, when I have a grievance too great to be rightly
borne, sometime when you are away from here in a home of your own, I shall speak out to father;
just empty my heart of all the disappointment and bitterness and rebellion. Somebody ought
to tell him the truth, and perhaps it will be me!"

"I wish it could be me," exclaimed Patty vindictively, and with an equal disregard of grammar.

"You would speak in temper, I'm afraid, Patty, and that would spoil all. I'm sorry you can't
go up to Ellen's," she sighed, turning back to her work; "you don't have pleasure enough for
one of your age; still, don't fret; something may happen to change things, and anyhow the weather
is growing warmer, and you and I have so many more outings in summer-time. Smooth down your
hair, child; there are straws in it, and it's all rough with the wind. I don't like flying
hair about a kitchen."

"I wish my hair was flying somewhere a thousand miles from here; or at least I should wish
it if it did not mean leaving you; for oh. I'm so miserable and disappointed and unhappy!"

Waitstill bent over the girl as she flung herself down beside the table and smoothed her shoulder
gently.

"There, there, dear; it isn't like my gay little sister to cry. What is the matter with you
to-day, Patty?"

"I suppose it's the spring," she said, wiping her eyes with her apron and smiling through her
tears. "Perhaps I need a dose of sulphur and molasses."

"Don't you feel well as common?"

"Well? I feel too well! I feel as if I was a young colt shut up in an attic. I want to kick
up my heels, batter the door down, and get out into the pasture. It's no use talking, Waity;--I
can't go on living without a bit of pleasure and I can't go on being patient even for your
sake. If it weren't for you, I'd run away as Job did; and I never believed Moses slipped on
the logs; I'm sure he threw himself into the river, and so should I if I had the courage!"

"Stop, Patty, stop, dear! You shall have your bit of pasture, at least. I'll do some of your
indoor tasks for you, and you shall put on your sunbonnet and go out and dig the dandelion
greens for dinner. Take the broken knife and a milkpan and don't bring in so much earth with
them as you did last time. Dry your eyes and look at the green things growing. Remember how
young you are and how many years are ahead of you! Go along, dear!"

Waitstill went about her work with rather a heavy heart. Was life going to be more rather than
less difficult, now that Patty was growing up? Would she he able to do her duty both by father
and sister and keep peace in the household, as she had vowed, in her secret heart, always to
do? She paused every now and then to look out of the window and wave an encouraging hand to
Patty. The girl's bonnet was off, and her uncovered head blazed like red gold in the sunlight.
The short young grass was dotted with dandelion blooms, some of them already grown to huge
disks of yellow, and Patty moved hither and thither, selecting the younger weeds, deftly putting
the broken knife under their roots and popping them into the tin pan. Presently, for Deacon
Baxter had finished the wagon and gone down the hill to relieve Cephas Cole at the counter,
Patty's shrill young whistle floated into the kitchen, but with a mischievous glance at the
open window she broke off suddenly and began to sing the words of the hymn with rather more
emphasis and gusto than strict piety warranted.

     "There'll be SOMEthing in heav-en for chil-dren to do,
      None are idle in that bless-ed land:
      There'll be WORK for the heart. There'll be WORK for the mind,
      And emPLOYment for EACH little hand.
        "There'll be SOME-thing to do,
         There'll be SOME-thing to do,
      There'll be SOME-thing for CHIL-dren to do!
      On that bright blessed shore where there's joy evermore,
      There'll be SOME-thing for CHIL-DREN to do."

Patty's young existence being full to the brim of labor, this view of heaven never in the least
appealed to her and she rendered the hymn with little sympathy. The main part of the verse
was strongly accented by jabs at the unoffending dandelion roots, but when the chorus came
she brought out the emphatic syllables by a beat of the broken knife on the milkpan.

This rendition of a Sabbath-School classic did not meet Waitstill's ideas of perfect propriety,
but she smiled and let it pass, planning some sort of recreation for a stolen half-hour of
the afternoon. It would have to be a walk through the pasture into the woods to see what had
grown since they went there a fortnight ago. Patty loved people better than Nature, but failing
the one she could put up with the other, for she had a sense of beauty and a pagan love of
color. There would be pale-hued innocence and blue and white violets in the moist places, thought
Waitstill, and they would have them in a china cup on the supper-table. No, that would never
do, for last time father had knocked them over when he was reaching for the bread, and in a
silent protest against such foolishness got up from the table and emptied theirs into the kitchen
sink.

"There's a place for everything," he said when he came back, "and the place for flowers is
outdoors."

Then in the pine woods there would be, she was sure, Star of Bethlehem, Solomon's Seal, the
white spray of groundnuts and bunchberries. Perhaps they could make a bouquet and Patty would
take it across the fields to Mrs. Boynton's door. She need not go in, and thus they would not
be disobeying their father's command not to visit that "crazy Boynton woman."

Here Patty came in with a pan full of greens and the sisters sat down in the sunny window to
get them ready for the pot.

"I'm calmer," the little rebel allowed. "That's generally the way it turns out with me. I get
into a rage, but I can generally sing it off!"

"You certainly must have got rid of a good deal of temper this morning, by the way your voice
sounded."

"Nobody can hear us in this out-of-the-way place. It's easy enough to see that the women weren't
asked to say anything when the men settled where the houses should be built! The men weren't
content to stick them on the top of a high hill, or half a mile from the stores, but put them
back to the main road, taking due care to cut the sink-window where their wives couldn't see
anything even when they were washing dishes."

"I don't know that I ever thought about it in that way"; and Waitstill looked out of the window
in a brown study while her hands worked with the dandelion greens. "I've noticed it, but I
never supposed the men did it intentionally."

"No, you wouldn't," said Patty with the pessimism of a woman of ninety, as she stole an admiring
glance at her sister. Patty's own face, irregular, piquant, tantalizing, had its peculiar charm,
and her brilliant skin and hair so dazzled the masculine beholder that he took note of no small
defects; but Waitstill was beautiful; beautiful even in her working dress of purple calico.
Her single braid of hair, the Foxwell hair, that in her was bronze and in Patty pale auburn,
was wound once around her fine head and made to stand a little as it went across the front.
It was a simple, easy, unconscious fashion of her own, quite different from anything done by
other women in her time and place, and it just suited her dignity and serenity. It looked like
a coronet, but it was the way she carried her head that gave you the fancy, there was such
spirit and pride in the poise of it on the long graceful neck. Her eyes were as clear as mountain
pools shaded by rushes, and the strength of the face was softened by the sweetness of the mouth.

Patty never let the conversation die out for many seconds at a time and now she began again.
"My sudden rages don't match my name very well, but, of course, mother didn't know how I was
going to turn out when she called me Patience, for I was nothing but a squirming little bald,
red baby; but my name really is too ridiculous when you think about it."

Waitstill laughed as she said: "It didn't take you long to change it! Perhaps Patience was
a hard word for a baby to say, but the moment you could talk you said, 'Patty wants this' and
'Patty wants that."'

"Did Patty ever get it? She never has since, that's certain! And look at your name: it's 'Waitstill,'
yet you never stop a moment. When you're not in the shed or barn, or chicken-house, or kitchen
or attic, or garden-patch, you are working in the Sunday School or the choir."

It seemed as if Waitstill did not intend to answer this arraignment of her activities. She
rose and crossed the room to put the pan of greens in the sink, preparing to wash them.

Taking the long-handled dipper from the nail, she paused a moment before plunging it into the
water pail; paused, and leaning her elbow on a corner of the shelf over the sink, looked steadfastly
out into the orchard.

Patty watched her curiously and was just going to offer a penny for her thoughts when Waitstill
suddenly broke the brief silence by saying: "Yes, I am always busy; it's better so, but all
the same, Patty, I'm waiting,--inside! I don't know for what, but I always feel that I am waiting!"

VI. A KISS

"SHALL we have our walk in the woods on the Edgewood side of the river, just for a change,
Patty?" suggested her sister. "The water is so high this year that the river will be splendid.
We can gather our flowers in the hill pasture and then you'll be quite near Mrs. Boynton's
and can carry the nosegay there while I come home ahead of you and get supper. I'll take to-day's
eggs to father's store on the way and ask him if he minds our having a little walk. I've an
errand at Aunt Abby's that would take me down to the bridge anyway."

"Very well," said Patty, somewhat apathetically. "I always like a walk with you, but I don't
care what becomes of me this afternoon if I can't go to Ellen's party."

The excursion took place according to Waitstill's plan, and at four o'clock she sped back to
her night work and preparations for supper, leaving Patty with a great bunch of early wildflowers
for Ivory's mother. Patty had left them at the Boyntons' door with Rodman, who was picking
up chips and volunteered to take the nosegay into the house at once.

"Won't you step inside?" the boy asked shyly, wishing to be polite, but conscious that visitors,
from the village very seldom crossed the threshold.

"I'd like to, but I can't this afternoon, thank you. I must run all the way down the hill now,
or I shan't be in time to supper."

"Do you eat meals together over to your house?" asked the boy.

"We're all three at the table if that means together."

"We never are. Ivory goes off early and takes lunch in a pail. So do I when I go to school.
Aunt Boynton never sits down to eat; she just stands at the window and takes a bite of something
now 'and then. You haven't got any mother, have you?"

"No, Rodman."

"Neither have I, nor any father, nor any relations but Aunt Boynton and Ivory. Ivory is very
good to me, and when he's at home I'm never lonesome."

"I wish you could come over and eat with sister and me," said Patty gently. "Perhaps sometime,
when my father is away buying goods and we are left alone, you could join us in the woods,
and we would have a picnic? We would bring enough for you; all sorts of good things; hard-boiled
eggs, doughnuts, apple-turnovers, and bread spread with jelly."

"I'd like it fine!" exclaimed Rodman, his big dark eyes sparkling with anticipation. "I don't
have many boys to play with, and I never went to a picnic Aunt Boynton watches for uncle 'most
all the time; she doesn't know he has been away for years and years. When she doesn't watch,
she prays. Sometimes she wants me to pray with her, but praying don't come easy to me."

"Neither does it to me," said Patty.

"I'm good at marbles and checkers and back-gammon and jack-straws, though."

"So am I," said Patty, laughing, "so we should be good friends. I'll try to get a chance to
see you soon again, but perhaps I can't; I'm a good deal tied at home."

"Your father doesn't like you to go anywheres, I guess," interposed Rodman. "I've heard Ivory
tell Aunt Boynton things, but I wouldn't repeat them. Ivory's trained me years and years not
to tell anything, so I don't."

"That's a good boy!" approved Patty. Then as she regarded him more closely, she continued,
"I'm sorry you're lonesome, Rodman, I'd like to see you look brighter."

"You think I've been crying," the boy said shrewdly. "So I have, but not because I've been
punished. The reason my eyes are so swollen up is because I killed our old toad by mistake
this morning. I was trying to see if I could swing the scythe so's to help Ivory in haying-time.
I've only 'raked after' and I want to begin on mowing soon's I can. Then somehow or other the
old toad came out from under the steps; I didn't see him, and the scythe hit him square. I
cried for an hour, that's what I did, and I don't care who knows it except I wouldn't like
the boys at school to hector me. I've buried the toad out behind the barn, and I hope Ivory'll
let me keep the news from Aunt Boynton. She cries enough now without my telling her there's
been a death in the family. She set great store by the old toad, and so did all of us."

"It's too bad; I'm sorry, but after all you couldn't help it."

"No, but we should always look round every-wheres when we're cutting; that's what Ivory says.
He says folks shouldn't use edged tools till they're old enough not to fool with 'em."

And Rodman looked so wise and old-fashioned for his years that Patty did not know whether to
kiss him or cry over him, as she said: "Ivory's always right, and now good-bye; I must go this
very minute. Don't forget the picnic."

"I won't!" cried the boy, gazing after her, wholly entranced with her bright beauty and her
kindness. "Say, I'll bring something, too,--white-oak acorns, if you like 'em; I've got a big
bagful up attic!"

Patty sped down the long lane, crept under the bars, and flew like a lapwing over the high-road.

"If father was only like any one else, things might be so different!" she sighed, her thoughts
running along with her feet. "Nobody to make a home for that poor lonesome little boy and that
poor lonesome big Ivory.... I am sure that he is in love with Waitstill. He doesn't know it;
she doesn't know it; nobody does but me, but I'm clever at guessing. I was the only one that
surmised Jed Morrill was going to marry again.... I should almost like Ivory for myself, he
is so tall and handsome, but of course he can never marry anybody; he is too poor and has his
mother to look after. I wouldn't want to take him from Waity, though, and then perhaps I couldn't
get him, anyway.... If I couldn't, he'd be the only one! I've never tried yet, but I feel in
my bones, somehow, that I could have any boy in Edgewood or Riverboro, by just crooking my
forefinger and beckoning to him.. .. I wish--I wish--they were different! They don't make me
want to beckon to them! My forefinger just stays straight and doesn't feel like crooking!...
There's Cephas Cole, but he's as stupid as an owl. I don't want a husband that keeps his mouth
wide open whenever I'm talking, no matter whether it's sense or nonsense. There's Phil Perry,
but he likes Ellen, and besides he's too serious for me; and there's Mark Wilson; he's the
best dressed, and the only one that's been to college. He looks at me all the time in meeting,
and asked me if I wouldn't take a walk some Sunday afternoon. I know he planned Ellen's party
hoping I'd be there!--Goodness gracious, I do believe that is his horse coming behind me! There's
no other in the village that goes at such a gait!"

It was, indeed, Mark Wilson, who always drove, according to Aunt Abby Cole, "as if he was goin'
for a doctor." He caught up with Patty almost in the twinkling of an eye, but she was ready
for him. She had taken off her sunbonnet just to twirl it by the string, she was so warm with
walking, and in a jiffy she had lifted the clustering curls from her ears, tucked them back
with a single expert movement, and disclosed two coral pendants just the color of her ear-tips
and her glowing cheeks.

"Hello, Patty!" the young man called, in brusque country fashion, as he reined up beside her.
"What are you doing over here? Why aren't you on your way to the party? I've been over to Limington
and am breaking my neck to get home in time myself."

"I am not going; there are no parties for me!" said Patty plaintively. "Not going! Oh! I say,
what's the matter? It won't be a bit of fun without you! Ellen and I made it up expressly for
you, thinking your father couldn't object to a candy-pull!"

"I can't help it; I did the best I could. Wait-still always asks father for me, but I wouldn't
take any chances to-day, and I spoke to him myself; indeed I almost coaxed him!"

"He's a regular old skinflint!" cried Mark, getting out of the wagon and walking beside her.

"You mustn't call him names," Patty interposed with some dignity. "I call him a good many myself,
but I'm his daughter."

"You don't look it," said Mark admiringly. "Come and have a little ride, Won't you?"

"Oh, I couldn't possibly, thank you. Some one would be sure to see us, and father's so strict."

"There isn't a building for half a mile! Just jump in and have a spin till we come to the first
house; then I'll let you out and you can walk the rest of the way home. Come, do, and make
up to me a little for my disappointment. I'll skip the candy-pull if you say the word."

It was an incredibly brief drive, at Mark's rate of speed; and as exciting and blissful as
it was brief and dangerous, Patty thought. Did she imagine it, or did Mark help her into the
wagon differently from--old Dr. Perry, for instance?

The fresh breeze lifted the gold thread of her curls and gave her cheeks a brighter color,
while her breath came fast through her parted lips and her eyes sparkled at the unexpected,
unaccustomed pleasure. She felt so grown up, so conscious of a new power as she sat enthroned
on the little wagon seat (Mark Wilson always liked his buggies "courtin' size" so the neighbors
said), that she was almost courageous enough to agree to make a royal progress through the
village; almost, but not quite.

"Come on, let's shake the old tabbies up and start 'em talking, shall we?" Mark suggested.
"I'll give you the reins and let Nero have a flick of the whip."

"No, I'd rather not drive," she said. "I'd be afraid of this horse, and, anyway, I must get
out this very minute; yes, I really must. If you hold Nero I can just slip down between the
wheels; you needn't help me."

Mark alighted notwithstanding her objections, saying gallantly, "I don't miss this pleasure,
not by a jugful! Come along! Jump!"

Patty stretched out her hands to be helped, but Mark forestalled her by putting his arms around
her and lifting her down. A second of time only was involved, but in that second he held; her
close and kissed her warm cheek, her cheek that had never felt the touch of any lips but those
of Waitstill. She pulled her sunbonnet over her flaming face, while Mark, with a gay smile
of farewell, sprang into the wagon and gave his horse a free rein.

Patty never looked up from the road, but walked faster and faster, her heart beating at breakneck
speed. It was a changed world that spun past her; fright, triumph, shame, delight, a gratified
vanity swam over her in turn.

A few minutes later she heard once more the rumble of wheels on the road. It was Cephas Cole
driving towards her over the brow of Saco Hill. "He'll have seen Mark," she thought, "but he
can't know I've talked and driven with him. Ugh! how stupid and common he looks!" "I heard
your father blowin' the supper-horn jest as I come over the bridge," remarked Cephas, drawing
up in the road. "He stood in the door-yard blowin' like Bedlam. I guess you 're late to supper."

"I'll be home in a few minutes," said Patty, "I got delayed and am a little behindhand."

"I'll turn right round if you'll git in and lemme take you back-along a piece; it'll save you
a good five minutes," begged Cephas, abjectly.

"All right; much obliged; but it's against the rules and you must drop me at the foot of our
hill and let me walk up."

"Certain; I know the Deacon 'n' I ain't huntin' for trouble any more'n you be; though I 'd
take it quick enough if you jest give me leave! I ain't no coward an' I could tackle the Deacon
to-morrow if so be I had anything to ask him."

This seemed to Patty a line of conversation distinctly to be discouraged under all the circumstances,
and she tried to keep Cephas on the subject of his daily tasks and his mother's rheumatism
until she could escape from his over-appreciative society.

"How do you like my last job?" he inquired as they passed his father's house. "Some think I've
got the ell a little mite too yaller. Folks that ain't never handled a brush allers think they
can mix paint better 'n them that knows their trade."

"If your object was to have everybody see the ell a mile away, you've succeeded," said Patty
cruelly. She never flung the poor boy a civil word for fear of getting something warmer than
civility in return.

"It'll tone down," Cephas responded, rather crestfallen. "I wanted a good bright lastin' shade.
'T won't look so yaller when father lets me paint the house to match, but that won't be till
next year. He makes fun of the yaller color same as you; says a home's something you want to
forget when you're away from it. Mother says the two rooms of the ell are big enough for somebody
to set up housekeepin' in. What do you think?"

"I never think," returned Patty with a tantalizing laugh. "Good-night, Cephas; thank you for
giving me a lift!"

VII. "WHAT DREAMS MAY COME"

SUPPER was over and the work done at last; the dishes washed, the beans put in soak, the hens
shut up for the night, the milk strained and carried down cellar. Patty went up to her little
room with the one window and the slanting walls and Waitstill followed and said good-night.
Her father put out the lights, locked the doors, and came up the creaking stairs. There was
never any talk between the sisters before going to bed, save on nights when their father was
late at the store, usually on Saturdays only, for the good talkers of the village, as well
as the gossips and loafers, preferred any other place to swap stories than the bleak atmosphere
provided by old Foxy at his place of business.

Patty could think in the dark; her healthy young body lying not uncomfortably on the bed of
corn husks, and the patchwork comforter drawn up under her chin. She could think, but for the
first time she could not tell her thoughts to Waitstill. She had a secret; a dazzling secret,
just like Ellen Wilson and some of the other girls who were several years older. Her afternoon's
experience loomed as large in her innocent mind as if it had been an elopement.

"I hope I'm not engaged to be married to him, EVEN IF HE DID--" The sentence was too tremendous
to be finished, even in thought. "I don't think I can be; men must surely say something, and
not take it for granted you are in love with them and want to marry them. It is what they say
when they ask that I should like much better than being married, when I'm only just past seventeen.
I wish Mark was a little different; I don't like his careless ways! He admires me, I can tell
one; that by the way he looks, but he admires himself just as much, and expects me to do the
same; still, I suppose none of them are perfect, and girls have to forgive lots of little things
when they are engaged. Mother must have forgiven a good many things when she took father. Anyway,
Mark is going away for a month on business, so I shan't have to make up my mind just yet!"
Here sleep descended upon the slightly puzzled, but on the whole delightfully complacent, little
creature, bringing her most alluring and untrustworthy dreams.

The dear innocent had, indeed, no need of haste! Young Mr. Marquis de Lafayette Wilson, Mark
for short, was not in the least a gay deceiver or ruthless breaker of hearts, and, so far as
known, no scalps of village beauties were hung to his belt. He was a likable, light-weight
young chap, as indolent and pleasure-loving as the strict customs of the community would permit;
and a kiss, in his mind, most certainly never would lead to the altar, else he had already
been many times a bridegroom. Miss Patience Baxter's maiden meditations and uncertainties and
perplexities, therefore, were decidedly premature. She was a natural-born, unconsciously artistic,
highly expert, and finished coquette. She was all this at seventeen, and Mark at twenty-four
was by no means a match for her in this field of effort, yet!--but sometimes, in getting her
victim into the net, the coquette loses her balance and falls in herself. There wasn't a bit
of harm in Marquis de Lafayette, but he was extremely agile in keeping out of nets!

Waitstill was restless, too, that night, although she could not have told the reason. She opened
her window at the back of the house and leaned out. The evening was mild with a soft wind blowing.
She could hear the full brook dashing through the edge of the wood-lot, and even the "ker-chug"
of an occasional bull-frog. There were great misty stars in the sky, but no moon.

There was no light in Aunt Abby Cole's kitchen, but a faint glimmer shone through the windows
of Uncle Bart's joiner's shop, showing that the old man was either having an hour of peaceful
contemplation with no companion but his pipe, or that there might be a little group of privileged
visitors, headed by Jed Morrill, busily discussing the affairs of the nation.

Waitstill felt troubled and anxious to-night; bruised by the little daily torments that lessened
her courage but never wholly destroyed it. Any one who believed implicitly in heredity might
have been puzzled, perhaps, to account for her. He might fantastically picture her as making
herself out of her ancestors, using a free hand, picking and choosing what she liked best,
with due care for the effect of combinations; selecting here and there and modifying, if advisable,
a trait of Grandpa or Grandma Foxwell, of Great-Uncle or Great-Aunt Baxter; borrowing qualities
lavishly from her own gently born and gently bred mother, and carefully avoiding her respected
father's Stock, except, perhaps, to take a dash of his pluck and an ounce of his persistence.
Jed Morrill remarked of Deacon Baxter once: "When Old Foxy wants anything he'll wait till hell
freezes over afore he'll give up." Waitstill had her father's firm chin, but there the likeness
ended. The proud curve of her nostrils, the clear well-opened eye with its deep fringe of lashes,
the earnest mouth, all these came from the mother who was little more than a dim memory.

Waitstill disdained any vague, dreary, colorless theory of life and its meaning. She had joined
the church at fifteen, more or less because other girls did and the parson had persuaded her;
but out of her hard life she had somehow framed a courageous philosophy that kept her erect
and uncrushed, no matter how great her difficulties. She had no idea of bringing a poor, weak,
draggled soul to her Maker at the last day, saying "Here is all I have managed to save out
of what you gave me!" That would be something, she allowed, immeasurably something; but pitiful
compared with what she might do if she could keep a brave, vigorous spirit and march to the
last tribunal strengthened by battles, struggles, defeats, victories; by the defense of weaker
human creatures, above all, warmed and vitalized by the pouring out and gathering in of love.

Patty slept sweetly on the other side of the partition, the contemplation of her twopenny triumphs
bringing a smile to her childish lips: but even so a good heart was there (still perhaps in
the process of making), a quick wit, ready sympathy, natural charm; plenty, indeed, for the
stronger sister to cherish, protect, and hold precious, as she did, with all her mind and soul.

There had always been a passionate loyalty in Waitstill's affection, wherever it had been bestowed.
Uncle Bart delighted in telling an instance of it that occurred when she was a child of five.
Maine had just separated amicably from her mother, Massachusetts, and become an independent
state. It was in the middle of March, but there was no snow on the ground and the village boys
had built a bonfire on a plot of land near Uncle Bart's joiner's shop. There was a large gathering
in celebration of the historic event and Waitstill crept down the hill with her homemade rag
doll in her arms. She stood on the outskirts of the crowd, a silent, absorbed little figure
clad in a shabby woollen coat, with a blue knit hood framing her rosy face. Deborah, her beloved,
her only doll, was tightly clasped in her arms, for Debby, like her parent, had few pleasures
and must not be denied so great a one as this. Suddenly, one of the thoughtless young scamps
in the group, wishing to create a new sensation and add to the general excitement, caught the
doll from the child's arms, and running forward with a loud war-whoop, flung it into the flames.
Waitstill did not lose an instant. She gave a scream Of anguish, and without giving any warning
of her intentions, probably without realizing them herself, she dashed through the little crowd
into the bonfire and snatched her cherished offspring from the burning pile. The whole thing
was over in the twinkling of an eye, for Uncle Bart was as quick as the child and dragged her
out of the imminent danger with no worse harm done than a good scorching.

He led the little creature up the hill to explain matters and protect her from a scolding.
She still held the doll against her heaving breast, saying, between her sobs: "I couldn't let
my Debby burn up! I couldn't, Uncle Bart; she's got nobody but me! Is my dress scorched so
much I can't wear it? You'll tell father how it was, Uncle Bart, won't you?"

Debby bore the marks of her adventure longer than her owner, for she had been longer in the
fire, but, stained and defaced as she was, she was never replaced, and remained the only doll
of Waitstill's childhood. At this very moment she lay softly and safely in a bureau drawer
ready to be lifted out, sometime, Waitstill fancied, and shown tenderly to Patty's children.
Of her own possible children she never thought. There was but one man in the world who could
ever be the father of them and she was separated from him by every obstacle that could divide
two human beings.

SUMMER

VIII. THE JOINER'S SHOP

VILLAGE "Aunts" and "Uncles" were elected to that relationship by the common consent of the
community; their fitness being established by great age, by decided individuality or eccentricity
of character, by uncommon lovableness, or by the possession of an abundant wit and humor. There
was no formality about the thing; certain women were always called "Aunt Sukie," or "Aunt Hitty,"
or what not, while certain men were distinguished as "Uncle Rish," or "Uncle Pel," without
previous arrangement, or the consent of the high contracting parties.

Such a couple were Cephas Cole's father and mother, Aunt Abby and Uncle Bart. Bartholomew Cole's
trade was that of a joiner; as for Aunt Abby's, it can only be said that she made all trades
her own by sovereign right of investigation, and what she did not know about her neighbor's
occupations was unlikely to be discovered on this side of Jordan. One of the villagers declared
that Aunt Abby and her neighbor, Mrs. Abel Day, had argued for an hour before they could make
a bargain about the method of disseminating a certain important piece of news, theirs by exclusive
right of discovery and prior possession. Mrs. Day offered to give Mrs. Cole the privilege of
Saco Hill and Aunt Betty-Jack's, she herself to take Guide-Board and Town-House Hills. Aunt
Abby quickly proved the injustice of this decision, saying that there were twice as many families
living in Mrs. Day's chosen territory as there were in that allotted to her, so the river road
to Milliken's Mills was grudgingly awarded to Aunt Abby by way of compromise, and the ladies
started on what was a tour of mercy in those days, the furnishing of a subject of discussion
for long, quiet evenings.

Uncle Bart's joiner's shop was at the foot of Guide-Board Hill on the Riverboro side of the
bridge, and it was the pleasantest spot in the whole village. The shop itself had a cheery
look, with its weather-stained shingles, its small square windows, and its hospitable door,
half as big as the front side of the building. The step was an old millstone too worn for active
service, and the piles of chips and shavings on each side of it had been there for so many
years that sweet-williams, clove pinks, and purple phlox were growing in among them in the
most irresponsible fashion; while a morning-glory vine had crept up and curled around a long-handled
rake that had been standing against the front of the house since early spring. There was an
air of cosy and amiable disorder about the place that would have invited friendly confabulation
even had not Uncle Bart's white head, honest, ruddy face, and smiling welcome coaxed you in
before you were aware. A fine Nodhead apple tree shaded the side windows, and underneath it
reposed all summer a bright blue sleigh, for Uncle Bart always described himself as being "plagued
for shed room" and kept things as he liked at the shop, having a "p'ison neat" wife who did
exactly the opposite at his house.

The seat of the sleigh was all white now with scattered fruit blossoms, and one of Waitstill's
earliest remembrances was of going downhill with Patty toddling at her side; of Uncle Bart's
lifting them into the sleigh and permitting them to sit there and eat the ripe red apples that
had fallen from the tree. Uncle Bart's son, Cephas (Patty's secret adorer), was a painter by
trade, and kept his pots and cans and brushes in a little outhouse at the back, while Uncle
Bart himself stood every day behind his long joiner's bench almost knee-deep in shavings. How
the children loved to play with the white, satiny rings, making them into necklaces, hanging
them to their ears and weaving them into wreaths.

Wonderful houses could always be built in the corner of the shop, out of the little odds and
ends and "nubbins" of white pine, and Uncle Bart was ever ready to cut or saw a special piece
needed for some great purpose.

The sound of the plane was sweet music in the old joiner's ears. "I don't hardly know how I'd
a made out if I'd had to work in a mill," he said confidentially to Cephas. "The noise of a
saw goin' all day, coupled with your mother's tongue mornin's an' evenin's, would 'a' been
too much for my weak head. I'm a quiet man, Cephas, a man that needs a peaceful shop where
he can get away from the comforts of home now and then, without shirkin' his duty nor causin'
gossip. If you should ever marry, Cephas,--which don't look to me likely without you pick out
a dif'rent girl,--I 'd advise you not to keep your stock o' paints in the barn or the shed,
for it's altogether too handy to the house and the women-folks. Take my advice and have a place
to yourself, even if it's a small one. A shop or a barn has saved many a man's life and reason
Cephas, for it's ag'in' a woman's nature to have you underfoot in the house without hectorin'
you. Choose a girl same's you would a horse that you want to hitch up into a span; 't ain't
every two that'll stan' together without kickin'. When you get the right girl, keep out of
her way consid'able an' there'll be less wear an' tear."

It was June and the countryside was so beautiful it seemed as if no one could be unhappy, however
great the cause. That was what Waitstill Baxter thought as she sat down on the millstone step
for a word with the old joiner, her best and most understanding friend in all the village.

"I've come to do my mending here with you," she said brightly, as she took out her well-filled
basket and threaded her needle. "Isn't it a wonderful morning? Nobody could look the world
in the face and do a wrong thing on such a day, could they, Uncle Bart?"

The meadows were a waving mass of golden buttercups; the shallow water at the river's edge
just below the shop was blue with spikes of arrow-weed; a bunch of fragrant water-lilies, gathered
from the mill-pond's upper levels, lay beside Waitstill's mending-basket, and every foot of
roadside and field within sight was swaying with long-stemmed white and gold daisies. The June
grass, the friendly, humble, companionable grass, that no one ever praises as they do the flowers,
was a rich emerald green, a velvet carpet fit for the feet of the angels themselves. And the
elms and maples! Was there ever such a year for richness of foliage? And the sky, was it ever
so blue or so clear, so far away, or so completely like heaven, as you looked at its reflection
in the glassy surface of the river?

"Yes, it's a pretty good day," allowed Uncle Bart judicially as he took a squint at his T-square.
"I don' know's I should want to start out an' try to beat it! The Lord can make a good many
kinds o' weather in the course of a year, but when He puts his mind on to it, an' kind o' gives
Himself a free hand, He can turn out a June morning that must make the Devil sick to his stomach
with envy! All the same, Waity, my cow ain't behavin' herself any better'n usual. She's been
rampagin' since sun-up. I've seen mother chasin' her out o' Mis' Day's garden-patch twice a'ready!--It
seems real good an' homey to see you settin' there sewin' while I'm workin' at the bench. Cephas
is down to the store, so I s'pose your father's off somewheres?"

Perhaps the June grass was a little greener, the buttercups yellower, the foliage more lacey,
the sky bluer, because Deacon Baxter had taken his luncheon in a pail under the wagon seat,
and departed on an unwilling journey to Moderation, his object being to press the collection
of some accounts too long overdue. There was something tragic in the fact, Waitstill thought,
that whenever her father left the village for a whole day, life at once grew brighter, easier,
more hopeful. One could breathe freely, speak one's heart out, believe in the future, when
father was away.

The girls had harbored many delightful plans at early breakfast. As it was Saturday, Patty
could catch little Rod Boynton, if he came to the bridge on errands as usual; and if Ivory
could spare him for an hour at noon they would take their luncheon and eat it together on the
river-bank as Patty had promised him. At the last moment, however, Deacon Baxter had turned
around in the wagon and said: "Patience, you go down to the store and have a regular house-cleanin'
in the stock-room. Git Cephas to lift what you can't lift yourself, move everything in the
place, sweep and dust it, scrub the floor, wash the winder, and make room for the new stuff
that they'll bring up from Mill-town 'bout noon. If you have any time left over, put new papers
on the shelves out front, and clean up and fix the show winder. Don't stand round gabbin' with
Cephas, and see't he don't waste time that's paid for by me. Tell him he might clean up the
terbaccer stains round the stove, black it, and cover it up for the summer if he ain't too
busy servin' cust'mers."

"The whole day spoiled!" wailed Patty, flinging herself down in the kitchen rocker. "Father's
powers of invention beat anything I ever saw! That stock-room could have been cleaned any time
this month and it's too heavy work for me anyway; it spoils my hands, grubbing around those
nasty, sticky, splintery boxes and barrels. Instead of being out of doors, I've got to be shut
up in that smelly, rummy, tobacco-y, salt-fishy, pepperminty place with Cephas Cole! He won't
have a pleasant morning, I can tell you! I shall snap his head off every time he speaks to me."

"So I would!" Waitstill answered composedly. "Everything is so clearly his fault that I certainly
would work off my temper on Cephas! Still, I can think of a way to make matters come out right.
I've got a great basket of mending that must be done, and you remember there's a choir rehearsal
for the new anthem this afternoon, but anyway I can help a little on the cleaning. Then you
can make Rodman do a few of the odd jobs, it will be a novelty to him; and Cephas will work
his fingers to the bone for you, as you well know, if you treat him like a human being."

"All right!" cried Patty joyously, her mood changing in an instant. "There's Rod coming over
the bridge now! Toss me my gingham apron and the scrubbing-brush, and the pail, and the tin
of soft soap, and the cleaning cloths; let's see, the broom's down there, so I've got everything.
If I wave a towel from the store, pack up luncheon for three. You come down and bring your
mending; then, when you see how I'm getting on, we can consult. I'm going to take the ten cents
I've saved and spend it in raisins. I can get a good many if Cephas gives me wholesale price,
with family discount subtracted from that. Cephas would treat me to candy in a minute, but
if I let him we'd have to ask him to the picnic! Good-bye!" And the volatile creature darted
down the hill singing, "There'll be something in heaven for children to do," at the top of
her healthy young lungs.

IX. CEPHAS SPEAKS

THE waving signal, a little later on, showed that Rodman could go to the picnic, the fact being
that he was having a holiday from eleven o'clock until two, and Ivory was going to drive to
the bridge at noon, anyway, so his permission could then be asked.

Patty's mind might have been thought entirely on her ugly task as she swept and dusted and
scrubbed that morning, but the reverse was true. Mark Wilson had gone away without saying good-bye
to her. This was not surprising, perhaps, as she was about as much sequestered in her hilltop
prison as a Turkish beauty in a harem; neither was it astonishing that Mark did not write to
her. He never had written to her, and as her father always brought home the very infrequent
letters that came to the family, Mark knew that any sentimental correspondence would be fraught
with danger. No, everything was probably just as it should be, and yet,--well, Patty had expected
during the last three weeks that something would happen to break up the monotony of her former
existence. She hardly knew what it would be, but the kiss dropped so lightly on her cheek by
Mark Wilson still burned in remembrance, and made her sure that it would have a sequel, or
an explanation.

Mark's sister Ellen and Phil Perry were in the midst of some form of lover's quarrel, and during
its progress Phil was paying considerable attention to Patty at Sabbath School and prayer-meeting,
occasions, it must be confessed, only provocative of very indirect and long-distance advances.
Cephas Cole, to the amazement of every one but his (constitutionally) exasperated mother, was
"toning down" the ell of the family mansion, mitigating the lively yellow, and putting another
fresh coat of paint on it, for no conceivable reason save that of pleasing the eye of a certain
capricious, ungrateful young hussy, who would probably say, when her verdict was asked, that
she didn't see any particular difference in it, one way or another.

Trade was not especially brisk at the Deacon's emporium this sunny June Saturday morning. Cephas
may have possibly lost a customer or two by leaving the store vacant while he toiled and sweated
for Miss Patience Baxter in the stockroom at the back, overhanging the river, but no man alive
could see his employer's lovely daughter tugging at a keg of shingle nails without trying to
save her from a broken back, although Cephas could have watched his mother move the house and
barn without feeling the slightest anxiety in her behalf. If he could ever get the "heft" of
the "doggoned" cleaning out of the way so that Patty's mind could be free to entertain his
proposition; could ever secure one precious moment of silence when she was not slatting and
banging, pushing and pulling things about, her head and ears out of sight under a shelf, and
an irritating air of absorption about her whole demeanor; if that moment of silence could ever,
under Providence, be simultaneous with the absence of customers in the front shop, Cephas intended
to offer himself to Patience Baxter that very morning.

Once, during a temporary lull in the rear, he started to meet his fate when Rodman Boynton
followed him into the back room, and the boy was at once set to work by Patty, who was the
most consummate slave-driver in the State of Maine. After half an hour there was another Heavensent
chance, when Rodman went up to Uncle Bart's shop with a message for Waitstill, but, just then,
in came Bill Morrill, a boy of twelve, with a request for a gallon of molasses; and would Cephas
lend him a stone jug over Sunday, for his mother had hers soakin' out in soap-suds 'cause 't
wa'n't smellin' jest right. Bill's message given, he hurried up the road on another errand,
promising to call for the molasses later.

Cephas put the gallon measure under the spigot of the molasses hogshead and turned on the tap.
The task was going to be a long one and he grew impatient, for the stream was only a slender
trickle, scarcely more than the slow dripping of drops, so the molasses must be very never
low, and with his mind full of weightier affairs he must make a note to tell the Deacon to
broach a new hogshead. Cephas feared that he could never make out a full gallon, in which case
Mrs. Morrill would be vexed, for she kept mill boarders and baked quantities of brown bread
and gingerbread and molasses cookies for over Sunday. He did wish trade would languish altogether
on this particular morning. The minutes dragged by and again there was perfect quiet in the
stock-room. As the door opened, Cephas, taking his last chance, went forward to meet Patty,
who was turning down the skirt of her dress, taking the cloth off her head, smoothing her hair,
and tying on a clean white ruffed apron, in which she looked as pretty as a pink.

"Patty!" stammered Cephas, seizing his golden opportunity, "Patty, keep your mind on me for
a minute. I've put a new coat o' paint on the ell just to please you; won't you get married
and settle down with me? I love you so I can't eat nor drink nor 'tend store nor nothin'!"

"Oh, I--I--couldn't, Cephas, thank you; I just couldn't,--don't ask me," cried Patty, as nervous
as Cephas himself now that her first offer had really come; "I'm only seventeen and I don't
feel like settling down, Cephas, and father wouldn't think of letting me get married."

"Don't play tricks on me, Patty, and keep shovin' me off so, an' givin' wrong reasons," pleaded
Cephas. "What's the trouble with me? I know mother's temper's onsartain, but we never need
go into the main house daytimes and father'd allers stand up ag'in' her if she didn't treat
you right. I've got a good trade and father has a hundred dollars o' my savin's that I can
draw out to-morrer if you'll have me."

"I can't, Cephas; don't move; stay where you are; no, don't come any nearer; I'm not fond of
you that way, and, besides,--and, besides--"

Her blush and her evident embarrassment gave Cephas a new fear.

"You ain't promised a'ready, be you?" he asked anxiously; "when there ain't a feller anywheres
around that's ever stepped foot over your father's doorsill but jest me?"

"I haven't promised anything or anybody,"

Patty answered sedately, gaining her self-control by degrees, "but I won't deny that I'm considering;
that's true!"

"Considerin' who?" asked Cephas, turning pale.

"Oh,--SEVERAL, if you must know the truth"; and Patty's tone was cruel in its jauntiness.

"SEVERAL!" The word did not sound like ordinary work-a-day Riverboro English in Cephas's ears.
He knew that "several" meant more than one, but he was too stunned to define the term properly
in its present strange connection.

"Whoever 't is wouldn't do any better by you'n I would. I'd take a lickin' for you any day,"
Cephas exclaimed abjectly, after a long pause.

"That wouldn't make any difference, Cephas," said Patty firmly, moving towards the front door
as if to end the interview. "If I don't love you UNlicked, I couldn't love you any better licked,
now, could I?--Goodness gracious, what am I stepping in? Cephas, quick! Something has been
running all over the floor. My feet are sticking to it."

"Good Gosh! It's Mis' Morrill's molasses!" cried Cephas, brought to his senses suddenly.

It was too true! Whatever had been the small obstruction in the tap, it had disappeared. The
gallon measure had been filled to the brim ten minutes before, and ever since, the treacly
liquid had been overflowing the top and spreading in a brown flood, unnoticed, over the floor.
Patty's feet were glued to it, her buff calico skirts lifted high to escape harm.

"I can't move," she cried. "Oh! You stupid, stupid Cephas, how could you leave the molasses
spigot turned on? See what you've done! You've wasted quarts and quarts! What will father say,
and how will you ever clean up such a mess? You never can get the floor to look so that he
won't notice it, and he is sure to miss the molasses. You've ruined my shoes, and I simply
can't bear the sight of you!"

At this Cephas all but blubbered in the agony of his soul. It was bad enough to be told by
Patty that she was "considering several," but his first romance had ended in such complete
disaster that he saw in a vision his life blasted; changed in one brief moment from that of
a prosperous young painter to that of a blighted and despised bungler, whose week's wages were
likely to be expended in molasses to make good the Deacon's loss.

"Find those cleaning-cloths I left in the hack room," ordered Patty with a flashing eye. "Get
some blocks, or bits of board, or stones, for me to walk on, so that I can get out of your
nasty mess. Fill Bill Morrill's jug, quick, and set it out on the steps for him to pick up.
I don't know what you'd do without me to plan for you! Lock the front door and hang father's
sign that he's gone to dinner on the doorknob. Scoop up all the molasses you can with one of
those new trowels on the counter. Scoop, and scrape, and scoop, and scrape; then put a cloth
on your oldest broom, pour lots of water on, pail after pail, and swab! When you've swabbed
till it won't do any more good, then scrub! After that, I shouldn't wonder if you had to fan
the floor with a newspaper or it'll never get dry before father comes home. I'll sit on the
flour barrel a little while and advise, but I can't stay long because I'm going to a picnic.
Hurry up and don't look as if you were going to die any minute! It's no use crying over spilt
molasses. You don't suppose I'm going to tell any tales after you've made me an offer of marriage,
do you? I'm not so mean as all that, though I may have my faults."

It was nearly two o'clock before the card announcing Deacon Baxter's absence at dinner was
removed from the front doorknob, and when the store was finally reopened for business it was
a most dejected clerk who dealt out groceries to the public. The worst feature of the affair
was that every one in the two villages suddenly and contemporaneously wanted molasses, so that
Cephas spent the afternoon reviewing his misery by continually turning the tap and drawing
off the fatal liquid. Then, too, every inquisitive boy in the neighborhood came to the back
of the store to view the operation, exclaiming: "What makes the floor so wet? Hain't been spillin'
molasses, have yer? Bet yer have! Good joke on Old Foxy!"

X. ON TORY HILL

It had been a heavenly picnic the little trio all agreed as to that; and when Ivory saw the
Baxter girls coming up the shady path that led along the river from the Indian Cellar to the
bridge, it was a merry group and a transfigured Rodman that caught his eye. The boy, trailing
on behind with the baskets and laden with tin dippers and wildflowers, seemed another creature
from the big-eyed, quiet little lad he saw every day. He had chattered like a magpie, eaten
like a bear, is torn his jacket getting wild columbines for Patty, been nicely darned by Waitstill,
and was in a state of hilarity that rendered him quite unrecognizable.

"We've had a lovely picnic!" called Patty; "I wish you had been with us!"

"You didn't ask me!" smiled Ivory, picking up Waitstill's mending-basket from the nook in the
trees where she had hidden it for safe-keeping.

"We've played games, Ivory," cried the boy. "Patty made them up herself. First we had the 'Landing
of the Pilgrims,' and Waitstill made believe be the figurehead of the Mayflower. Then Patty
was Pocahontas and I was Cap'n John Smith, and look, we are all dressed up for the Indian wedding!"

Waitstill had on a crown of white birch bark and her braid of hair, twined with running ever-green,
fell to her waist. Patty was wreathed with columbines and decked with some turkey feathers
that she had put in her basket as too pretty to throw away. Waitstill looked rather conscious
in her unusual finery, but Patty sported it with the reckless ease and innocent vanity that
characterized her.

"I shall have to run into father's store to put myself tidy," Waitstill said, "so good-bye,
Rodman, we'll have another picnic some day. Patty, you must do the chores this afternoon, you
know, so that I can go to choir rehearsal."

Rodman and Patty started up the hill gayly with their burdens, and Ivory walked by Waitstill's
side as she pulled off her birch-bark crown and twisted her braid around her head with a heightened
color at being watched.

"I'll say good-bye now, Ivory, but I'll see you at the meeting-house," she said, as she neared
the store. "I'll go in here and brush the pine needles off, wash my hands, and rest a little
before rehearsal. That's a puzzling anthem we have for to-morrow."

"I have my horse here; let me drive you up to the church."

"I can't, Ivory, thank you. Father's orders are against my driving out with any one, you know."

"Very well, the road is free, at any rate. I'll hitch my horse down here in the woods somewhere
and when you start to walk I shall follow and catch up with you. There's luckily only one way
to reach the church from here, and your father can't blame us if we both take it!"

And so it fell out that Ivory and Waitstill walked together in the cool of the afternoon to
the meeting-house on Tory Hill. Waitstill kept the beaten path on one side and Ivory that on
the other, so that the width of the country road, deep in dust, was between them, yet their
nearness seemed so tangible a thing that each could feel the heart beating in the other's side.
Their talk was only that of tried friends, a talk interrupted by long beautiful silences; silences
that come only to a man and woman whose understanding of each other is beyond question and
answer. Not a sound broke the stillness, yet the very air, it seemed to them, was shedding
meanings: the flowers were exhaling a love secret with their fragrances, the birds were singing
it boldly from the tree-tops, yet no word passed the man's lips or the girl's. Patty would
have hung out all sorts of signals and lures to draw the truth from Ivory and break through
the walls of his self-control, but Waitstill, never; and Ivory Boynton was made of stuff so
strong that he would not speak a syllable of love to a woman unless he could say all. He was
only five-and-twenty, but he had been reared in a rigorous school, and had learned in its poverty,
loneliness, and anxiety lessons of self-denial and self-control that bore daily fruit now.
He knew that Deacon Baxter would never allow any engagement to exist between Waitstill and
himself; he also knew that Waitstill would never defy and disobey her father if it meant leaving
her younger sister to fight alone a dreary battle for which she was not fitted. If there was
little hope on her side there seemed even less on his. His mother's mental illness made her
peculiarly dependent upon him, and at the same time held him in such strict bondage that it
was almost impossible for him to get on in the world or even to give her the comforts she needed.
In villages like Riverboro in those early days there was no putting away, even of men or women
so demented as to be something of a menace to the peace of the household; but Lois Boynton
was so gentle, so fragile, so exquisite a spirit, that she seemed in her sad aloofness simply
a thing to be sheltered and shielded somehow in her difficult life journey. Ivory often thought
how sorely she needed a daughter in her affliction. If the baby sister had only lived, the
home might have been different; but alas! there was only a son,--a son who tried to be tender
and sympathetic, but after all was nothing but a big, clumsy, uncomprehending man-creature,
who ought to be felling trees, ploughing, sowing, reaping, or at least studying law, making
his own fortune and that of some future wife. Old Mrs. Mason, a garrulous, good-hearted grandame,
was their only near neighbor, and her visits always left his mother worse rather than better.
How such a girl as Waitstill would pour comfort and beauty and joy into a lonely house like
his, if only he were weak enough to call upon her strength and put it to so cruel a test. God
help him, he would never do that, especially as he could not earn enough to keep a larger family,
bound down as he was by inexorable responsibilities. Waitstill, thus far in life, had suffered
many sorrows and enjoyed few pleasures; marriage ought to bring her freedom and plenty, not
carking care and poverty. He stole long looks at the girl across the separating space that
was so helpless to separate,--feeding his starved heart upon her womanly graces. Her quick,
springing step was in harmony with the fire and courage of her mien. There was a line or two
in her face,--small wonder; but an "unconquerable soul" shone in her eyes; shone, too, in no
uncertain way, but brightly and steadily, expressing an unshaken joy in living. Valiant, splendid,
indomitable Waitstill! He could never tell her, alas! but how he gloried in her!

It is needless to say that no woman could be the possessor of such a love as Ivory Boynton's
and not know of its existence. Waitstill never heard a breath of it from Ivory's lips; even
his eyes were under control and confessed nothing; nor did his hand ever clasp hers, to show
by a tell-tale touch the truth he dared not utter; nevertheless she felt that she was beloved.
She hid the knowledge deep in her heart and covered it softly from every eye but her own; taking
it out in the safe darkness sometimes to wonder over and adore in secret. Did her love for
Ivory rest partly on a sense of vocation?--a profound, inarticulate divining of his vast need
of her? He was so strong, yet so weak because of the yoke he bore, so bitterly alone in his
desperate struggle with life, that her heart melted like wax whenever she thought of him. When
she contemplated the hidden mutiny in her own heart, she was awestruck sometimes at the almost
divine patience of Ivory's conduct as a son.

"How is your mother this summer, Ivory?" she asked as they sat down on the meeting-house steps
waiting for Jed Morrill to open the door. "There is little change in her from year to year,
Waitstill.--By the way, why don't we get out of this afternoon sun and sit in the old graveyard
under the trees? We are early and the choir won't get here for half an hour.--Dr. Perry says
that he does not understand mother's case in the least, and that no one but some great Boston
physician could give a proper opinion on it; of course, that is impossible at present."

They sat down on the grass underneath one of the elms and Waitstill took off her hat and leaned
back against the tree-trunk.

"Tell me more," she said; "it is so long since we talked together quietly and we have never
really spoken of your mother."

"Of course," Ivory continued, "the people of the village all think and speak of mother's illness
as religious insanity, but to me it seems nothing of the sort. I was only a child when father
first fell ill with Jacob Cochrane, but I was twelve when father went away from home on his
'mission,' and if there was any one suffering from delusions in our family it was he, not mother.
She had altogether given up going to the Cochrane meetings, and I well remember the scene when
my father told her of the revelation he had received about going through the state and into
New Hampshire in order to convert others and extend the movement. She had no sympathy with
his self-imposed mission, you may be sure, though now she goes back in her memory to the earlier
days of her married life, when she tried hard, poor soul, to tread the same path that father
was treading, so as to be by his side at every turn of the road.

"I am sure" (here Ivory's tone was somewhat dry and satirical) "that father's road had many
turns, Waitstill! He was a schoolmaster in Saco, you know, when I was born but he soon turned
from teaching to preaching, and here my mother followed with entire sympathy, for she was intensely,
devoutly religious. I said there was little change in her, but there is one new symptom. She
has ceased to refer to her conversion to Cochranism as a blessed experience. Her memory of
those first days seems to have faded, As to her sister's death and all the circumstances of
her bringing Rodman home, her mind is a blank. Her expectation of father's return, on the other
hand, is much more intense than ever."

"She must have loved your father dearly, Ivory, and to lose him in this terrible way is much
worse than death. Uncle Bart says he had a great gift of language!"

"Yes, and it was that, in my mind, that led him astray. I fear that the Spirit of God was never
so strong in father as the desire to influence people by his oratory. That was what drew him
to preaching in the first place, and when he found in Jacob Cochrane a man who could move an
audience to frenzy, lift them out of the body, and do with their spirits as he willed, he acknowledged
him as master. Whether his gospel was a pure and undefiled religion I doubt, but he certainly
was a master of mesmeric control. My mother was beguiled, entranced, even bewitched at first,
I doubt not, for she translated all that Cochrane said into her own speech, and regarded him
as the prophet of a new era. But Cochrane's last 'revelations' differed from the first, and
were of the earth, earthy. My mother's pure soul must have revolted, but she was not strong
enough to drag father from his allegiance. Mother was of better family than father, but they
were both well educated and had the best schooling to be had in their day. So far as I can
judge, mother always had more 'balance' than father, and much better judgment,--yet look at
her now!"

"Then you think it was your father's disappearance that really caused her mind to waver?" asked
Waitstill.

"I do, indeed. I don't know what happened between them in the way of religious differences,
nor how much unhappiness these may have caused. I remember she had an illness when we first
came here to live and I was a little chap of three or four, but that was caused by the loss
of a child, a girl, who lived only a few weeks. She recovered perfectly, and her head was as
clear as mine for a year or two after father went away. As his letters grew less frequent,
as news of him gradually ceased to come, she became more and more silent, and retired more
completely into herself. She never went anywhere, nor entertained visitors, because she did
not wish to hear the gossip and speculation that were going on in the village. Some of it was
very hard for a wife to bear, and she resented it indignantly; yet never received a word from
father with which to refute it. At this time, as nearly as I can judge, she was a recluse,
and subject to periods of profound melancholy, but nothing worse. Then she took that winter
journey to her sister's deathbed, brought home the boy, and, hastened by exposure and chill
and grief, I suppose, her mind gave way,--that's all!" And Ivory sighed drearily as he stretched
himself on the greensward, and looked off towards the snow-clad New Hampshire hills. "I've
meant to write the story of the 'Cochrane craze' sometime, or such part of it as has to do
with my family history, and you shall read it if you like. I should set down my child-hood
and my boyhood memories, together with such scraps of village hearsay as seem reliable. You
were not so much younger than I, but I was in the thick of the excitement, and naturally I
heard more than you, having so bitter a reason for being interested. Jacob Cochrane has altogether
disappeared from public view, but there's many a family in Maine and New Hampshire, yes, and
in the far West, that will feel his influence for years to come."

"I should like very much to read your account. Aunt Abby's version, for instance, is so different
from Uncle Bart's that one can scarcely find the truth between the two; and father's bears
no relation to that of any of the others."

"Some of us see facts and others see visions," replied Ivory, "and these differences of opinion
crop up in the village every day when anything noteworthy is discussed. I came upon a quotation
in my reading last evening that described it:

     'One said it thundered... another that an angel spake'"

"Do you feel as if your father was dead, Ivory?"

"I can only hope so! That thought brings sadness with it, as one remembers his disappointment
and failure, but if he is alive he is a traitor."

There was a long pause and they could see in the distance Humphrey Barker with his clarionet
and Pliny Waterhouse with his bass viol driving up to the churchyard fence to hitch their horses.
The sun was dipping low and red behind the Town-House Hill on the other side of the river.

"What makes my father dislike the very mention of yours?" asked Waitstill. "I know what they
say: that it is because the two men had high words once in a Cochrane meeting, when father
tried to interfere with some of the exercises and was put out of doors. It doesn't seem as
if that grievance, seventeen or eighteen years ago, would influence his opinion of your mother,
or of you."

"It isn't likely that a man of your father's sort would forget or forgive what he considered
an injury; and in refusing to have anything to do with the son of a disgraced man and a deranged
woman, he is well within his rights."

Ivory's cheeks burned red under the tan, and his hand trembled a little as he plucked bits
of clover from the grass and pulled them to pieces absent-mindedly. "How are you getting on
at home these days, Waitstill?" he asked, as if to turn his own mind and hers from a too painful
subject.

"You have troubles enough of your own without hearing mine, Ivory, and anyway they are not
big afflictions, heavy sorrows, like those you have to bear. Mine are just petty, nagging,
sordid, cheap little miseries, like gnat-bites;--so petty and so sordid that I can hardly talk
to God about them, much less to a human friend. Patty is my only outlet and I need others,
yet I find it almost impossible to escape from the narrowness of my life and be of use to any
one else." The girl's voice quivered and a single tear-drop on her cheek showed that she was
speaking from a full heart. "This afternoon's talk has determined me in one thing," she went
on. "I am going to see your mother now and then. I shall have to do it secretly, for your sake,
for hers, and for my own, but if I am found out, then I will go openly. There must be times
when one can break the lower law, and yet keep the higher. Father's law, in this case, is the
lower, and I propose to break it."

"I can't have you getting into trouble, Waitstill," Ivory objected. "You're the one woman I
can think of who might help my mother; all the same, I would not make your life harder; not
for worlds!"

"It will not be harder, and even if it was I should 'count it all joy' to help a woman bear
such sorrow as your mother endures patiently day after day"; and Waitstill rose to her feet
and tied on her hat as one who had made up her mind.

It was almost impossible for Ivory to hold his peace then, so full of gratitude was his soul
and so great his longing to pour out the feeling that flooded it. He pulled himself together
and led the way out of the churchyard. To look at Waitstill again would be to lose his head,
but to his troubled heart there came a flood of light, a glory from that lamp that a woman
may hold up for a man; a glory that none can take from him, and none can darken; a light by
which he may walk and live and die.

XI. A JUNE SUNDAY

IT was a Sunday in June, and almost the whole population of Riverboro and Edgewood was walking
or driving in the direction of the meeting-house on Tory Hill.

Church toilettes, you may well believe, were difficult of attainment by Deacon Baxter's daughters,
as they had been by his respective helpmates in years gone by. When Waitstill's mother first
asked her husband to buy her a new dress, and that was two years after marriage, he simply
said: "You look well enough; what do you want to waste money on finery for, these hard times?
If other folks are extravagant, that ain't any reason you should be. You ain't obliged to take
your neighbors for an example:--take 'em for a warnin'!"

"But, Foxwell, my Sunday dress is worn completely to threads," urged the second Mrs. Baxter.

"That's what women always say; they're all alike; no more idea o' savin' anything than a skunk-blackbird!
I can't spare any money for gew-gaws, and you might as well understand it first as last. Go
up attic and open the hair trunk by the winder; you'll find plenty there to last you for years
to come."

The second Mrs. Baxter visited the attic as commanded, and in turning over the clothes in the
old trunk, knew by instinct that they had belonged to her predecessor in office. Some of the
dresses were neat, though terribly worn and faded, but all were fortunately far too short and
small for a person of her fine proportions. Besides, her very soul shrank from wearing them,
and her spirit revolted both from the insult to herself and to the poor dead woman she had
succeeded, so she came downstairs to darn and mend and patch again her shabby wardrobe. Waitstill
had gone through the same as her mother before her, but in despair, when she was seventeen,
she began to cut over the old garments for herself and Patty. Mercifully there were very few
of them, and they had long since been discarded. At eighteen she had learned to dye yarns with
yellow oak or maple bark and to make purples from elder and sumac berries; she could spin and
knit as well as any old "Aunt" of the village, and cut and shape a garment as deftly as the
Edgewood tailoress, but the task of making bricks without straw was a hard one, indeed.

She wore a white cotton frock on this particular Sunday. It was starched and ironed with a
beautiful gloss, while a touch of distinction was given to her costume by a little black sleeveless
"roundabout" made out of the covering of an old silk umbrella. Her flat hat had a single wreath
of coarse daisies around the crown, and her mitts were darned in many places, nevertheless
you could not entirely spoil her; God had used a liberal hand in making her, and her father's
parsimony was a sort of boomerang that flew back chiefly upon himself.

As for Patty, her style of beauty, like Cephas Cole's ell had to be toned down rather than
up, to be effective, but circumstances had been cruelly unrelenting in this process of late.
Deacon Baxter had given the girls three or four shopworn pieces of faded yellow calico that
had been repudiated by the village housewives as not "fast" enough in color to bear the test
of proper washing. This had made frocks, aprons, petticoats, and even underclothes, for two
full years, and Patty's weekly objurgations when she removed her everlasting yellow dress from
the nail where it hung were not such as should have fallen from the lips of a deacon's daughter.
Waitstill had taken a piece of the same yellow material, starched and ironed it, cut a curving,
circular brim from it, sewed in a pleated crown, and lo! a hat for Patty! What inspired Patty
to put on a waist ribbon of deepest wine color, with a little band of the same on the pale
yellow hat, no one could say.

"Do you think you shall like that dull red right close to the yellow, Patty?" Waitstill asked
anxiously.

"It looks all right on the columbines in the Indian Cellar," replied Patty, turning and twisting
the hat on her head. "If we can't get a peek at the Boston fashions, we must just find our
styles where we can!"

The various roads to Tory Hill were alive with vehicles on this bright Sunday morning. Uncle
Bart and Abel Day, with their respective wives on the back seat of the Cole's double wagon,
were passed by Deacon Baxter and his daughters, Waitstill being due at meeting earlier than
others by reason of her singing in the choir. The Deacon's one-horse, two-wheeled "shay" could
hold three persons, with comfort on its broad seat, and the twenty-year-old mare, although
she was always as hollow as a gourd, could generally do the mile, uphill all the way, in half
an hour, if urged continually, and the Deacon, be it said, if not good at feeding, was unsurpassed
at urging.

Aunt Abby Cole could get only a passing glimpse of Patty in the depths of the "shay," but a
glimpse was always enough for her, as her opinion of the girl's charms was considerably affected
by the forlorn condition of her son Cephas, whom she suspected of being hopelessly in love
with the young person aforesaid, to whom she commonly alluded as "that red-headed bag-gage."

"Patience Baxter's got the kind of looks that might do well enough at a tavern dance, or a
husking, but they're entirely unsuited to the Sabbath day or the meetin'-house," so Aunt Abby
remarked to Mrs. Day in the way of backseat confidence. "It's unfortunate that a deacon's daughter
should be afflicted with that bold style of beauty! Her hair's all but red; in fact, you might
as well call it red, when the sun shines on it: but if she'd ever smack it down with bear's
grease she might darken it some; or anyhow she'd make it lay slicker; but it's the kind of
hair that just matches that kind of a girl,--sort of up an' comin'! Then her skin's so white
and her cheeks so pink and her eyes so snappy that she'd attract attention without half trying
though I guess she ain't above makin' an effort."

"She's innocent as a kitten," observed Mrs. Day impartially.

"Oh, yes, she's innocent enough an' I hope she'll keep so! Waitstill's a sight han'somer, if
the truth was told; but she's the sort of girl that's made for one man and the rest of em never
look at her. The other one's cut out for the crowd, the more the merrier. She's a kind of man-trap,
that girl is!--Do urge the horse a little mite, Bartholomew! It makes me kind o' hot to be
passed by Deacon Baxter. It's Missionary Sunday, too, when he gen'ally has rheumatism too bad
to come out."

"I wonder if he ever puts anything into the plate," said Mrs. Day. "No one ever saw him, that
I know of."

"The Deacon keeps the Thou Shalt Not commandments pretty well," was Aunt Abby's terse response.
"I guess he don't put nothin' into the plate, but I s'pose we'd ought to be thankful he don't
take nothin' out. The Baptists are gettin' ahead faster than they'd ought to, up to the Mills.
Our minister ain't no kind of a proselyter, Seems as if he didn't care how folks got to heaven
so long as they got there! The other church is havin' a service this afternoon side o' the
river, an' I'd kind o' like to go, except it would please 'em too much to have a crowd there
to see the immersion. They tell me, but I don't know how true, that that Tillman widder woman
that come here from somewheres in Vermont wanted to be baptized to-day, but the other converts
declared THEY wouldn't be, if she was!"

"Jed Morrill said they'd have to hold her under water quite a spell to do any good," chuckled
Uncle Bart from the front seat.

"Well, I wouldn't repeat it, Bartholomew, on the Sabbath day; not if he did say it. Jed Morrill's
responsible for more blasphemious jokes than any man in Edgewood. I don't approve of makin'
light of anybody's religious observances if they're ever so foolish," said Aunt Abby somewhat
enigmatically. "Our minister keeps remindin' us that the Baptists and Methodists are our brethren,
but I wish he'd be a little more anxious to have our S'ceity keep ahead of the others."

"Jed's 'bout right in sizin' up the Widder Tillman," was Mr. Day's timid contribution to the
argument. "I ain't a readin' man, but from what folks report I should think she was one o'
them critters that set on rocks bewilderin' an' bedevilin' men-folks out o' their senses--SYREENS,
I think they call 'em; a reg'lar SYREEN is what that woman is, I guess!"

"There, there, Abel, you wouldn't know a syreen if you found one in your baked beans, so don't
take away a woman's character on hearsay." And Mrs. Day, having shut up her husband as was
her bounden duty as a wife and a Christian, tied her bonnet strings a little tighter and looked
distinctly pleased with herself.

"Abel ain't startin' any new gossip," was Aunt Abby's opinion, as she sprung to his rescue.
"One or two more holes in a colander don't make much dif'rence.--Bartholomew, we're certainly
goin' to be late this mornin'; we're about the last team on the road"; and Aunt Abby glanced
nervously behind. "Elder Boone ain't begun the openin' prayer, though, or we should know it.
You can hear him pray a mile away, when the wind's right. I do hate to be late to meetin'.
The Elder allers takes notice; the folks in the wing pews allers gapes an' stares, and the
choir peeks through the curtain, takin' notes of everything you've got on your back. I hope
to the land they'll chord and keep together a little mite better 'n they've done lately, that's
all I can say! If the Lord is right in our midst as the Bible says, He can't think much of
our singers this summer!"

"They're improvin', now that Pliny Waterhouse plays his fiddle," Mrs. Day remarked pacifically.
"There was times in the anthem when they kept together consid'able well last Sunday. They didn't
always chord, but there, they chorded some!--we're most there now, Abby, don't fret! Cephas
won't ring the last bell till he knows his own folks is crossin' the Common!"

Those were days of conscientious church-going and every pew in the house was crowded. The pulpit
was built on pillars that raised it six feet higher than the floor; the top was cushioned and
covered with red velvet surmounted by a huge gilt-edged Bible. There was a window in the tower
through which Cephas Cole could look into the church, and while tolling the bell could keep
watch for the minister. Always exactly on time, he would come in, walk slowly up the right-hand
aisle, mount the pulpit stairs, enter and close the door after him. Then Cephas would give
one tremendous pull to warn loiterers on the steps; a pull that meant, "Parson's in the pulpit!"
and was acted upon accordingly. Opening the big Bible, the minister raised his right hand impressively,
and saying, "Let us pray," the whole congregation rose in their pews with a great rustling
and bowed their heads devoutly for the invocation.

Next came the hymn, generally at that day one of Isaac Watts's. The singers, fifteen or twenty
in number, sat in a raised gallery opposite the pulpit, and there was a rod in front hung with
red curtains to hide them when sitting down. Any one was free to join, which perhaps accounted
for Aunt Abby's strictures as to time and tune. Jed Morrill, "blasphemious" as he was considered
by that acrimonious lady, was the leader, and a good one, too. There would be a great whispering
and buzzing when Deacon Sumner with his big fiddle and Pliny Waterhouse with his smaller one
would try to get in accord with Humphrey Baker and his clarionet. All went well when Humphrey
was there to give the sure key-note, but in his absence Jed Morrill would use his tuning-fork.
When the key was finally secured by all concerned, Jed would raise his stick, beat one measure
to set the time, and all joined in, or fell in, according to their several abilities. It was
not always a perfect thing in the way of a start, but they were well together at the end of
the first line, and when, as now, the choir numbered a goodly number of voices, and there were
three or four hundred in the pews, nothing more inspiring in its peculiar way was ever heard,
than the congregational singing of such splendid hymns as "Old Hundred," "Duke Street," or
"Coronation."

Waitstill led the trebles, and Ivory was at the far end of the choir in the basses, but each
was conscious of the other's presence. This morning he could hear her noble voice rising a
little above, or, perhaps from its quality, separating itself somehow, ever so little, from
the others. How full of strength and hope it was, her voice! How steadfast to the pitch; how
golden its color; how moving in its crescendos! How the words flowed from her lips; not as
if they had been written years ago, but as if they were the expression of her own faith.

"There may be them in Boston that can sing louder, and they may be able to run up a little
higher than Waitstill, but the question is, could any of 'em make Aunt Abby Cole shed tears?"
This was Jed Morrill's tribute to his best soprano.

There were Sunday evening prayer-meetings, too, held at "early candlelight," when Waitstill
and Lucy Morrill would make a duet of "By cool Siloam's Shady Rill," or the favorite "Naomi,"
and the two fresh young voices, rising and falling in the tender thirds of the old tunes, melted
all hearts to new willingness of sacrifice.

   "Father, whate'er of earthly bliss
     Thy sov'reign will denies,
   Accepted at Thy Throne of grace
     Let this petition rise!

   "Give me a calm, a thankful heart,
     From every murmur free!
   The blessing of Thy grace impart
     And let me live to Thee!"

How Ivory loved to hear Waitstill sing these lines! How they eased his burden as they were
easing hers, falling on his impatient, longing heart like evening dew on thirsty grass!

XII. THE GREEN-EYED MONSTER

"WHILE Thee I seek, protecting Power," was the first hymn on this particular Sunday morning,
and it usually held Patty's rather vagrant attention to the end, though it failed to do so
to-day. The Baxters occupied one of the wing pews, a position always to be envied, as one could
see the singers without turning around, and also observe everybody in the congregation,--their
entrance, garments, behavior, and especially their bonnets,--without being in the least indiscreet,
or seeming to have a roving eye.

Lawyer Wilson's pew was the second in front of the Baxters in the same wing, and Patty, seated
decorously but unwillingly beside her father, was impatiently awaiting the entrance of the
family, knowing that Mark would be with them if he had returned from Boston. Timothy Grant,
the parish clerk, had the pew in between, and afforded a most edifying spectacle to the community,
as there were seven young Grants of a church-going age, and the ladies of the congregation
were always counting them, reckoning how many more were in their cradles at home and trying
to guess from Mrs. Grant's lively or chastened countenance whether any new ones had been born
since the Sunday before.

Patty settled herself comfortably, and put her foot on the wooden "cricket," raising her buff
calico a little on the congregation side, just enough to show an inch or two of petticoat.
The petticoat was as modestly long as the frock itself, and disclosing a bit of it was nothing
more heinous than a casual exhibition of good needlework. Deacon Baxter furnished only the
unbleached muslin for his daughters' undergarments; but twelve little tucks laboriously done
by hand, elaborate inch-wide edging, crocheted from white spool cotton, and days of bleaching
on the grass in the sun, will make a petticoat that can be shown in church with some justifiable
pride.

The Wilsons came up the aisle a moment later than was their usual habit, just after the parson
had ascended the pulpit. Mrs. Wilson always entered the pew first and sat in the far end. Patty
had looked at her admiringly, and with a certain feeling of proprietorship, for several Sundays.
There was obviously no such desirable mother-in-law in the meeting-house. Her changeable silk
dress was the latest mode; her shawl of black llama lace expressed wealth in every delicate
mesh, and her bonnet had a distinction that could only have emanated from Portland or Boston.
Ellen Wilson usually came in next, with as much of a smile to Patty in passing as she dared
venture in the Deacon's presence, and after her sidled in her younger sister Selina, commonly
called "Silly," and with considerable reason.

Mark had come home! Patty dared not look up, but she felt his approach behind the others, although
her eyes sought the floor, and her cheeks hung out signals of abashed but certain welcome.
She heard the family settle in their seats somewhat hastily, the click of the pew door and
the sound of Lawyer Wilson's cane as he stood it in the corner; then the parson rose to pray
and Patty closed her eyes with the rest of the congregation.

Opening them when Elder Boone rose to announce the hymn, they fell--amazed, resentful, uncomprehending--on
the spectacle of Mark Wilson finding the place in the book for a strange young woman who sat
beside him. Mark himself had on a new suit and wore a seal ring that Patty had never observed
before; while the dress, pelisse, and hat of the unknown were of a nature that no girl in Patty's
position, and particularly of Patty's disposition, could have regarded without a desire to
tear them from her person and stamp them underfoot; or better still, flaunt them herself and
show the world how they should be worn!

Mark found the place in the hymn-book for the--creature, shared it with her, and once, when
the Grant twins wriggled and Patty secured a better view, once, Mark shifted his hand on the
page so that his thumb touched that of his pretty neighbor, who did not remove hers as if she
found the proximity either unpleasant or improper. Patty compared her own miserable attire
with that of the hated rival in front, and also contrasted Lawyer Wilson's appearance with
that of her father; the former, well dressed in the style of a gentleman of the time, in broadcloth,
with fine linen, and a tall silk hat carefully placed on the floor of the pew; while Deacon
Baxter wore homespun made of wool from his own sheep, spun and woven, dyed and finished, at
the fulling-mill in the village, and carried a battered felt hat that had been a matter of
ridicule these dozen years. (The Deacon would be buried in two coats, Jed Morrill always said,
for he owned just that number, and would be too mean to leave either of 'em behind him!)

The sermon was fifty minutes long, time enough for a deal of thinking. Many a housewife, not
wholly orthodox, cut and made over all her children's clothes, in imagination; planned the
putting up of her fruit, the making of her preserves and pickles, and arranged her meals for
the next week, during the progress of those sermons. Patty watched the parson turn leaf after
leaf until the final one was reached. Then came the last hymn, when the people stretched their
aching limbs, and rising, turned their backs on the minister and faced the choir. Patty looked
at Waitstill and wished that she could put her throbbing head on her sisterly shoulder and
cry,--mostly with rage. The benediction was said, and with the final "Amen" the pews were opened
and the worshippers crowded into the narrow aisles and moved towards the doors.

Patty's plans were all made. She was out of her pew before the Wilsons could possibly leave
theirs, and in her progress down the aisle securely annexed her great admirer, old Dr. Perry,
as well as his son Philip. Passing the singing-seats she picked up the humble Cephas and carried
him along in her wake, chatting and talking with her little party while her father was at the
horse-sheds, making ready to go home between services as was his habit, a cold bite being always
set out on the kitchen table according to his orders. By means of these clever manoeuvres Patty
made herself the focus of attention when the Wilson party came out on the steps, and vouchsafed
Mark only a nonchalant nod, airily flinging a little greeting with the nod,--just a "How d'ye
do, Mark? Did you have a good time in Boston?"

Patty and Waitstill, with some of the girls who had come long distances, ate their luncheon
in a shady place under the trees behind the meeting-house, for there was an afternoon service
to come, a service with another long sermon. They separated after the modest meal to walk about
the Common or stray along the road to the Academy, where there was a fine view.

Two or three times during the summer the sisters always went quietly and alone to the Baxter
burying-lot, where three grassgrown graves lay beside one another, unmarked save by narrow
wooden slabs so short that the initials painted on them were almost hidden by the tufts of
clover. The girls had brought roots of pansies and sweet alyssum, and with a knife made holes
in the earth and planted them here and there to make the spot a trifle less forbidding. They
did not speak to each other during this sacred little ceremony; their hearts were too full
when they remembered afresh the absence of headstones, the lack of care, in the place where
the three women lay who had ministered to their father, borne him children, and patiently endured
his arbitrary and loveless rule. Even Cleve Flanders' grave,--the Edgewood shoemaker, who lay
next,--even his resting-place was marked and, with a touch of some one's imagination marked
by the old man's own lapstone twenty-five pounds in weight, a monument of his work-a-day life.

Waitstill rose from her feet, brushing the earth from her hands, and Patty did the same. The
churchyard was quiet, and they were alone with the dead, mourned and unmourned, loved and unloved.

"I planted one or two pansies on the first one's grave," said Waitstill soberly. "I don't know
why we've never done it before. There are no children to take notice of and remember her; it's
the least we can do, and, after all, she belongs to the family."

"There is no family, and there never was!" suddenly cried Patty. "Oh! Waity, Waity, we are
so alone, you and I! We've only each other in all the world, and I'm not the least bit of help
to you, as you are to me! I'm a silly, vain, conceited, ill-behaved thing, but I will be better,
I will! You won't ever give me up, will you, Waity, even if I'm not like you? I haven't been
good lately!"

"Hush, Patty, hush!" And Waitstill came nearer to her sister with a motherly touch of her hand.
"I'll not have you say such things; you that are the helpfullest and the lovingest girl that
ever was, and the cleverest, too, and the liveliest, and the best company-keeper!"

"No one thinks so but you!" Patty responded dolefully, although she wiped her eyes as if a
bit consoled.

It is safe to say that Patty would never have given Mark Wilson a second thought had he not
taken her to drive on that afternoon in early May. The drive, too, would have quickly fled
from her somewhat fickle memory had it not been for the kiss. The kiss was, indeed, a decisive
factor in the situation, and had shed a rosy, if somewhat fictitious light of romance over
the past three weeks. Perhaps even the kiss, had it never been repeated, might have lapsed
into its true perspective, in due course of time, had it not been for the sudden appearance
of the stranger in the Wilson pew. The moment that Patty's gaze fell upon that fashionably
dressed, instantaneously disliked girl, Marquis Wilson's stock rose twenty points in the market.
She ceased, in a jiffy, to weigh and consider and criticize the young man, but regarded him
with wholly new eyes. His figure was better than she had realized, his smile more interesting,
his manners more attractive, his eyelashes longer; in a word, he had suddenly grown desirable.
A month ago she could have observed, with idle and alien curiosity, the spectacle of his thumb
drawing nearer to another (feminine) thumb, on the page of the Watts and Select Hymn book;
now, at the morning service, she had wished nothing so much as to put Mark's thumb back into
his pocket where it belonged, and slap the girl's thumb smartly and soundly as it deserved.

The ignorant cause of Patty's distress was a certain Annabel Franklin, the daughter of a cousin
of Mrs. Wilson's. Mark had stayed at the Franklin house during his three weeks' visit in Boston,
where he had gone on business for his father. The young people had naturally seen much of each
other and Mark's inflammable fancy had been so kindled by Annabel's doll-like charms that he
had persuaded her to accompany him to his home and get a taste of country life in Maine. Such
is man, such is human nature, and such is life, that Mark had no sooner got the whilom object
of his affections under his own roof than she began to pall.

Annabel was twenty-three, and to tell the truth she had palled before, more than once. She
was so amiable, so well-finished,--with her smooth flaxen hair, her neat nose, her buttonhole
of a mouth, and her trim shape,--that she appealed to the opposite sex quite generally and
irresistibly as a worthy helpmate. The only trouble was that she began to bore her suitors
somewhat too early in the game, and they never got far enough to propose marriage. Flaws in
her apparent perfection appeared from day to day and chilled the growth of the various young
loves that had budded so auspiciously. She always agreed with everybody and everything in sight,
even to the point of changing her mind on the instant, if circumstances seemed to make it advisable.
Her instinctive point of view, when she went so far as to hold one, was somewhat cut and dried;
in a word, priggish. She kept a young man strictly on his good behavior, that much could be
said in her favor; the only criticism that could be made on this estimable trait was that no
bold youth was ever tempted to overstep the bounds of discretion when in her presence. No unruly
words of love ever rose to his lips; his hand never stole out involuntarily and imprudently
to meet her small chilly one; the sight of her waist never even suggested an encircling arm;
and as a fellow never desired to kiss her, she was never obliged to warn or rebuke or strike
him off her visiting list. Her father had an ample fortune and some one would inevitably turn
up who would regard Annabel as an altogether worthy and desirable spouse. That was what she
had seemed to Mark Wilson for a full week before he left the Franklin house in Boston, but
there were moments now when he regretted, fugitively, that he had ever removed her from her
proper sphere. She did not seem to fit in to the conditions of life in Edgewood, and it may
even be that her most glaring fault had been to describe Patty Baxter's hair at this very Sunday
dinner as "carroty," her dress altogether "dreadful," and her style of beauty "unladylike."
Ellen Wilson's feelings were somewhat injured by these criticisms of her intimate friend, and
in discussing the matter privately with her brother he was inclined to agree with her.

And thus, so little do we know of the prankishness of the blind god, thus was Annabel Franklin
working for her rival's best interests; and instead of reviling her in secret, and treating
her with disdain in public, Patty should have welcomed her cordially to all the delights of
Riverboro society.

XIII. HAYING-TIME

EVERYBODY in Riverboro, Edgewood, Milliken's Mills, Spruce Swamp, Duck Pond, and Moderation
was "haying." There was a perfect frenzy of haying, for it was the Monday after the "Fourth,"
the precise date in July when the Maine farmer said good-bye to repose, and "hayed" desperately
and unceasingly, until every spear of green in his section was mowed down and safely under
cover. If a man had grass of his own, he cut it, and if he had none, he assisted in cutting
that of some other man, for "to hay," although an unconventional verb, was, and still is, a
very active one, and in common circulation, although not used by the grammarians.

Whatever your trade, and whatever your profession, it counted as naught in good weather. The
fish-man stopped selling fish, the meat-man ceased to bring meat; the cobbler, as well as the
judge, forsook the bench; and even the doctor made fewer visits than usual. The wage for work
in the hay-fields was a high one, and every man, boy, and horse in a village was pressed into
service.

When Ivory Boynton had finished with his own small crop, he commonly went at once to Lawyer
Wilson, who had the largest acreage of hay-land in the township. Ivory was always in great
demand, for he was a mighty worker in the field, and a very giant at "pitching," being able
to pick up a fair-sized hay-cock at one stroke of the fork and fling it on to the cart as if
it were a feather. Lawyer Wilson always took a hand himself if signs of rain appeared, and
Mark occasionally visited the scene of action when a crowd in the field made a general jollification,
or when there was an impending thunderstorm. In such cases even women and girls joined the
workers and all hands bent together to the task of getting a load into the barn and covering
the rest.

Deacon Baxter was wont to call Mark Wilson a "worthless, whey-faced, lily-handed whelp," but
the description, though picturesque, was decidedly exaggerated. Mark disliked manual labor,
but having imbibed enough knowledge of law in his father's office to be an excellent clerk,
he much preferred travelling about, settling the details of small cases, collecting rents and
bad bills, to any form of work on a farm. This sort of life, on stage-coaches and railway trains,
or on long driving trips with his own fast trotter, suited his adventurous disposition and
gave him a sense of importance that was very necessary to his peace of mind. He was not especially
intimate with Ivory Boynton, who studied law with his father during all vacations and in every
available hour of leisure during term time, as did many another young New England schoolmaster.
Mark's father's praise of Ivory's legal ability was a little too warm to please his son, as
was the commendation of one of the County Court judges on Ivory's preparation of a brief in
a certain case in the Wilson office. Ivory had drawn it up at Mr. Wilson's request, merely
to show how far he understood the books and cases he was studying, and he had no idea that
it differed in any way from the work of any other student; all the same, Mark's own efforts
in a like direction had never received any special mention. When he was in the hay-field he
also kept as far as possible from Ivory, because there, too, he felt a superiority that made
him, for the moment, a trifle discontented. It was no particular pleasure for him to see Ivory
plunge his fork deep into the heart of a hay-cock, take a firm grasp of the handle, thrust
forward his foot to steady himself, and then raise the great fragrant heap slowly, and swing
it up to the waiting haycart amid the applause of the crowd. Rodman would be there, too, helping
the man on top of the load and getting nearly buried each time, as the mass descended upon
him, but doing his slender best to distribute and tread it down properly, while his young heart
glowed with pride at Cousin Ivory's prowess.

Independence Day had passed, with its usual gayeties for the young people, in none of which
the Baxter family had joined, and now, at eleven o'clock on this burning July morning, Waitstill
was driving the old mare past the Wilson farm on her way to the river field. Her father was
working there, together with the two hired men whom he took on for a fortnight during the height
of the season. If mowing, raking, pitching, and carting of the precious crop could only have
been done at odd times during the year, or at night, he would not have embittered the month
of July by paying out money for labor: but Nature was inexorable in the ripening of hay and
Old Foxy was obliged to succumb to the inevitable. Waitstill had a basket packed with luncheon
for three and a great demijohn of cool ginger tea under the wagon seat. Other farmers sometimes
served hard cider, or rum, but her father's principles were dead against this riotous extravagance.
Temperance, in any and all directions, was cheap, and the Deacon was a very temperate man,
save in language.

The fields on both sides of the road were full of haymakers and everywhere there was bustle
and stir. There would be three or four men, one leading, the others following, slowly swinging
their way through a noble piece of grass, and the smell of the mown fields in the sunshine
was sweeter than honey in the comb. There were patches of black-eyed Susans in the meadows
here and there, while pink and white hardhack grew by the road, with day lilies and blossoming
milkweed. The bobolinks were fluting from every tree; there were thrushes in the alder bushes
and orioles in the tops of the elms, and Waitstill's heart overflowed with joy at being in
such a world of midsummer beauty, though life, during the great heat and incessant work of
haying-time, was a little more rigorous than usual. The extra food needed for the hired men
always kept her father in a state of mind closely resembling insanity. Coming downstairs to
cook breakfast she would find the coffee or tea measured out for the pot. The increased consumption
of milk angered him beyond words, because it lessened the supply of butter for sale. Everything
that could be made with buttermilk was ordered so to be done, and nothing but water could be
used in mixing the raised bread. The corncake must never have an egg; the piecrust must be
shortened only with lard, or with a mixture of beef-fat and dripping; and so on, and so on,
eternally.

When the girls were respectively seventeen and thirteen, Waitstill had begged a small plot
of ground for them to use as they liked, and beginning at that time they had gradually made
a little garden, with a couple of fruit trees and a thicket of red, white, and black currants
raspberry and blackberry bushes. For several summers now they had sold enough of their own
fruit to buy a pair of shoes or gloves, a scarf or a hat, but even this tiny income was beginning
to be menaced. The Deacon positively suffered as he looked at that odd corner of earth, not
any bigger than his barn floor, and saw what his girls had done with no tools but a spade and
a hoe and no help but their own hands. He had no leisure (so he growled) to cultivate and fertilize
ground for small fruits, and no money to pay a man to do it, yet here was food grown under
his very eye, and it did not belong to him! The girls worked in their garden chiefly at sunrise
in spring and early summer, or after supper in the evening; all the same Waitstill had been
told by her father the day before that she was not only using ground, but time, that belonged
to him, and that he should expect her to provide "pie-filling" out of her garden patch during
haying, to help satisfy the ravenous appetites of that couple of "great, gorming, greedy lubbers"
that he was hiring this year. He had stopped the peeling of potatoes before boiling because
he disapproved of the thickness of the parings he found in the pig's pail, and he stood over
Patty at her work in the kitchen until Waitstill was in daily fear of a tempest of some sort.

Coming in from the shed one morning she met her father just issuing from the kitchen where
Patty was standing like a young Fury in front of the sink. "Father's been spying at the eggshells
I settled the coffee with, and said I'd no business to leave so much good in the shell when
I broke an egg. I will not bear it; he makes me feel fairly murderous! You'd better not leave
me alone with him when I'm like this. Oh! I know that I'm wicked, but isn't he wicked too,
and who was wicked first?"

Patty's heart had been set on earning and saving enough pennies for a white muslin dress and
every day rendered the prospect more uncertain; this was a sufficient grievance in itself to
keep her temper at the boiling point had there not been various other contributory causes.
Waitstill's patience was flagging a trifle, too, under the stress of the hot days and the still
hotter, breathless nights. The suspicion crossed her mind now and then that her father's miserliness
and fits of temper might be caused by a mental malady over which he now had little or no control,
having never mastered himself in all his life. Her power of endurance would be greater, she
thought, if only she could be certain that this theory was true, though her slavery would be
just as galling.

It would be so easy for her to go away and earn a living; she who had never had a day of illness
in her life; she who could sew, knit, spin, weave, and cook. She could make enough money in
Biddeford or Portsmouth to support herself, and Patty, too, until the proper work was found
for both. But there would be a truly terrible conflict of wills, and such fierce arraignment
of her unfilial conduct, such bitter and caustic argument from her father, such disapproval
from the parson and the neighbors, that her very soul shrank from the prospect. If she could
go alone, and have no responsibility over Patty's future, that would be a little more possible,
but she must think wisely for two.

And how could she leave Ivory when there might perhaps come a crisis in his life where she
could be useful to him? How could she cut herself off from those Sundays in the choir, those
dear fugitive glimpses of him in the road or at prayer-meeting? They were only sips of happiness,
where her thirsty heart yearned for long, deep draughts, but they were immeasurably better
than nothing. Freedom from her father's heavy yoke, freedom to work, and read, and sing, and
study, and grow,--oh! how she longed for this, but at what a cost would she gain it if she
had to harbor the guilty conscience of an undutiful and rebellious daughter, and at the same
time cut herself off from the sight of the one being she loved best in all the world.

She felt drawn towards Ivory's mother to-day. Three weeks had passed since her talk with Ivory
in the churchyard, but there had been no possibility of an hour's escape from home. She was
at liberty this afternoon--relatively at liberty; for although her work, as usual, was laid
out for her, it could be made up somehow or other before nightfall. She could drive over to
the Boynton's place, hitch her horse in the woods near the house, make her visit, yet be in
plenty of time to go up to the river field and bring her father home to supper. Patty was over
at Mrs. Abel Day's, learning a new crochet stitch and helping her to start a log-cabin quilt.
Ivory and Rodman, she new, were both away in the Wilson hay-field; no time would ever be more
favorable; so instead of driving up Town-House Hill when she returned to the village she kept
on over the bridge.

XIV. UNCLE BART DISCOURSES

UNCLE BART and Cephas were taking their nooning hour under the Nodhead apple tree as Waitstill
passed the joiner's shop and went over the bridge.

"Uncle Bart might somehow guess where I am going," she thought, "but even if he did he would
never tell any one."

"Where's Waitstill bound this afternoon, I wonder?" drawled Cephas, rising to his feet and
looking after the departing team. "That reminds me, I'd better run up to Baxter's and see if
any-thing's wanted before I open the store."

"If it makes any dif'rence," said his father dryly, as he filled his pipe, "Patty's over to
Mis' Day's spendin' the afternoon. Don't s'pose you want to call on the pig, do you? He's the
only one to home."

Cephas made no remark, but gave his trousers a hitch, picked up a chip, opened his jack-knife,
and sitting down on the greensward began idly whittling the bit of wood into shape.

"I kind o' wish you'd let me make the new ell two-story, father; 't wouldn't be much work,
take it in slack time after hayin'."

"Land o' Liberty! What do you want to do that for, Cephas? You 'bout pestered the life out
o' me gittin' me to build the ell in the first place, when we didn't need it no more'n a toad
does a pocketbook. Then nothin' would do but you must paint it, though I shan't be able to
have the main house painted for another year, so the old wine an' the new bottle side by side
looks like the Old Driver, an' makes us a laughin'-stock to the village;--and now you want
to change the thing into a two-story! Never heerd such a crazy idee in my life."

"I want to settle down," insisted Cephas doggedly.

"Well, settle; I'm willin'! I told you that, afore you painted the ell. Ain't two rooms, fourteen
by fourteen, enough for you to settle down in? If they ain't, I guess your mother'd give you
one o' the chambers in the main part."

"She would if I married Phoebe Day, but I don't want to marry Phoebe," argued Cephas. "And
mother's gone and made a summer kitchen for herself out in the ell, a'ready. I bet yer she'll
never move out if I should want to move in on a 'sudden."

"I told you you was takin' that risk when you cut a door through from the main part," said
his father genially. "If you hadn't done that, your mother would 'a' had to gone round outside
to git int' the ell and mebbe she'd 'a' stayed to home when it stormed, anyhow. Now your wife'll
have her troopin' in an' out, in an' out, the whole 'durin' time."

"I only cut the door through to please so't she'd favor my gittin' married, but I guess 't
won't do no good. You see, father, what I was thinkin' of is, a girl would mebbe jump at a
two-story, four-roomed ell when she wouldn't look at a smaller place."

"Pends upon whether the girl's the jumpin' kind or not! Hadn't you better git everything fixed
up with the one you've picked out, afore you take your good savin's and go to buildin' a bigger
place for her?"

"I've asked her once a'ready," Cephas allowed, with a burning face. "I don't s'pose you know
the one I mean?"

"No kind of an idee," responded his father, with a quizzical wink that was lost on the young
man, as his eyes were fixed upon his whittling. "Does she belong to the village?"

"I ain't goin' to let folks know who I've picked out till I git a little mite forrarder," responded
Cephas craftily. "Say, father, it's all right to ask a girl twice, ain't it?

"Certain it is, my son. I never heerd there was any special limit to the number o' times you
could ask 'em, and their power o' sayin' 'No' is like the mercy of the Lord; it endureth forever.--You
wouldn't consider a widder, Cephas? A widder'd be a good comp'ny-keeper for your mother."

"I hain't put my good savin's into an ell jest to marry a comp'ny-keeper for mother," responded
Cephas huffily. "I want to be number one with my girl and start right in on trainin' her up
to suit me."

"Well, if trainin' 's your object you'd better take my advice an' keep it dark before marriage,
Cephas. It's astonishin' how the female sect despises bein' trained; it don't hardly seem to
be in their nature to make any changes in 'emselves after they once gits started."

"How are you goin' to live with 'em, then?" Cephas inquired, looking up with interest coupled
with some incredulity.

"Let them do the training," responded his father, peacefully puffing out the words with his
pipe between his lips. "Some of 'em's mild and gentle in discipline, like Parson Boone's wife
or Mis' Timothy Grant, and others is strict and firm like your mother and Mis' Abel Day. If
you happen to git the first kind, why, do as they tell you, and thank the Lord 't ain't any
worse. If you git the second kind, jest let 'em put the blinders on you and trot as straight
as you know how, without shying nor kickin' over the traces, nor bolting 'cause they've got
control o' the bit and 't ain't no use fightin' ag'in' their superior strength.--So fur as
you can judge, in the early stages o' the game, my son,--which ain't very fur,--which kind
have you picked out?"

Cephas whittled on for some moments without a word, but finally, with a sigh drawn from the
very toes of his boots, he responded gloomily,--

"She's awful spunky, the girl is, anybody can see that; but she's a young thing, and I thought
bein' married would kind o' tame her down!"

"You can see how much marriage has tamed your mother down," observed Uncle Bart dispassionately;
"howsomever, though your mother can't be called tame, she's got her good p'ints, for she's
always to be counted on. The great thing in life, as I take it, Cephas, is to know exactly
what to expect. Your mother's gen'ally credited with an onsartin temper, but folks does her
great injustice in so thinking for in a long experience I've seldom come across a temper less
onsartin than your mother's. You know exactly where to find her every mornin' at sun-up and
every night at sundown. There ain't nothin' you can do to put her out o' temper, cause she's
all out aforehand. You can jest go about your reg'lar business 'thout any fear of disturbin'
her any further than she's disturbed a'ready, which is consid'rable. I don't mind it a mite
nowadays, though, after forty years of it. It would kind o' gall me to keep a stiddy watch
of a female's disposition day by day, wonderin' when she was goin' to have a tantrum. A tantrum
once a year's an awful upsettin' kind of a thing in a family, my son, but a tantrum every twenty-four
hours is jest part o' the day's work." There was a moment's silence during which Uncle Bart
puffed his pipe and Cephas whittled, after which the old man continued: "Then, if you happen
to marry a temper like your mother's, Cephas, look what a pow'ful worker you gen'ally get!
Look at the way they sweep an' dust an' scrub an' clean! Watch 'em when they go at the dish-washin',
an' how they whack the rollin'-pin, an' maul the eggs, an' heave the wood int' the stove, an'
slat the flies out o' the house! The mild and gentle ones enough, will be settin' in the kitchen
rocker read-in' the almanac when there ain't no wood in the kitchen box, no doughnuts in the
crock, no pies on the swing shelf in the cellar, an' the young ones goin' round without a second
shift to their backs!"

Cephas's mind was far away during this philosophical dissertation on the ways of women. He
could see only a sunny head fairly rioting with curls; a pair of eyes that held his like magnets,
although they never gave him a glance of love; a smile that lighted the world far better than
the sun; a dimple into which his heart fell headlong whenever he looked at it!

"You're right, father; 'tain't no use kickin' ag'in 'em," he said as he rose to his feet preparatory
to opening the Baxter store. "When I said that 'bout trainin' up a girl to suit me, I kind
o' forgot the one I've picked out. I'm considerin' several, but the one I favor most-well,
I believe she'd fire up at the first sight o' training and that's the gospel truth."

"Considerin' several, be you, Cephas?" laughed Uncle Bart. "Well, all I hope is, that the one
you favor most--the girl you've asked once a'ready--is considerin' you!"

Cephas went to the pump, and wetting a large handkerchief put it in the crown of his straw
hat and sauntered out into the burning heat of the open road between his father's shop and
Deacon Baxter's store.

"I shan't ask her the next time till this hot spell's over," he thought, "and I won't do it
in that dodgasted old store ag'in, neither; I ain't so tongue-tied outdoors an' I kind o' think
I'd be more in the sperit of it after sundown, some night after supper!"

XV. IVORY'S MOTHER

WAITSTILL found a cool and shady place in which to hitch the old mare, loosening her check-rein
and putting a sprig of alder in her headstall to assist her in brushing off the flies.

One could reach the Boynton house only by going up a long grass-grown lane that led from the
high-road. I believe no individual of our kind ever possessed less natural vanity than myself.
At intervals, by an extraordinary effort, I arrived at sublime ideas, but presently sunk again
into my original languor. To be loved by every one who knew me was my most ardent wish. I was
naturally mild, my cousin was equally so, and those who had the care of us were of similiar
dispositions. Everything contributed to strengthen those propensities which nature had implanted
in my breast, and during the two years I was neither the victim nor witness of any violent emotions.

I
knew nothing so delightful as to see every one content, not only with me, but all that concerned
them. When repeating our catechism at church, nothing could give me greater vexation, on being obliged
to hesitate, than to see Miss Lambercier's countenance express disapprobation and uneasiness. This
alone was more afflicting to me than the shame of faltering before so many witnesses, which, notwithstanding,
was sufficiently painful; for though not oversolicitous of praise, I was feelingly alive to
shame; yet I can truly affirm, the dread of being reprimanded by Miss Lambercier alarmed me
less than the thought of making her uneasy.

Neither she nor her brother were deficient in a reasonable severity,
but as this was scarce ever exerted without just cause, I was more
afflicted at their disapprobation than the punishment.

Certainly the method of treating youth would be altered if the distant effects, this indiscriminate,
and frequently indiscreet method produces, were more conspicuous. I would willingly excuse
myself from a further explanation, did not the lesson this example conveys (which points out
an evil as frequent as it is pernicious) forbid my silence.

As Miss Lambercier felt a mother's affection, she sometimes exerted a mother's authority, even to
inflicting on us when we deserved it, the punishment of infants.

She had often threatened it, and this threat of a treatment entirely new, appeared to me extremely
dreadful; but I found the reality much less terrible than the idea, and what is still more
unaccountable, this punishment increased my affection for the person who had inflicted it. All
this affection, aided by my natural mildness, was scarcely sufficient to prevent my seeking, by
fresh offences, a return of the same chastisement; for a degree of sensuality had mingled with
the smart and shame, which left more desire than fear of a repetition.

I was well convinced the same discipline from her brother would have produced a quite contrary effect;
but from a man of his disposition this was not probable, and if I abstained from meriting correction
it was merely from a fear of offending Miss Lambercier, for benevolence,
aided by the passions, has ever maintained an empire over me which
has given law to my heart.

This event, which, though desirable, I had not endeavored to accelerate, arrived without my
fault; I should say, without my seeking; and I profited by it with
a safe conscience; but this second, was also the last time, for Miss
Lambercier, who doubtless had some reason to imagine this chastisement
did not produce the desired effect, declared it was too fatiguing,
and that she renounced it for the future.

Till now we had slept in her chamber, and during the winter, even in her bed; but two days
after another room was prepared for us, and from that moment I had
the honor (which I could very well have dispensed with) of being treated
by her as a great boy.

Who would believe this childish discipline, received at eight years
old, from the hands of a woman of thirty, should influence my propensities,
my desires, my passions, for the rest of my life, and that in quite
a contrary sense from what might naturally have been expected?

The very incident that inflamed my senses, gave my desires such an extraordinary turn, that,
confined to what I had already experienced, I sought no further, and, with blood boiling with
sensuality, almost from my birth, preserved my purity beyond the age when the coldest constitutions
lose their insensibility; long tormented, without knowing by what, I gazed on every handsome woman
with delight; imagination incessantly brought their charms to my remembrance, only to transform
them into so many Miss Lamberciers.

If ever education was perfectly chaste, it was certainly that I received; my three aunts were not
only of exemplary prudence, but maintained a degree of modest reserve
which women have long since thought unnecessary.

My father, it is true, loved pleasure, but his gallantry was rather of the last than the present
century, and he never expressed his affection for any woman he regarded in terms a virgin could
have blushed at; indeed, it was impossible more attention should be paid to that regard we owe
the morals of children than was uniformly observed by every one I
had any concern with.

An equal degree of reserve in this particular was observed at M. Lambercier's, where a good maid-servant
was discharged for having once made use of an expression before us
which was thought to contain some degree of indelicacy.

I had no precise idea of the ultimate effect of the passions, but the conception I had formed was
extremely disgusting; I entertained a particular aversion for courtesans, nor could I look
on a rake without a degree of disdain mingled with terror.

These prejudices of education, proper in themselves to retard the
first explosions of a combustible constitution, were strengthened,
as I have already hinted, by the effect the first moments of sensuality
produced in me, for notwithstanding the troublesome ebullition of
my blood, I was satisfied with the species of voluptuousness I had
already been acquainted with, and sought no further.

Thus I passed the age of puberty, with a constitution extremely ardent, without knowing or even
wishing for any other gratification of the passions than what Miss
Lambercier had innocently given me an idea of; and when I became a
man, that childish taste, instead of vanishing, only associated with
the other.

This folly, joined to a natural timidity, has always prevented my being very enterprising with
women, so that I have passed my days in languishing in silence for those I most admired, without
daring to disclose my wishes.

It will be readily conceived that this mode of making love is not attended with a rapid progress
or imminent danger to the virtue of its object; yet, though I have
few favors to boast of, I have not been excluded from enjoyment, however
imaginary.

Thus the senses, in concurrence with a mind equally timid and romantic, have preserved my
moral chaste, and feelings uncorrupted, with precisely the same inclinations, which, seconded
with a moderate portion of effrontery, might have plunged me into the most unwarrantable excesses.

I
have made the first, most difficult step, in the obscure and painful maze of my Confessions.
We never feel so great a degree of repugnance in divulging what is really criminal, as what
is merely ridiculous.

I am now assured of my resolution, for after what I have dared disclose,
nothing can have power to deter me.

The difficulty attending these acknowledgments will be readily conceived, when I declare, that
during the whole of my life, though frequently laboring under the most violent agitation, being hurried
away with the impetuosity of a passion which (when in company with those I loved) deprived
me of the faculty of sight and hearing, I could never, in the course of the most unbounded familiarity,
acquire sufficient resolution to declare my folly, and implore the
only favor that remained to bestow.

In thus investigating the first traces of my sensible existence, I find elements, which, though seemingly
incompatible, have united to produce a simple and uniform effect; while others, apparently the
same, have, by the concurrence of certain circumstances, formed such different combinations, that
it would never be imagined they had any affinity; who would believe, for example, that one
of the most vigorous springs of my soul was tempered in the identical source from whence luxury
and ease mingled with my constitution and circulated in my veins?

Before I quit this subject, I will add a striking instance of the different effects they produced.

One
day, while I was studying in a chamber contiguous to the kitchen, the maid set some of Miss
Lambercier's combs to dry by the fire, and on coming to fetch them some time after, was surprised
to find the teeth of one of them broken off. Who could be suspected of this mischief? No one
but myself had entered the room: I was questioned, but denied having
any knowledge of it.

Mr. and Miss Lambercier consult, exhort, threaten, but all to no purpose; I obstinately persist
in the denial; and, though this was the first time I had been detected in a confirmed falsehood,
appearances were so strong that they overthrew all my protestations.

This affair was thought serious; the mischief, the lie, the obstinacy, were considered equally
deserving of punishment, which was not now to be administered by Miss Lambercier. My uncle
Bernard was written to; he arrived; and my poor cousin being charged with a crime no less serious,
we were conducted to the same execution, which was inflicted with great severity. If finding
a remedy in the evil itself, they had sought ever to allay my depraved desires, they could not
have chosen a shorter method to accomplish their designs, and, I can assure my readers, I was
for a long time freed from the dominion of them.

As this severity could not draw from me the expected acknowledgment, which obstinacy brought on
several repetitions, and reduced me to a deplorable situation, yet
I was immovable, and resolutely determined to suffer death rather
than submit.

Force, at length, was obliged to yield to the diabolical infatuation of a child, for no better
name was bestowed on my constancy, and I came out of this dreadful trial, torn, it is true,
but triumphant. Fifty years have expired since this adventure--the fear of punishment is no
more. Well, then, I aver, in the face of Heaven, I was absolutely innocent: and, so far from
breaking, or even touching the comb, never came near the fire. It will be asked, how did this
mischief happen? I can form no conception of it, I only know my own innocence.

Let any one figure to himself a character whose leading traits were
docility and timidity, but haughty, ardent, and invincible, in its
passions; a child, hitherto governed by the voice of reason, treated
with mildness, equity, and complaisance, who could not even support
the idea of injustice, experiencing, for the first time, so violent
an instance of it, inflicted by those he most loved and respected.

What perversion of ideas!

What confusion in the heart, the brain, in all my little being, intelligent and moral!--let
any one, I say, if possible, imagine all this, for I am incapable of giving the least idea of
what passed in my mind at that period.

My reason was not sufficiently established to enable me to put myself in the place of others,
and judge how much appearances condemned me, I only beheld the rigor of a dreadful chastisement,
inflicted for a crime I had not committed; yet I can truly affirm, the smart I suffered, though
violent, was inconsiderable compared to what I felt from indignation, rage, and despair. My
cousin, who was almost in similar circumstances, having been punished
for an involuntary fault as guilty of a premediated crime, became
furious by my example.

Both in the same bed, we embraced each other with convulsive transport; we were almost suffocated;
and when our young hearts found sufficient relief to breathe out our indigination, we sat up
in the bed, and with all our force, repeated a hundred times, Carnifex!
Carnifex! Carnifex! executioner, tormentor.

Even while I write this I feel my pulse quicken, and should I live
a hundred thousand years, the agitation of that moment would still
be fresh in my memory.

The first instance of violence and oppression is so deeply engraved on my soul, that every
relative idea renews my emotion: the sentiment of indignation, which in its origin had reference
only to myself, has acquired such strength, and is at present so
completely detached from personal motives, that my heart is as much
inflamed at the sight or relation of any act of injustice (whatever
may be the object, or wheresoever it may be perpetrated) as if I was
the immediate sufferer.

When I read the history of a merciless tyrant, or the dark and the subtle machination of a
knavish designing priest, I could on the instant set off to stab the miscreants, though I was
certain to perish in the attempt.

I have frequently fatigued myself by running after and stoning a cock, a cow, a dog, or any
animal I saw tormenting another, only because it was conscious of
possessing superior strength.

This may be natural to me, and I am inclined to believe it is, though
the lively impression of the first injustice I became the victim of
was too long and too powerfully remembered not to have added considerable
force to it.

This occurrence terminated my infantine serenity; from that moment I ceased to enjoy a pure
unadulterated happiness, and on a retrospection of the pleasure of my childhood, I yet feel they
ended here. We continue at Bossey some months after this event, but were like our first parents
in the Garden of Eden after they had lost their innocence; in appearance our situation was the same,
in effect it was totally different.

Affection, respect; intimacy, confidence, no longer attached the pupils
to their guides; we beheld them no longer as divinities, who could
read the secrets of our hearts; we were less ashamed of committing
faults, more afraid of being accused of them: we learned to dissemble,
to rebel, to lie: all the vices common to our years began to corrupt
our happy innocence, mingle with our sports, and embitter our amusements.

The country itself, losing those sweet and simple charms which captivate the heart, appeared a gloomy
desert, or covered with a veil that concealed its beauties. We cultivated our little gardens
no more: our flowers were neglected. We no longer scratched away the mould, and broke out into
exclamations of delight, on discovering that the grain we had sown began to shoot. We were disgusted
with our situation; our preceptors were weary of us. In a word, my uncle wrote for our return,
and we left Mr. and Miss Lambercier without feeling any regret at the separation.

Near thirty years passed away from my leaving Bossey, without once recalling the place to my mind
with any degree of satisfaction; but after having passed the prime
of life, as I decline into old age (while more recent occurrences
are wearing out apace) I feel these remembrances revive and imprint
themselves on my heart, with a force and charm that every day acquires
fresh strength; as if, feeling life fleet from me, I endeavored to
catch it again by its commencement.

The most trifling incident of those happy days delight me, for no other reason than being of
those days.

I recall every circumstance of time, place, and persons; I see the maid or footman busy in the
chamber, a swallow entering the window, a fly settling on my hand
while repeating my lessons.

 I won't have a daughter o'
mine consortin' with any o' that Boynton crew. Perhaps a night outdoors will teach you who's
master in this house, you imperdent, shameless girl! We'll try it, anyway!" And with that he
banged down the window and disappeared, gibbering and jabbering impotent words that she could
hear but not understand.

Waitstill was almost stunned by the suddenness of this catastrophe. She stood with her feet
rooted to the earth for several minutes and then walked slowly away out of sight of the house.
There was a chair beside the grindstone under the Porter apple tree and she sank into it, crossed
her arms on the back, and bowing her head on them, burst into a fit of weeping as tempestuous
and passionate as it was silent, for although her body fairly shook with sobs no sound escaped.

The minutes passed, perhaps an hour; she did not take account of time. The moon went behind
clouds, the night grew misty and the stars faded one by one. There would be rain to-morrow
and there was a great deal of hay cut, so she thought in a vagrant sort of way.

Meanwhile Patty upstairs was in a state of suppressed excitement and terror. It was a quarter
of an hour before her father settled him-self in bed; then an age, it seemed to her, before
she heard his heavy breathing. When she thought it quite safe, she slipped on a print wrapper,
took her shoes in her hand, and crept noiselessly downstairs, out through the kitchen and into
the shed. Lifting the heavy bar that held the big doors in place she closed them softly behind
her, stepped out, and looked about her in the darkness. Her quick eye espied in the distance,
near the barn, the bowed figure in the chair, and she flew through the wet grass without a
thought of her bare feet till she reached her sister's side and held her in a close embrace.

"My darling, my own, own, poor darling!" she cried softly, the tears running down her cheeks.
"How wicked, how unjust to serve my dearest sister so! Don't cry, my blessing, don't cry; you
frighten me! I'll take care of you, dear! Next time I'll interfere; I'll scratch and bite;
yes, I'll strangle anybody that dares to shame you and lock you out of the house! You, the
dearest, the patientest, the best!"

Waitstill wiped her eyes. "Let us go farther away where we can talk," she whispered.

"Where had we better sleep?" Patty asked. "On the hay, I think, though we shall stifle with
the heat"; and Patty moved towards the barn.

"No, you must go back to the house at once, Patty dear; father might wake and call you, and
that would make matters worse. It's beginning to drizzle, or I should stay out in the air.
Oh! I wonder if father's mind is going, and if this is the beginning of the end! If he is in
his sober senses, he could not be so strange, so suspicious, so unjust."

"He could be anything, say anything, do anything," exclaimed Patty. "Perhaps he is not responsible
and perhaps he is; it doesn't make much difference to us. Come along, blessed darling! I'll
tuck you in, and then I'll creep back to the house, if you say I must. I'll go down and make
the kitchen fire in the morning; you stay out here and see what happens. A good deal will happen,
I'm thinking, if father speaks to me of you! I shouldn't be surprised to see the fur flying
in all directions; I'll seize the first moment to bring you out a cup of coffee and we'll consult
about what to do. I may tell you now, I'm all for running away!"

Waitstill's first burst of wretchedness had subsided and she had recovered her balance. "I'm
afraid we must wait a little longer, Patty," she advised. "Don't mention my name to father,
but see how he acts in the morning. He was so wild, so unlike himself, that I almost hope he
may forget what he said and sleep it off. Yes, we must just wait."

"No doubt he'll be far calmer in the morning if he remembers that, if he turns you out, he
faces the prospect of three meals a day cooked by me," said Patty. "That's what he thinks he
would face, but as a matter of fact I shall tell him that where you sleep I sleep, and where
you eat I eat, and when you stop cooking I stop! He won't part with two unpaid servants in
a hurry, not at the beginning of haying." And Patty, giving Waitstill a last hug and a dozen
tearful kisses, stole reluctantly back to the house by the same route through which he had left it.

Patty was right. She found the fire lighted when she went down into the kitchen next morning,
and without a word she hurried breakfast on to the table as fast as she could cook and serve
it. Waitstill was safe in the barn chamber, she knew, and would be there quietly while her
father was feeding the horse and milking the cows; or perhaps she might go up in the woods
and wait until she saw him driving away.

The Deacon ate his breakfast in silence, looking and acting very much as usual, for he was
generally dumb at meals. When he left the house, however, and climbed into the wagon, he turned
around and said in his ordinary gruff manner: "Bring the lunch up to the field yourself to-day,
Patience. Tell your sister I hope she's come to her senses in the course of the night. You've
got to learn, both of you, that my 'say-so' must be law in this house. You can fuss and you
can fume, if it amuses you any, but 't won't do no good. Don't encourage Waitstill in any whinin'
nor blubberin'. Jest tell her to come in and go to work and I'll overlook what she done this
time. And don't you give me any more of your eye-snappin' and lip-poutin' and head-in-the-air
imperdence! You're under age, and if you don't look out, you'll get something that's good for
what ails you! You two girls jest aid an' abet one another that's what you do, aid an' abet
one another, an if you carry it any further I'll find some way o' separatin' you, do you hear?"

Patty spoke never a word, nor fluttered an eyelash. She had a proper spirit, but now her heart
was cold with a new fear, and she felt, with Waitstill, that her father must be obeyed and
his temper kept within bounds, until God provided them a way of escape.

She ran out to the barn chamber and, not finding Waitstill, looked across the field and saw
her coming through the path from the woods. Patty waved her hand, and ran to meet her sister,
joy at the mere fact of her existence, of being able to see her again, and of hearing her dear
voice, almost choking her in its intensity. When they reached the house she helped her upstairs
as if she were a child, brought her cool water to wash away the dust of the haymow, laid out
some clean clothes for her, and finally put her on the lounge in the darkened sitting-room.

"I won't let anybody come near the house," she said, "and you must have a cup of tea and a
good sleep before I tell you all that father said. Just comfort yourself with the thought that
he is going to 'overlook it' this time! After I carry up his luncheon, I shall stop at the
store and ask Cephas to come out on the river bank for a few minutes. Then I shall proceed
to say what I think of him for telling father where you went yesterday afternoon."

"Don't blame Cephas!" Waitstill remonstrated. "Can't you see just how it happened? He and Uncle
Bart were sitting in front of the shop when I drove by. When father came home and found the
house empty and the horse not in the stall, of course he asked where I was, and Cephas probably
said he had seen me drive up Saco Hill. He had no reason to think that there was any harm in that."

"If he had any sense he might know that he shouldn't tell anything to father except what happens
in the store," Patty insisted. "Were you frightened out in the barn alone last night, poor dear?"

"I was too unhappy to think of fear and I was chiefly nervous about you, all alone in the house
with father."

"I didn't like it very much, myself! I buttoned my bedroom door and sat by the window all night,
shivering and bristling at the least sound. Everybody calls me a coward, but I'm not! Courage
isn't not being frightened; it's not screeching when you are frightened. Now, what happened
at the Boyntons'?"

"Patty, Ivory's mother is the most pathetic creature I ever saw!" And Waitstill sat up on the
sofa, her long braids of hair hanging over her shoulders, her pale face showing the traces
of her heavy weeping. "I never pitied any one so much in my whole life! To go up that long,
long lane; to come upon that dreary house hidden away in the trees; to feel the loneliness
and the silence; and then to know that she is living there like a hermit-thrush in a forest,
without a woman to care for her, it is heart-breaking!"

"How does the house look,--dreadful?"

"No: everything is as neat as wax. She isn't 'crazy,' Patty, as we understand the word. Her
mind is beclouded somehow and it almost seems as if the cloud might lift at any moment. She
goes about like somebody in a dream, sewing or knitting or cooking. It is only when she talks,
and you notice that her eyes really see nothing, but are looking beyond you, that you know
there is anything wrong."

"If she appears so like other people, why don't the neighbors go to see her once in a while?"

"Callers make her unhappy, she says, and Ivory told me that he dared not encourage any company
in the house for fear of exciting her, and making her an object of gossip, besides. He knows
her ways perfectly and that she is safe and content with her fancies when she is alone, which
is seldom, after all."

"What does she talk about?" asked Patty.

"Her husband mostly. She is expecting him to come back daily. We knew that before, of course,
but no one can realize it till they see her setting the table for him and putting a saucer
of wild strawberries by his plate; going about the kitchen softly, like a gentle ghost."

"It gives me the shudders!" said Patty. "I couldn't bear it! If she never sees strangers, what
in the world did she make of you? How did you begin?"

"I told her I had known Ivory ever since we were school children. She was rather strange and
indifferent at first, and then she seemed to take a fancy to me."

"That's queer!" said Patty, smiling fondly and giving Waitstill's hair the hasty brush of a kiss.

"She told me she had had a girl baby, born two or three years after Ivory, and that she had
always thought it died when it was a few weeks old. Then suddenly she came closer to me--

"Oh! Waity, weren't you terrified?"

"No, not in the least. Neither would you have been if you had been there. She put her arms
round me and all at once I understood that the poor thing mistook me just for a moment for
her own daughter come back to life. It was a sudden fancy and I don't think it lasted, but
I didn't know how to deal with it, or contradict it, so I simply tried to soothe her and let
her ease her heart by talking to me. She said when I left her: 'Where is your house? I hope
it is near! Do come again and sit with me. Strength flows into my weakness when you hold my
hand!' I somehow feel, Patty, that she needs a woman friend even more than a doctor. And now,
what am I to do? How can I forsake her; and yet here is this new difficulty with father?"

"I shouldn't forsake her; go there when you can, but be more careful about it. You told father
that you didn't regret what you had done, and that when he ordered you to do unreasonable things,
you should disobey him. After all, you are not a black slave. Father will never think of that
particular thing again, perhaps, any more than he ever alluded to my driving to Saco with Mrs.
Day after you had told him it was necessary for one of us to go there occasionally. He knows
that if he is too hard on us, Dr. Perry or Uncle Bart would take him in hand. They would have
done it long ago if we had ever given any one even a hint of what we have to endure. You will
be all right, because you only want to do kind, neighborly things. I am the one that will always
have to suffer, because I can't prove that it's a Christian duty to deceive father and steal
off to a dance or a frolic. Yet I might as well be a nun in a convent for all the fun I get!
I want a white book-muslin dress; I want a pair of thin shoes with buckles; I want a white
hat with a wreath of yellow roses; I want a volume of Byron's poems; and oh! nobody knows--nobody
but the Lord could understand--how I want a string of gold beads."

"Patty, Patty! To hear you chatter anybody would imagine you thought of nothing but frivolities.
I wish you wouldn't do yourself such injustice; even when nobody hears you but me, it is wrong."

"Sometimes when you think I'm talking nonsense it's really the gospel truth," said Patty. "I'm
not a grand, splendid character, Waitstill, and it's no use your deceiving yourself about me;
if you do, you'll be disappointed."

"Go and parboil the beans and get them into the pot, Patty. Pick up some of the windfalls and
make a green-apple pie, and I'll be with you in the kitchen myself before long. I never expect
to be disappointed in you, Patty, only continually surprised and pleased."

"I thought I'd begin making some soft soap to-day," said Patty mischievously, as she left the
room. "We have enough grease saved up. We don't really need it yet, but it makes such a disgusting
smell that I'd rather like father to have it with his dinner. It's not much of a punishment
for our sleepless night."

AUTUMN

XVII. A BRACE OF LOVERS

HAYING was over, and the close, sticky dog-days, too, and August was slipping into September.
There had been plenty of rain all the season and the countryside was looking as fresh and green
as an emerald. The hillsides were already clothed with a verdant growth of new grass and

     "The red pennons of the cardinal flowers
      Hung motionless upon their upright staves."

How they gleamed in the meadow grasses and along the brooksides like brilliant flecks of flame,
giving a new beauty to the nosegays that Waitstill carried or sent to Mrs. Boynton every week.

To the eye of the casual observer, life in the two little villages by the river's brink went
on as peacefully as ever, but there were subtle changes taking place nevertheless. Cephas Cole
had "asked" the second time and again had been refused by Patty, so that even a very idiot
for hopefulness could not urge his father to put another story on the ell.

"If it turns out to be Phoebe Day," thought Cephas dolefully, "two rooms is plenty good enough,
an' I shan't block up the door that leads from the main part, neither, as I thought likely
I should. If so be it's got to be Phoebe, not Patty, I shan't care whether mother troops out
'n' in or not." And Cephas dealt out rice and tea and coffee with so languid an air, and made
such frequent mistakes in weighing the sugar, that he drew upon himself many a sharp rebuke
from the Deacon.

"Of course I'd club him over the head with a salt fish twice a day under ord'nary circumstances,"
Cephas confided to his father with a valiant air that he never wore in Deacon Baxter's presence;
"but I've got a reason, known to nobody but myself, for wantin' to stan' well with the old
man for a spell longer. If ever I quit wantin' to stan' well with him, he'll get his comeuppance,
short an sudden!"

"Speakin' o' standin' well with folks, Phil Perry's kind o' makin' up to Patience Baxter, ain't
he, Cephas?" asked Uncle Bart guardedly. "Mebbe you wouldn't notice it, hevin' no partic'lar
int'rest, but your mother's kind o got the idee into her head lately, an' she's turrible far-sighted."

"I guess it's so!" Cephas responded gloomily. "It's nip an' tuck 'tween him an' Mark Wilson.
That girl draws 'em as molasses does flies! She does it 'thout liftin' a finger, too, no more
'n the molasses does. She just sets still an' IS! An' all the time she's nothin' but a flighty
little red-headed spitfire that don't know a good husband when she sees one. The feller that
gits her will live to regret it, that's my opinion!" And Cephas thought to himself: "Good Lord,
don't I wish I was regrettin' it this very minute!"

"I s'pose a girl like Phoebe Day'd be consid'able less trouble to live with?" ventured Uncle Bart.

"I never could take any fancy to that tow hair o' hern! I like the color well enough when I'm
peeling it off a corn cob, but I don't like it on a girl's head," objected Cephas hypercritically.
"An' her eyes hain't got enough blue in 'em to be blue: they're jest like skim-milk. An' she
keeps her mouth open a little mite all the time, jest as if there wa'n't no good draught through,
an' she was a-tryin' to git air. An' 't was me that begun callin' her 'Feeble Phoebe in school,
an' the scholars'll never forgit it; they'd throw it up to me the whole 'durin' time if I should
go to work an' keep company with her!"

"Mebbe they've forgot by this time," Uncle Bart responded hopefully; "though 't is an awful
resk when you think o' Companion Pike! Samuel he was baptized and Samuel he continued to be,
'till he married the Widder Bixby from Waterboro. Bein' as how there wa'n't nothin' partic'ly
attractive 'bout him,--though he was as nice a feller as ever lived,--somebody asked her why
she married him, an' she said her cat hed jest died an' she wanted a companion. The boys never
let go o' that story! Samuel Pike he ceased to be thirty year ago, an' Companion Pike he's
remained up to this instant minute!"

"He ain't lived up to his name much," remarked Cephas. "He's to home for his meals, but I guess
his wife never sees him between times."

"If the cat hed lived mebbe she'd 'a' been better comp'ny on the whole," chuckled Uncle Bart.
"Companion was allers kind o' dreamy an' absent-minded from a boy. I remember askin' him what
his wife's Christian name was (she bein' a stranger to Riverboro) an' he said he didn't know!
Said he called her Mis' Bixby afore he married her an' Mis' Pike afterwards!"

"Well, there 's something turrible queer 'bout this marryin' business," and Cephas drew a sigh
from the heels of his boots. "It seems's if a man hedn't no natcheral drawin' towards a girl
with a good farm 'n' stock that was willin' to have him! Seems jest as if it set him ag'in'
her somehow! And yet, if you've got to sing out o' the same book with a girl your whole lifetime,
it does seem's if you'd ought to have a kind of a fancy for her at the start, anyhow!"

"You may feel dif'rent as time goes on, Cephas, an' come to see Feeble--I would say Phoebe--as
your mother does. 'The best fire don't flare up the soonest,' you know." But old Uncle Bart
saw that his son's heart was heavy and forbore to press the subject.

Annabel Franklin had returned to Boston after a month's visit and to her surprise had returned
as disengaged as she came. Mark Wilson, thoroughly bored by her vacuities of mind, longed now
for more intercourse with Patty Baxter, Patty, so gay and unexpected; so lively to talk with,
so piquing to the fancy, so skittish and difficult to manage, so temptingly pretty, with a
beauty all her own, and never two days alike.

There were many lions in the way and these only added to the zest of pursuit. With all the
other girls of the village opportunities multiplied, but he could scarcely get ten minutes
alone with Patty. The Deacon's orders were absolute in regard to young men. His daughters were
never to drive or walk alone with them, never go to dances or "routs" of any sort, and never
receive them at the house; this last mandate being quite unnecessary, as no youth in his right
mind would have gone a-courtin' under the Deacon's forbidding gaze. And still there were sudden,
delicious chances to be seized now and then if one had his eyes open and his wits about him.
There was the walk to or from the singing-school, when a sentimental couple could drop a few
feet, at least, behind the rest and exchange a word or two in comparative privacy; there were
the church "circles" and prayer-meetings, and the intervals between Sunday services when Mark
could detach Patty a moment from the group on the meeting-house steps. More valuable than all
these, a complete schedule of Patty's various movements here and there, together with a profound
study of Deacon Baxter's habits, which were ordinarily as punctual as they were disagreeable,
permitted Mark many stolen interviews, as sweet as they were brief. There was never a second
kiss, however, in these casual meetings and partings. The first, in springtime, had found Patty
a child, surprised, unprepared. She was a woman now; for it does not take years to achieve
that miracle; months will do it, or days, or even hours. Her summer's experience with Cephas
Cole had wonderfully broadened her powers, giving her an assurance sadly lacking before, as
well as a knowledge of detail, a certain finished skill in the management of a lover, which
she could ably use on any one who happened to come along. And, at the moment, any one who happened
to come along served the purpose admirably, Philip Perry as well as Marquis Wilson.

Young Perry's interest in Patty, as we have seen, began with his alienation from Ellen Wilson,
the first object of his affections, and it was not at the outset at all of a sentimental nature.
Philip was a pillar of the church, and Ellen had proved so entirely lacking in the religious
sense, so self-satisfied as to her standing with the heavenly powers, that Philip dared not
expose himself longer to her society, lest he find himself "unequally yoked together with an
unbeliever," thus defying the scriptural admonition as to marriage.

Patty, though somewhat lacking in the qualities that go to the making of trustworthy saints,
was not, like Ellen, wholly given over to the fleshpots and would prove a valuable convert,
Philip thought; one who would reflect great credit upon him if he succeeded in inducing her
to subscribe to the stern creed of the day.

Philip was a very strenuous and slightly gloomy believer, dwelling considerably on the wrath
of God and the doctrine of eternal punishment.

(No wonder that Jacob Cochrane's lively songs, cheerful, hopeful, militant, and bracing, fell
with a pleasing sound upon the ear of the believer of that epoch.) The love of God had, indeed,
entered Philip's soul, but in some mysterious way had been ossified after it got there. He
had intensely black hair, dark skin, and a liver that disposed him constitutionally to an ardent
belief in the necessity of hell for most of his neighbors, and the hope of spending his own
glorious immortality in a small, properly restricted, and prudently managed heaven. He was
eloquent at prayer-meeting and Patty's only objection to him there was in his disposition to
allude to himself as a "rebel worm," with frequent references to his "vile body." Otherwise,
and when not engaged in theological discussion, Patty liked Philip very much. His own father,
although an orthodox member of the fold in good and regular standing, had "doctored" Phil conscientiously
for his liver from his youth up, hoping in time to incite in him a sunnier view of life, for
the doctor was somewhat skilled in adapting his remedies to spiritual maladies. Jed Morrill
had always said that when old Mrs. Buxton, the champion convert of Jacob Cochrane, was at her
worst,--keeping her whole family awake nights by her hysterical fears for their future,--Dr.
Perry had given her a twelfth of a grain of tartar emetic, five times a day until she had entire
mental relief and her anxiety concerning the salvation of her husband and children was set
completely at rest.

The good doctor noted with secret pleasure his son's growing fondness for the society of his
prime favorite, Miss Patience Baxter. "He'll begin by trying to save her soul," he thought;
"Phil always begins that way, but when Patty gets him in hand he'll remember the existence
of his heart, an organ he has never taken into consideration. A love affair with a pretty girl,
good but not too pious, will help Phil considerable, however it turns out."

There is no doubt but that Phil was taking his chances and that under Patty's tutelage he was
growing mellower. As for Patty, she was only amusing herself, and frisking, like a young lamb,
in pastures where she had never strayed before. Her fancy flew from Mark to Phil and from Phil
back to Mark again, for at the moment she was just a vessel of emotion, ready to empty herself
on she knew not what. Temperamentally, she would take advantage of currents rather than steer
at any time, and it would be the strongest current that would finally bear her away. Her idea
had always been that she could play with fire without burning her own fingers, and that the
flames she kindled were so innocent and mild that no one could be harmed by them. She had fancied,
up to now, that she could control, urge on, or cool down a man's feeling forever and a day,
if she chose, and remain mistress of the situation. Now, after some weeks of weighing and balancing
her two swains, she found herself confronting a choice, once and for all. Each of them seemed
to be approaching the state of mind where he was likely to say, somewhat violently: "Take me
or leave me, one or the other!" But she did not wish to take them, and still less did she wish
to leave them, with no other lover in sight but Cephas Cole, who was almost, though not quite,
worse than none.

If matters, by lack of masculine patience and self-control, did come to a crisis, what should
she say definitely to either of her suitors? Her father despised Mark Wilson a trifle more
than any young man on the river, and while he could have no objection to Phil Perry's character
or position in the world, his hatred of old Dr. Perry amounted to a disease. When the doctor
had closed the eyes of the third Mrs. Baxter, he had made some plain and unwelcome statements
that would rankle in the Deacon's breast as long as he lived. Patty knew, therefore, that the
chance of her father's blessing falling upon her union with either of her present lovers was
more than uncertain, and of what use was an engagement, if there could not be a marriage?

If Patty's mind inclined to a somewhat speedy departure from her father's household, she can
hardly be blamed, but she felt that she could not carry any of her indecisions and fears to
her sister for settlement. Who could look in Waitstill's clear, steadfast eyes and say: "I
can't make up my mind which to marry"? Not Patty. She felt, instinctively, that Waitstill's
heart, if it moved at all, would rush out like a great river to lose itself in the ocean, and
losing itself forget the narrow banks through which it had flowed before. Patty knew that her
own love was at the moment nothing more than the note of a child's penny flute, and that Waitstill
was perhaps vibrating secretly with a deeper, richer music than could ever come to her. Still,
music of some sort she meant to feel. "Even if they make me decide one way or another before
I am ready," she said to herself, "I'll never say 'yes' till I'm more in love than I am now!"

There were other reasons why she did not want to ask Waitstill's advice. Not only did she shrink
from the loving scrutiny of her sister's eyes, and the gentle probing of her questions, which
would fix her own motives on a pin-point and hold them up unbecomingly to the light; but she
had a foolish, generous loyalty that urged her to keep Waitstill quite aloof from her own little
private perplexities.

"She will only worry herself sick," thought Patty. "She won't let me marry without asking father's
permission, and she'd think she ought not to aid me in deceiving him, and the tempest would
be twice as dreadful if it fell upon us both! Now, if anything happens, I can tell father that
I did it all myself and that Waitstill knew nothing about it whatever. Then, oh, joy! if father
is too terrible, I shall be a married woman and I can always say: 'I will not permit such cruelty!
Waitstill is dependent upon you no longer, she shall come at once to my husband and me!'"

This latter phrase almost intoxicated Patty, so that there were moments when she could have
run up to Milliken's Mills and purchased herself a husband at any cost, had her slender savings
permitted the best in the market; and the more impersonal the husband the more delightedly
Patty rolled the phrase under her tongue.

"I can never be 'published' in church," she thought, "and perhaps nobody will ever care enough
about me to brave father's displeasure and insist on running away with me. I do wish somebody
would care 'frightfully' about me, enough for that; enough to help me make up my mind; so that
I could just drive up to father's store some day and say: 'Good afternoon, father! I knew you'd
never let me marry--'" (there was always a dash here, in Patty's imaginary discourses, a dash
that could be filled in with any Christian name according to her mood of the moment)"'so I
just married him anyway; and you needn't be angry with my sister, for she knew nothing about
it. My husband and I are sorry if you are displeased, but there's no help for it; and my husband's
home will always be open to Waitstill, whatever happens.'"

Patty, with all her latent love of finery and ease, did not weigh the worldly circumstances
of the two men, though the reflection that she would have more amusement with Mark than with
Philip may have crossed her mind. She trusted Philip, and respected his steady-going, serious
view of life; it pleased her vanity, too, to feel how her nonsense and fun lightened his temperamental
gravity, playing in and out and over it like a butterfly in a smoke bush. She would be safe
with Philip always, but safety had no special charm for one of her age, who had never been
in peril. Mark's superior knowledge of the world, moreover, his careless, buoyant manner of
carrying himself, his gay, boyish audacity, all had a very distinct charm for her;--and yet--

But there would be no "and yet" a little later. Patty's heart would blaze quickly enough when
sufficient heat was applied to it, and Mark was falling more and more deeply in love every
day. As Patty vacillated, his purpose strengthened; the more she weighed, the more he ceased
to weigh, the difficulties of the situation; the more she unfolded herself to him, the more
he loved and the more he respected her. She began by delighting his senses; she ended by winning
all that there was in him, and creating continually the qualities he lacked, after the manner
of true women even when they are very young and foolish.

XVIII. A STATE O' MAINE PROPHET

SUMMER was dying hard, for although it had passed, by the calendar, Mother Nature was still
keeping up her customary attitude.

There had been a soft rain in the night and every spear of grass was brilliantly green and
tipped with crystal. The smoke bushes in the garden plot, and the asparagus bed beyond them,
looked misty as the sun rose higher, drying the soaked earth and dripping branches. Spiders'
webs, marvels of lace, dotted the short grass under the apple trees. Every flower that had
a fragrance was pouring it gratefully into the air; every bird with a joyous note in its voice
gave it more joyously from a bursting throat; and the river laughed and rippled in the distance
at the foot of Town House Hill. Then dawn grew into full morning and streams of blue smoke
rose here and there from the Edgewood chimneys. The world was alive, and so beautiful that
Waitstill felt like going down on her knees in gratitude for having been born into it and given
a chance of serving it in any humble way whatsoever.

Wherever there was a barn, in Riverboro or Edgewood, one could have heard the three-legged
stools being lifted from the pegs, and then would begin the music of the milk-pails; first
the resonant sound of the stream on the bottom of the tin pail, then the soft delicious purring
of the cascade into the full bucket, while the cows serenely chewed their cuds and whisked
away the flies with swinging tails. Deacon Baxter was taking his cows to a pasture far over
the hill, the feed having grown too short in his own fields. Patty was washing dishes in the
kitchen and Waitstill was in the dairy-house at the butter-making, one of her chief delights.
She worked with speed and with beautiful sureness, patting, squeezing, rolling the golden mass,
like the true artist she was, then turning the sweet-scented waxen balls out of the mould on
to the big stone-china platter that stood waiting. She had been up early and for the last hour
she had toiled with devouring eagerness that she might have a little time to herself. It was
hers now, for Patty would be busy with the beds after she finished the dishes, so she drew
a folded paper from her pocket, the first communication she had ever received in Ivory's handwriting,
and sat down to read it.

MY DEAR WAITSTILL:--

Rodman will take this packet and leave it with you when he finds opportunity. It is not in
any real sense a letter, so I am in no danger of incurring your father's displeasure. You will
probably have heard new rumors concerning my father during the past few days, for Peter Morrill
has been to Enfield, New Hampshire, where he says letters have been received stating that my
father died in Cortland, Ohio, more than five years ago. I shall do what I can to substantiate
this fresh report as I have always done with all the previous ones, but I have little hope
of securing reliable information at this distance, and after this length of time. I do not
know when I can ever start on a personal quest myself, for even had I the money I could not
leave home until Rodman is much older, and fitted for greater responsibility. Oh! Waitstill,
how you have helped my poor, dear mother! Would that I were free to tell you how I value your
friendship! It is something more than mere friendship! What you are doing is like throwing
a life-line to a sinking human being. Two or three times, of late, mother has forgotten to
set out the supper things for my father. Her ten years' incessant waiting for him seems to
have subsided a little, and in its place she watches for you. [Ivory had written "watches for
her daughter" but carefully erased the last two words.] You come but seldom, but her heart
feeds on the sight of you. What she needed, it seems, was the magical touch of youth and health
and strength and sympathy, the qualities you possess in such great measure.

If I had proof of my father's death I think now, perhaps, that I might try to break it gently
to my mother, as if it were fresh news, and see if possibly I might thus remove her principal
hallucination. You see now, do you not, how sane she is in many, indeed in most ways,--how
sweet and lovable, even how sensible?

To help you better to understand the influence that has robbed me of both father and mother
and made me and mine the subject of town and tavern gossip for years past, I have written for
you just a sketch of the "Cochrane craze"; the romantic story of a man who swayed the wills
of his fellow-creatures in a truly marvellous manner. Some local historian of his time will
doubtless give him more space; my wish is to have you know something more of the circumstances
that have made me a prisoner in life instead of a free man; but prisoner as I am at the moment,
I am sustained just now by a new courage. I read in my copy of Ovid last night: "The best of
weapons is the undaunted heart." This will help you, too, in your hard life, for yours is the
most undaunted heart in all the world.

IVORY BOYNTON

The chronicle of Jacob Cochrane's career in the little villages near the Saco River has no
such interest for the general reader as it had for Waitstill Baxter. She hung upon every word
that Ivory had written and realized more clearly than ever before the shadow that had followed
him since early boyhood; the same shadow that had fallen across his mother's mind and left,
continual twilight there.

No one really knew, it seemed, why or from whence Jacob Cochrane had come to Edgewood. He simply
appeared at the old tavern, a stranger, with satchel in hand, to seek entertainment. Uncle
Bart had often described this scene to Waitstill, for he was one of those sitting about the
great open fire at the time. The man easily slipped into the group and soon took the lead in
conversation, delighting all with his agreeable personality, his nimble tongue and graceful
speech. At supper-time the hostess and the rest of the family took their places at the long
table, as was the custom, and he astonished them by his knowledge not only of town history,
but of village matters they had supposed unknown to any one.

When the stranger had finished his supper and returned to the bar-room, he had to pass through
a long entry, and the landlady, whispering to her daughter, said:--

"Betsy, you go up to the chamber closet and get the silver and bring it down. This man is going
to sleep there and I am afraid of him. He must be a fortune-teller, and the Lord only knows
what else!"

In going to the chamber the daughter had to pass through the bar-room. As she was moving quietly
through, hoping to escape the notice of the newcomer, he turned in his chair, and looking her
full in the face, suddenly said:--

"Madam, you needn't touch your silver. I don't want it. I am a gentleman."

Whereupon the bewildered Betsy scuttled back to her mother and told her the strange guest was
indeed a fortune-teller.

Of Cochrane's initial appearance as a preacher Ivory had told Waitstill in their talk in the
churchyard early in the summer. It was at a child's funeral that the new prophet created his
first sensation and there, too, that Aaron and Lois Boynton first came under his spell. The
whole countryside had been just then wrought up to a state of religious excitement by revival
meetings and Cochrane gained the benefit of this definite preparation for his work. He claimed
that all his sayings were from divine inspiration and that those who embraced his doctrine
received direct communication from the Almighty. He disdained formal creeds and all manner
of church organizations, declaring sectarian names to be marks of the beast and all church
members to be in Babylon. He introduced re-baptism as a symbolic cleansing from sectarian stains,
and after some months advanced a proposition that his flock hold all things in common. He put
a sudden end to the solemn "deaconing-out" and droning of psalm tunes and grafted on to his
form of worship lively singing and marching accompanied by clapping of hands and whirling in
circles; during the progress of which the most hysterical converts, or the most fully "Cochranized,"
would swoon upon the floor; or, in obeying their leader's instructions to "become as little
children," would sometimes go through the most extraordinary and unmeaning antics.

It was not until he had converted hundreds to the new faith that he added more startling revelations
to his gospel. He was in turn bold, mystical, eloquent, audacious, persuasive, autocratic;
and even when his self-styled communications from the "Almighty" controverted all that his
hearers had formerly held to be right, he still magnetized or hypnotized them into an unwilling
assent to his beliefs. There was finally a proclamation to the effect that marriage vows were
to be annulled when advisable and that complete spiritual liberty was to follow; a liberty
in which a new affinity might be sought, and a spiritual union begun upon earth, a union as
nearly approximate to God's standards as faulty human beings could manage to attain.

Some of the faithful fell away at this time, being unable to accept the full doctrine, but
retained their faith in Cochrane's original power to convert sinners and save them from the
wrath of God. Storm-clouds began to gather in the sky however, as the delusion spread, month
by month and local ministers everywhere sought to minimize the influence of the dangerous orator,
who rose superior to every attack and carried himself like some magnificent martyr-at-will
among the crowds that now criticized him here or there in private and in public.

"What a picture of splendid audacity he must have been," wrote Ivory, "when he entered the
orthodox meeting-house at a huge gathering where he knew that the speakers were to denounce
his teachings. Old Parson Buzzell gave out his text from the high pulpit: Mark XIII, 37, 'AND
WHAT I SAY UNTO YOU I SAY UNTO ALL, WATCH!' Just here Cochrane stepped in at the open door
of the church and heard the warning, meant, he knew, for himself, and seizing the moment of
silence following the reading of the text, he cried in his splendid sonorous voice, without
so much as stirring from his place within the door-frame: "'Behold I stand at the door and
knock. If any man hear my voice I will come in to him and will sup with him,--I come to preach
the everlasting gospel to every one that heareth, and all that I want here is my bigness on
the floor.'"

"I cannot find," continued Ivory on another page, "that my father or mother ever engaged in
any of the foolish and childish practices which disgraced the meetings of some of Cochrane's
most fanatical followers and converts. By my mother's conversations (some of which I have repeated
to you, but which may be full of errors, because of her confusion of mind), I believe she must
have had a difference of opinion with my father on some of these views, but I have no means
of knowing this to a certainty; nor do I know that the question of choosing spiritual consorts'
ever came between or divided them. This part of the delusion always fills me with such unspeakable
disgust that I have never liked to seek additional light from any of the older men and women
who might revel in giving it. That my mother did not sympathize with my father's going out
to preach Cochrane's gospel through the country, this I know, and she was so truly religious,
so burning with zeal, that had she fully believed in my father's mission she would have spurred
him on, instead of endeavoring to detain him."

"You know the retribution that overtook Cochrane at last," wrote Ivory again, when he had shown
the man's early victories and his enormous influence. "There began to be indignant protests
against his doctrines by lawyers and doctors, as well as by ministers; not from all sides however;
for remember, in extenuation of my father's and my mother's espousal of this strange belief,
that many of the strongest and wisest men, as well as the purest and finest women in York county
came under this man's spell for a time and believed in him implicitly, some of them even unto
the end.

"Finally there was Cochrane's arrest and examination, the order for him to appear at the Supreme
Court, his failure to do so, his recapture and trial, and his sentence of four years imprisonment
on several counts, in all of which he was proved guilty. Cochrane had all along said that the
Anointed of the Lord would never be allowed to remain in jail, but he was mistaken, for he
stayed in the State's Prison at Charlestown, Massachusetts, for the full duration of his sentence.
Here (I am again trying to plead the cause of my father and mother), here he received much
sympathy and some few visitors, one of whom walked all the way from Edgewood to Boston, a hundred
and fifteen miles, with a petition for pardon, a petition which was delivered, and refused,
at the Boston State House. Cochrane issued from prison a broken and humiliated man, but if
report says true, is still living, far out of sight and knowledge, somewhere in New Hampshire.
He once sent my father an epitaph of his own selection, asking him to have it carved upon his
gravestone should he die suddenly when away from his friends. My mother often repeats it, not
realizing how far from the point it sounds to us who never knew him in his glory, but only
in his downfall.

   "'He spread his arms full wide abroad
       His works are ever before his God,
     His name on earth shall long remain,
       Through envious sinners fret in vain.'"

"We are certain," concluded Ivory, "that my father preached with Cochrane in Limington, Limerick,
and Parsonsfield; he also wrote from Enfield and Effingham in New Hampshire; after that, all
is silence. Various reports place him in Boston, in New York, even as far west as Ohio, whether
as Cochranite evangelist or what not, alas! we can never know. I despair of ever tracing his
steps. I only hope that he died before he wandered too widely, either from his belief in God
or his fidelity to my mother's long-suffering love."

Waitstill read the letter twice through and replaced it in her dress to read again at night.
It seemed the only tangible evidence of Ivory's love that she had ever received and she warmed
her heart with what she felt that he had put between the lines.

"Would that I were free to tell you how I value your friendship!" "My mother's heart feeds
on the sight of you!" "I want you to know something of the circumstances that have made me
a prisoner in life, instead of a free man." "Yours is the most undaunted heart in all the world!"
These sentences Waitstill rehearsed again and again and they rang in her ears like music, converting
all the tasks of her long day into a deep and silent joy.

XIX. AT THE BRICK STORE

THERE were two grand places for gossip in the community; the old tavern on the Edgewood side
of the bridge and the brick store in Riverboro. The company at the Edgewood Tavern would be
a trifle different in character, more picturesque, imposing, and eclectic because of the transient
guests that gave it change and variety. Here might be found a judge or lawyer on his way to
court; a sheriff with a handcuffed prisoner; a farmer or two, stopping on the road to market
with a cartful of produce; and an occasional teamster, peddler, and stage-driver. On winter
nights champion story-tellers like Jed Morrill and Rish Bixby would drop in there and hang
their woollen neck-comforters on the pegs along the wall-side, where there were already hats,
topcoats, and fur mufflers, as well as stacks of whips, canes, and ox-goads standing in the
corners. They would then enter the room, rubbing their hands genially, and, nodding to Companion
Pike, Cephas Cole, Phil Perry and others, ensconce themselves snugly in the group by the great
open fireplace. The landlord was always glad to see them enter, for their stories, though old
to him, were new to many of the assembled company and had a remarkable greet on the consumption
of liquid refreshment.

On summer evenings gossip was languid in the village, and if any occurred at all it would be
on the loafer's bench at one or the other side of the bridge. When cooler weather came the
group of local wits gathered in Riverboro, either at Uncle Bart's joiner's shop or at the brick
store, according to fancy. The latter place was perhaps the favorite for Riverboro talkers.
It was a large, two-story, square, brick building with a big-mouthed chimney and an open fire.
When every house in the two villages had six feet of snow around it, roads would always be
broken to the brick store, and a crowd of ten or fifteen men would be gathered there talking,
listening, betting, smoking, chewing, bragging, playing checkers, singing, and "swapping stories."

Some of the men had been through the War of 1812 and could display wounds received on the field
of valor; others were still prouder of scars won in encounters with the Indians, and there
was one old codger, a Revolutionary veteran, Bill Dunham by name, who would add bloody tales
of his encounters with the "Husshons." His courage had been so extraordinary and his slaughter
so colossal that his hearers marvelled that there was a Hessian left to tell his side of the
story, and Bill himself doubted if such were the case.

"'T is an awful sin to have on your soul," Bill would say from his place in a dark corner,
where he would sit with his hat pulled down over his eyes till the psychological moment came
for the "Husshons" to be trotted out. "'T is an awful sin to have on your soul,--the extummination
of a race o' men; even if they wa'n't nothin' more 'n so many ignorant cockroaches. Them was
the great days for fightin'! The Husshons was the biggest men I ever seen on the field, most
of 'em standin' six feet eight in their stockin's,--but Lord! how we walloped 'em! Once we
had a cannon mounted an' loaded for 'em that was so large we had to draw the ball into it with
a yoke of oxen!"

Bill paused from force of habit, just as he had paused for the last twenty years. There had
been times when roars of incredulous laughter had greeted this boast, but most of this particular
group had heard the yarn more than once and let it pass with a smile and a wink, remembering
the night that Abel Day had asked old Bill how they got the oxen out of the cannon on that
most memorable occasion.

"Oh!" said Bill, "that was easy enough; we jest unyoked 'em an' turned 'em out o' the primin'-hole!"

It was only early October, but there had been a killing frost, and Ezra Simms, who kept the
brick store, flung some shavings and small wood on the hearth and lighted a blaze, just to
induce a little trade and start conversation on what threatened to be a dull evening. Peter
Morrill, Jed's eldest brother, had lately returned from a long trip through the state and into
New Hampshire, and his adventures by field and flood were always worth listening to. He went
about the country mending clocks, and many an old time-piece still bears his name, with the
date of repairing, written in pencil on the inside of its door.

There was never any lack of subjects at the brick store, the idiosyncrasies of the neighbors
being the most prolific source of anecdote and comment. Of scandal about women there was little,
though there would be occasional harmless pleasantries concerning village love affairs; prophecies
of what couple would be next "published" in the black-walnut frame up at the meeting-house;
a genial comment on the number and chances of Patience Baxter's various beaux; and whenever
all else failed, the latest story of Deacon Baxter's parsimony, in which the village traced
the influence of heredity.

"He can't hardly help it, inheritin' it on both sides," was Abel Day's opinion. "The Baxters
was allers snug, from time 'memorial, and Foxy's the snuggest of 'em. When I look at his ugly
mug an' hear his snarlin' voice, I thinks to myself, he's goin' the same way his father did.
When old Levi Baxter was left a widder-man in that house o' his'n up river, he grew wuss an'
wuss, if you remember, till he wa'n't hardly human at the last; and I don't believe Foxy even
went up to his own father's funeral."

"'T would 'a' served old Levi right if nobody else had gone," said Rish Bixby. "When his wife
died he refused to come into the house till the last minute. He stayed to work in the barn
until all the folks had assembled, and even the men were all settin' down on benches in the
kitchen. The parson sent me out for him, and I'm blest if the old skunk didn't come in through
the crowd with his sleeves rolled up,--went to the sink and washed, and then set down in the
room where the coffin was, as cool as a cowcumber."

"I remember that funeral well," corroborated Abel Day. "An' Mis' Day heerd Levi say to his
daughter, as soon as they'd put poor old Mrs. Baxter int' the grave: 'Come on, Marthy; there
's no use cryin' over spilt milk; we'd better go home an' husk out the rest o' that corn.'
Old Foxy could have inherited plenty o' meanness from his father, that's certain, an' he's
added to his inheritance right along, like the thrifty man he is. I hate to think o' them two
fine girls wearin' their fingers to the bone for his benefit."

"Oh, well! 't won't last forever," said Rish Bixby. "They're the handsomest couple o' girls
on the river an' they'll get husbands afore many years. Patience'll have one pretty soon, by
the looks. She never budges an inch but Mark Wilson or Phil Perry are follerin' behind, with
Cephas Cole watchin' his chance right along, too. Waitstill don't seem to have no beaux; what
with flyin' around to keep up with the Deacon, an' bein' a mother to Patience, her hands is
full, I guess."

"If things was a little mite dif'rent all round, I could prognosticate who Waitstill could
keep house for," was Peter Morrill's opinion.

"You mean Ivory Boynton? Well, if the Deacon was asked he'd never give his consent, that's
certain; an' Ivory ain't in no position to keep a wife anyways. What was it you heerd 'bout
Aaron Boynton up to New Hampshire, Peter?" asked Abel Day.

"Consid'able, one way an' another; an' none of it would 'a' been any comfort to Ivory. I guess
Aaron 'n' Jake Cochrane was both of 'em more interested in savin' the sisters' souls than the
brothers'! Aaron was a fine-appearin' man, and so was Jake for that matter, 'n' they both had
the gift o' gab. There's nothin' like a limber tongue if you want to please the women-folks!
If report says true, Aaron died of a fever out in Ohio somewheres; Cortland's the place, I
b'lieve. Seems's if he hid his trail all the way from New Hampshire somehow, for as a usual
thing, a man o' book-larnin' like him would be remembered wherever he went. Wouldn't you call
Aaron Boynton a turrible larned man, Timothy?"

Timothy Grant, the parish clerk, had just entered the store on an errand, but being directly
addressed, and judging that the subject under discussion was a discreet one, and that it was
too early in the evening for drinking to begin, he joined the group by the fireside. He had
preached in Vermont for several years as an itinerant Methodist minister before settling down
to farming in Edgewood, only giving up his profession because his quiver was so full of little
Grants that a wandering life was difficult and undesirable. When Uncle Bart Cole had remarked
that Mis' Grant had a little of everything in the way of baby-stock now,--black, red, an' yaller-haired,
dark and light complected, fat an' lean, tall an' short, twins an' singles,--Jed Morrill had
observed dryly: "Yes, Mis' Grant kind o' reminds me of charity."

"How's that?" inquired Uncle Bart.

"She beareth all things," chuckled Jed.

"Aaron Boynton was, indeed, a man of most adhesive larnin'," agreed Timothy, who had the reputation
of the largest and most unusual vocabulary in Edgewood. "Next to Jacob Cochrane I should say
Aaron had more grandeloquence as an orator than any man we've ever had in these parts. It don't
seem's if Ivory was goin' to take after his father that way. The little feller, now, is smart's
a whip, an' could talk the tail off a brass monkey."

"Yes, but Rodman ain't no kin to the Boyntons," Abel reminded him. "He inhails from the other
side o' the house."

"That's so; well, Ivory does, for certain, an' takes after his mother, right enough, for she
hain't spoken a dozen words in as many years, I guess. Ivory's got a sight o' book-knowledge,
though, an' they do say he could talk Greek an' Latin both, if we had any of 'em in the community
to converse with. I've never paid no intention to the dead languages, bein' so ocker-pied with
other studies."

"Why do they call 'em the dead languages, Tim?" asked Rish Bixby.

"Because all them that ever spoke 'em has perished off the face o' the land," Timothy answered
oracularly. "Dead an' gone they be, lock, stock, an' barrel; yet there was a time when Latins
an' Crustaceans an' Hebrews an' Prooshians an' Australians an' Simesians was chatterin' away
in their own tongues, an' so pow'ful that they was wallopin' the whole earth, you might say."

"I bet yer they never tried to wallop these here United States," interpolated Bill Dunham from
the dark corner by the molasses hogs-head.

"Is Ivory in here?" The door opened and Rodman Boynton appeared on the threshold.

"No, sonny, Ivory ain't been in this evening," replied Ezra Simms. "I hope there ain't nothin'
the matter over to your house?"

"No, nothing particular," the boy answered hesitatingly; "only Aunt Boynton don't seem so well
as common and I can't find Ivory anywhere."

"Come along with me; I'll help you look for him an' then I'll go as fur as the lane with yer
if we don't find him." And kindly Rish Bixby took the boy's hand and left the store.

"Mis' Boynton had a spell, I guess!" suggested the storekeeper, peering through the door into
the darkness. "'T ain't like Ivory to be out nights and leave her to Rod."

"She don't have no spells," said Abel Day. "Uncle Bart sees consid'able of Ivory an' he says
his mother is as quiet as a lamb.--Couldn't you git no kind of a certif'cate of Aaron's death
out o' that Enfield feller, Peter? Seems's if that poor woman'd oughter be stopped watchin'
for a dead man; tuckerin' herself all out, an' keepin' Ivory an' the boy all nerved up."

"I've told Ivory everything I could gether up in the way of information, and give him the names
of the folks in Ohio that had writ back to New Hampshire. I didn't dialate on Aaron's goin's-on
in Effingham an' Portsmouth, cause I dassay 't was nothin' but scandal. Them as hates the Cochranites'll
never allow there's any good in 'em, whereas I've met some as is servin' the Lord good an'
constant, an' indulgin' in no kind of foolishness an' deviltry whatsoever."

"Speakin' o' Husshons," said Bill Dunham from his corner, "I remember--"

"We wa'n't alludin' to no Husshons," retorted Timothy Grant. "We was dealin' with the misfortunes
of Aaron Boynton, who never fit valoriously on the field o' battle, but perished out in Ohio
of scarlit fever, if what they say in Enfield is true."

"Tis an easy death," remarked Bill argumentatively. "Scarlit fever don't seem like nothin'
to me! Many's the time I've been close enough to fire at the eyeball of a Husshon, an' run
the resk o' bein' blown to smithereens!--calm and cool I alters was, too! Scarlit fever is
an easy death from a warrior's p'int o' view!"

"Speakin' of easy death," continued Timothy, "you know I'm a great one for words, bein' something
of a scholard in my small way. Mebbe you noticed that Elder Boone used a strange word in his
sermon last Sunday? Now an' then, when there's too many yawnin' to once in the congregation,
Parson'll out with a reg'lar jaw-breaker to wake 'em up. The word as near as I could ketch
it was 'youthinasia.' I kep' holt of it till noontime an' then I run home an' looked through
all the y's in the dictionary without findin' it. One would rather, however, dwell on the brighter
hues of the picture than on its shadows and blemishes; let us not, then, seek to "draw his
frailties from their dread abode." His greatest fault was his renunciation of a father's duty
to his offspring; but this crime he expiated by a long and bitter repentance. We cannot, perhaps,
very readily excuse the way in which he has occasionally treated the memory of his mistress and
benefactress.

That he loved Madame de Warens--his 'Mamma'--deeply and sincerely is undeniable, notwithstanding
which he now and then dwells on her improvidence and her feminine indiscretions with an unnecessary
and unbecoming lack of delicacy that has an unpleasant effect on the reader, almost seeming
to justify the remark of one of his most lenient critics--that, after all, Rousseau had the
soul of a lackey. He possessed, however, many amiable and charming qualities, both as a man
and a writer, which were evident to those amidst whom he lived, and will be equally so to the
unprejudiced reader of the Confessions. He had a profound sense of justice and a real desire
for the improvement and advancement of the race. Owing to these excellences he was beloved
to the last even by persons whom he tried to repel, looking upon them as members of a band of
conspirators, bent upon destroying his domestic peace and depriving him of the means of subsistence.

Those
of his writings that are most nearly allied in tone and spirit to the 'Confessions' are the
'Reveries d'un Promeneur Solitaire' and 'La Nouvelle Heloise'. His correspondence throws much
light on his life and character, as do also parts of 'Emile'. It is not easy in our day to
realize the effect wrought upon the public mind by the advent of 'La Nouvelle Heloise'. Julie and
Saint-Preux became names to conjure with; their ill-starred amours
were everywhere sighed and wept over by the tender-hearted fair; indeed,
in composing this work, Rousseau may be said to have done for Switzerland
what the author of the Waverly Novels did for Scotland, turning its
mountains, lakes and islands, formerly regarded with aversion, into
a fairyland peopled with creatures whose joys and sorrows appealed
irresistibly to every breast.

Shortly after its publication began to flow that stream of tourists and travellers which tends
to make Switzerland not only more celebrated but more opulent every
year.

It, is one of the few romances written in the epistolary form that do not oppress the reader
with a sense of languor and unreality; for its creator poured into its pages a tide of passion
unknown to his frigid and stilted predecessors, and dared to depict
Nature as she really is, not as she was misrepresented by the modish
authors and artists of the age.

Some persons seem shy of owning an acquaintance with this work; indeed, it has been made the
butt of ridicule by the disciples of a decadent school.

Its faults and its beauties are on the surface; Rousseau's own estimate is freely expressed at
the beginning of the eleventh book of the Confessions and elsewhere. It might be wished that the
preface had been differently conceived and worded; for the assertion made therein that the book
may prove dangerous has caused it to be inscribed on a sort of Index,
and good folk who never read a line of it blush at its name.



"I don't see where in thunder you picked up so much larnin', Timothy!" It was Abel Day's exclamation,
but every one agreed with him.

XX. THE ROD THAT BLOSSOMED

IVORY BOYNTON had taken the horse and gone to the village on an errand, a rare thing for him
to do after dark, so Rod was thinking, as he sat in the living-room learning his Sunday-School
lesson on the same evening that the men were gossiping at the brick store. His aunt had required
him, from the time when he was proficient enough to do so, to read at least a part of a chapter
in the Bible every night. Beginning with Genesis he had reached Leviticus and had made up his
mind that the Bible was a much more difficult book than "Scottish Chiefs," not withstanding
the fact that Ivory helped him over most of the hard places. At the present juncture he was
vastly interested in the subject of "rods" as unfolded in the book of Exodus, which was being
studied by his Sunday-School class. What added to the excitement was the fact that his uncle's
Christian name, Aaron, kept appearing in the chronicle, as frequently as that of the great
lawgiver Moses himself; and there were many verses about the wonder-working rods of Moses and
Aaron that had a strange effect upon the boy's ear, when he read them aloud, as he loved to
do whenever he was left alone for a time. When his aunt was in the room his instinct kept him
from doing this, for the mere mention of the name of Aaron, he feared, might sadden his aunt
and provoke in her that dangerous vein of reminiscence that made Ivory so anxious.

"It kind o' makes me nervous to be named 'Rod,' Aunt Boynton," said the boy, looking up from
the Bible. "All the rods in these Exodus chapters do such dreadful things! They become serpents,
and one of them swallows up all the others: and Moses smites the waters with a rod and they
become blood, and the people can't drink the water and the fish die! Then they stretch a rod
across the streams and ponds and bring a plague of frogs over the land, with swarms of flies
and horrible insects."

"That was to show God's power to Pharaoh, and melt his hard heart to obedience and reverence,"
explained Mrs. Boynton, who had known the Bible from cover to cover in her youth and could
still give chapter and verse for hundreds of her favorite passages.

"It took an awful lot of melting, Pharaoh's heart!" exclaimed the boy. "Pharaoh must have been
worse than Deacon Baxter! I wonder if they ever tried to make him good by being kind to him!
I've read and read, but I can't find they used anything on him but plagues and famines and
boils and pestilences and thunder and hail and fire!--Have I got a middle name, Aunt Boynton,
for I don't like Rod very much?"

"I never heard that you had a middle name; you must ask Ivory," said his aunt abstractedly.

"Did my father name me Rod, or my mother?'

"I don't really know; perhaps it was your mother, but don't ask questions, please."

"I forgot, Aunt Boynton! Yes, I think perhaps my mother named me. Mothers 'most always name
their babies, don't they? My mother wasn't like you; she looked just like the picture of Pocahontas
in my History. She never knew about these Bible rods, I guess."

"When you go a little further you will find pleasanter things about rods," said his aunt, knitting,
knitting, intensely, as was her habit, and talking as if her mind were a thousand miles away.
"You know they were just little branches of trees, and it was only God's power that made them
wonderful in any way."

"Oh! I thought they were like the singing-teacher's stick he keeps time with."

"No; if you look at your Concordance you'll finds it gives you a chapter in Numbers where there's
something beautiful about rods. I have forgotten the place; it has been many years since I
looked at it. Find it and read it aloud to me." The boy searched his Concordance and readily
found the reference in the seventeenth chapter of Numbers.

"Stand near me and read," said Mrs. Boynton. "I like to hear the Bible read aloud!"

Rodman took his Bible and read, slowly and haltingly, but with clearness and understanding:

1. AND THE LORD SPAKE UNTO MOSES, SAYING,

2.

Through the boy's mind there darted the flash of a thought, a sad thought. He himself was a
Rod on whom no man's name seemed to be written, orphan that he was, with no knowledge of his
parents!

Suddenly he hesitated, for he had caught sight of the name of Aaron in the verse that he was
about to read, and did not wish to pronounce it in his aunt's hearing.

"This chapter is most too hard for me to read out loud, Aunt Boynton," he stammered. "Can I
study it by myself and read it to Ivory first?" "Go on, go on, you read very sweetly; I can
not remember what comes and I wish to hear it."

The boy continued, but without raising his eyes from the Bible.

3.

4. AND THOU SHALT LAY THEM UP IN THE TABERNACLE OF THE CONGREGATION BEFORE THE TESTIMONY, WHERE
I WILL MEET WITH YOU.

5.

Rodman had read on, absorbed in the story and the picture it presented to his imagination.
He liked the idea of all the princes having a rod according to the house of their fathers;
he liked to think of the little branches being laid on the altar in the tabernacle, and above
all he thought of the longing of each of the princes to have his own rod chosen for the blossoming.

6.

Oh! how the boy hoped that Aaron's branch would be the one chosen to blossom! He felt that
his aunt would be pleased, too; but he read on steadily, with eyes that glowed and breath that
came and went in a very palpitation of interest.

7. AND MOSES LAID UP THE RODS BEFORE THE LORD IN THE TABERNACLE OF WITNESS.

8. AND IT CAME TO PASS, THAT ON THE MORROW MOSES WENT INTO THE TABERNACLE OF WITNESS; AND,
BEHOLD, THE ROD OF AARON WAS BUDDED AND BROUGHT FORTH BUDS, AND BLOOMED BLOSSOMS, AND YIELDED
ALMONDS.

It was Aaron's rod, then, and was an almond branch! How beautiful, for the blossoms would have
been pink; and how the people must have marvelled to see the lovely blooming thing on the dark
altar; first budding, then blossoming, then bearing nuts! And what was the rod chosen for?
He hurried on to the next verse.

9. AND MOSES BROUGHT OUT ALL THE RODS FROM BEFORE THE LORD UNTO ALL THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL:
AND THEY LOOKED, AND TOOK EVERY MAN HIS ROD.

"Oh! Aunt Boynton!" cried the boy, "I love my name after I've heard about the almond rod! Aren't
you proud that it's Uncle's name that was written on the one that blossomed?"

He turned swiftly to find that his aunt's knitting had slipped on the floor; her nerveless
hands drooped by her side as if there were no life in them, and her head had fallen against
the back of her chair. The boy was paralyzed with fear at the sight of her closed eyes and
the deathly pallor of her face. He had never seen her like this before, and Ivory was away.
He flew for a bottle of spirit, always kept in the kitchen cupboard for emergencies, and throwing
wood on the fire in passing, he swung the crane so that the tea-kettle was over the flame.
He knew only the humble remedies that he had seen used here or there in illness, and tried
them timidly, praying every moment that he might hear Ivory's step. He warmed a soapstone in
the embers, and taking off Mrs. Boynton's shoes, put it under her cold feet. He chafed her
hands and gently poured a spoonful of brandy between her pale lips. Then sprinkling camphor
on a handkerchief he held it to her nostrils and to his joy she stirred in her chair; before
many minutes her lids fluttered, her lips moved, and she put her hand to her heart.

"Are you better, Aunt dear?" Rod asked in a very wavering and tearful voice.

She did not answer; she only opened her eyes and looked at him. At length she whispered faintly,
"I want Ivory; I want my son."

"He's out, Aunt dear. Shall I help you to bed the way Ivory does? If you'll let me, then I'll
run to the bridge 'cross lots, like lightning, and bring him back."

She assented, and leaning heavily on his slender shoulder, walked feebly into her bedroom off
the living-room. Rod was as gentle as a mother and he was familiar with all the little offices
that could be of any comfort; the soapstone warmed again for her feet, the bringing of her
nightgown from the closet, and when she was in bed, another spoonful of brandy in hot milk;
then the camphor by her side, an extra homespun blanket over her, and the door left open so
that she could see the open fire that he made into a cheerful huddles contrived so that it
would not snap and throw out dangerous sparks in his absence.

All the while he was doing this Mrs. Boynton lay quietly in the bed talking to herself fitfully,
in the faint murmuring tone that was habitual to her. He could distinguish scarcely anything,
only enough to guess that her mind was still on the Bible story that he was reading to her
when she fainted. "THE ROD OF AARON WAS AMONG THE OTHER RODS," he heard her say; and, a moment
later, "BRING AARON'S ROD AGAIN BEFORE THE TESTIMONY."

Was it his uncle's name that had so affected her, wondered the boy, almost sick with remorse,
although he had tried his best to evade her command to read the chapter aloud? What would Ivory,
his hero, his pattern and example, say? It had always seen Rod's pride to carry his little
share of every burden that fell to Ivory, to be faithful and helpful in every task given to
him. He could walk through fire without flinching, he thought, if Ivory told him to, and he
only prayed that he might not be held responsible for this new calamity.

"I want Ivory!" came in a feeble voice from the bedroom.

"Does your side ache worse?" Rod asked, tip-toeing to the door.

"No, I am quite free from pain."

"Would you be afraid to stay alone just for a while if I lock both doors and run to find Ivory
and bring him back?"

"No, I will sleep," she whispered, closing her eyes. "Bring him quickly before I forget what
I want to say to him."

Rod sped down the lane and over the fields to the brick store where Ivory usually bought his
groceries. His cousin was not there, but one of the men came out and offered to take his horse
and drive over the bridge to see if he were at one of the neighbors' on that side of the river.
Not a word did Rod breathe of his aunt's illness; he simply said that she was lonesome for
Ivory, and so he came to find him. In five minutes they saw the Boynton horse hitched to a
tree by the road-side, and in a trice Rod called him and, thanking Mr. Bixby, got into Ivory's
wagon to wait for him. He tried his best to explain the situation as they drove along, but
finally concluded by saying: "Aunt really made me read the chapter to her, Ivory. I tried not
to when I saw Uncle's name in most every verse, but I couldn't help it."

"Of course you couldn't! Now you jump out and hitch the horse while I run in and see that nothing
has happened while she's been left alone. Perhaps you'll have to go for Dr. Perry."

Ivory went in with fear and trembling, for there was no sound save the ticking of the tall
clock. The fire burned low upon the hearth, and the door was open into his mother's room. He
lifted a candle that Rod had left ready on the table and stole softly to her bedside. She was
sleeping like a child, but exhaustion showed itself in every line of her face. He felt her
hands and feet and found the soapstone in the bed; saw the brandy bottle and the remains of
a cup of milk on the light-stand; noted the handkerchief, still strong of camphor on the counterpane,
and the blanket spread carefully over her knees, and then turned approvingly to meet Rod stealing
into the room on tiptoe, his eyes big with fear.

"We won't wake her, Rod. I'll watch a while, then sleep on the sitting-room lounge."

"Let me watch, Ivory! I'd feel better if you'd let me, honest I would!"

The boy's face was drawn with anxiety. Ivory's attention was attracted by the wistful eyes
and the beauty of the forehead under the dark hair. He seemed something more than the child
of yesterday--a care and responsibility and expense, for all his loving obedience; he seemed
all at once different to-night; older, more dependable, more trustworthy; in fact, a positive
comfort and help in time of trouble.

"I did the best I knew how; was anything wrong?" asked the boy, as Ivory stood regarding him
with a friendly smile.

"Nothing wrong, Rod! Dr. Perry couldn't have done any better with what you had on hand. I don't
know how I should get along without you, boy!" Here Ivory patted Rod's shoulder. "You're not
a child any longer, Rod; you're a man and a brother, that's what you are; and to prove it I'll
take the first watch and call you up at one o'clock to take the second, so that I can be ready
for my school work to-morrow! How does that suit you?"

"Tip-top!" said the boy, flushing with pride. "I'll lie down with my clothes on; it's only
nine o'clock and I'll get four hours' sleep; that's a lot more than Napoleon used to have!"

He carried the Bible upstairs and just before he blew out his candle he looked again at the
chapter in Numbers, thinking he would show it to Ivory privately next day. Again the story
enchanted him, and again, like a child, he put his own name and his living self among the rods
in the tabernacle.

"Ivory would be the prince of our house," he thought. "Oh! how I'd like to be Ivory's rod and
have it be the one that was chosen to blossom and keep the rebels from murmuring!"

XXI. LOIS BURIES HER DEAD

THE replies that Ivory had received from his letters of inquiry concerning his father's movements
since leaving Maine, and his possible death in the West, left no reasonable room for doubt.
Traces of Aaron Boynton in New Hampshire, in Massachusetts, in New York, and finally in Ohio,
all pointed in one direction, and although there were gaps and discrepancies in the account
of his doings, the fact of his death seemed to be established by two apparently reliable witnesses.

That he was not unaccompanied in his earliest migrations seemed clear, but the woman mentioned
as his wife disappeared suddenly from the reports, and the story of his last days was the story
of a broken-down, melancholy, unfriended man, dependent for the last offices on strangers.
He left no messages and no papers, said Ivory's correspondent, and never made mention of any
family connections whatsoever. He had no property and no means of defraying the expenses of
his illness after he was stricken with the fever. No letters were found among his poor effects
and no article that could prove his identity, unless it were a small gold locket, which bore
no initials or marks of any kind, but which contained two locks of fair and brown hair, intertwined.
The tiny trinket was enclosed in the letter, as of no value, unless some one recognized it
as a keepsake. Ivory read the correspondence with a heavy heart, inasmuch as it corroborated
all his worst fears. He had sometimes secretly hoped that his father might return and explain
the reason of his silence; or in lieu of that, that there might come to light the story of
a pilgrimage, fanatical, perhaps, but innocent of evil intention, one that could be related
to his wife and his former friends, and then buried forever with the death that had ended it.

Neither of these hopes could now ever be realized, nor his father's memory made other than
a cause for endless regret, sorrow, and shame. His father, who had begun life so handsomely,
with rare gifts of mind and personality, a wife of unusual beauty and intelligence, and while
still young in years, a considerable success in his chosen profession. His poor father! What
could have been the reasons for so complete a downfall?

Ivory asked Dr. Perry's advice about showing one or two of the briefer letters and the locket
to his mother. After her fainting fit and the exhaustion that followed it, Ivory begged her
to see the old doctor, but without avail. Finally, after days of pleading he took her hands
in his and said: "I do everything a mortal man can do to be a good son to you, mother; won't
you do this to please me, and trust that I know what is best?" Whereupon she gave a trembling
assent, as if she were agreeing to something indescribably painful, and indeed this sight of
a former friend seemed to frighten her strangely.

After Dr. Perry had talked with her for a half-hour and examined her sufficiently to make at
least a reasonable guess as to her mental and physical condition, he advised Ivory to break
the news of her husband's death to her.

"If you can get her to comprehend it," he said, "it is bound to be a relief from this terrible
suspense."

"Will there be any danger of making her worse? Mightn't the shock Cause too violent emotion?"
asked Ivory anxiously.

"I don't think she is any longer capable of violent emotion," the doctor answered. "Her mind
is certainly clearer than it was three years ago, but her body is nearly burned away by the
mental conflict. There is scarcely any part of her but is weary; weary unto death, poor soul.
One cannot look at her patient, lovely face without longing to lift some part of her burden.
Make a trial, Ivory; it's a justifiable experiment and I think it will succeed. I must not
come any oftener myself than is absolutely necessary; she seemed afraid of me."

The experiment did succeed. Lois Boynton listened breathlessly, with parted lips, and with
apparent comprehension, to the story Ivory told her. Over and over again he told her gently
the story of her husband's death, trying to make it sink into her mind clearly, so that there
should be no consequent bewilderment She was calm and silent, though her face showed that she
was deeply moved. She broke down only when Ivory showed her the locket.

"I gave it to my husband when you were born, my son!" she sobbed. "After all, it seems no surprise
to me that your father is dead. He said he would come back when the Mayflowers bloomed, and
when I saw the autumn leaves I knew that six months must have gone and he would never stay
away from us for six months without writing. That is the reason I have seldom watched for him
these last weeks. I must have known that it was no use!"

She rose from her rocking-chair and moved feebly towards her bedroom. "Can you spare me the
rest of the day, Ivory?" she faltered, as she leaned on her son and made her slow progress
from the kitchen. "I must bury the body of my grief and I want to be alone at first... If only
I could see Waitstill! We have both thought this was coming: she has a woman's instinct...
she is younger and stronger than I am, and she said it was braver not to watch and pine and
fret as I have done... but to have faith in God that He would send me a sign when He was ready....
She said if I could manage to be braver you would be happier too... ." Here she sank on to
her bed exhausted, but still kept up her murmuring faintly and feebly, between long intervals
of silence.

"Do you think Waitstill could come to-morrow?" she asked. "I am so much braver when she is
here with me.... After supper I will put away your father's cup and plate once and for all,
Ivory, and your eyes need never fill with tears again, as they have, sometimes, when you have
seen me watching.... You needn't worry about me; I am remembering better these days, and the
bells that ring in my ears are not so loud. If only the pain in my side were less and I were
not so pressed for breath, I should be quite strong and could see everything clearly at last.
... There is something else that remains to be remembered. I have almost caught it once and
it must come to me again before long.... Put the locket under my pillow, Ivory; close the door,
please, and leave me to myself.... I can't make it quite clear, my feeling about it, but it
seems just as if I were going to bury your father and I want to be alone."

XXII. HARVEST-TIME

NEW ENGLAND'S annual pageant of autumn was being unfolded day by day in all its accustomed
splendor, and the feast and riot of color, the almost unimaginable glory, was the common property
of the whole countryside, rich and poor, to be shared alike if perchance all eyes were equally
alive to the wonder and the beauty.

Scarlet days and days of gold followed fast one upon the other; Saco Water flowing between
quiet woodlands that were turning red and russet and brown, and now plunging through rocky
banks all blazing with crimson.

Waitstill Baxter went as often as she could to the Boynton farm, though never when Ivory was
at home, and the affection between the younger and the older woman grew closer and closer,
so that it almost broke Waitstill's heart to leave the fragile creature, when her presence
seemed to bring such complete peace and joy.

"No one ever clung to me so before," she often thought as she was hurrying across the fields
after one of her half-hour visits. "But the end must come before long. Ivory does not realize
it yet, nor Rodman, but it seems as if she could never survive the long winter. Thanksgiving
Day is drawing nearer and nearer, and how little I am able to do for a single creature, to
prove to God that I am grateful for my existence! I could, if only I were free, make such a
merry day for Patty and Mark and their young friends. Oh! what joy if father were a man who
would let me set a bountiful table in our great kitchen; would sit at the head and say grace,
and we could bow our heads over the cloth, a united family! Or, if I had done my duty in my
home and could go to that other where I am so needed--go with my father's blessing! If only
I could live in that sad little house and brighten it! I would trim the rooms with evergreen
and creeping-Jenny; I would put scarlet alder berries and white ever-lastings and blue fringed
gentians in the vases! I would put the last bright autumn leaves near Mrs. Boynton's bed and
set out a tray with a damask napkin and the best of my cooking; then I would go out to the
back door where the woodbine hangs like a red waterfall and blow the dinner-horn for my men
down in the harvest-field! All the woman in me is wasting, wasting! Oh! my dear, dear man,
how I long for him! Oh! my own dear man, my helpmate, shall I ever live by his side? I love
him, I want him, I need him! And my dear little unmothered, unfathered boy, how happy I could
make him! How I should love to cook and sew for them all and wrap them in comfort! How I should
love to smooth my dear mother's last days,--for she is my mother, in spirit, in affection,
in desire, and in being Ivory's!"

Waitstill's longing, her discouragement, her helplessness, overcame her wholly, and she flung
herself down under a tree in the pasture in a very passion of sobbing, a luxury in which she
could seldom afford to indulge herself. The luxury was short-lived, for in five minutes she
heard Rodman's voice, and heard him running to meet her as he often did when she came to their
house or went away from it, dogging her footsteps or Patty's whenever or wherever he could
waylay them.

"Why, my dear, dear Waity, did you tumble and hurt yourself?" the boy cried.

"Yes, dreadfully, but I'm better now, so walk along with me and tell me the news, Rod."

"There isn't much news. Ivory told you I'd left school and am studying at home? He helps me
evenings and I'm 'way ahead of the class."

"No, Ivory didn't tell me. I haven't seen him lately."

"I said if the big brother kept school, the little brother ought to keep house," laughed the boy.

"He says I can hire out as a cook pretty soon! Aunt Boynton's 'most always up to get dinner
and supper, but I can make lots of things now,-- things that Aunt Boynton can eat, too."

"Oh, I cannot bear to have you and Ivory cooking for yourselves!" exclaimed Waitstill, the
tears starting again from her eyes. "I must come over the next time when you are at home, Rod,
and I can help you make something nice for supper.

"We get along pretty well," said Rodman contentedly. "I love book-learning like Ivory and I'm
going to be a schoolmaster or a preacher when Ivory's a lawyer. Do you think Patty'd like a
schoolmaster or a preacher best, and do you think I'd be too young to marry her by and by,
if she would wait for me?"

"I didn't think you had any idea of marrying Patty," laughed Waitstill through her tears. "Is
this something new?"

"It's not exactly new," said Rod, jumping along like a squirrel in the path. "Nobody could
look at Patty and not think about marrying her. I'd love to marry you, too, but you re too
big and grand for a boy. Of course, I'm not going to ask Patty yet. Ivory said once you should
never ask a girl until you can keep her like a queen; then after a minute he said: 'Well, maybe
not quite like a queen, Rod, for that would mean longer than a man could wait. Shall we say
until he could keep her like the dearest lady in the land?' That 's the way he said it.--You
do cry dreadfully easy to-day, Waity; I'm sure you barked your leg or skinned your knee when
you fell down.--Don't you think the 'dearest lady in the land' is a nice-sounding sentence?"

"I do, indeed!" cried Waitstill to herself as she turned the words over and over trying to
feed her hungry heart with them.

"I love to hear Ivory talk; it's like the stories in the books. We have our best times in the
barn, for I'm helping with the milking, now. Our yellow cow's name is Molly and the red cow
used to be Dolly, but we changed her to Golly, 'cause she's so troublesome. Molly's an easy
cow to milk and I can get almost all there is, though Ivory comes after me and takes the strippings.
Golly swishes her tail and kicks the minute she hears us coming; then she stands stiff-legged
and grits her teeth and holds on to her milk HARD, and Ivory has to pat and smooth and coax
her every single time. Ivory says she's got a kind of an attachment inside of her that she
shuts down when he begins to milk."

"We had a cross old cow like that, once," said Waitstill absently, loving to hear the boy's
chatter and the eternal quotations from his beloved hero.

"We have great fun cooking, too," continued Rod. "When Aunt Boynton was first sick she stayed
in bed more, and Ivory and I hadn't got used to things. One morning we bound up each other's
burns. Ivory had three fingers and I two, done up in buttery rags to take the fire out. Ivory
called us 'Soldiers dressing their Wounds after the Battle.' Sausages spatter dreadfully, don't
they? And when you turn a pancake it flops on top of the stove. Can you flop one straight, Waity?"

"Yes, I can, straight as a die; that's what girls are made for. Now run along home to your
big brother, and do put on some warmer clothes under your coat; the weather's getting colder."

"Aunt Boynton hasn't patched our thick ones yet, but she will soon, and if she doesn't, Ivory'll
take this Saturday evening and do them himself; he said so."

"He shall not!" cried Waitstill passionately. "It is not seemly for Ivory to sew and mend,
and I will not allow it. You shall bring me those things that need patching without telling
any one, do you hear, and I will meet you on the edge of the pasture Saturday afternoon and
give them back to you. You are not to speak of it to any one, you understand, or perhaps I
shall pound you to a jelly. You'd make a sweet rosy jelly to eat with turkey for Thanksgiving
dinner, you dear, comforting little boy!"

Rodman ran towards home and Waitstill hurried along, scarcely noticing the beauties of the
woods and fields and waysides, all glowing masses of goldenrod and purple frost flowers. The
stone walls were covered with wild-grape and feathery clematis vines. Everywhere in sight the
cornfields lay yellow in the afternoon sun and ox carts heavily loaded with full golden ears
were going home to the barns to be ready for husking.

A sudden breeze among the orchard boughs as she neared the house was followed by a shower of
russets, and everywhere the red Baldwins gleamed on the apple-tree boughs, while the wind-falls
were being gathered and taken to the cider mills. There was a grove of maples on the top of
Town-House Hill and the Baxters' dooryard was a blaze of brilliant color. To see Patty standing
under a little rock maple, her brown linsey-woolsey in I one with the landscape, and the hood
of her brown cape pulled over her bright head, was a welcome for anybody. She looked flushed
and excited as she ran up to her sister and said, "Waity, darling, you've been crying! Has
father been scolding you?"

"No, dear, but my heart is aching to-day so that I can scarcely bear it. A wave of discouragement
came over me as I was walking through the woods, and I gave up to it a bit. I remembered how
soon it will be Thanksgiving Day, and I'll so like to make it happier for you and a few others
that I love."

Patty could have given a shrewd guess as to the chief cause of the heartache, but she forebore
to ask any questions. "Cheer up, Waity," she cried. "You never can tell; we may have a thankful
Thanksgiving, after all! Who knows what may happen? I'm 'strung up' this afternoon and in a
fighting mood. I've felt like a new piece of snappy white elastic all day; it's the air, just
like wine, so cool and stinging and full of courage! Oh, yes, we won't give up hope yet awhile,
Waity, not until we're snowed in!"

"Put your arms round me and give me a good hug, Patty! Love me hard, HARD, for, oh! I need
it badly just now!"

And the two girls clung together for a moment and then went into the house with hands close-locked
and a kind of sad, desperate courage in their young hearts. What would either of them have
done, each of them thought, had she been forced to endure alone the life that went on day after
day in Deacon Baxter's dreary house?

XXIII. AUNT ABBY'S WINDOW

MRS. ABEL DAY had come to spend the afternoon with Aunt Abby Cole and they were seated at the
two sitting-room windows, sweeping the landscape with eagle eyes in the intervals of making
patchwork.

"The foliage has been a little mite too rich this season," remarked Aunt Abby. "I b'lieve I'm
glad to see it thinin' out some, so 't we can have some kind of an idee of what's goin' on
in the village."

"There's plenty goin' on," Mrs. Day answered unctuously; "some of it aboveboard an' some underneath
it."

"An' that's jest where it's aggravatin' to have the leaves so thick and the trees so high between
you and other folks' houses. Trees are good for shade, it's true, but there's a limit to all
things. There was a time when I could see 'bout every-thing that went on up to Baxters', and
down to Bart's shop, and, by goin' up attic, consid'able many things that happened on the bridge.
Bart vows he never planted that plum tree at the back door of his shop; says the children must
have hove out plum stones when they was settin' on the steps and the tree come up of its own
accord. He says he didn't take any notice of it till it got quite a start and then 't was such
a healthy young bush he couldn't bear to root it out. I tell him it's kind O' queer it should
happen to come up jest where it spoils my view of his premises. Men folks are so exasperatin'
that sometimes I wish there was somebody different for us to marry, but there ain't,--so there
we be!"

"They are an awful trial," admitted Mrs. Day. "Abel never sympathizes with my head-aches. I
told him a-Sunday I didn't believe he'd mind if I died the next day, an' all he said was: 'Why
don't you try it an' see, Lyddy?' He thinks that's humorous."

"I know; that's the way Bartholomew talks; I guess they all do. You can see the bridge better
'n I can, Lyddy; has Mark Wilson drove over sence you've been settin' there? He's like one
o' them ostriches that hides their heads in the sand when the bird-catchers are comin' along,
thinkin' 'cause they can't see anything they'll never BE seen! He knows folks would never tell
tales to Deacon Baxter, whatever the girls done; they hate him too bad. Lawyer Wilson lives
so far away, he can't keep any watch o' Mark, an' Mis' Wilson's so cityfied an' purse-proud
nobody ever goes to her with any news, bad or good; so them that's the most concerned is as
blind as bats. Mark's consid'able stiddier'n he used to be, but you needn't tell me he has
any notion of bringin' one o' that Baxter tribe into his family. He's only amusin' himself."

"Patty'll be Mrs. Wilson or nothin'," was Mrs. Day's response. "Both o' them girls is silk
purses an' you can't make sows' ears of 'em. We ain't neither of us hardly fair to Patty, an'
I s'pose it 's because she didn't set any proper value on Cephas."

"Oh, she's good enough for Mark, I guess, though I ain't so sure of his intentions as you be.
She's nobody's fool, Patty ain't, I allow that, though she did treat Cephas like the dirt in
the road. I'm thankful he's come to his senses an' found out the diff'rence between dross an'
gold."

"It's very good of you to put it that way, Abby," Mrs. Day responded gratefully, for it was
Phoebe, her own offspring, who was alluded to as the most precious of metals. "I suppose we'd
better have the publishing notice put up in the frame before Sunday? There'll be a great crowd
out that day and at Thanksgiving service the next Thursday too!"

"Cephas says he don't care how soon folks hears the news, now all's settled," said his mother.
"I guess he's kind of anxious that the village should know jest how little truth there is in
the gossip 'bout him bein' all upset over Patience Baxter. He said they took consid'able notice
of him an' Phoebe settin' together at the Harvest Festival last evenin'. My head was now completely
turned; and during the two days she remained here, I was intoxicated with delight. At her departure,
I would have thrown myself into the water after her, and absolutely
rent the air with my cries.

The week following she sent me sweetmeats, gloves, etc. This certainly would have appeared extremely
gallant, had I not been informed of her marriage at the same instant, and that the journey I
had thought proper to give myself the honor of, was only to buy her
wedding suit.

My indignation may easily be conceived; I shall not attempt to describe it. In this heroic fury,
I swore never more to see the perfidious girl, supposing it the greatest punishment that could
be inflicted on her. This, however, did not occasion her death, for twenty years after, while
on a visit to my father, being on the lake, I asked who those ladies
were in a boat not far from ours.

"What!" said my father smiling, "does not your heart inform you? It is your former flame, it is
Madame Christin, or, if you please, Miss Vulson." I started at the almost forgotten name, and
instantly ordered the waterman to turn off, not judging it worth while to be perjured, however favorable
the opportunity for revenge, in renewing a dispute of twenty years past, with a woman of forty.

Thus,
before my future destination was determined, did I fool away the most precious moments of my youth.
After deliberating a long time on the bent of my natural inclination, they resolved to dispose of
me in a manner the most repugnant to them.

"The Deacon; Cephas is paintin' up to the Mills."

"Well, Mark Wilson's horse an' buggy is meanderin' slowly down Aunt Betty-Jack's hill, an'
Mark is studyin' the road as if he was lookin' for a four-leafed clover."

"He'll hitch at the tavern, or the Edgewood store, an' wait his chance to get a word with Patience,"
said Aunt Abby. "He knows when she takes milk to the Morrills', or butter to the parsonage;
also when she eats an' drinks an' winks her eye an' ketches her breath an' lifts her foot.
Now he's disappeared an' we'll wait.. .. Why, as to that Boston singer,--an' by the way, they
say Ellen Wilson's goin' to take lessons of her this winter,--she kind o' bewildered me, Lyddy!
Of course, I ain't never been to any cities, so I don't feel altogether free to criticise;
but what did you think of her, when she run up so high there, one time? I don't know how high
she went, but I guess there wa'n't no higher to go!"

"It made me kind o' nervous," allowed Mrs. Day.

"Nervous! Bart' an' I broke out in a cold sweat! He said she couldn't hold a candle to Waitstill
Baxter. But it's that little fly-away Wilson girl that'll get the lessons, an' Waitstill will
have to use her voice callin' the Deacon home to dinner. Things ain't divided any too well
in this world, Lyddy."

"Waitstill's got the voice, but she lacks the trainin'. The Boston singer knows her business,
I'll say that for her," said Mrs. Day.

"She's got good stayin' power," agreed Aunt Abby. "Did you notice how she held on to that high
note when she'd clumb where she wanted to git? She's got breath enough to run a gristmill,
that girl has! And how'd she come down, when she got good and ready to start? Why, she zig-zagged
an' saw-toothed the whole way! It kind o' made my flesh creep!"

"I guess part o' the trouble's with us country folks," Mrs. Day responded, "for folks said
she sung runs and trills better'n any woman up to Boston."

"Runs an' trills," ejaculated Abby scornfully. "I was talkin' 'bout singin' not runnin'. My
niece Ella up to Parsonfield has taken three terms on the pianner an' I've heerd her practise.
Scales has got to be done, no doubt, but they'd ought to be done to home, where they belong;
a concert ain't no place for 'em... . There, what did I tell yer? Patience Baxter's crossin'
the bridge with a pail in her hand. She's got that everlastin' yeller-brown, linsey-woolsey
on, an' a white 'cloud' wrapped around her head with con'sid'able red hair showin' as usual.
You can always see her fur's you can a sunrise! And there goes Rod Boynton, chasin' behind
as usual. Those Baxter girls make a perfect fool o' that boy, but I don't s'pose Lois Boynton's
got wit enough to make much fuss over the poor little creeter!"

Mark Wilson could certainly see Patty Baxter as far as he could a sunrise, although he was
not intimately acquainted with that natural phenomenon. He took a circuitous route from his
watch-tower, and, knowing well the point from which there could be no espionage from Deacon
Baxter's store windows, joined Patty in the road, took the pail from her hand, and walked up
the hill beside her. Of course, the village could see them, but, as Aunt Abby had intimated,
there wasn't a man, woman, or child on either side of the river who wouldn't have taken the
part of the Baxter girls against their father.

XXIV. PHOEBE TRIUMPHS

MEANTIME Feeble Phoebe Day was driving her father's horse up to the Mills to bring Cephas Cole
home. It was a thrilling moment, a sort of outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual
tie, for their banns were to be published the next day, so what did it matter if the community,
nay, if the whole universe, speculated as to why she was drawing her beloved back from his
daily toil? It had been an eventful autumn for Cephas. After a third request for the hand of
Miss Patience Baxter, and a refusal of even more than common decision and energy, Cephas turned
about face and employed the entire month of September in a determined assault upon the affections
of Miss Lucy Morrill, but with no better avail. His heart was not ardently involved in this
second wooing, but winter was approaching, he had moved his mother out of her summer quarters
back to the main house, and he doggedly began papering the ell and furnishing the kitchen without
disclosing to his respected parents the identity of the lady for whose comfort he was so hospitably
preparing.

Cephas's belief in the holy state of matrimony as being the only one proper for a man, really
ought to have commended him to the opposite (and ungrateful) sex more than it did, and Lucy
Morrill held as respectful an opinion of the institution and its manifold advantages as Cephas
himself, but she was in a very unsettled frame of mind and not at all susceptible to wooing.
She had a strong preference for Philip Perry, and held an opinion, not altogether unfounded
in human experience, that in course of time, when quite deserted by Patty Baxter, his heart
might possibly be caught on the rebound. It was only a chance, but Lucy would almost have preferred
remaining unmarried, even to the withering age of twenty-five, rather than not be at liberty
to accept Philip Perry in case she should be asked.

Cephas therefore, by the middle of October, could be picturesquely and alliteratively described
as being raw from repeated rejections. His bruised heart and his despised ell literally cried
out for the appreciation so long and blindly withheld. Now all at once Phoebe disclosed a second
virtue; her first and only one, hitherto, in the eyes of Cephas, having been an ability to
get on with his mother, a feat in which many had made an effort and few indeed had succeeded.
Phoebe, it seems, had always secretly admired, respected, and loved Cephas Cole! Never since
her pale and somewhat glassy blue eye had opened on life had she beheld a being she could so
adore if encouraged in the attitude.

The moment this unusual and unexpected poultice was really applied to Cephas's wounds, they
began to heal. In the course of a month the most ordinary observer could have perceived a physical
change in him. He cringed no more, but held his head higher; his back straightened; his voice
developed a gruff, assertive note, like that of a stern Roman father; he let his moustache
grow, and sometimes, in his most reckless moments, twiddled the end of it. Finally he swaggered;
but that was only after Phoebe had accepted him and told him that if a girl traversed the entire
length of the Saco River (which she presumed to be the longest in the world, the Amazon not
being familiar to her), she could not hope to find his equal as a husband.

And then congratulations began to pour in! Was ever marriage so fortuitous! The Coles' farm
joined that of the Days and the union between the two only children would cement the friendship
between the families. The fact that Uncle Bart was a joiner, Cephas a painter, and Abel Day
a mason and bricklayer made the alliance almost providential in its business opportunities.
Phoebe's Massachusetts aunt sent a complete outfit of gilt-edged china, a clock, and a mahogany
chamber set. Aunt Abby relinquished to the young couple a bedroom and a spare chamber in the
"main part," while the Days supplied live-geese feathers and table and bed-linen with positive
prodigality. Aunt Abby trod the air like one inspired. "Balmy" is the only adjective that could
describe her.

"If only I could 'a' looked ahead," smiled Uncle Bart quizzically to himself, "I'd 'a' had
thirteen sons and daughters an' married off one of 'em every year. That would 'a' made Abby's
good temper kind o' permanent."

Cephas was content, too. There was a good deal in being settled and having "the whole doggoned
business" off your hands. Phoebe looked a very different creature to him in these latter days.
Her eyes were just as pale, of course, but they were brighter, and they radiated love for him,
an expression in the female eye that he had thus far been singularly unfortunate in securing.
She still held her mouth slightly open, but Cephas thought that it might be permissible, perhaps
after three months of wedded bliss, to request her to be more careful in closing it. He believed,
too, that she would make an effort to do so just to please him; whereas a man's life or property
would not be safe for a single instant if he asked Miss Patience Baxter to close her mouth,
not if he had been married to her for thirty times three months!

Cephas did not think of Patty any longer with bitterness, in these days, being of the opinion
that she was punished enough in observing his own growing popularity and prosperity.

"If she should see that mahogany chamber set going into the ell I guess she'd be glad enough
to change her tune!" thought Cephas, exultingly; and then there suddenly shot through his mind
the passing fancy--"I wonder if she would!" He promptly banished the infamous suggestion however,
reinforcing his virtue with the reflection that the chamber set was Phoebe's, anyway, and the
marriage day appointed, and the invitations given out, and the wedding-cake being baked, a
loaf at a time, by his mother and Mrs. Day.

As a matter of fact Patty would have had no eyes for Phoebe's magnificent mahogany, even had
the cart that carried it passed her on the hill where she and Mark Wilson were walking. Her
promise to marry him was a few weeks old now, and his arm encircled her slender waist under
the brown homespun cape. That in itself was a new sensation and gave her the delicious sense
of belonging to somebody who valued her highly, and assured her of his sentiments clearly and
frequently, both by word and deed. Life, dull gray life, was going to change its hue for her
presently, and not long after, she hoped, for Waitstill, too! It needed only a brighter, a
more dauntless courage; a little faith that nettles, when firmly grasped, hurt the hand less,
and a fairer future would dawn for both of them. The Deacon was a sharper nettle than she had
ever meddled with before, but in these days, when the actual contact had not yet occurred,
she felt sure of herself and longed for the moment when her pluck should be tested and proved.

The "publishing" of Cephas and his third choice, their dull walk up the aisle of the meeting-house
before an admiring throng, on the Sunday when Phoebe would "appear bride," all this seemed
very tame as compared with the dreams of this ardent and adventurous pair of lovers who had
gone about for days harboring secrets greater and more daring, they thought, than had ever
been breathed before within the hearing of Saco Water.

XXV. LOVE'S YOUNG DREAMS

IT was not an afternoon for day-dreams, for there was a chill in the air and a gray sky. With Miss
Goton this passion might have acquired a degree of fury; I should have been a Turk, a tiger, had
I once imagined she bestowed her favors on any but myself. The pleasure I felt on approaching
Miss Vulson was sufficiently ardent, though unattended with uneasy sensations; but at sight
of Miss Goton, I felt myself bewildered--every sense was absorbed in ecstasy. I believe it
would have been impossible to have remained long with her; I must have been suffocated with
the violence of my palpitations. The hickory trees flung out a few yellow flags
from the ends of their twigs, but the forests wore a tattered and dishevelled look, and the
withered leaves that lay in dried heaps upon the frozen ground, driven hither and thither by
every gust of the north wind, gave the unthinking heart a throb of foreboding. Yet the glad
summer labor of those same leaves was finished according to the law that governed them, and
the fruit was theirs and the seed for the coming year. No breeze had been strong enough to
shake them from the tree till they were ready to forsake it. Now they had severed the bond
that had held them so tightly and fluttered down to give the earth all their season's earnings.
On every hillside, in every valley and glen, the leaves that had made the summer landscape
beautiful, lay contentedly:

   "Where the rain might rain upon them,
    Where the sun might shine upon them,
    Where the wind might sigh upon them,
    And the snow might die upon them."

Brown, withered, dead, buried in snow they might be, yet they were ministering to all the leaves
of the next spring-time, bequeathing to them in turn the beauty that had been theirs; the leafy
canopies for countless song birds, the grateful shade for man and beast.

Young love thought little of Nature's miracles, and hearts that beat high and fast were warm
enough to forget the bleak wind and gathering clouds. If there were naked trees, were there
not full barrels of apples in every cellar? If there was nothing but stubble in the frozen
fields, why, there was plenty of wheat and corn at the mill all ready for grinding. The cold
air made one long for a cheery home and fireside, the crackle of a hearth-log, the bubbling
of a steaming kettle; and Patty and Mark clung together as they walked along, making bright
images of a life together, snug, warm, and happy.

Patty was a capricious creature, but all her changes were sudden and endearing ones, captivating
those who loved her more than a monotonous and unchanging virtue. Any little shower, with Patty,
always ended with a rainbow that made the landscape more enchanting than before. Of late her
little coquetries and petulances had disappeared as if by magic. She had been melted somehow
from irresponsible girlhood into womanhood, and that, too, by the ardent affection of a very
ordinary young man who had no great gift save that of loving Patty greatly. The love had served
its purpose, in another way, too, for under its influence Mark's own manhood had broadened
and deepened. He longed to bind Patty to him for good and all, to capture the bright bird whose
fluttering wings and burnished plumage so captured his senses and stirred his heart, but his
longings had changed with the quality of his love and he glowed at the thought of delivering
the girl from her dreary surroundings and giving her the tenderness, the ease and comfort,
the innocent gayety, that her nature craved.

"You won't fail me, Patty darling?" he was saying at this moment. "Now that our plans are finally
made, with never a weak point any where as far as I can see, my heart is so set upon carrying
them out that every hour of waiting seems an age!"

"No, I won't fail, Mark; but I never know the day that father will go to town until the night
before. I can always hear him making his preparations in the barn and the shed, and ordering
Waitstill here and there. He is as excited as if he was going to Boston instead of Milltown."

"The night before will do. I will watch the house every evening till you hang a white signal
from your window."

"It won't be white," said Patty, who would be mischievous on her deathbed; "my Sunday-go-to-meetin'
petticoat is too grand, and everything else that we have is yellow."

"I shall see it, whatever color it is, you can be sure of that!" said Mark gallantly. "Then
it's decided that next morning I'll wait at the tavern from sunrise, and whenever your father
and Waitstill have driven up Saco Hill, I'll come and pick you up and we 'll be off like a
streak of lightning across the hills to New Hampshire. In answer to "F.S. Martin"--Calamity (calamitas),
not from calamus, as it is usually derived, but perhaps from obs. calamis, i.e. columis, from
[Greek: kholo, kolhao, kolhazo] to maim, mutilate, and so for columitas. (See Riddle's Lat.-Eng.


"I should like that, for they would be our only wedding-bells. Oh! Mark! What if Waitstill
shouldn't go, after all: though I heard father tell her that he needed her to buy things for
the store, and that they wouldn't be back till after nightfall. Just to think of being married
without Waitstill!"

"You can do without Waitstill on this one occasion, better than you can without me," laughed
Mark, pinching Patty's cheek. "I've given the town clerk due notice and I have a friend to
meet me at his office. He is going to lend me his horse for the drive home, and we shall change
back the next week. That will give us a fresh horse each way, and we'll fly like the wind,
snow or no snow, When we come down Guide Board Hill that night, Patty, we shall be man and
wife; isn't that wonderful?"

"We shall be man and wife in New Hampshire, but not in Maine, you say," Patty reminded him
dolefully. "It does seem dreadful that we can't be married in our own state, and have to go
dangling about with this secret on our minds, day and night; but it can't be helped! You'll
try not to even think of me as your wife till we go to Portsmouth to live, won't you?"

