The nine days' session, from July 27 to August 5, yielded the indispensable supplies. But the
suspension of the Habeas Corpus Act, as a necessary war measure, was prevented by the disloyal
minority, some of whom wished to see the British defeated and all of whom were ready to break
their oath of allegiance whenever it suited them to do so. The patriotic majority, returned
by the votes of United Empire Loyalists and all others who were British born and bred, issued
an address that echoed the appeal made by Brock himself in the following words: 'We are engaged
in an awful and eventful contest. This proclamation shows admirably the sort of impression
which the invaders wished to produce on Canadians. But Hull felt less confidence than his proclamation
was intended to display. He knew that, while the American government had been warned in January
about the necessity of securing the naval command of Lake Erie, no steps had yet been taken
to secure it. Ever since the beginning of March, when he had written a report based on his
seven years' experience as governor of Michigan, he had been gradually learning that Eustis
was bent on acting in defiance of all sound military advice. In April he had accepted his new
position very much against his will and better judgment. In May he had taken command of the
assembling militiamen at Dayton in Ohio. In June he had been joined by a battalion of inexperienced
regulars. And now, in July, he was already feeling the ill effects of having to carry on what
should have been an amphibious campaign without the assistance of any proper force afloat;
for on the 2nd ten days before he issued his proclamation at Sandwich, Lieutenant Rolette,
an enterprising French-Canadian officer in the Provincial Marine, had cut his line of communication
along the Detroit and had taken an American schooner which contained his official plan of campaign,
besides a good deal of baggage and stores.

There were barely six hundred British on the line of the Detroit when Hull first crossed over
to Sandwich with twenty-five hundred men. These six hundred comprised less than 150 regulars,
about 300 militia, and some 150 Indians. Yet Hull made no decisive effort against the feeble
little fort of Malden, which was the only defence of Amherstburg by land. The distance was
nothing, only twelve miles south from Sandwich. He sent a sort of flying column against it.
But this force went no farther than half-way, where the Americans were checked at the bridge
over the swampy little Riviere aux Canards by the Indians under Tecumseh, the great War Chief
of whom we shall soon hear more.

Hull's failure to take Fort Malden was one fatal mistake. His failure to secure his communications
southward from Detroit was another. Apparently yielding to the prevalent American idea that
a safe base could be created among friendly Canadians without the trouble of a regular campaign,
he sent off raiding parties up the Thames. According to his own account, these parties 'penetrated
sixty miles into the settled part of the province.' According to Brock, they 'ravaged the country
as far as the Moravian Town.' But they gained no permanent foothold. By the beginning of August
Hull's position had already become precarious. The Canadians had not proved friendly. The raid
up the Thames and the advance towards Amherstburg had both failed. And the first British reinforcements
had already begun to arrive. These were very small. But even a few good regulars helped to
discourage Hull; and the new British commander, Colonel Procter of the 41st, was not yet to
be faced by a task beyond his strength. Worse yet for the Americans, Brock might soon be expected
from the east; the Provincial Marine still held the water line of communication from the south;
and dire news had just come in from the west.

