The men are described as tall, straight, and of comely proportions; no beards; hair black,
coarse, and thick; noses broad, flat, and full at the end; with big lips and wide mouths',
yet nothing so unsightly as the Moors; and the women as having "handsome limbs, slender arms,
pretty hands, and when they sing they have a pleasant tange in their voices. The men shaved
their hair on the right side, the women acting as barbers, and left the hair full length on
the left side, with a lock an ell long." A Puritan divine--"New England's Plantation, 1630"--says
of the Indians about him, "their hair is generally black, and cut before like our gentlewomen,
and one lock longer than the rest, much like to our gentlemen, which fashion I think came from
hence into England."

Their love of ornaments is sufficiently illustrated by an extract from Strachey, which is in
substance what Smith writes:

"Their eares they boare with wyde holes, commonly two or three, and in the same they doe hang
chaines of stayned pearle braceletts, of white bone or shreeds of copper, beaten thinne and
bright, and wounde up hollowe, and with a grate pride, certaine fowles' legges, eagles, hawkes,
turkeys, etc., with beasts clawes, bears, arrahacounes, squirrells, etc. The clawes thrust
through they let hang upon the cheeke to the full view, and some of their men there be who
will weare in these holes a small greene and yellow-couloured live snake, neere half a yard
in length, which crawling and lapping himself about his neck oftentymes familiarly, he suffreeth
to kisse his lippes. Others weare a dead ratt tyed by the tayle, and such like conundrums."

This is the earliest use I find of our word "conundrum," and the sense it bears here may aid
in discovering its origin.

Powhatan is a very large figure in early Virginia history, and deserves his prominence. He
was an able and crafty savage, and made a good fight against the encroachments of the whites,
but he was no match for the crafty Smith, nor the double-dealing of the Christians. There is
something pathetic about the close of his life, his sorrow for the death of his daughter in
a strange land, when he saw his territories overrun by the invaders, from whom he only asked
peace, and the poor privilege of moving further away from them into the wilderness if they
denied him peace.

In the midst of this savagery Pocahontas blooms like a sweet, wild rose. She was, like the
Douglas, "tender and true." Wanting apparently the cruel nature of her race generally, her
heroic qualities were all of the heart. No one of all the contemporary writers has anything
but gentle words for her. Barbarous and untaught she was like her comrades, but of a gentle
nature. Stripped of all the fictions which Captain Smith has woven into her story, and all
the romantic suggestions which later writers have indulged in, she appears, in the light of
the few facts that industry is able to gather concerning her, as a pleasing and unrestrained
Indian girl, probably not different from her savage sisters in her habits, but bright and gentle;
struck with admiration at the appearance of the white men, and easily moved to pity them, and
so inclined to a growing and lasting friendship for them; tractable and apt to learn refinements;
accepting the new religion through love for those who taught it, and finally becoming in her
maturity a well-balanced, sensible, dignified Christian woman.

According to the long-accepted story of Pocahontas, she did something more than interfere to
save from barbarous torture and death a stranger and a captive, who had forfeited his life
by shooting those who opposed his invasion. In all times, among the most savage tribes and
in civilized society, women have been moved to heavenly pity by the sight of a prisoner, and
risked life to save him--the impulse was as natural to a Highland lass as to an African maid.
Pocahontas went further than efforts to make peace between the superior race and her own. When
the whites forced the Indians to contribute from their scanty stores to the support of the
invaders, and burned their dwellings and shot them on sight if they refused, the Indian maid
sympathized with the exposed whites and warned them of stratagems against them; captured herself
by a base violation of the laws of hospitality, she was easily reconciled to her situation,
adopted the habits of the foreigners, married one of her captors, and in peace and in war cast
in her lot with the strangers. Why fearest thou thy last day?

He is no more guiltie, and conferreth no more to thy death, than any of the others. It is not
the last step that causeth weariness: it only declares it. All daies
march towards death, only the last comes to it." She did
not live to be pained by the contrast, to which her eyes were opened, between her own and her
adopted people, nor to learn what things could be done in the Christian name she loved, nor
to see her husband in a less honorable light than she left him, nor to be involved in any way
in the frightful massacre of 1622. If she had remained in England after the novelty was over,
she might have been subject to slights and mortifying neglect. The struggles of the fighting
colony could have brought her little but pain. Dying when she did, she rounded out one of the
prettiest romances of all history, and secured for her name the affection of a great nation,
whose empire has spared little that belonged to her childhood and race, except the remembrance
of her friendship for those who destroyed her people.