Moses was a law-giver, Daniel was a prince, Isaiah a courtier, and David a king; but Amos,
the author of my text, was a peasant, and, as might be supposed, nearly all his parallelisms
are pastoral, his prophecy full of the odor of new-mown hay, and the rattle of locusts, and
the rumble of carts with sheaves, and the roar of wild beasts devouring the flock while the
shepherd came out in their defense. He watched the herds by day, and by night inhabited a booth
made out of bushes, so that through these branches he could see the stars all night long, and
was more familiar with them than we who have tight roofs to our houses, and hardly ever see
the stars except among the tall brick chimneys of the great towns. But at seasons of the year
when the herds were in special danger, he would stay out in the open field all through the
darkness, his only shelter the curtain of the night, heaven, with the stellar embroideries
and silvered tassels of lunar light.

What a life of solitude, all alone with his herds! Poor Amos! And at twelve o'clock at night,
hark to the wolf's bark, and the lion's roar, and the bear's growl, and the owl's te-whit-te-whos,
and the serpent's hiss, as he unwittingly steps too near while moving through the thickets!
So Amos, like other herdsmen, got the habit of studying the map of the heavens, because it
was so much of the time spread out before him. He noticed some stars advancing and others receding.
He associated their dawn and setting with certain seasons of the year. He had a poetic nature,
and he read night by night, and month by month, and year by year, the poem of the constellations,
divinely rhythmic. But two rosettes of stars especially attracted his attention while seated
on the ground, or lying on his back under the open scroll of the midnight heavens--the Pleiades,
or Seven Stars, and Orion. The former group this rustic prophet associated with the spring,
as it rises about the first of May. The latter he associated with the winter, as it comes to
the meridian in January. The Pleiades, or Seven Stars, connected with all sweetness and joy;
Orion, the herald of the tempest. The ancients were the more apt to study the physiognomy and
juxtaposition of the heavenly bodies, because they thought they had a special influence upon
the earth; and perhaps they were right. If the moon every few hours lifts and lets down the
tides of the Atlantic Ocean, and the electric storms of last year in the sun, by all scientific
admission, affected the earth, why not the stars have proportionate effect?

And there are some things which make me think that it may not have been all superstition which
connected the movements and appearance of the heavenly bodies with great moral events on earth.
Did not a meteor run on evangelistic errand on the first Christmas night, and designate the
rough cradle of our Lord? Did not the stars in their courses fight against Sisera? Was it merely
coincidental that before the destruction of Jerusalem the moon was eclipsed for twelve consecutive
nights? Did it merely happen so that a new star appeared in constellation Cassiopeia, and then
disappeared just before King Charles IX. of France, who was responsible for St. Bartholomew
massacre, died? Was it without significance that in the days of the Roman Emperor Justinian
war and famine were preceded by the dimness of the sun, which for nearly a year gave no more
light than the moon, although there were no clouds to obscure it?

Astrology, after all, may have been something more than a brilliant heathenism. No wonder that
Amos of the text, having heard these two anthems of the stars, put down the stout rough staff
of the herdsman and took into his brown hand and cut and knotted fingers the pen of a prophet,
and advised the recreant people of his time to return to God, saying: "Seek Him that maketh
the Seven Stars and Orion." This command, which Amos gave 785 years B.C., is just as appropriate
for us, 1885 A.D.

In the first place, Amos saw, as we must see, that the God who made the Pleiades and Orion
must be the God of order. It was not so much a star here and a star there that impressed the
inspired herdsman, but seven in one group, and seven in the other group. He saw that night
after night and season after season and decade after decade they had kept step of light, each
one in its own place, a sisterhood never clashing and never contesting precedence. From the
time Hesiod called the Pleiades the "seven daughters of Atlas" and Virgil wrote in his Æneid
of "Stormy Orion" until now, they have observed the order established for their coming and
going; order written not in manuscript that may be pigeon-holed, but with the hand of the Almighty
on the dome of the sky, so that all nations may read it. Order. Persistent order. Sublime order.
Omnipotent order.

What a sedative to you and me, to whom communities and nations sometimes seem going pell-mell,
and world ruled by some fiend at hap-hazard, and in all directions maladministration! The God
who keeps seven worlds in right circuit for six thousand years can certainly keep all the affairs
of individuals and nations and continents in adjustment. We had not better fret much, for the
peasant's argument of the text was right. If God can take care of the seven worlds of the Pleiades
and the four chief worlds of Orion, He can probably take care of the one world we inhabit.

So I feel very much as my father felt one day when we were going to the country mill to get
a grist ground, and I, a boy of seven years, sat in the back part of the wagon, and our yoke
of oxen ran away with us and along a labyrinthine road through the woods, so that I thought
every moment we would be dashed to pieces, and I made a terrible outcry of fright, and my father
turned to me with a face perfectly calm, and said: "De Witt, what are you crying about? I guess
we can ride as fast as the oxen can run." And, my hearers, why should we be affrighted and
lose our equilibrium in the swift movement of worldly events, especially when we are assured
that it is not a yoke of unbroken steers that are drawing us on, but that order and wise government
are in the yoke?

In your occupation, your mission, your sphere, do the best you can, and then trust to God;
and if things are all mixed and disquieting, and your brain is hot and your heart sick, get
some one to go out with you into the starlight and point out to you the Pleiades, or, better
than that, get into some observatory, and through the telescope see further than Amos with
the naked eye could--namely, two hundred stars in the Pleiades, and that in what is called
the sword of Orion there is a nebula computed to be two trillion two hundred thousand billions
of times larger than the sun. Oh, be at peace with the God who made all that and controls all
that--the wheel of the constellations turning in the wheel of galaxies for thousands of years
without the breaking of a cog or the slipping of a band or the snap of an axle. For your placidity
and comfort through the Lord Jesus Christ I charge you, "Seek Him that maketh the Seven Stars
and Orion."

