"Miss Jennie Brawner had one son--Gus Brawner--and he may be living now in Atlanta.

"My uncle said he seen the Yankees come through Thomasville, Georgia. I never seen an army
of them. I seen soldiers, plenty of em. None of the Brooks or Brawners went to war that I heard
of. I was kept close and too young to know much of what happened. I heard about the Ku Klux
but I never seen them.

"I know Miss Jennie Brawner come from Virginia but I don't brought grandma with her or bought
her. She never did say.

"I don't vote. My husband voted, I don't know how he voted.

"Since I been sick, I get a check and commodities."

Interviewer: Miss Sallie C. Miller Person interviewed: Pete Newton, Clarksville, Arkansas Age:
83 [TR: 85?] Occupation: Farmer and day laborer

"My white folks was as good to me as they could be. I ain't got no kick to make about my white
people. The boys was all brave. I was raised on the farm. I staid with my boss till I was nearly
grown. When the war got so hot my boss was afraid the 'Feds' would get us. He sent my mammy
to Texas and sent me in the army with Col. Bashom, to take care of his horses. I was about
eleven or twelve years old. Col. Bashom was always good to me. He always found a place for
me to sleep and eat. Sometimes after the colonel left the folks would run as off and not let
me stay but I never told the colonel. I went to Boston, Texas with the colonel and his men
and when he went on the big raid into Missouri he left me in Sevier County, Arkansas with his
horses 'Little Baldy' and 'Orphan Boy'. They was race horses. The colonel always had race horses.
He was killed at Pilot Knob, Missouri. After the colonel was killed his son George (I shore
did think a lot of George) come after me and the horses and brough' us home.

"While I was in Arkadelphia with Col. Bashom's horses, I went down to the spring to water the
horses. The artillery was there cleaning a big cannon they called 'Old Tom'. Of course I went
up to watch them. One of the men saw me and hollered, 'Stick his head in the cannon.' It liked
to scared me to death. I jumped on that race horse and run. I reconed I would have been killed
but my uncle was there and saw me and stopped the horse.

"Another time we went to a place and me and another colored boy was taking care of the horses
while our masters eat dinner. I saw some watermelons in the garden with a paling fence around
it. I said if the other boy would pull a paling off I would crawl through and get us a watermelon.
He did but the man who owned the place saw me just as I got the melon and whipped us and told
us if we hollered he would kill us. We didn't holler and we never told Col. Bashom either.

"After the war my mammie come back from Texas and took me over to Dover to live but my old
boss told her if she would let him have me he would raise and educate me like his own children.
When I got back the old boss already had a boy so I went to live with one of his sons. He told
me it was time for me to learn how to work. My boss was rough but he was good to me and taught
me how to work. The old boss had five sons in the army and all was wounded except one. One
of them was shot through and through in the battle of Oak Hill. He got a furlough and come
back and died. I left my white folks in 1869 and went to farming for myself up in Hartman bottom.
I married when I was about seventeen years old.

"They though' a house near us was hainted. Nobody wanted to live in it so they went to see
what the noise was. They found a pet coon with a piece of chain around his neck. The coon would
run across the floor and drag the chain.

"The children now are bad. No telling that will be in the next twenty or thirty years everything
is so changed now.

"I learnt to sing the hymns but never sang in the choir. We sang 'Dixie', 'John Brown's Body
Lies, etc.', 'Juanita', 'Just Before the Battle, Mother', 'Old Black Joe'."

Interviewer: Mrs. Bernice Bowden
Person interviewed: Charlie Norris
                    122 Miller Street, Pine Bluff, Arkansas
Age: 81

"Born in slavery times? That's me, I reckon. I was born October 1, 1857 in Arkansas in Union
County. Tom Murphy was old master's name.

"Yes ma'am, I remember the first regiment left Arkansas--went to Virginia. I member our white
folks had us packin' grub out in the woods cause they was spectin' the Yankees.

"I member when the first regiment started out. The music boat come to the landin' and played
'Yankee Doodle.' They carried all us chillun out there.

"After they fit they just come by from daylight till dark to eat. They was death on bread.
My mother and Susan Murphy, that was the old lady herself, cooked bread for em.

"I stayed with the Murphys--round on the plantation amongst em for five or six years after
freedom. Andrew Norris, my father's old master, was the first sheriff of Ouachita County.

"My mother belonged to the Murphys and my father belonged to the Norrises and after freedom
they never did go back together.

"My mother told me that Susan Murphy would suckle me when my mother was out workin' and then
my mother would suckle her daughter.

"I was raised up in the house you might say till I was a big nigger. Had plenty to eat. That's
one thing they did do. I lived right amongst a settlement of what they called free niggers
cause they was treated so well.

"Sometimes Susan Murphy got after me and whipped me and old Marse Tom would tell me to run
and not let her whip me. You see, I was worth $1,500 to him and he thought a lot of us black kids.

"Old man Tom Murphy raised me up to a big nigger and never did whip me but twice and that was
cause I got drunk on tobacco and turned out his horse.

"Yes ma'am, I voted till bout two or three years ago. Oh Lawd, the colored used to hold office
down in the country. I've voted for white and black.

"Some of the colored folks better off free and some not. That's what I think but they don't."

Interviewer: Miss Irene Robertson
Person Interviewed: Emma Oats (Mulatto)
                    Holly Grove, Ark.
Age: 90 or older

"I was born in St. Louis. My mother died when I was little. I never knowed no father. (He was
probably a white man.) Jack Oats raised me. Jim Oats at Helena was his son. He is still living.
He come through here (Holly Grove) not long ago. I was raised on the Esque place.

"I was fraid of my grandma. I wouldn't live with her. I know'd her. She was a big woman, big
white eyes, big thick lips, and had 'Molly Glaspy hair,' long straight soft hair. She was a
African woman. She made my clothes. I was fraid of her. I never lived with her. My folks was
all free folks. When my mother died my uncle took us--me and brother. He hired us out and we
got stole. Gene Oglesby stole us and brought us to Memphis to Joe Nivers. I recken he sold
us then. Then they stood me up in the parlor and sold me to Jack Oats. They said I was 'good
pluck.' Joe Nivers sold me to Jack Oats for $1,150.00 when I was four years old. My brother
was name Milton Smith. I ain't seen him from that day till this. Joe Nivers kept him, I recken.
I come here on a 'legal tender'--name of the boat I recken. I know that. I recken it was name
of a boat. I got off and Thornton Walls, old colored man, toted me cross every mud hole we
come to. He belong to Bud Walls' (white man at Holly Grove) daddy. When we got home Jack Oats
and all of em was there.

