THE

LIFE

OF

GEORGE WASHINGTON,

COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE

AMERICAN FORCES,

DURING THE WAR WHICH ESTABLISHED THE INDEPENDENCE OF HIS COUNTRY, AND

FIRST PRESIDENT

OF THE

UNITED STATES.

COMPILED UNDER THE INSPECTION OF

THE HONOURABLE BUSHROD WASHINGTON,

FROM

ORIGINAL PAPERS

BEQUEATHED TO HIM BY HIS DECEASED RELATIVE, AND NOW IN POSSESSION OF THE AUTHOR.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED,

AN INTRODUCTION,

CONTAINING A COMPENDIOUS VIEW OF THE COLONIES PLANTED BY THE ENGLISH ON THE

CONTINENT OF NORTH AMERICA,

FROM THEIR SETTLEMENT TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF THAT WAR WHICH TERMINATED IN THEIR

INDEPENDENCE.

BY JOHN MARSHALL.

VOL. V.

THE CITIZENS' GUILD OF WASHINGTON'S BOYHOOD HOME FREDERICKSBURG, VA.

1926

Printed in the U.S.A.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER I.

G. Washington again unanimously elected President.... War between Great Britain and France....
Queries of the President respecting the conduct to be adopted by the American government....
Proclamation of neutrality.... Arrival of Mr. Genet as minister from France.... His conduct....
Illegal proceedings of the French cruisers.... Opinions of the cabinet.... State of parties....
Democratic societies.... Genet calculates upon the partialities of the American people for
France, and openly insults their government.... Rules laid down by the executive to be observed
in the ports of the United States in relation to the powers at war.... The President requests
the recall of Genet.... British order of 8th of June, 1793.... Decree of the national convention
relative to neutral commerce.

CHAPTER II.

Meeting of congress.... President's speech.... His message on the foreign relations of the
United States.... Report of the Secretary of State on the commerce of the United States....
He resigns.... Is succeeded by Mr. Randolph.... Mr. Madison's resolutions founded on the above
report.... Debate thereon.... Debates on the subject of a navy.... An embargo law.... Mission
of Mr. Jay to Great Britain.... Inquiry into the conduct of the Secretary of the Treasury,
terminates honourably to him.... Internal taxes.... Congress adjourns.

CHAPTER III.

Genet recalled.... Is succeeded by Mr. Fauchet.... Gouverneur Morris recalled, and is succeeded
by Mr. Monroe.... Kentucky remonstrance.... Intemperate resolutions of the people of that state....
General Wayne defeats the Indians on the Miamis.... Insurrection in the western parts of Pennsylvania....
Quelled by the prompt and vigorous measures of the government.... Meeting of Congress.... President's
speech.... Democratic societies.... Resignation of Colonel Hamilton.... Is succeeded by Mr.
Wolcott.... Resignation of General Knox.... Is succeeded by Colonel Pickering.... Treaty between
the United States and Great Britain.... Conditionally ratified by the President.... The treaty
unpopular.... Mr. Randolph resigns.... Is succeeded by Colonel Pickering.... Colonel M'Henry
appointed secretary at war.... Charge against the President rejected..... Treaty with the Indians
north-west of the Ohio.... With Algiers.... With Spain.... Meeting of congress.... President's
speech.... Mr. Adet succeeds Mr. Fauchet..... The house of representatives call upon the President
for papers relating to the treaty with Great Britain.... He declines sending them.... Debates
upon the treaty making power.... Upon the bill for making appropriations to carry into execution
the treaty with Great Britain.... Congress adjourns.... The President endeavours to procure
the liberation of Lafayette.

CHAPTER IV.

Letters from General Washington to Mr. Jefferson.... Hostile measures of France against the
United States.... Mr. Monroe recalled and General Pinckney appointed to succeed him.... General
Washington's valedictory address to the people of the United States.... The Minister of France
endeavours to influence the approaching election.... The President's speech to congress....
He denies the authenticity of certain spurious letters published in 1776.... John Adams elected
President, and Thomas Jefferson Vice President.... General Washington retires to Mount Vernon....
Political situation of the United States at this period.... The French government refuses to
receive General Pinckney as Minister.... Congress is convened.... President's speech.... Three
envoys extraordinary deputed to France.... Their treatment.... Measures of hostility adopted
by the American government against France.... General Washington appointed Commander-in-chief
of the American army.... His death.... And character.

{1793}

The term for which the President and Vice President had been elected being about to expire
on the third of March, the attention of the public had been directed to the choice of persons
who should fill those high offices for the ensuing four years. Respecting the President, but
one opinion prevailed. From various motives, all parties concurred in desiring that the present
chief magistrate should continue to afford his services to his country. Yielding to the weight
of the representations made to him from various quarters, General Washington had been prevailed
upon to withhold a declaration, he had at one time purposed to make, of his determination to
retire from political life.

Respecting the person who should fill the office of Vice President, the public was divided.
The profound statesman who had been called to the duties of that station, had drawn upon himself
a great degree of obloquy, by some political tracts, in which he had laboured to maintain the
proposition that a balance in government was essential to the preservation of liberty. In these
disquisitions, he was supposed by his opponents to have discovered sentiments in favour of
distinct orders in society; and, although he had spoken highly of the constitution of the United
States, it was imagined that his balance could be maintained only by hereditary classes. He
was also understood to be friendly to the system of finance which had been adopted; and was
believed to be among the few who questioned the durability of the French republic. His great
services, and acknowledged virtues, were therefore disregarded; and a competitor was sought
for among those who had distinguished themselves in the opposition. The choice was directed
from Mr. Jefferson by a constitutional restriction on the power of the electors, which would
necessarily deprive him of the vote to be given by Virginia. It being necessary to designate
some other opponent to Mr. Adams, George Clinton, the governor of New York, was selected for
this purpose.

Throughout the war of the revolution, this gentleman had filled the office of chief magistrate
of his native state; and, under circumstances of real difficulty, had discharged its duties
with a courage, and an energy, which secured the esteem of the Commander-in-chief, and gave
him a fair claim to the favour of his country. Embracing afterwards with ardour the system
of state supremacy, he had contributed greatly to the rejection of the resolutions for investing
congress with the power of collecting an impost on imported goods, and had been conspicuous
for his determined hostility to the constitution of the United States. His sentiments respecting
the measures of the government were known to concur with those of the minority in congress.

[Sidenote: George Washington again unanimously elected president.]

Both parties seemed confident in their strength; and both made the utmost exertions to insure
success. On opening the ballots in the senate chamber, it appeared that the unanimous suffrage
of his country had been once more conferred on General Washington, and that Mr. Adams had received
a plurality of the votes.

The unceasing endeavours of the executive to terminate the Indian war by a treaty, had at length
succeeded with the savages of the Wabash; and, through the intervention of the Six Nations,
those of the Miamis had also been induced to consent to a conference to be held in the course
of the ensuing spring. Though probability was against the success of this attempt to restore
peace, all offensive operations, on the part of the United States, were still farther suspended.
The Indians did not entirely abstain from hostilities; and the discontents of the western people
were in no small degree increased by this temporary prohibition of all incursions into the
country of their enemy. In Georgia, where a desire to commence hostilities against the southern
Indians had been unequivocally manifested, this restraint increased the irritation against
the administration.

The Indian war was becoming an object of secondary magnitude. The critical and irritable state
of things in France began so materially to affect the United States, as to require an exertion
of all the prudence, and all the firmness, of the government. The 10th[1] of August, 1792,
was succeeded in that nation by such a state of anarchy, and by scenes of so much blood and
horror; the nation was understood to be so divided with respect to its future course; and the
republican party was threatened by such a formidable external force; that there was much reason
to doubt whether the fallen monarch would be finally deposed, or reinstated with a greater
degree of splendour and power than the constitution just laid in ruins, had assigned to him.
That, in the latter event, any partialities which might be manifested towards the intermediate
possessors of authority, would be recollected with indignation, could not be questioned by
an attentive observer of the vindictive spirit of parties;--a spirit which the deeply tragic
scenes lately exhibited, could not fail to work up to its highest possible pitch. The American
minister at Paris, finding himself in a situation not expected by his government, sought to
pursue a circumspect line of conduct, which should in no respect compromise the United States.
The executive council of France, disappointed at the coldness which that system required, communicated
their dissatisfaction to their minister at Philadelphia. At the same time, Mr. Morris made
full representations of every transaction to his government, and requested explicit instructions
for the regulation of his future conduct.

     [Footnote 1: The day on which the palace of the Tuilleries
     was stormed and the royal government subverted.]

The administration entertained no doubt of the propriety of recognizing the existing authority
of France, whatever form it might assume. That every nation possessed a right to govern itself
according to its own will, to change its institutions at discretion, and to transact its business
through whatever agents it might think proper, were stated to Mr. Morris to be principles on
which the American government itself was founded, and the application of which could be denied
to no other people. The payment of the debt, so far as it was to be made in Europe, might be
suspended only until the national convention should authorize some power to sign acquittances
for the monies received; and the sums required for St. Domingo would be immediately furnished.
These payments would exceed the instalments which had fallen due; and the utmost punctuality
would be observed in future. These instructions were accompanied with assurances that the government
would omit no opportunity of convincing the French people of its cordial wish to serve them;
and with a declaration that all circumstances seemed to destine the two nations for the most
intimate connexion with each other. It was also pressed upon Mr. Morris to seize every occasion
of conciliating the affections of France to the United States, and of placing the commerce
between the two countries on the best possible footing.[2]

     [Footnote 2: With this letter were addressed two others to
     the ministers at London and Paris respectively, stating the
     interest taken by the President and people of the United
     States in the fate of the Marquis de Lafayette. This
     gentleman was declared a traitor by France, and was
     imprisoned by Prussia. The ministers of the United States
     were to avail themselves of every opportunity of sounding
     the way towards his liberation, which they were to endeavour
     to obtain by informal solicitations; but, if formal ones
     should be necessary, they were to watch the moment when they
     might be urged with the best prospect of success. This
     letter was written at the sole instance of the President.]

The feelings of the President were in perfect unison with the sentiments expressed in this
letter. His attachment to the French nation was as strong, as consistent with a due regard
to the interests of his own; and his wishes for its happiness were as ardent, as was compatible
with the duties of a chief magistrate to the state over which he presided. Devoted to the principles
of real liberty, and approving unequivocally the republican form of government, he hoped for
a favourable result from the efforts which were making to establish that form, by the great
ally of the United States; but was not so transported by those efforts, as to involve his country
in their issue; or totally to forget that those aids which constituted the basis of these partial
feelings, were furnished by the family whose fall was the source of triumph to a large portion
of his fellow citizens.

He therefore still preserved the fixed purpose of maintaining the neutrality of the United
States, however general the war might be in Europe; and his zeal for the revolution did not
assume so ferocious a character as to silence the dictates of humanity, or of friendship.

Not much time elapsed before the firmness of this resolution was put to the test.

[Sidenote: War between Great Britain and France.]

Early in April, the declaration of war made by France against Great Britain and Holland reached
the United States. This event restored full vivacity to a flame, which a peace of ten years
had not been able to extinguish. A great majority of the American people deemed it criminal
to remain unconcerned spectators of a conflict between their ancient enemy and republican France.
The feeling upon this occasion was almost universal. Men of all parties partook of it. Disregarding
totally the circumstances which led to the rupture, except the order which had been given to
the French minister to leave London, and disregarding equally the fact that actual hostilities
were first commenced by France, the war was confidently and generally pronounced a war of aggression
on the part of Great Britain, undertaken with the sole purpose of imposing a monarchical government
on the French people. The few who did not embrace these opinions, and they were certainly very
few, were held up as objects of public detestation; and were calumniated as the tools of Britain,
and the satellites of despotism.

Yet the disposition to engage in the war, was far from being general. The inclination of the
public led to a full indulgence of the most extravagant partiality; but not many were willing
to encounter the consequences which that indulgence would infallibly produce. The situation
of America was precisely that, in which the wisdom and foresight of a prudent and enlightened
government, was indispensably necessary to prevent the nation from inconsiderately precipitating
itself into calamities, which its reflecting judgment would avoid.

As soon as intelligence of the rupture between France and Britain was received in the United
States, indications were given in some of the seaports, of a disposition to engage in the unlawful
business of privateering on the commerce of the belligerent powers. The President was firmly
determined to suppress these practices, and immediately requested the attention of the heads
of departments to this interesting subject.

[Sidenote: Queries put by the president to his cabinet in relation to the conduct proper to
be adopted by the American government in consequence of this event.]

As the new and difficult situation in which the United States were placed suggested many delicate
inquiries, he addressed a circular letter to the cabinet ministers, inclosing for their consideration
a well digested series of questions, the answers to which would form a complete system by which
to regulate the conduct of the executive in the arduous situations which were approaching.[3]

     [Footnote 3: See note No. I. at the end of the volume.]

These queries, with some of the answers of them, though submitted only to the cabinet, found
their way to the leading members of the opposition; and were among the unacknowledged but operating
pieces of testimony, on which the charge against the administration, of cherishing dispositions
unfriendly to the French republic, was founded. In taking a view of the whole ground, points
certainly occurred, and were submitted to the consideration of the cabinet, on which neither
the chief magistrate nor his ministers felt any doubt. But the introduction of questions relative
to these points, among others with which they were intimately connected, would present a more
full view of the subject, and was incapable of producing any mischievous effect, while they
were confined to those for whom alone they were intended.

With the same unanimity, the President was advised to receive a minister from the republic
of France; but, on the question respecting a qualification to his reception, a division was
perceived. The secretary of state and the attorney general were of opinion, that no cause existed
for departing in the present instance from the usual mode of acting on such occasions. The
revolution in France, they conceived, had produced no change in the relations between the two
nations; nor was there any thing in the alteration of government, or in the character of the
war, which would impair the right of France to demand, or weaken the duty of the United States
faithfully to comply with the engagements which had been solemnly formed.

The secretaries of the treasury, and of war, held a different opinion. Admitting in its fullest
latitude the right of a nation to change its political institutions according to its own will,
they denied its right to involve other nations, absolutely and unconditionally, in the consequences
of the changes which it may think proper to make. They maintained the right of a nation to
absolve itself from the obligations even of real treaties, when such a change of circumstances
takes place in the internal situation of the other contracting party, as so essentially to
alter the existing state of things, that it may with good faith be pronounced to render a continuance
of the connexion which results from them, disadvantageous or dangerous.

They reviewed the most prominent of those transactions which had recently taken place in France,
and noticed the turbulence, the fury, and the injustice with which they were marked. The Jacobin
club at Paris, whose influence was well understood, had even gone so far, previous to the meeting
of the convention, as to enter into measures with the avowed object of purging that body of
those persons, favourers of royalty, who might have escaped the attention of the primary assemblies.
This review was taken, to show that the course of the revolution had been attended with circumstances
which militate against a full conviction of its having been brought to its present stage, by
such a free, regular, and deliberate act of the nation, as ought to silence all scruples about
the validity of what had been done. They appeared to doubt whether the present possessors of
power ought to be considered as having acquired it with the real consent of France, or as having
seized it by violence;--whether the existing system could be considered as permanent, or merely
temporary.

They were therefore of opinion, not that the treaties should be annulled or absolutely suspended,
but that the United States should reserve, for future consideration and discussion, the question
whether the operation of those treaties ought not to be deemed temporarily and provisionally
suspended. Should this be the decision of the government, they thought it due to a spirit of
friendly and candid procedure, in the most conciliating terms, to apprize the expected minister
of this determination.

On the questions relative to the application of the clause of guarantee to the existing war,
some diversity of sentiment also prevailed. The secretary of state and the attorney general
conceived, that no necessity for deciding thereon existed, while the secretaries of the treasury,
and of war, were of opinion that the treaty of alliance was plainly defensive, and that the
clause of guarantee did not apply to a war which, having been commenced by France, must be
considered as offensive on the part of that power.

Against convening congress, the opinion appears to have been unanimous.

The cabinet being thus divided on an important part of the system which, in the present critical
posture of affairs, ought to be adopted by the executive, the President signified his desire
that the ministers would respectively state to him in writing the opinions they had formed,
together with the reasoning and authorities by which those opinions were supported.

The written arguments which were presented on this occasion, while they attest the labour,
and reflect honour on the talents of those by whom they were formed, and evince the equal sincerity
and zeal with which the opinions on each side were advanced, demonstrate an opposition of sentiment
respecting the French revolution, which threatened to shed its influence on all measures connected
with that event, and to increase the discord which already existed in the cabinet.

So far as respected the reception of a minister from the French republic without qualifying
that act by any explanations, and the continuing obligation of the treaties, the President
appears to have decided in favour of the opinions given by the secretary of state and the attorney
general.

[Sidenote: Proclamation of neutrality.]

The proclamation of neutrality which was prepared by the attorney general, in conformity with
the principles which had been adopted, was laid before the cabinet; and, being approved, was
signed by the President, and ordered to be published.

This measure derives importance from the consideration, that it was the commencement of that
system to which the American government afterwards inflexibly adhered, and to which much of
the national prosperity is to be ascribed. It is not less important in another view. Being
at variance with the prejudices, the feelings, and the passions of a large portion of the society,
and being founded on no previous proceedings of the legislature, it presented the first occasion,
which was thought a fit one, for openly assaulting a character, around which the affections
of the people had thrown an armour theretofore deemed sacred, and for directly criminating
the conduct of the President himself. It was only by opposing passions to passions, by bringing
the feeling in favour of France, into conflict with those in favour of the chief magistrate,
that the enemies of the administration could hope to obtain the victory.

For a short time, the opponents of this measure treated it with some degree of delicacy. The
opposition prints occasionally glanced at the executive; considered all governments, including
that of the United States, as naturally hostile to the liberty of the people; and ascribed
to this disposition, the combination of European governments against France, and the apathy
with which this combination was contemplated by the executive. At the same time, the most vehement
declamations were published, for the purpose of inflaming the resentments of the people against
Britain; of enhancing the obligations of America to France; of confirming the opinions, that
the coalition of European monarchs was directed, not less against the United States, than against
that power to which its hostility was avowed, and that those who did not avow this sentiment
were the friends of that coalition, and equally the enemies of America and France.

These publications, in the first instance, sufficiently bitter, quickly assumed a highly increased
degree of acrimony.

As soon as the commotions which succeeded the deposition of Louis XVI. had, in some degree,
subsided, the attention of the French government was directed to the United States, and the
resolution was taken to recall the minister who had been appointed by the king; and to replace
him with one who might be expected to enter, with more enthusiasm, into the views of the republic.[4]

     [Footnote 4: See note No. II. at the end of the volume.]

The citizen Genet, a gentleman of considerable talents, and of an ardent temper, was selected
for this purpose.

The letters he brought to the executive of the United States, and his instructions, which he
occasionally communicated, were, in a high degree, flattering to the nation, and decently respectful
to its government. But Mr. Genet was also furnished with private instructions, which the course
of subsequent events tempted him to publish. These indicate that, if the American executive
should not be found sufficiently compliant with the views of France, the resolution had been
taken to employ with the people of the United States the same policy which was so successfully
used with those of Europe; and thus to affect an object which legitimate negotiations might
fail to accomplish.

[Sidenote: Arrival of Mr. Genet as minister from France.]

Mr. Genet possessed many qualities which were peculiarly adapted to the objects of his mission;
but he seems to have been betrayed by the flattering reception which was given him, and by
the universal fervour expressed for his republic, into a too speedy disclosure of his intentions.
He was received by the governor of that state, and by its citizens, with an enthusiasm well
calculated to dissipate every doubt he might previously have entertained, concerning the dispositions
on which he was to operate. At this place he continued for several days, receiving extravagant
marks of public attachment, during which time, he undertook to authorize the fitting and arming
of vessels in that port, enlisting men, and giving commissions to cruise and commit hostilities
on nations with whom the United States were at peace. The captures made by these cruisers were
brought into port, and the consuls of France were assuming, under the authority of Mr. Genet,
to hold courts of admiralty on them, to try, condemn, and authorize their sale.

From Charleston, Mr. Genet proceeded by land to Philadelphia, receiving on his journey, at
the different towns through which he passed, such marks of enthusiastic attachment as had never
before been lavished on a foreign minister. On the 16th of May, he arrived at the seat of government,
preceded by the intelligence of his transactions in South Carolina. This information did not
diminish the extravagant transports of joy with which he was welcomed by the great body of
the inhabitants. Means had been taken to render his entry pompous and triumphal; and the opposition
papers exultingly stated that he was met at Gray's ferry by "crowds who flocked from every
avenue of the city, to meet the republican ambassador of an allied nation."

The day succeeding his arrival, he received addresses of congratulation from particular societies,
and from the citizens of Philadelphia, who waited on him in a body, in which they expressed
their fervent gratitude for the "zealous and disinterested aids," which the French people had
furnished to America, unbounded exultation at the success with which their arms had been crowned,
and a positive conviction that the safety of the United States depended on the establishment
of the republic. The answers to these addresses were well calculated to preserve the idea of
a complete fraternity between the two nations; and that their interests were identified.

The day after being thus accredited by the citizens of Philadelphia, he was presented to the
President, by whom he was received with frankness, and with expressions of a sincere and cordial
regard for his nation. In the conversation which took place on this occasion, Mr. Genet gave
the most explicit assurances that, in consequence of the distance of the United States from
the theatre of action, and of other circumstances, France did not wish to engage them in the
war, but would willingly leave them to pursue their happiness and prosperity in peace. The
more ready faith was given to these declarations, because it was believed that France might
derive advantages from the neutrality of America, which would be a full equivalent for any
services which she could render as a belligerent.

Before the ambassador of the republic had reached the seat of government, a long catalogue
of complaints, partly founded on his proceedings in Charleston, had been made by the British
minister to the American executive.

This catalogue was composed of the assumptions of sovereignty already mentioned;--assumptions
calculated to render America an instrument of hostility to be wielded by France against those
powers with which she might be at war.

[Sidenote: Illegal proceedings of the French cruisers.]

These were still further aggravated by the commission of actual hostilities within the territories
of the United States. The ship Grange, a British vessel which had been cleared out from Philadelphia,
was captured by the French frigate L'Ambuscade within the capes of the Delaware, while on her
way to the ocean.

The prizes thus unwarrantly made, being brought within the power of the American government,
Mr. Hammond, among other things, demanded a restitution of them.

On many of the points suggested by the conduct of Mr. Genet, and by the memorials of the British
minister, it would seem impossible that any difference of opinion could exist among intelligent
men, not under the dominion of a blind infatuation.

[Sidenote: Opinions of the Cabinet in relation thereto.]

The question of restitution, except as to the Grange, was more dubious. The secretary of state
and the attorney general contended that, if the commissions granted by Mr. Genet were invalid,
the captures were totally void, and the courts would adjudge the property to remain in the
former owners. In this point of view, therefore, there being a regular remedy at law, it would
be irregular for the government to interpose.

If, on the contrary, the commissions were good, then, the captures having been made on the
high seas, under a valid commission from a power at war with Great Britain, the original right
of the British owner was, by the laws of war, transferred to the captor.

The legal right being in the captor, it could only be taken from him by an act of force, that
is to say, of reprisal for the offence committed against the United States in the port of Charleston.
Reprisal is a very serious thing, ought always to be preceded by a demand and refusal of satisfaction,
is generally considered as an act of war, and never yet failed to produce it in the case of
a nation able to make war.

Admitting the case to be of sufficient importance to require reprisal, and to be ripe for that
step, the power of taking it was vested by the constitution in congress, not in the executive
department of the government.

Of the reparation for the offence committed against the United States, they were themselves
the judges, and could not be required by a foreign nation, to demand more than was satisfactory
to themselves. By disavowing the act, by taking measures to prevent its repetition, by prosecuting
the American citizens who were engaged in it, the United States ought to stand justified with
Great Britain; and a demand of further reparation by that power would be a wrong on her part.

The circumstances under which these equipments had been made, in the first moments of the war,
before the government could have time to take precautions against them, and its immediate disapprobation
of those equipments, must rescue it from every imputation of being accessory to them, and had
placed it with the offended, not the offending party.

Those gentlemen were therefore of opinion, that the vessels which had been captured on the
high seas, and brought into the United States, by privateers fitted out and commissioned in
their ports, ought not to be restored.

The secretaries of the treasury, and of war, were of different opinion. They urged that a neutral,
permitting itself to be made an instrument of hostility by one belligerent against another,
became thereby an associate in the war. If land or naval armaments might be formed by France
within the United States, for the purpose of carrying on expeditions against her enemy, and
might return with the spoils they had taken, and prepare new enterprises, it was apparent that
a state of war would exist between America and those enemies, of the worst kind for them: since,
while the resources of the country were employed in annoying them, the instruments of this
annoyance would be occasionally protected from pursuit, by the privileges of an ostensible
neutrality. It was easy to see that such a state of things could not be tolerated longer than
until it should be perceived.

It being confessedly contrary to the duty of the United States, as a neutral nation, to suffer
privateers to be fitted in their ports to annoy the British trade, it seemed to follow that
it would comport with their duty, to remedy the injury which may have been sustained, when
it is in their power so to do.

That the fact had been committed before the government could provide against it might be an
excuse, but not a justification. Every government is responsible for the conduct of all parts
of the community over which it presides, and is supposed to possess, at all times, the means
of preventing infractions of its duty to foreign nations. In the present instance, the magistracy
of the place ought to have prevented them. However valid this excuse might have been, had the
privateers expedited from Charleston been sent to the French dominions, there to operate out
of the reach of the United States, it could be of no avail when their prizes were brought into
the American ports, and the government, thereby, completely enabled to administer a specific
remedy for the injury.

Although the commissions, and the captures made under them, were valid as between the parties
at war, they were not so as to the United States. For the violation of their rights, they had
a claim to reparation, and might reasonably demand, as the reparation to which they were entitled,
restitution of the property taken, with or without an apology for the infringement of their
sovereignty. This they had a right to demand as a species of reparation consonant with the
nature of the injury, and enabling them to do justice to the party in injuring whom they had
been made instrumental. It could be no just cause of complaint on the part of the captors that
they were required to surrender a property, the means of acquiring which took their origin
in a violation of the rights of the United States.

On the other hand, there was a claim on the American government to arrest the effects of the
injury or annoyance to which it had been made accessory. To insist therefore on the restitution
of the property taken, would be to enforce a right, in order to the performance of a duty.

These commissions, though void as to the United States, being valid as between the parties,
the case was not proper for the decision of the courts of justice. The whole was an affair
between the governments of the parties concerned, to be settled by reasons of state, not rules
of law. It was the case of an infringement of national sovereignty to the prejudice of a third
party, in which the government was to demand a reparation, with the double view of vindicating
its own rights, and of doing justice to the suffering party.

They, therefore, were of opinion that, in the case stated for their consideration, restitution
ought to be made.

On the point respecting which his cabinet was divided, the President took time to deliberate.
Those principles on which a concurrence of sentiment had been manifested being considered as
settled, the secretary of state was desired to communicate them to the ministers of France
and Britain; and circular letters were addressed to the executives of the several states, requiring
their co-operation, with force if necessary, in the execution of the rules which were established.

The citizen Genet was much dissatisfied with these decisions of the American government. He
thought them contrary to natural right, and subversive of the treaties by which the two nations
were connected. In his exposition of these treaties, he claimed, for his own country, all that
the two nations were restricted from conceding to others, thereby converting negative limitations
into an affirmative grant of privileges to France.

Without noticing a want of decorum in some of the expressions which Mr. Genet had employed,
he was informed that the subjects on which his letter treated had, from respect to him, been
reconsidered by the executive; but that no cause was perceived for changing the system which
had been adopted. He was further informed that, in the opinion of the President, the United
States owed it to themselves, and to the nations in their friendship, to expect, as a reparation
for the offence of infringing their sovereignty, that the vessels, thus illegally equipped,
would depart from their ports.

Mr. Genet was not disposed to acquiesce in these decisions. Adhering to his own construction
of the existing treaty, he affected to consider the measures of the American government as
infractions of it, which no power in the nation had a right to make, unless the United States
in congress assembled should determine that their solemn engagements should no longer be performed.
Intoxicated with the sentiments expressed by a great portion of the people, and unacquainted
with the firm character of the executive, he seems to have expected that the popularity of
his nation would enable him to overthrow that department, or to render it subservient to his views.

     [Footnote 5: The regulation alluded to as was stated by Mr.
     Jefferson in reply, did not relate to vessels arming for
     defence, but to cruisers against the enemies of France.]

A few days previous to the reception of the letter from which the above is an extract, two
citizens of the United States, who had been engaged by Mr. Genet in Charleston to cruise in
the service of France, were arrested by the civil magistrate, in pursuance of the determination
formed by the executive for the prosecution of persons having thus offended against the laws.
Mr. Genet demanded their release in the following extraordinary terms:

"I have this moment been informed that two officers in the service of the republic of France,
citizen Gideon Henfield and John Singletary, have been arrested on board the privateer of the
French republic, the Citizen Genet, and conducted to prison.

This lofty offensive style could not fail to make a deep impression on a mind penetrated with
a just sense of those obligations by which the chief magistrate is bound to guard the dignity
of his government, and to take care that his nation be not degraded in his person. Yet, in
no single instance, did the administration, in its communications with Mr. Genet, permit itself
to be betrayed into the use of one intemperate expression. The firmness with which the extravagant
pretensions of that gentleman were resisted, proceeding entirely from a sense of duty and conviction
of right, was unaccompanied with any marks of that resentment which his language and his conduct
were alike calculated to inspire.

[Sidenote: State of parties.]

Mr. Genet appears to have been prevented from acquiescing in a line of conduct thus deliberately
adopted and prudently pursued, by a belief that the sentiments of the people were in direct
opposition to the measures of their government. So excessive, and so general, were the demonstrations
of enthusiastic devotion to France; so open were their expressions of outrage and hostility
towards all the powers at war with that republic; so thin was the veil which covered the chief
magistrate from that stream of malignant opprobrium directed against every measure which thwarted
the views of Mr. Genet; that a person less sanguine than that minister might have cherished
the hope of being able ultimately to triumph over the opposition to his designs. Civic festivals,
and other public assemblages of people, at which the ensigns of France were displayed in union
with those of America; at which the red cap, as a symbol of French liberty and fraternity,
triumphantly passed from head to head; at which toasts were given expressive of a desire to
identify the people of America with those of France; and, under the imposing guise of adhering
to principles not to men, containing allusions to the influence of the President which could
not be mistaken; appeared to Mr. Genet to indicate a temper extremely favourable to his hopes,
and very different from that which would be required for the preservation of an honest neutrality.
Through the medium of the press, these sentiments were communicated to the public, and were
represented as flowing from the hearts of the great body of the people. In various other modes,
that important engine contributed its powerful aid to the extension of opinions, calculated,
essentially, to vary the situation of the United States. The proclamation of neutrality which
was treated as a royal edict, was not only considered as assuming powers not belonging to the
executive, and, as evidencing the monarchical tendencies of that department, but as demonstrating
the disposition of the government to break its connexions with France, and to dissolve the
friendship which united the people of the two republics. The scenes of the revolutionary war
were brought into review; the object and effect of British hostility were painted in glowing
colours; and the important aids afforded by France were drawn with a pencil not less animated.
That the conduct of Britain, since the treaty of peace had furnished unequivocal testimony
of enmity to the United States, was strongly pressed. With this continuing enmity was contrasted
the amicable dispositions professed by the French republic; and it was asked with indignation,
whether the interests of the United States required that they should pursue "a line of conduct
entirely impartial between these two powers? That the services of the one as well as the injuries
of the other, should be forgotten? that a friend and an enemy should be treated with equal
favour? and that neither gratitude nor resentment should constitute a feature of the American
character?" The supposed freedom of the French was opposed to the imagined slavery of the English;
and it was demanded whether "the people of America were alike friendly to republicanism and
to monarchy? to liberty and to despotism?"

On the various points of controversy which had arisen between the executive and Mr. Genet,
this active and powerful party openly and decidedly embraced the principles for which that
minister contended. It was assumed that his demands were sanctioned by subsisting treaties,
and that his exposition of those instruments was perfectly correct.

Mr. Genet was exhorted not to relax in his endeavours to maintain the just rights of his country;
and was assured that, in the affections of the people, he would find a firm and certain support.

These principles and opinions derived considerable aid from the labours and intrigues of certain
societies, who had constituted themselves the guardians of American liberty.

The manner in which that attention of the conduct of those invested with the power which is
essential in balanced governments, may safely be employed, had been so misconceived, that temporary
and detached clubs of citizens had occasionally been formed in different parts of the United
States, for the avowed purpose of watching the conduct of their rulers. After the adoption
of the constitution, some slight use was made, by its enemies, of this weapon; and, in the
German Republican Society particularly, many of the most strenuous opponents of the administration
were collected.

[Sidenote: Democratic societies formed.]

The force and power of these institutions had been fully developed, and their efficacy in prostrating
existing establishments clearly ascertained by the revolution in France. The increased influence
which they derived from corresponding with each other, had been unequivocally demonstrated;
and soon after the arrival of Mr. Genet, a democratic society was formed in Philadelphia on
the model of the Jacobin club in Paris. An anxious solicitude for the preservation of freedom,
the very existence of which was menaced by a "European confederacy transcendent in power and
unparalleled in iniquity;" which was endangered also by "the pride of wealth and arrogance
of power," displayed within the United States; was the motive assigned for the association.
"A constant circulation of useful information, and a liberal communication of republican sentiments,
were thought to be the best antidotes to any political poison with which the vital principle
of civil liberty might be attacked:" and to give the more extensive operation to their labours,
a corresponding committee was appointed, through whom they would communicate with other societies,
which might be established on similar principles, throughout the United States.

Faithful to their founder, and true to the real objects of their association, these societies
continued, during the term of their existence, to be the resolute champions of all the encroachments
attempted by the agents of the French republic on the government of the United States, and
the steady defamers of the views and measures of the American executive.

Thus strongly supported, Mr. Genet persisted in his construction of the treaties between the
two nations; and, in defiance of the positive determination of the government, continued to
act according to that construction.

The President was called to Mount Vernon by urgent business, which detained him less than three
weeks; and, in his absence, the heads of departments superintended the execution of those rules
which had been previously established.

In this short interval, a circumstance occurred, strongly marking the rashness of the minister
of France, and his disrespect to the executive of the United States.

The Little Sarah, an English merchantman, had been captured by a French frigate, and brought
into the port of Philadelphia, where she was completely equipped as a privateer, and was just
about to sail on a cruise under the name of le petit Democrat, when the secretary of the treasury
communicated her situation to the secretaries of state and of war; in consequence of which,
Governor Mifflin was desired to cause an examination of the fact. The warden of the port was
directed to institute the proper inquiries; and late in the evening of the sixth of July, he
reported her situation, and that she was to sail the next day. Mr. Dallas communicated this
message to the French minister in terms as conciliatory as its nature would permit. On receiving
it, he gave a loose to the most extravagant passion. After exclaiming with vehemence against
the measure, he complained, in strong terms, and with many angry epithets, of the ill treatment
which he had received from some of the officers of the general government, which he contrasted
with the cordial attachment that was expressed by the people at large for his nation. He ascribed
the conduct of those officers to principles inimical to the cause of France, and of liberty.
He insinuated that, by their influence, the President had been misled; and observed with considerable
emphasis, that the President was not the sovereign of this country. The powers of peace and
war being vested in congress, it belonged to that body to decide those questions growing out
of treaties which might involve peace or war; and the President, therefore, ought to have assembled
the national legislature before he ventured to issue his proclamation of neutrality, or to
prohibit, by his instructions to the state governors, the enjoyment of the particular rights
which France claimed under the express stipulations of the treaty of commerce. The executive
construction of that treaty was neither just nor obligatory; and he would make no engagement
which might be construed into a relinquishment of rights which his constituents deemed indispensable.
In the course of this vehement and angry declamation, he spoke of publishing his correspondence
with the officers of government, together with a narrative of his proceedings; and said that,
although the existing causes would warrant an abrupt departure, his regard for the people of
America would induce him to remain here, amidst the insults and disgusts that he daily suffered
in his official character from the public officers, until the meeting of congress; and if that
body should agree in the opinions and support the measures of the President, he would certainly
withdraw, and leave the dispute to be adjusted between the two nations themselves. His attention
being again called by Mr. Dallas to the particular subject, he peremptorily refused to enter
into any arrangements for suspending the departure of the privateer, and cautioned him against
any attempt to seize her, as she belonged to the republic; and, in defence of the honour of
her flag, would unquestionably repel force by force.

On receiving the report of Mr. Dallas, Governor Mifflin ordered out one hundred and twenty
militia, for the purpose of taking possession of the privateer; and communicated the case,
with all its circumstances, to the officers of the executive government. On the succeeding
day, Mr. Jefferson waited on Mr. Genet, in the hope of prevailing on him to pledge his word
that the privateer should not leave the port until the arrival of the President. The minister
was not less intemperate with Mr. Jefferson than he had been with Mr. Dallas. He indulged himself,
in a repetition of nearly the same passionate language, and again spoke, with extreme harshness,
of the conduct of the executive. He persisted in refusing to make any engagements for the detention
of the vessel; and, after his rage had in some degree spent itself, he entreated that no attempt
might be made to take possession of her, as her crew was on board, and force would be repelled
by force.

He then also said that she was not ready to sail immediately. She would change her position,
and fall down the river a small distance on that day; but was not yet ready to sail.

In communicating this conversation to Governor Mifflin, Mr. Jefferson stated his conviction
that the privateer would remain in the river until the President should decide on her case;
in consequence of which, the governor dismissed the militia, and requested the advice of the
heads of departments on the course which it would be proper for him to pursue. Both the governor
and Mr. Jefferson stated, that in reporting the conversation between Mr. Genet and himself,
Mr. Dallas had said that Mr. Genet threatened, in express terms, "to appeal from the President
to the people."

Thus braved and insulted in the very heart of the American empire, the secretaries of the treasury,
and of war, were of opinion that it was expedient to take immediate provisional measures for
establishing a battery on Mud Island, under cover of a party of militia, with directions, that
if the vessel should attempt to depart before the pleasure of the President should be known
concerning her, military coercion should be employed to arrest her progress.

The secretary of state dissenting from this opinion, the measure was not adopted. The vessel
fell down to Chester before the arrival of the President, and sailed on her cruise before the
power of the government could be interposed.

On the 11th of July the President reached Philadelphia, and requested that his cabinet ministers
would convene at his house the next day at nine in the morning.

Among the papers placed in his hands by the secretary of state, which required immediate attention,
were those which related to the Little Democrat. On reading them, a messenger was immediately
despatched for the secretary, but he had retired, indisposed, to his seat in the country. Upon
hearing this, the President instantly addressed a letter to him, of which the following is
an extract.

In answer to this letter, the secretary stated the assurances which had on that day been given
to him by Mr. Genet, that the vessel would not sail before the President's decision respecting
her should be made. In consequence of this information, immediate coercive measures were suspended;
and in the council of the succeeding day it was determined to retain in port all[6] privateers
which had been equipped by any of the belligerent powers within the United States. This determination
was immediately communicated to Mr. Genet; but, in contempt of it, the Little Democrat proceeded
on her cruise.

     [Footnote 6: They were particularly enumerated, and the
     decision was also extended to the ship Jane, an English
     armed merchantman, alleged by Mr. Genet to be a privateer,
     and the governor was requested to attend to her, and if he
     found her augmenting her force and about to depart, to cause
     her to be stopped.

     The Jane had augmented her armament by replacing four old
     gun-carriages with new ones, and opening two new portholes.
     The request of the British consul that these alterations
     might be allowed was peremptorily rejected, and directions
     were given that she should be restored precisely to the
     situation in which she entered the port. Had she attempted
     to sail without obeying these orders, Governor Mifflin had
     taken measures to stop her at Mud Island.]

In this, as in every effort made by the executive to maintain the neutrality of the United
States, that great party which denominated itself "THE PEOPLE," could perceive only a settled
hostility to France and to liberty, a tame subserviency to British policy, and a desire, by
provoking France, to engage America in the war, for the purpose of extirpating republican principles.[7]

     [Footnote 7: See note No. III. at the end of the volume.]

The administration received strong additional evidence of the difficulty that would attend
an adherence to the system which had been commenced, in the acquittal of Gideon Henfield.

A prosecution had been instituted against this person who had enlisted in Charleston on board
a French privateer equipped in that port, which had brought her prizes into the port of Philadelphia.
This prosecution had been directed under the advice of the attorney general, who was of opinion,
that persons of this description were punishable for having violated subsisting treaties, which,
by the constitution, are the supreme law of the land; and that they were also indictable at
common law, for disturbing the peace of the United States.

It could not be expected that the democratic party would be inattentive to an act so susceptible
of misrepresentation.

As the trial approached, a great degree of sensibility was displayed; and the verdict in favour
of Henfield was celebrated with extravagant marks of joy and exultation. It bereaved the executive
of the strength to be derived from an opinion, that punishment might be legally inflicted on
those who should openly violate the rules prescribed for the preservation of neutrality; and
exposed that department to the obloquy of having attempted a measure which the laws would not
justify.

About this time, a question growing out of the war between France and Britain, the decision
of which would materially affect the situation of the United States, was presented to the consideration
of the executive.

It will be recollected that during the war which separated America from Britain, the celebrated
compact termed the armed neutrality was formed in the north of Europe, and announced to the
belligerent powers. A willingness to acquiesce in the principles it asserted, one of which
was that free bottoms should make free goods, was expressed by the governments engaged in the
war, with the single exception of Great Britain. But, however favourably the United States,
as a belligerent, might view a principle which would promote the interests of inferior maritime
powers, they were not willing, after the termination of hostilities, to enter into engagements
for its support which might endanger their future peace; and, in this spirit, instructions
were given to their ministers in Europe.

This principle was ingrafted into the treaty of commerce with France; but no stipulation on
the subject had been made with England. It followed, that, with France, the character of the
bottom was imparted to the cargo; but with Britain, the law of nations was the rule by which
the respective rights of the belligerent and neutral were to be decided.

Construing this rule to give security to the goods of a friend in the bottoms of an enemy,
and to subject the goods of an enemy to capture in the bottoms of a friend, the British cruisers
took French property out of American vessels, and their courts condemned it as lawful prize.

Mr. Genet had remonstrated against the acquiescence of the American executive in this exposition
of the law of nations, in such terms as he was accustomed to employ; and on the 9th of July,
in the moment of the contest respecting the Little Democrat, he had written a letter demanding
an immediate and positive answer to the question, what measures the President had taken, or
would take, to cause the American flag to be respected? He observed, that "as the English would
continue to carry off, with impunity, French citizens, and French property found on board of
American vessels, without embarrassing themselves with the philosophical principles proclaimed
by the President of the United States," and as the embarrassing engagements of France deprived
her of the privileges of making reprisals at every point, it was necessary for the interests
of both nations, quickly to agree on taking other measures.

Not receiving an immediate answer, Mr. Genet, towards the close of July, again addressed the
secretary of state on the subject. In this extraordinary letter, after complaining of the insults
offered to the American flag by seizing the property of Frenchmen confided to its protection,
he added, "your political rights are counted for nothing. In vain do the principles of neutrality
establish, that friendly vessels make friendly goods; in vain, sir, does the President of the
United States endeavour, by his proclamation, to reclaim the observation of this maxim; in
vain does the desire of preserving peace lead to sacrifice the interests of France to that
of the moment; in vain does the thirst of riches preponderate over honour in the political
balance of America: all this management, all this condescension, all this humility, end in
nothing; our enemies laugh at it; and the French, too confident, are punished for having believed
that the American nation had a flag, that they had some respect for their laws, some conviction
of their strength, and entertained some sentiment of their dignity. It is not possible for
me, sir, to paint to you all my sensibility at this scandal which tends to the diminution of
your commerce, to the oppression of ours, and to the debasement and vilification of republics.
It is for Americans to make known their generous indignation at this outrage; and I must confine
myself to demand of you a second time, to inform me of the measures which you have taken, in
order to obtain restitution of the property plundered from my fellow citizens, under the protection
of your flag. It is from our government they have learnt that the Americans were our allies,
that the American nation was sovereign, and that they knew how to make themselves respected.
It is then under the very same sanction of the French nation, that they have confided their
property and persons to the safeguard of the American flag; and on her, they submit the care
of causing those rights to be respected. But if our fellow citizens have been deceived, if
you are not in a condition to maintain the sovereignty of your people, speak; we have guaranteed
it when slaves, we shall be able to render it formidable, having become freemen."

On the day preceding the date of this offensive letter, the secretary of state had answered
that of the 9th of July; and, without noticing the unbecoming style in which the decision of
the executive was demanded, had avowed and defended the opinion, that "by the general law of
nations, the goods of an enemy found in the vessels of a friend are lawful prize." This fresh
insult might therefore be passed over in silence.

While a hope remained that the temperate forbearance of the executive, and the unceasing manifestations
of its friendly dispositions towards the French republic, might induce the minister of that
nation to respect the rights of the United States, and to abstain from violations of their
sovereignty, an anxious solicitude not to impair the harmony which he wished to maintain between
the two republics, had restrained the President from adopting those measures respecting Mr.
Genet, which the conduct of that gentleman required. He had seen a foreign minister usurp within
the territories of the United States some of the most important rights of sovereignty, and
persist, after the prohibition of the government, in the exercise of those rights. In asserting
this extravagant claim, so incompatible with national independence, the spirit in which it
originated had been pursued, and the haughty style of a superior had been substituted for the
respectful language of diplomacy. He had seen the same minister undertake to direct the civil
government; and to pronounce, in opposition to the decisions of the executive, in what departments
of the constitution of the United States had placed certain great national powers. To render
this state of things more peculiarly critical and embarrassing, the person most instrumental
in producing it, had, from his arrival, thrown himself into the arms of the people, stretched
out to receive him; and was emboldened by their favour, to indulge the hope of succeeding in
his endeavours, either to overthrow their government, or to bend it to his will. But the full
experiment had now been made; and the result was a conviction not to be resisted, that moderation
would only invite additional injuries, and that the present insufferable state of things could
be terminated only by procuring the removal of the French minister, or by submitting to become,
in his hands, the servile instrument of hostility against the enemies of his nation. Information
was continually received from every quarter, of fresh aggressions on the principles established
by the government; and, while the executive was thus openly disregarded and contemned, the
members of the administration were reproached in all the papers of an active and restless opposition,
as the violators of the national faith, the partisans of monarchy, and the enemies of liberty
and of France.

The unwearied efforts of that department to preserve that station in which the various treaties
in existence had placed the nation, were incessantly calumniated[8] as infractions of those
treaties, and ungrateful attempts to force the United States into the war against France.

     [Footnote 8: See note No. IV. at the end of the volume.]

The judgment of the President was never hastily formed; but, once made up, it was seldom to
be shaken. Before the last letter of Mr. Genet was communicated to him, he seems to have determined
to take decisive measures respecting that minister.

[Sidenote: Rules laid down by the executive in relation to the powers at war within the ports
of the United States.]

That the course to be pursued might be well considered, the secretary of state was requested
to collect all the correspondence with him, to be laid before a cabinet council about to be
held for the purpose of adjusting a complete system of rules to be observed by the belligerents
in the ports of the United States. These rules were discussed at several meetings, and finally,
on the third of August, received the unanimous approbation of the cabinet. They[9] evidence
the settled purpose of the executive, faithfully to observe all the national engagements, and
honestly to perform the duties of that neutrality in which the war found them, and in which
those engagements left them free to remain.

     [Footnote 9: See note No. V. at the end of the volume.]

[Sidenote: The president requests the recall of Genet.]

In the case of the minister of the French republic, it was unanimously agreed that a letter
should be written to Mr. Morris, the minister of the United States at Paris, stating the conduct
of Mr. Genet, resuming the points of difference which had arisen between the government and
that gentleman, assigning the reasons for the opinion of the former, desiring the recall of
the latter, and directing that this letter, with those which had passed between Mr. Genet and
the secretary of state, should be laid before the executive of the French government.

To a full view of the transactions of the executive with Mr. Genet, and an ample justification
of its measures, this able diplomatic performance adds assurances of unvarying attachment to
France, expressed in such terms of unaffected sensibility, as to render it impossible to suspect
the sincerity of the concluding sentiment--"that, after independence and self-government, there
was nothing America more sincerely wished than perpetual friendship with them."

An adequate idea of the passion it excited in Mr. Genet, who received the communication in
September, at New York, can be produced only by a perusal of his letter addressed, on that
occasion, to the secretary of state. The asperity of his language was not confined to the President,
whom he still set at defiance, whom he charged with transcending the limits prescribed by the
constitution, and of whose accusation before congress he spoke as an act of justice "which
the American people, which the French people, which all free people were interested to reclaim:"
nor to those "gentlemen who had been painted to him so often as aristocrats, partisans of monarchy,
partisans of England, and consequently enemies of the principles which all good Frenchmen had
embraced with a religious enthusiasm." Its bitterness was also extended to the secretary of
state himself, whom he had been induced to consider as his personal friend, and who had, he
said, "initiated him into mysteries which had inflamed his hatred against all those who aspire
to an absolute power."

During these deliberations, Mr. Genet was received in New York with the same remarks of partiality
to his nation, and of flattering regard to himself, which had been exhibited in the more southern
states. At this place too, he manifested the same desire to encourage discontent at the conduct
of the government, and to embark America in the quarrel, by impressing an opinion that the
existence of liberty depended on the success of the French republic, which he had uniformly
avowed. In answer to an address from the republican citizens of New York, who had spoken of
the proclamation of neutrality as relating only to acts of open hostility, not to the feelings
of the heart; and who had declared that they would "exultingly sacrifice a liberal portion
of their dearest interests could there result, on behalf of the French republic, an adequate
advantage;" he said--"in this respect I can not but interpret as you have done the declaration
of your government. They must know that the strict performance of treaties is the best and
safest policy; they must know that good faith alone can inspire respectability to a nation;
that a pusillanimous conduct provokes insult, and brings upon a country those very dangers
which it weakly means to avert.

"There is indeed too much reason to fear that you are involved in the general conspiracy of
tyrants against liberty. They never will, they never can forgive you for having been the first
to proclaim the rights of man. But you will force them to respect you by pursuing with firmness
the only path which is consistent with your national honour and dignity.

"The cause of France is the cause of all mankind, and no nation is more deeply interested than
you are in its success. Whatever fate awaits her, you are ultimately to share. But the cause
of liberty is great and it shall prevail.

"And if France, under a despotic yoke, has been able so successfully to assert your rights,
they can never again be endangered while she is at liberty to exert, in your support, that
powerful arm which now defies the combined efforts of a whole world."

While these exertions were successfully making to give increased force, and a wider extent,
to opinions which might subvert the system adopted by the executive, Mr. Jay, the chief justice
of the United States, and Mr. King, a senator representing the state, arrived in New York from
Philadelphia. They had been preceded by a report, which was whispered in private circles, that
the French minister had avowed a determination to appeal from the President to the people.
The confidential intercourse subsisting between these gentlemen and a part of the administration
rendering it probable that this declaration, if made, had been communicated to them, they were
asked, whether the report was true; having received the information through a channel[10] which
was entitled to the most implicit faith, they answered that it was.

     [Footnote 10: They received it from the secretaries of the
     treasury and of war.]

Their having said so was controverted; and they were repeatedly required, in the public papers,
to admit or deny that they had made such an assertion. Thus called upon, they published a certificate
avowing that they had made the declaration imputed to them.

On reflecting men this communication made a serious impression. The recent events in Poland,
whose dismemberment and partition were easily traced to the admission of foreign influence,
gave additional solemnity to the occurrence, and led to a more intent consideration of the
awful causes which would embolden a foreign minister to utter such a threat.

That party, which in the commencement of the contests respecting the constitution was denominated
federal, had generally supported the measures of the administration.

That which was denominated anti-federal, had generally opposed those measures. South of the
Potomac especially, there was certainly many important exceptions to this arrangement of parties;
yet as a general arrangement, it was unquestionably correct.

In the common partialities for France, in the common hope that the revolution in that country
would be crowned with success, and would produce important benefits to the human race, they
had equally participated; but in the course to be pursued by the United States, the line of
separation between the two parties was clear and distinct. The federalists were universally
of opinion that, in the existing war, America ought to preserve a neutrality as impartial as
was compatible with her treaties; and that those treaties had been fairly and justly construed
by the executive. Seduced however by their wishes, and by their affections, they at first yielded
implicit faith to the assurances given by Mr. Genet of the disinclination of the French republic
to draw them from this eligible position; and from this belief, they receded slowly and reluctantly.

They were inclined to ascribe the bitter invectives which were pronounced against the executive
to an inveterate hostility to the government, and to those who administered it; and, when at
length they were compelled to perceive that the whole influence of Mr. Genet was employed in
stimulating and pointing these invectives, they fondly indulged the hope that his nation would
not countenance his conduct. Adding to their undiminished attachment to the chief magistrate,
a keen sense of the disgrace, the humiliation, and the danger of permitting the American government
to be forced into any system of measures by the machinations of a foreign minister with the
people, they had occasionally endeavoured, through the medium of the press, to keep the public
mind correct; and, when it was announced that an appeal to themselves was threatened, they
felt impelled by the strongest sentiments of patriotism and regard for national honour, to
declare the indignation which the threat had inspired. In every quarter of the union, the people
assembled in their districts, and the strength of parties was fully tried. The contest was
warm and strenuous. But public opinion appeared to preponderate greatly in favour of neutrality,
and of the proclamation by which its observance was directed. It was apparent too, that the
American bosom still glowed with ardent affection for their chief magistrate; and that, however
successful might have been the shafts directed against some of those who shared his confidence,
the arrows aimed at himself had missed their mark.

Yet it was not to be concealed that the indiscreet arrogance of Mr. Genet, the direct insults
to the President, and the attachment which many, who were in opposition to the general measures
of the administration, still retained for the person of that approved patriot, contributed
essentially to the prevalence of the sentiment which was called forth by the occasion.

In the resolutions expressing the strongest approbation of the measures which had been adopted,
and the greatest abhorrence of foreign influence, a decided partiality for France was frequently
manifested; while in those of a contrary description, respect for the past services of the
President, and a willingness to support the executive in the exercises of its constitutional
functions, seemed, when introduced, to be reluctantly placed among the more agreeable declarations
of detestation for those who sought to dissolve the union between America and France, and of
the devotion with which the French revolution ought to be espoused by all the friends of liberty.

The effect which the certificate of Mr. Jay and Mr. King might possibly produce was foreseen;
and Mr. Genet sought to avoid its influence by questioning its veracity. Not only had it never
been alleged that the exceptionable expressions were used to the President personally, but
it was certain that they had not been uttered in his presence. Affecting not to have adverted
to this obvious circumstance, the minister, on the 13th of August, addressed a letter to the
chief magistrate, which, being designed for publication, was itself the act he had threatened,
in which he subjoined to a detail of his accusations against the executive, the demand of an
explicit declaration that he had never intimated to him an intention to appeal to the people.

On the 16th this letter was answered by the secretary of state, who, after acknowledging its
receipt by the President, added, "I am desired to observe to you that it is not the established
course for the diplomatic characters residing here to have any direct correspondence with him.
The secretary of state is the organ through which their communications should pass.

"The President does not conceive it to be within the line of propriety or duty, for him to
bear evidence against a declaration, which, whether made to him or others, is perhaps immaterial;
he therefore declines interfering in the case."

Seldom has more conclusive testimony been offered of the ascendency which, in the conflicts
of party, the passions maintain over reason, than was exhibited, on this occasion, by the zealous
partisans of the French minister. It might have been expected that, content with questioning
the fact, or with diverting the obloquy attending it from the French nation, no American would
have been found hardy enough to justify it; and but few, to condemn those gentlemen by whose
means it had reached the public ear. Nothing could be farther removed from this expectation,
than the conduct that was actually observed. The censure merited by the expressions themselves
fell, not upon the person who had used them, but upon those who had communicated them to the
public. Writers of considerable political eminence, charged them as being members of a powerful
faction who were desirous of separating America from France, and connecting her with England,
for the purpose of introducing the British constitution.

As if no sin could equal the crime of disclosing to the people a truth which, by inducing reflection,
might check the flood of that passion for France which was deemed the surest test of patriotism,
the darkest motives were assigned for the disclosure, and the reputation of those who made
it has scarcely been rescued by a lapse of years, and by a change of the subjects of controversy,
from the peculiar party odium with which they were at the time overwhelmed.

Sentiments of a still more extraordinary nature were openly avowed. In a republican country,
it was said, the people alone were the basis of government. All powers being derived from them,
might, by them, be withdrawn at pleasure. They alone were the authors of the law, and to them
alone, must the ultimate decision on the interpretation belong. From these delicate and popular
truths, it was inferred, that the doctrine that the sovereignty of the nation resided in the
departments of government was incompatible with the principles of liberty; and that, if Mr.
Genet dissented from the interpretation given by the President to existing treaties, he might
rightfully appeal to the real sovereign whose agent the President was, and to whom he was responsible
for his conduct. Is the President, it was asked, a consecrated character, that an appeal from
his decisions must be considered criminal? or are the people in such a state of monarchical
degradation, that to speak of consulting them is an offence as great, as if America groaned
under a dominion equally tyrannical with the old monarchy of France?

It was soon ascertained that Mr. Dallas, to whom this threat of appealing to the people had
been delivered, did not admit that the precise words had been used. Mr. Genet then, in the
coarsest terms, averred the falsehood of the certificate which had been published, and demanded
from the attorney general, and from the government, that Mr. Jay and Mr. King should be indicted
for a libel upon himself and his nation. That officer accompanied his refusal to institute
this information with the declaration that any other gentleman of the profession, who might
approve and advise the attempt, could be at no loss to point out a mode which would not require
his intervention.

While the minister of the French republic thus loudly complained of the unparalleled injury
he received from being charged with employing a particular exceptionable phrase, he seized
every fair occasion to carry into full execution the threat which he denied having made. His
letters, written for the purpose of publication, and actually published by himself, accused
the executive, before the tribunal of the people, on those specific points, from its decisions
respecting which he was said to have threatened the appeal. As if the offence lay, not in perpetrating
the act, but in avowing an intention to perpetrate it, this demonstration of his designs did
not render his advocates the less vehement in his support, nor the less acrimonious in reproaching
the administration, as well as Mr. Jay and Mr. King.

Whilst insult was thus added to insult, the utmost vigilance of the executive officers was
scarcely sufficient to maintain an observance of the rules which had been established for preserving
neutrality in the American ports. Mr. Genet persisted in refusing to acquiesce in those rules;
and fresh instances of attempts to violate them were continually recurring. Among these, was
an outrage committed in Boston, too flagrant to be overlooked.

A schooner, brought as a prize into the port of Boston by a French privateer, was claimed by
the British owner; who instituted proceedings at law against her, for the purpose of obtaining
a decision on the validity of her capture. She was rescued from the possession of the marshal,
by an armed force acting under the authority of Mr. Duplaine, the French consul, which was
detached from a frigate then lying in port. Until the frigate sailed, she was guarded by a
part of the crew; and, notwithstanding the determination of the American government that the
consular courts should not exercise a prize jurisdiction within the territories of the United
States, Mr. Duplaine declared his purpose to take cognizance of the case.

To this act of open defiance, it was impossible for the President to submit. The facts being
well attested, the exequatur which had been granted to Mr. Duplaine was revoked, and he was
forbidden further to exercise the consular functions. It will excite surprise that even this
necessary measure could not escape censure. The self-proclaimed champions of liberty discovered
in it a violation of the constitution, and a new indignity to France.

Mr. Genet did not confine his attempts to employ the force of America against the enemies of
his country to maritime enterprises. On his first arrival, he is understood to have planned
an expedition against the Floridas, to be carried on from Georgia; and another against Louisiana,
to be carried on from the western parts of the United States. Intelligence was received that
the principal officers were engaged; and the temper of the people inhabiting the western country
was such as to furnish some ground for the apprehension, that the restraints which the executive
was capable of imposing, would be found too feeble to prevent the execution of this plan. The
remonstrances of the Spanish commissioners on this subject, however, were answered with explicit
assurances that the government would effectually interpose to defeat any expedition from the
territories of the United States against those of Spain; and the governor of Kentucky was requested
to co-operate in frustrating this improper application of the military resources of his state.

It was not by the machinations of the French minister alone that the neutrality of the United
States was endangered. The party which, under different pretexts, urged measures the inevitable
tendency of which was war, derived considerable aid, in their exertions to influence the passions
of the people, from the conduct of others of the belligerent powers. The course pursued both
by Britain and Spain rendered the task of the executive still more arduous, by furnishing weapons
to the enemies of neutrality, capable of being wielded with great effect.

The resentment excited by the rigour with which the maritime powers of Europe retained the
monopoly of their colonial commerce, had, without the aid of those powerful causes which had
lately been brought into operation, been directed peculiarly against Great Britain. These resentments
had been greatly increased. That nation had not mitigated the vexations and inconveniences
which war necessarily inflicts on neutral trade, by any relaxations in her colonial policy.

[Sidenote: Decree of the national convention relative to neutral commerce.]

To this rigid and repulsive system, that of France presented a perfect contrast. Either influenced
by the politics of the moment, or suspecting that, in a contest with the great maritime nations
of Europe, her commerce must search for security in other bottoms than her own, she opened
the ports of her colonies to every neutral flag, and offered to the United States a new treaty,
in which it was understood that every mercantile distinction between Americans and Frenchmen
should be totally abolished.

With that hasty credulity which, obedient to the wishes, can not await the sober and deliberate
decisions of the judgment, the Americans ascribed this change, and these propositions, to the
liberal genius of freedom; and expected the new commercial and political systems to be equally
durable. As if, in the term REPUBLIC, the avaricious spirit of commercial monopoly would lose
its influence over men; as if the passions were to withdraw from the management of human affairs,
and leave the helm to the guidance of reason, and of disinterested philanthropy; a vast proportion
of the American people believed this novel system to be the genuine offspring of new-born liberty;
and consequently expected that, from the success of the republican arms, a flood of untried
good was to rush upon the world.

The avidity with which the neutral merchants pressed forward to reap the rich and tempting
harvest offered to them by the regulations and the wants of France, presented a harvest not
less rich and tempting to the cruisers of her enemies. Captures to a great extent were made,
some with, others without, justifiable cause; and the irritations inseparable from disappointment
in gathering the fruits of a gainful traffic, were extensively communicated to the agricultural
part of society.

The vexations on the ocean to which neutrals are commonly exposed during war, were aggravated
by a measure of the British cabinet, which war was not admitted to justify.

[Sidenote: British order of 1793.]

The vast military exertions of the French republic had carried many hands from their usual
occupations, to the field; and the measures of government, added to the internal commotions,
had discouraged labour by rendering its profits insecure. These causes, aided perhaps by unfavourable
seasons, had produced a scarcity which threatened famine. This state of things suggested to
their enemies the policy of increasing the internal distress, by cutting off the external supply.
In execution of this plan, the British cruisers were instructed "to stop all vessels loaded
wholly or in part with corn, flour, or meal, bound to any port in France, or any port occupied
by the armies of France, and to send them to such ports as shall be most convenient, in order
that such corn, meal, or flour, may be purchased on behalf of his majesty's government, and
the ships be relieved after such purchase, and after a due allowance for freight; or that the
masters of such ships on giving due security, to be approved by the court of admiralty, be
permitted to proceed to dispose of their cargoes of corn, meal, or flour, in the ports of any
country in amity with his majesty."

In the particular character of the war, and in the general expressions of some approved modern
writers on the law of nations, the British government sought a justification of this strong
measure. But by neutrals generally, it was deemed an unwarrantable invasion of their rights;
and the remonstrances made against it by the American government in particular, were serious
and earnest. This attempt to make a principle, which was understood to be applicable only to
blockaded places, subservient to the impracticable plan of starving an immense agricultural
nation, was resisted with great strength of reasoning by the administration; and added, not
inconsiderably, to the resentment felt by the body of the people.[11]

     [Footnote 11: See note No. VI. at the end of the volume.]

Hostilities on the ocean disclosed still another source of irritation, which added its copious
stream to the impetuous torrent which threatened to sweep America into the war that desolated
Europe.

The British government had long been accustomed to resort to the practice of manning their
fleet by impressment. The exercise of this prerogative had not been confined to the land. Merchantmen
in their ports, and even at sea, were visited, and mariners were taken out of them, to be employed
in the royal navy. The profits of trade enabling neutral merchants to give high wages, British
sailors were tempted, in great numbers, to enter their service; but the neutral ship furnished
no protection. Disregarding the bottom in which they sailed, the officers of the navy impressed
them wherever found, often leaving scarcely hands enough to navigate the vessel into port.

The Americans were peculiarly exposed to the abuse to which such usages are liable. Descended
from the same ancestors and speaking the same language, the distinction between them and the
English, though in general sufficiently marked, was not always so visible as to prevent unintentional
error; nor were the captains of ships of war, at all times, very solicitous to avoid mistake.
Native Americans, therefore, were frequently impressed, and compelled to serve against the
French republic.

The British cabinet disclaimed all pretensions to the impressment of real American citizens,
and declared officially a willingness to discharge them, on the establishment of their citizenship.
But time was necessary to procure the requisite testimonials; and those officers who had notoriously
offended in this respect, were not so discountenanced by their government as to be deterred
from a repetition of the offence. There was too, one class of citizens, concerning whose rights
a difference of opinion prevailed, which has not even yet been adjusted. These were British
subjects who had migrated to, and been adopted by, the United States.

The continuance of the Indian war added still another item to this catalogue of discontents.

The efforts of the United States to make a treaty with the savages of the Miamis had proved
abortive. The Indians insisted on the Ohio as the boundary between them and the whites; and,
although the American commissioners expressed a willingness to relinquish some of the lands
purchased at the treaty of fort Harmar, and pressed them to propose some line between the boundary
established by that treaty and the Ohio, they adhered inflexibly to their original demand.

It was extensively believed in America, and information collected from the Indians countenanced
the opinion, that they were encouraged by the government of Canada to persevere in this claim,
and that the treaty was defeated by British influence. The conviction was universal that this
influence would continue so long as the posts south of the lakes should be occupied by British
troops; and the uneasiness which the detention of those posts created, daily acquired strength.
Unfortunately, the original pretext for detaining them was not yet removed. The courts of the
United States had not yet declared that British debts contracted before the war, were recoverable.
In one of the circuits, a decision had been recently made, partly favourable, and partly unfavourable,
to the claim of the creditor. To this decision writs of error had been brought, and the case
was pending before the supreme court. The motives therefore originally assigned for holding
the posts on the lakes still remained; and, as it was a maxim with the executive "to place
an adversary clearly in the wrong," and it was expected that the existing impediments to the
fulfilment of the treaty on the part of the United States would soon be done away, it was thought
unadviseable, had the military force of the union been equal to the object, to seize those
posts, until their surrender could be required in consequence of a complete execution of the
treaty. In the mean time, the British minister was earnestly pressed upon the subject.

This prudent conduct was far from being satisfactory to the people. Estimating at nothing,
infractions made by themselves, and rating highly those committed by the opposite party, they
would, in any state of things, have complained loudly of this act of the British government.
But, agitated as they were by the various causes which were perpetually acting on their passions,
it is not wonderful that an increased influence was given to this measure; that it should be
considered as conclusive testimony of British hostility, and should add to the bitterness with
which the government was reproached for attempting a system "alike friendly and impartial to
the belligerent powers."

The causes of discontent which were furnished by Spain, though less the theme of public declamation,
continued to be considerable.

The American ministers at Madrid could make no progress in their negotiation. The question
of limits remained unsettled, and the Mississippi was still closed against the Americans. In
addition to these subjects of disquiet, the southern states were threatened with war from the
Creeks and Cherokees, who were, with good reason, believed to be excited to hostility by the
Spanish government. Of these irritating differences, that which related to the Mississippi
was far the most operative, and embarrassing. The imagination, especially when warmed by discontent,
bestows on a good which is withheld, advantages much greater than the reality will justify;
and the people of the western country were easily persuaded to believe that the navigation
of the Mississippi was a mine of wealth which would at once enrich them. That jealousy which
men so readily entertain of the views of those with whom they do not associate, had favoured
the efforts made by the enemies of the administration, to circulate the opinion that an opposition
of interests existed between the eastern and the western people, and that the endeavours of
the executive to open their great river were feeble and insincere. At a meeting of the Democratic
Society in Lexington, in Kentucky, this sentiment was unanimously avowed in terms of peculiar
disrespect to the government; and a committee was appointed to open a correspondence with the
inhabitants of the whole western country, for the purpose of uniting them on this all important
subject, and of preparing on it a remonstrance to the President and congress of the United
States, to be expressed "in the bold, decent and determined language, proper to be used by
injured freemen when they address the servants of the people." They claimed much merit for
their moderation in having thus long, out of regard to their government, and affection for
their fellow citizens on the Atlantic, abstained from the use of those means which they possessed
for the assertion of what they termed a natural and unalienable right; and seemed to indicate
the opinion that this forbearance could not be long continued. Without regarding the determination
of Spain in the case or the poverty of the means placed in the hands of the executive for inducing
a change in this determination, they demanded from the government the free use of the Mississippi,
as if only an act of the will was necessary to insure it to them. Not even the probability
that the public and intemperate expression of these dangerous dispositions would perpetuate
the evil, could moderate them. This restless uneasy temper gave additional importance to the
project of an expedition against Louisiana, which had been formed by Mr. Genet.

These public causes for apprehending hostilities[12] with Spain, were strengthened by private
communications. The government had received intelligence from their ministers in Europe that
propositions had been made by the cabinet of Madrid to that of London, the object of which
was the United States. The precise nature of these propositions was not ascertained, but it
was understood generally, that their tendency was hostile.

     [Footnote 12: The state of affairs was so inauspicious to
     the continuance of peace that in a letter written in the
     month of June, to the secretary of war, the President thus
     expressed himself: "It is of great importance that this
     government should be fully informed of the Spanish force in
     the Floridas, the troops which have lately arrived, the
     number of their posts, and the strength and situation of
     each; together with such other circumstances as would enable
     it to adopt correspondent measures, in case we should, in
     spite of our endeavours to avoid it, get embroiled with that
     nation. It would be too improvident, might be too late, and
     certainly would be disgraceful, to have this information to
     obtain when our plans ought to be formed." After suggesting
     the propriety of making the proper inquiries in a particular
     channel, he added, "I point you to the above as one source
     only of information. My desire to obtain knowledge of these
     facts leads me to request with equal earnestness, that you
     would improve every other to ascertain them with certainty.
     No reasonable expense should be spared to accomplish objects
     of such magnitude in times so critical."]

Thus unfavourable to the pacific views of the executive were the circumstances under which
congress was to assemble.

{1793}

[Sidenote: Meeting of Congress.]

A malignant fever, believed to be infectious, had, through part of the summer and autumn, severely
afflicted the city of Philadelphia, and dispersed the officers of the executive government.
Although the fear of contagion was not entirely dispelled when the time for the meeting of
congress arrived, yet, such was the active zeal of parties, and such the universal expectation
that important executive communications would be made, and that legislative measures not less
important would be founded on them, that both houses were full on the first day, and a joint
committee waited on the President with the usual information that they were ready to receive
his communications.

On the fourth of December, at twelve, the President met both houses in the senate chamber.
His speech was moderate, firm, dignified, and interesting.

These observations were followed by a recommendation to augment the supply of arms and ammunition
in the magazines, and to improve the militia establishment.

After referring to a communication to be subsequently made for occurrences relative to the
connexion of the United States with Europe, which had, he said, become extremely interesting;
and after reviewing Indian affairs, he particularly addressed the house of representatives.

[Sidenote: His message on the subject of the foreign relations of the United States.]

The day succeeding that on which this speech was delivered, a special message was sent to both
houses, containing some of the promised communications relative to the connexion of the United
States with foreign powers. I have gone further.

The message next proceeded to state that inquiries had been instituted respecting the vexations
and spoliations committed on the commerce of the United States, the result of which when received
would be communicated.

The order issued by the British government on the 8th of June, and the measures taken by the
executive of the United States in consequence thereof, were briefly noticed; and the discussions
which had taken place in relation to the non-execution of the treaty of peace were also mentioned.
The message was then concluded with a reference to the negotiations with Spain.

This message was accompanied with copies of the correspondence between the secretary of state
and the French minister, on the points of difference which subsisted between the two governments,
together with several documents necessary for the establishment of particular facts; and with
the letter written by Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Morris, which justified the conduct of the United
States by arguments too clear to be misunderstood, and too strong ever to be encountered.

The extensive discussions which had taken place relative to the non-execution of the treaty
of peace, and the correspondence produced by the objectionable measures which had been adopted
by the British government during the existing war, were also laid before the legislature.

In a popular government, the representatives of the people may generally be considered as a
mirror, reflecting truly the passions and feelings which govern their constituents. In the
late elections, the strength of parties had been tried; and the opposition had derived so much
aid from associating the cause of France with its own principles, as to furnish much reason
to suspect that, in one branch of the legislature at least, it had become the majority. The
first act of the house of representatives served to strengthen this suspicion. By each party
a candidate for the chair was brought forward; and Mr. Muhlenberg, who was supported by the
opposition, was elected by a majority of ten votes, against Mr. Sedgewick, whom the federalists
supported.

The answer, however, to the speech of the President, wore no tinge of that malignant and furious
spirit which had infused itself into the publications of the day. Breathing the same affectionate
attachment to his person and character which had been professed in other times, and being approved
by every part of the house, it indicated that the leaders, at least, still venerated their
chief magistrate, and that no general intention as yet existed, to involve him in the obloquy
directed against his measures.

The proclamation of neutrality was approved in guarded terms, and the topics of the speech
were noticed in a manner which indicated dispositions cordially to co-operate with the executive.

On the part of the senate also, the answer to the speech was unfeignedly affectionate. In warm
terms they expressed the pleasure which the re-election of the President gave them.

In a few days, a confidential message was delivered, communicating the critical situation of
affairs with Spain. The negotiations attempted with that power in regard to the interesting
objects of boundary, navigation, and commerce, had been exposed to much delay and embarrassment,
in consequence of the changes which the French revolution had effected in the political state
of Europe. Meanwhile, the neighborhood of the Spanish colonies to the United States had given
rise to various other subjects of discussion, one of which had assumed a very serious aspect.

Having the best reason to suppose that the hostility of the southern Indians was excited by
the agents of Spain, the President had directed the American commissioners at Madrid to make
the proper representations on the subject, and to propose that each nation should, with good
faith, promote the peace of the other with their savage neighbours.

About the same time, the Spanish government entertained, or affected to entertain, corresponding
suspicions of like hostile excitements by the agents of the United States, to disturb their
peace with the same nations. The representations which were induced by these real or affected
suspicions, were accompanied with pretensions, and made in a style, to which the American executive
could not be inattentive. His Catholic Majesty asserted these claims as a patron and protector
of those Indians. He assumed a right to mediate between them and the United States, and to
interfere in the establishment of their boundaries.

Notwithstanding the zeal and enthusiasm with which the pretensions of the French republic,
as asserted by their minister, continued to be supported out of doors, they found no open advocate
in either branch of the legislature. That this circumstance is, in a great measure, to be ascribed
to the temperate conduct of the executive, and to the convincing arguments with which its decisions
were supported, ought not to be doubted. But when it is recollected that the odium which these
decisions excited, sustained no diminution; that the accusation of hostility to France and
to liberty, which originated in them, was not retracted; that, when afterwards many of the
controverted claims were renewed by France, her former advocates still adhered to her; it is
not unreasonable to suppose that other considerations mingled themselves with the conviction
which the correspondence laid before the legislature was calculated to produce.

An attack on the administration could be placed on no ground more disadvantageous than on its
controversy with Mr. Genet. The conduct and language of that minister were offensive to reflecting
men of all parties. The President had himself taken so decisive a part in favour of the measures
which had been adopted, that they must be ascribed to him, not to his cabinet; and, of consequence,
the whole weight of his personal character must be directly encountered, in an attempt to censure
those measures. From this censure it would have been difficult to extricate the person who
was contemplated by the party in opposition as its chief; for the secretary of state had urged
the arguments of the administration with a degree of ability and earnestness, which ought to
have silenced the suspicion that he might not feel their force.

The expression of a legislative opinion, in favour of the points insisted on by the French
minister, would probably have involved the nation in a calamitous war, the whole responsibility
for which would rest on them.

To these considerations was added another which could not be disregarded. The party in France,
to which Mr. Genet owed his appointment, had lost its power; and his fall was the inevitable
consequence of the fall of his patrons. That he would probably be recalled was known in America;
and that his conduct had been disapproved by his government was generally believed. The future
system of the French republic, with regard to the United States, could not be foreseen; and
it would be committing something to hazard, not to wait its development.

These objections did not exist to an indulgence of the partialities and prejudices of the nation
towards the belligerent powers, in measures suggested by its resentment against Great Britain.
But, independent of these considerations, it is scarcely possible to doubt that congress really
approved the conduct of the executive with regard to France, and was also convinced that a
course of hostility had been pursued by Great Britain, which the national interest and the
national honour required them to repel. In the irritable state of the public temper, it was
not difficult to produce this opinion.

In addition to the causes of dissatisfaction with Great Britain which have already been suggested,
others soon occurred. Under her auspices, a truce for one year had been lately negotiated between
Portugal and the Regency of Algiers, which, by withdrawing a small squadron stationed during
the war, by the former power, in the Streights, opened a passage into the Atlantic to the cruisers
of the latter. The capture of American merchantmen, which was the immediate consequence of
this measure, was believed, in the United States, to have been its motive. Not admitting the
possibility that a desire to extricate Portugal from a war unproductive of any advantages,
and to leave her maritime force free to act elsewhere, could have induced this interposition
of England, the Americans ascribed it, exclusively, to that enmity to their commerce, and to
that jealousy of its prosperity, which had, as they conceived, long marked the conduct of those
who administered the affairs of that nation.

This transaction was afterwards explained by England, and was ascribed to her desire to serve
an ally, and to enable that ally to act more efficaciously in a common cause.

From governments accustomed to trust rather to artifice, than to force or to reason, and influenced
by vindictive passions which they have not strength or courage to gratify, hostility may be
expected to exert itself in a cruel insidious policy, which unfeelingly dooms individuals to
chains, and involves them in ruin, without having a tendency to effect any national object.
But the British character rather wounds by its pride, and offends by its haughtiness, and open
violence, than injures by the secret indulgence of a malignant, but a paltry and unprofitable
revenge: and, certainly, such unworthy motives ought not lightly to be imputed to a great and
magnanimous nation, which dares to encounter a world, and risk its existence, for the preservation
of its station in the scale of empires, of its real independence, and of its liberty.

But, in believing the views of the British cabinet to be unfriendly to the United States, America
was perhaps not entirely mistaken. Indeed, dispositions of a different nature could not reasonably
have been expected. It may be denied, but can not be disguised, that the sentiments openly
expressed by a great majority of the American people, warranted the opinion that, notwithstanding
the exertions of the administration, they were about to arrange themselves, in the war, on
the side of France. In a government like that of the United States, no firmness on the part
of the chief magistrate can long resist the current of popular opinion; and that opinion, without
professing it, unquestionably led to war.

If the character of the British minister at Philadelphia is to be collected from his intercourse
with the executive of the country to which he was deputed, there is reason to suppose that
his communications to his own government did not diminish the impression which the evidence
furnished on this subject, by the American people themselves, was calculated to make. It is
therefore not improbable, whatever may be the permanent views of England respecting the commercial
prosperity of the United States, that the measures of the British cabinet, about this time,
were taken in the belief that war between the two nations was a probable event.

This report stated the exports of the United States in articles of their own produce and manufacture
at nineteen millions, five hundred and eighty-seven thousand, and fifty-five dollars; and the
imports at nineteen millions, eight hundred and twenty-three thousand, and sixty dollars.

Of the exports, nearly one-half was carried to the kingdom of Great Britain and its dominions;
of the imports, about four-fifths were brought from the same countries. The American shipping
amounted to two hundred and seventy-seven thousand, five hundred and nineteen tons, of which
not quite one-sixth was employed in the trade with Great Britain and its dominions.

In all the nations of Europe, most of the articles produced in the United States were subjected
to heavy duties, and some of them were prohibited. In England, the trade of the United States
was in the general on as good a footing as the trade of other countries; and several articles
were more favoured than the same articles of the growth of other countries.

The statements and arguments of this report tended to enforce the policy of making discriminations
which might favour the commerce of the United States with France, and discourage that with
England; and which might promote the increase of American navigation as a branch of industry,
and a resource of defence.

This was the last official act of the secretary of state. Early in the preceding summer, he
had signified to the President his intention to retire in September from the public service;
and had, with some reluctance, consented to postpone the execution of this intention to the
close of the year. Retaining his purpose, he resigned his office on the last day of December.

[Sidenote: He resigns.]

This gentleman withdrew from political station at a moment when he stood particularly high
in the esteem of his countrymen. His determined opposition to the financial schemes which had
been proposed by the secretary of the treasury, and approved by the legislative and executive
departments of the government; his ardent and undisguised attachment to the revolutionary party
in France; the dispositions which he was declared to possess in regard to Great Britain; and
the popularity of his opinions respecting the constitution of the United States; had devoted
to him that immense party whose sentiments were supposed to comport with his, on most, or all
of these interesting subjects. To the opposite party he had, of course, become particularly
unacceptable. But the publication of his correspondence with Mr. Genet dissipated much of the
prejudice which had been excited against him. He had, in that correspondence, maintained with
great ability the opinions embraced by the federalists on those points of difference which
had arisen between the two republics; and which, having become universally the subjects of
discussion, had in some measure displaced those topics on which parties were previously divided.
The partiality for France that was conspicuous through the whole of it, detracted nothing from
its merit in the opinion of the friends of the administration, because, however decided their
determination to support their own government in a controversy with any nation whatever, they
felt all the partialities for that republic which the correspondence expressed. The hostility
of his enemies therefore was, for a time, considerably lessened, without a corresponding diminution
of the attachment of his friends. It would have been impracticable, in office, long to preserve
these dispositions. And it would have been difficult to maintain that ascendency which he held
over the minds of those who had supported, and probably would continue to support, every pretension
of the French republic, without departing from principles and measures which he had openly
and ably defended.

[Sidenote: Is succeeded by Mr. Randolph.]

He was immediately succeeded by Mr. Edmund Randolph; and the office of attorney general was
filled by Mr. William Bradford, a gentleman of considerable eminence in Pennsylvania.

{1794}

On the fourth of January, the house resolved itself into a committee of the whole, on the report
of the secretary of state, relative to the privileges and restrictions of the commerce of the
United States; when Mr. Madison, after some prefatory observations, laid on the table a series
of resolutions[13] for the consideration of the members.

     [Footnote 13: See note No. VII. at the end of the volume.]

[Sidenote: Mr. Madison's resolutions founded on the above report.]

These memorable resolutions embraced almost completely the idea of the report. They imposed
an additional duty on the manufactures, and on the tonnage of vessels, of nations having no
commercial treaty with the United States; while they reduced the duties already imposed by
law, on the tonnage of vessels belonging to nations having such commercial treaty: and they
reciprocated the restrictions which were imposed on American navigation.

[Sidenote: Debate thereon.]

On the 13th of January they were taken into consideration, when the debate was opened by Mr.
Smith of South Carolina.

After noticing the importance of the subject to the best interests of the United States, he
observed that, being purely commercial in its nature, he would exclude from the view he should
take of it, those political considerations which some might think connected with it. He imagined
it would be right to dismiss, for the present, all questions respecting the Indians, Algerines,
and western posts. There would be a time for these questions; and then he should give his opinion
upon them with firmness, and according to what he conceived to be the true interests of his
country. The regulation of commerce gave of itself sufficient scope for argument, without mixing
it with extraneous matter.

After some general observations on the delicacy of the crisis, and on the claims of the resolutions
to dispassionate investigation, he proceeded to consider the report on which they were founded.

The great object of that report being to establish a contrast between France and Britain, he
would request the attention of the committee to an accurate statement of facts, which, being
compared with the report, would enable them to decide on the justness of its inferences.

In the opinion that any late relaxations of the French republic were produced by interests
too momentary and fluctuating to be taken as the basis of calculations for a permanent system,
he should present a comparative view of the commerce of the United States to those countries,
as it stood anterior to the revolution of France. For this purpose, he produced a table which
had been formed by a person whose commercial information was highly respectable, from which
he said it would appear, notwithstanding the plaudits so generally bestowed on the justice
and liberality of the one nation, and the reproaches uttered against the other, that, with
the exception of the trifling article of fish oil, the commerce of the United States was not
more favoured in France than in Great Britain, and was, in many important articles, more favoured
by the latter power, than that of other nations.

Mr. Smith then reviewed, in detail, the advantages and disadvantages attending the sale of
the great products of America in the ports of each nation, which, he conceived, were more encouraged
by the British than by the French market.

A comparative statement, he added, of the value of the exports of the two countries, would
assist in confirming this opinion.

The value of the exports to Great Britain, at the close of the year ending with September,
1789, was nearly double those made to France in the same period: and even the average of the
years 1790, 1791 and 1792, gave an annual excess to the exports to Great Britain of three millions,
seven hundred and fifty-two thousand, seven hundred and sixty dollars.

The great amount of merchandise imported from Britain, instead of being a grievance, demonstrated,
in the opinion of Mr. Smith, the utility of the trade with that country. For the extent of
the intercourse between the two nations, several obvious reasons might be assigned. Britain
was the first manufacturing country in the world, and was more able, than any other, to supply
an assortment of those articles which were required in the United States. She entitled herself,
too, to the preference which was given her, by the extensive credit she afforded. To a young
country wanting capital, credit was of immense advantage. It enabled them to flourish by the
aid of foreign capital, the use of which had, more than any other circumstance, nourished the
industry of America.

By the advocates for forcing a trade with France, it was asserted that she could supply the
wants of America on better terms than Great Britain. To do this, she must not only sell cheaper,
but give credit, which, it was known her merchants either could not, or would not give.

The very necessity of laying a duty on British manufactures, in order to find a sale for those
of other countries, was a proof that the first could be purchased on better terms, or were
better adapted to the market.

If the object of the resolutions were the encouragement of domestic manufactures, there might
be some semblance of argument in their favour. But this is not contemplated. Their avowed object
is to turn the course of trade from one nation to another, by means which would subject the
citizens of the United States to great inconvenience.

Mr. Smith next proceeded to consider the subject with a view to navigation.

The trade of the United States to Great Britain, for the transportation of their own produce,
was as free in American as in British bottoms, a few trifling port charges excepted. In France,
they enjoyed the advantages granted to the most favoured nation. Thus far the comparison was
in favour of Great Britain. In the West Indies, he admitted the existence of a different state
of things. All American bottoms were excluded from the British islands, with the exception
of Turks island. In the French islands, vessels under sixty tons were admitted, but this advantage
was common to all other nations.

The effect of the difference in the regulations of the two rival nations in respect of navigation,
was not so considerable as the secretary of state had supposed. He had stated the tonnage employed
in the intercourse with France and her colonies, at 116,410 tons; and that employed in the
commerce with Great Britain at 43,580 tons. The secretary was led into this miscalculation
by taking for his guide, the actual entries of American bottoms from the dominions of each
country in the year. As four voyages are made to the West Indies, while only two are made to
Europe, the vessels employed in the former traffic will be counted four times in the year,
and those employed in the latter will be counted only twice in the same period. The deceptiveness
of the calculations made from these data had induced a call on the secretary of the treasury
for an account of the actual tonnage employed in trade with foreign nations for one year. This
account shows that France employs 82,510 tons, and Great Britain 66,582 tons, of American shipping;
leaving in favour of France, an excess of 15,928, instead of 72,830 tons, as reported by the
secretary of state.

From this comparative view taken of the regulations of the two nations, Mr. Smith conceived
himself justified in saying, that the commercial system of Great Britain towards the United
States, far from being hostile, was friendly; and that she made many discriminations in their
favour. France, on the contrary, placed them on a better situation than her rival, only in
one solitary instance, the unimportant article of fish oil.

If this be a true picture of the existing state of things, and he could not perceive in what
it was defective, was it not time, he asked, that the deceptions practised on the people by
the eulogists of France and the revilers of Great Britain, should be removed?

The resolutions were supported by Mr. Madison, Mr. Findley, Mr. Nicholas, Mr. Clarke, Mr. Smiley,
Mr. Moore, and Mr. Giles.

They admitted the subject before the committee to be of a commercial nature, but conceived
it to be impracticable to do justice to the interests of the United States, without some allusions
to politics. The question was in some measure general. They were to inquire how far it was
the interest of this country by commercial regulations to vary the state of commerce now existing.
They were of opinion that most of the injuries proceeding from Great Britain were inflicted
for the promotion of her commercial objects, and were to be remedied by commercial resistance.
The Indian war, and the Algerine attack, originated both in commercial views, or Great Britain
must stand without excuse for instigating the most horrid cruelties. The propositions before
the committee were the strongest weapon America possessed, and would, more probably than any
other, restore her to all her political and commercial rights. They professed themselves the
friends of free trade, and declared the opinion that it would be to the general advantage,
if all commerce was free. But this rule was not without its exceptions. The navigation act
of Great Britain was a proof of the effect of one exception on the prosperity of national commerce.
The effect produced by that act was equally rapid and extensive.

There is another exception to the advantages of a free trade, where the situation of a country
is such with respect to another, that by duties on the commodities of that other, it shall
not only invigorate its own means of rivalship, but draw from that other the hands employed
in the production of those commodities. When such an effect can be produced, it is so much
clear gain, and is consistent with the general theory of national rights.

The effect of leaving commerce to regulate itself is to submit it to the regulation of other
nations. If the United States had a commercial intercourse with one nation only, and should
permit a free trade, while that nation proceeded on a monopolizing system, would not the carrying
trade be transferred to that nation, and with it, the maritime strength it confers be heaped
upon a rival? Then, in the same proportion to the freedom granted to the vessels of other nations
in the United States, and to the burdens other nations impose on American vessels, will be
the transfer of those maritime resources.

The propositions before the committee should be examined as they concern navigation, manufactures,
and the just principles of discrimination that ought to prevail in their policy to nations
having treaties with them.

With respect to navigation, it was conceded that they were not placed upon the same footing
by the two nations with whom they had the greatest commercial intercourse. British vessels
could bring the produce of all countries into any port of the United States; while American
vessels could carry to the ports of Britain only their own commodities, and those only to a
part of her dominions. From her ports in the West Indies they were entirely excluded.

To exhibit at a glance the effect of the British navigation act, it was sufficient to compare
the quantity of American and British tonnage employed in their intercourse with each other.
The former in 1790 amounted to 43,000 tons, and the latter to 240,000 tons. The effect of British
policy would be further shown by showing the proportion of domestic tonnage employed at the
same time in the intercourse with other European nations. With Spain the American was to the
Spanish as five to one, with Portugal six to one, Netherlands fifteen to one, Denmark twelve
to one, France five to one, Great Britain one to five. This ratio had by particular circumstances
been somewhat changed. From calculations founded on the documents last introduced into the
house, it appeared that, at present, the proportion of American to foreign tonnage employed
in the American trade was, with Spain as sixteen to one, Portugal seventeen to one, Netherlands
twenty-six to one, Denmark fifteen to one, Russia fourteen to one, France between four and
five to one, and Great Britain one to three.

The situation of American commerce was the more mortifying when the nature and amount of their
exports came to be considered. They were not only necessaries of life, or necessaries for manufactures,
and therefore of life to the manufacturer, but their bulkiness gave them an advantage over
the exports of every other country. If America, to increase her maritime strength, should secure
to herself the transportation of her own commodities, leaving to other nations the transportation
of theirs, it would greatly augment the proportion of her shipping and of her sailors.

In relation to manufactures, the regulations existing between the United States and Great Britain
were not more equal. Out of the whole amount of manufactured articles imported into this country,
which was stated in round numbers at fifteen millions, two hundred and ninety thousand dollars,
Great Britain furnished thirteen millions, nine hundred and sixty thousand. In the same period,
in the year 1789-90, the articles which the United States received from France, a country which
actually consumed more of their produce, amounted only to one hundred and fifty-five thousand
dollars. The balance of trade, at the same epoch, was greatly in favour of the United States
with every other nation, and greatly against them with Britain. Although it might happen in
some cases, that other advantages might be derived from an intercourse with a particular nation,
which might compensate for an unfavourable balance of trade, it was impossible that this could
happen in the intercourse with Great Britain. Other nations, however, viewed a balance of trade
against them as a real evil; and Great Britain, in particular, was careful to prevent it. What
then must be the feelings of a nation, between whom and the United States the most friendly
relations existed, when she saw, not only the balance of trade against her, but that what was
thus obtained from her, flowed in the same manner into the coffers of one of her most jealous
rivals, and inveterate enemies?

The propriety of discriminating between nations having treaties with the United States, and
those having none, was admitted in some states before the establishment of the present government,
and was sanctioned by that house during their sittings in New York. It was the practice of
nations to make such a discrimination. It was necessary to give value to treaties.

The disadvantages of depending on a single nation for articles of necessary consumption was
strongly pressed; and it was added as an evil of most serious magnitude, more truly alarming
than any other of its features, that this commercial dependence produced an influence in their
councils which enabled it, the more inconvenient it became by its constant growth, to throw
the more obstacles in the way of a necessary remedy.

They entertained no apprehensions of injurious consequences from adopting the proposed resolutions.
The interests of Great Britain would not suffer her to retaliate: and the intercourse between
the two countries would not be interrupted further than was required by the convenience and
the interests of the United States. But if Great Britain should retaliate, the effects of a
commercial conflict would be felt by her, much more sensibly, than by the United States. Its
effects would be felt in the shipping business, by the merchants, and above all by the manufacturer.

Calculations were offered, by comparing the total amount of British exports with those to the
United States, to prove, that three hundred thousand British manufacturers would be suddenly
thrown out of employment, by withdrawing the trade carried on between America and that country.
In the complication of distress to which such a measure would reduce them, they would consider
the United States as a natural asylum from wretchedness. But whether they remained in discontent
at home, or sought their fortune abroad, the evil would be considered and felt by the British
government as equally great, and they would surely beware of taking any step that might provoke it.

On the advantages of America in such a contest with a populous and manufacturing country, they
dwelt with peculiar earnestness. She produced all the necessaries of life within herself, and
could dispense with the articles received from others. But Great Britain, not producing them
in sufficient abundance, was dependent on the United States for the supply of her most essential
wants. Again, the manufacturer of that country was dependent on this for the sale of his merchandise
which was to purchase his bread. Thus was produced a double dependence of Great Britain on
the United States. She was also dependent on them for the raw materials which formed the basis
of her manufactures. Her West Indies were almost completely dependent. This country furnished
the best market for their productions, and was almost the only one which could supply them
with the necessaries of life. The regulation excluding the provisions of other foreign countries
was entitled to no consideration. It was of ancient date, and had remained untouched because
there was no other foreign country by which provisions could be supplied.

That the commercial regulations of Great Britain were as favourable to the United States as
to other nations, ought not to satisfy America. If other nations were willing to bear impositions,
or were unable to retaliate, their examples were not worthy of imitation. America was in a
condition to insist, and ought to insist, on perfect commercial equality.

It was denied that any real advantage was derived from the extensive credit given by the merchants
of Great Britain. On the contrary, the use made of British capital was pronounced a great political
evil. It increased the unfavourable balance of trade, discouraged domestic manufactures, and
promoted luxury. But its greatest mischief was, that it favoured a system of British influence,
which was dangerous to their political security.

As the debate advanced, the expressions of exasperation against Britain became stronger; and
occasionally allusions were made to those party questions which had long agitated the public
mind, with a bitterness which marked their intimate connexion with the conduct of the United
States to foreign countries.

It was said to be proper in deciding the question under debate, to take into view political,
as well as commercial considerations. Ill will and jealousy had at all times been the predominant
features of the conduct of England to the United States. That government had grossly violated
the treaty of peace, had declined a commercial treaty, had instigated the Indians to raise
the tomahawk and scalping knife against American citizens, had let loose the Algerines upon
their unprotected commerce, and had insulted their flag, and pillaged their trade in every
quarter of the world. These facts being notorious, it was astonishing to hear gentlemen ask
how had Britain injured their commerce?

The conduct of France, on the contrary, had been warm and friendly. That nation respected American
rights, and had offered to enter into commercial arrangements on the liberal basis of perfect
reciprocity.

The period which Mr. Smith had taken as that at which the systems of the two nations should
be compared with each other, was reprobated with peculiar severity. It was insinuated to proceed
from a wish that the United States should directly countenance the restoration of despotism;
and much regret was expressed that a distrust of the permanency of the French revolution should
be avowed. It was hoped and believed that the present was the settled state of things; and
that the old order of things was unsettled for ever: that the French revolution was as much
more permanent than had been the French despotism, as was the great fabric of nature, than
the petty plastic productions of art. To exclude the period since the revolution, would be
to exclude some of the strongest evidences of the friendship of one nation, and the enmity
of the other.

The animadversions which had been made on the report of the secretary of state were retorted
with acrimony. It was declared that he would not suffer by a comparison in point of intelligence,
accuracy, and patriotism, either with the laborious compiler of the table produced by Mr. Smith,
or with the gentleman who had been judiciously selected for its interpreter. Some explanations
were given of the inaccuracies which had been alleged; and the facts omitted were declared
to be immaterial circumstances, which, if inserted, would have swelled the report, without
adding to the information it communicated.

In reply to the argument which stated that Great Britain did not, in common years, raise a
sufficient quantity of grain for her own consumption, and would consequently afford an increasing
market for American wheat and flour, it was remarked that this not only established the all
important position of the dependence of that country on this, but suggested a very interesting
reflection. It was that the continual increase of debt and paper machinery, will not produce
a correspondent increase of ability in the nation to feed itself. That an infinity of paper
will not produce an infinity of food.

In contrasting the ability of the two nations to support a commercial conflict, it was said,
"Great Britain, tottering under the weight of a king, a court, a nobility, a priesthood, armies,
navies, debts, and all the complicated machinery of oppression which serves to increase the
number of unproductive, and lessen the number of productive hands; at this moment engaged in
a foreign war; taxation already carried to the ultimatum of financial device; the ability of
the people already displayed in the payment of taxes, constituting a political phenomenon;
all prove the debility of the system, and the decreptitude of old age. On the other hand, the
United States, in the flower of youth; increasing in hands; increasing in wealth; and, although
an imitative policy had unfortunately prevailed in the erection of a funded debt, in the establishment
of an army, the anticipation of a navy,[14] and all the paper machinery for increasing the
number of unproductive, and lessening the number of productive hands; yet the operation of
natural causes has, as yet, in some degree, countervailed their influence, and still furnish
a great superiority in comparison with Great Britain."

An attempt was made to liken the present situation of America to that in which she stood at
the commencement of her revolutionary war; and the arguments drawn from the inconvenience to
which a privation of British manufactures would expose the people at large were answered by
observing--"This was not the language of America at the time of the non-importation association;
this was not her language at the time of the declaration of independence. Whence then this
change of American sentiment? Has America less ability than she then had? Is she less prepared
for a national trial than she then was? This can not be pretended. There is, it is true, one
great change in her political situation. America has now a funded debt: she had no funded debt
at those glorious epochs. May not this change of sentiment, therefore, be looked for in her
change of situation in this respect? May it not be looked for in the imitative sympathetic
organization of our funds with the British funds? May it not be looked for in the indiscriminate
participation of citizens and foreigners in the emoluments of the funds? May it not be looked
for in the wishes of some to assimilate the government of the United States to that of Great
Britain? or at least, in wishes for a more intimate connexion?

     [Footnote 14: Resolutions had been offered for the creation
     of a small navy to be employed in the Mediterranean.]

"If these causes exist, it is not difficult to find the source of the national debility. It
is not difficult to see that the interests of the few, who receive and disburse the public
contributions, are more respected than the interest of the great majority of the society, who
furnish the contributions. It is not difficult to see that the government, instead of legislating
for a few millions, is legislating for a few thousands; and that the sacredness of their rights
is the great obstacle to a great national exertion."

In addition to Mr. Smith, of South Carolina, the resolutions were opposed by Mr. Smith, of
Maryland, Mr. Goodhue, Mr. Lea, Mr. Dexter, Mr. Ames, Mr. Dayton, Mr. Hartley, Mr. Tracy, Mr.
Hillhouse, Mr. Forest, Mr. Fitzsimmons, and Mr. Foster.

If, it was said, the United States had sustained political wrongs from Great Britain, they
should feel as keenly as any persons for the prostrated honour of their country; but this was
not the mode of redressing them. When that subject should be brought before congress, they
would not be slow in taking such measures as the actual state of things might require. But
they did not approve of retaliating injuries under the cloak of commercial regulations. Independent
of other objections, it would derogate from the dignity of the American character.

The resolutions, it was said, ought to be contemplated commercially; and the influence they
would probably have on the United States, deliberately weighed. If they were adopted, it ought
to be because they would promote the interests of America, not because they would benefit one
foreign nation, and injure another. It was an old adage that there was no friendship in trade.
Neither ought there to be any hatred. These maxims should not be forgotten in forming a judgment
on the propositions before the committee. Their avowed objects were to favour the navigation
and the manufactures of the United States, and their probable operation on these objects ought
to be considered.

It had been said that the American tonnage ought to bear the same proportion to the foreign
tonnage employed in her trade, as exists between the bulk of her exports and imports. But the
correctness of this principle was not admitted. The fact was otherwise, and it was not believed
to be an evil.

Great Britain carries for other nations from necessity. Her situation is calculated for navigation.
Her country is fully peopled, so full that the ground is not sufficient to furnish bread for
the whole. Instead, therefore, of ploughing the earth for subsistence, her subjects are obliged
to plough the ocean. The defence of their coasts has been another cause which obliges them
to abandon the more lucrative pursuits of agriculture, to provide for their defence. They have
been compelled to sacrifice profit to safety.

The United States possessed a fertile, extensive, and unsettled country; and it might well
be questioned how far their real interests would be promoted by forcing a further acceleration
of the growth of their marine, by impelling their citizens from the cultivation of the soil
to the navigation of the ocean. The measures already adopted had been very operative; and it
was by no means certain that an additional stimulus would be advantageous. The increased duty
on foreign tonnage, and on goods imported in foreign bottoms, had already been attended with
sensible effects. In 1790, the American tonnage was one-half the whole tonnage employed in
their trade: in 1791, it was three-fifths: in 1792, it had increased to two-thirds. This growth
was believed to be sufficiently rapid. It was more rapid than the growth of British tonnage
had ever been under the fostering care of their celebrated navigation act. Let the existing
system be left to its natural operation, and it was believed that it would give to the United
States that share in the carriage of their commodities, which it was their interest to take.

But if a different opinion prevailed, and it was conceived that additional encouragement ought
to be given to navigation, then let the duty on all foreign bottoms be increased, and let the
particular disabilities to which American vessels are subjected in any country, be precisely
retaliated. The discriminations proposed, instead of increasing American navigation, were calculated
to encourage the navigation of one foreign nation at the expense of another.

The United States did not yet possess shipping sufficient for the exportation of their produce.
The residue must reach a market in foreign bottoms, or rot upon their hands. They were advancing
to a different state of things; but, in the mean time, they ought to pursue their interest,
and employ those vessels which would best answer their purpose. The attempt to make it their
interest to employ the vessels of France rather than those of Britain, by discriminating duties
which must enhance the price of freight, was a premium to the vessels of the favourite nation,
paid by American agriculture.

The navigation act of Great Britain had been made a subject of heavy complaint. But that act
was not particularly directed against the United States. It had been brought into operation
while they were yet colonies, and was not more unfavourable to them than to others. To its
regulations, Great Britain was strongly attached; and it was not probable that America could
compel her to relinquish them. Calculations were made on the proportion of British manufactures
consumed in America, from which it was inferred that her trade, though important, was not sufficiently
important to force that nation to abandon a system which she considered as the basis of her
grandeur. In the contest, considerable injury would be unquestionably sustained; and nothing
was perceived in the situation of the United States, which should induce them to stand forth
the champions of the whole commercial world, in order to compel the change of a system, in
which all other nations had acquiesced. But if they were to engage in such a contest, it was
by a similar act, by opposing disabilities to disabilities, that it ought to be carried on.
Upon this point, several members who were opposed to the resolutions, avowed an opinion favourable
to an American navigation act, and expressed their willingness to concur in framing regulations
which meet the prohibitions imposed on their vessels with corresponding prohibitions. Thus
far they were ready to go; but they were not ready to engage in a contest injurious to themselves,
for the benefit of a foreign nation.

Another avowed object of the resolutions was to favour the manufactures of the United States.
But certainly it was not by discriminating duties, by endeavouring to shift commerce from one
channel to another, that American manufactures were to be promoted. This was to be done by
pursuing the course already adopted, by laying protecting duties on selected articles, in the
manufacture of which America had made some progress; and by a prohibitory duty on others, of
which a sufficient domestic supply could be afforded. But the proposed measure only went to
the imposition of a tax on their own citizens, for the benefit of a foreign nation.

If the British market afforded an assortment of goods best suited to their consumption, and
could give them cheaper, a prohibitory duty imposed upon those goods would only drive their
citizens to seek them in another market, less able to supply their wants, and at a dearer rate.
There was nothing in this tending to encourage manufactures.

If the United States were prepared to manufacture to the whole amount of their wants, the importation
of all rival articles might be prohibited. But this they were not prepared to do. Their manufactures
must advance by slow degrees; and they were not to enter into a measure of this kind, for the
purpose of retaliating on a nation which had not commercially injured them.

The resolutions then were adapted to the encouragement neither of the navigation, nor the manufactures
of the United States, but of a foreign nation. Their effect would obviously be to force trade
to change its natural course, by discriminations against a nation which had in no instance
discriminated against the United States, but had favoured them in many points of real importance.
By what commercial considerations could such a system be recommended?

That it would be attended with great immediate inconveniences must be admitted; but for these,
ample compensation, it had been said, was to be found in its remote advantages. These were,
a diminution of American commerce with one nation, by its proportional augmentation with another;
and a repeal of the navigation act, and of the colonial system of Great Britain.

On the subject of forcing trade from one nation to another, which is, of necessity, so complicated
in principle, so various and invisible in consequence, the legislature should never act but
with the utmost caution. They should constantly keep in view, that trade will seek its own
markets, find its own level, and regulate itself much better than it could be regulated by
law. Although the government might embarrass it, and injure their own citizens, and even foreign
nations, for a while, it would eventually rise above all the regulations they could make. Merchants,
if left to themselves, would always find the best markets. They would buy as cheap and sell
as dear as possible. Why drive them from those markets into others which were less advantageous?
If trade with Britain was less free, or less profitable, than with France, the employment of
coercive means to force it into French channels would be unnecessary. It would voluntarily
run in them. That violence must be used in order to change its course, demonstrated that it
was in its natural course.

It was extraordinary to hear gentlemen complaining of British restrictions on American commerce,
and at the same time stating her proportion of that commerce as a national grievance, and that
the trade was so free as to become an injury. The very circumstance that she retained so large
a share of it, was evidence that it did not experience in her ports unusual burdens. Whenever
greater advantages were offered by other countries, there would be no need of legislative interference
to induce the merchants to embrace them. That portion of trade would go to each country, for
which the circumstances of each were calculated. If Great Britain purchased more American produce
than she consumed, it was because, all circumstances considered, it was the interest of America
to sell her more than she consumed. While this interest continued, no mischief could result
from the fact; when the cause should cease, the effect would cease also, without the intervention
of the legislature.

It was very improbable that the resolutions under consideration would effect their other avowed
object, a repeal of the British navigation act.

The season, it was said, was peculiarly unfavourable to such experiments. The internal convulsions
of France had laid her manufactures in ruins. She was not in a condition to supply her own
wants, much less those of the United States. The superb column erected at Lyons could furnish
no stimulus to the industry of her manufacturers.

But the attempt to stop the natural intercourse between the United States and Great Britain,
though incapable of producing on the latter the full effect which was desired, might inflict
deep and lasting wounds on the most essential interests of the former. The injuries which their
agriculture would sustain from the measure, might be long and severely felt.

It had been proudly stated, that while America received articles which might be dispensed with,
she furnished in return the absolute necessaries of life; she furnished bread, and raw materials
for manufactures. "One would think," said Mr. Tracy, "to hear the declarations in this house,
that all men were fed at the opening of our hand; and, if we shut that hand, the nations starve,
and if we but shake the fist after it is shut, they die." And yet one great objection to the
conduct of Britain was, her prohibitory duty on the importation of bread stuff while it was
under a certain price.

Nothing could be more deceptive than the argument founded on the nature of American exports.
What, it was asked, would be done with the surplus produce of the United States? Was it to
remain in the country, and rot upon the hands of those who raised it? If not, if it was to
be exported, it would find its way to the place of demand. Food would search out those who
needed it; and the raw material would be carried to the manufacturer whose labour could give
it value.

But there was a much more serious aspect in which this subject ought to be placed. The products
of America grew in other soils than hers. The demands for them might be supplied by other countries.
Indeed, in some instances, articles usually obtained from the United States would be excluded
by a fair competition with the same articles furnished by other countries. The discriminations
made in their favour enabled them to obtain a preference in the British market. By withholding
those which were of the growth of the United States, Great Britain would not lose the article,
but America would lose the market; and a formidable rival would be raised up, who would last
much longer than the resolutions under consideration. It is easy by commercial regulations
to do much mischief, and difficult to retrieve losses. It is impossible to foresee all evils
which may arise out of such measures; and their effects may last after the cause is removed.

The opponents of the resolutions persisted to consider the credit given by British merchants,
as a solid advantage to any country which, like the United States, was defective in commercial
capital; but they denied that, from that source, any political influence had arisen. "If,"
said Mr. Tracy, "we may argue from a great state, Virginia, to the union, this is not true;
for although that state owes immense debts, her representatives come forward with great spirit
to bring Great Britain to her feet. The people to the eastward do not owe the English merchants,
and are very generally opposed to these regulations. These facts must convince us that the
credit given by Great Britain, does not operate to produce a fear, and a dependence, which
can be alarming to government."

"If," said Mr. Dexter, "I have a predilection for any country besides my own, that bias is
in favour of France, the place of my father's sepulture. No one, more than myself, laments
the spasm of patriotism which convulses that nation, and hazards the cause of freedom; but
I shall not suffer the torrent of love or hatred to sweep me from my post. I am sent neither
to plead the cause of France nor England, but am delegated as a guardian of the rights and
interests of America."

The speakers against the resolutions universally laboured to exclude from all weight in the
decision on them, considerations which were foreign to the interests of the United States.
"The discussion of this subject," said Mr. Tracy, "has assumed an appearance which must be
surprising to a stranger, and painful in the extreme to ourselves. The supreme legislature
of the United States is seriously deliberating, not upon the welfare of our own citizens, but
upon the relative circumstances of two European nations; and this deliberation has not for
its object, the relative benefits of their markets to us, but which form of government is best
and most like our own, which people feel the greatest affection for us, and what measures we
can adopt which will best humble one and exalt the other.

"The primary motive of these resolutions, as acknowledged by their defenders, is, not the increase
of our agriculture, manufactures, or navigation, but to humble Great Britain and build up France;
and although it is said our manufactures and navigation may receive some advantage, it is only
mentioned as a substitute in case of failure as to the great object.

"The discussion in favour of these resolutions has breathed nothing but hostility and revenge
against the English; and yet they put on the mild garb of commercial regulations. Legislatures,
always cautious of attempting to force trade from its own channels and habits, should certainly
be peculiarly cautious, when they do undertake such business, to set about it with temperance
and coolness; but in this debate, we are told of the inexecution of a former treaty, withholding
western posts, insults and dominations of a haughty people, that through the agency of Great
Britain the savages are upon us on one side, and the Algerines on the other. The mind is roused
by a group of evils, and then called upon to consider a statement of duties on goods imported
from foreign countries. If the subject is commercial, why not treat it commercially, and attend
to it with coolness? if it is a question of political hostility, or of war, a firmer tone may
be adopted."

On this side of the question, the conduct of Great Britain, if as hostile as it was represented
to be, was spoken of with high indignation. "If," said Mr. Tracy, "these statements are founded
in fact, I can not justify myself to my constituents, or my conscience, in saying the adoption
of the regulations of commerce, a navigation act, or the whole parade of shutting ports, and
freeing trade from its shackles, is in any degree calculated to meet or remedy the evil.

"Although I deprecate war as the worst of calamities for my country, yet I would inquire seriously
whether we had on our part, fulfilled the treaty with Great Britain, and would do complete
justice to them first. I would negotiate as long and as far as patience ought to go; and, if
I found an obstinate denial of justice, I would then lay the hand of force upon the western
posts, and would teach the world that the United States were no less prompt in commanding justice
to be done them, than they had been patient and industrious in attempting to obtain it by fair
and peaceable means. In this view of the subject I should be led to say, away with your milk
and water regulations; they are too trifling to effect objects of such importance. Are the
Algerines to be frightened with paper resolves, or the Indians to be subdued, or the western
posts taken, by commercial regulations? when we consider the subject merely as a commercial
one, it goes too far, and attempts too much; but when considered as a war establishment, it
falls infinitely short of the mark, and does too little."

This earnest and interesting debate was protracted to a great length, and was conducted on
both sides with great spirit and eloquence. At length, on the third of February, the question
was taken on the first resolution, which was carried by a majority of five. The further consideration
of the resolutions was then postponed until the first Monday in March.

This animated debate was succeeded by another, on a question which also brought into full view,
the systems that were embraced by the opposite parties, on some of those great national subjects
which give a character to an administration.

On the second of January, a resolution was agreed to in the house of representatives declaring
"that a naval force adequate to the protection of the commerce of the United States against
the Algerine corsairs, ought to be provided." The force proposed was to consist of six frigates;
four of forty-four, and two of thirty-six guns.

This measure was founded on the communications of the President, representing the improbability
of being able to negotiate a peace with the dey of Algiers; and on undoubted information that
the corsairs of that regency had, during their first short cruise in the Atlantic, captured
eleven American merchantmen, and made upwards of one hundred prisoners; and were preparing
to renew their attack on the unprotected vessels of the United States.

In every stage of its progress this bill was most strenuously opposed.

[Sidenote: Debates on the subject of a navy.]

The measure was viewed simply as a present protection to commerce, and then as the commencement
of a permanent naval establishment. In both characters it was reprobated with extreme severity.

As a measure of protection, it was declared to be altogether incompetent to the attainment
of its object, because the force contemplated was insufficient, and because it could not be
brought into immediate use. The measure, therefore, would be totally inefficacious.

But the object might be effected by other means, more eligible, and less expensive. By proper
management, and a due attention to time and circumstances, a peace might be procured with money.

Nations possessing a naval force greatly superior to the proposed armament, had found it to
their advantage to purchase the friendship of the Algerines. That mode of procuring peace was
recommended both by its efficacy, and its economy. Unless the object was obtained, the money
would not be expended.

Another mode of giving security to their commerce, preferable to the plan in the bill, was
to purchase the protection of foreign powers. This might be acquired at a less expense than
would be incurred in fitting out the proposed armament, and its utility would be immediate.

But the measure was also to be considered as the commencement of a permanent navy. The question
which this view of it presented, was one of the most important that could engage the consideration
of the house. The adoption of the principle would involve a complete dereliction of the policy
of discharging the public debt. History afforded no instance of a nation which continued to
increase its navy, and at the same time to decrease its debt.

To the expensiveness of the navy system were ascribed the oppression under which the people
of England groaned, the overthrow of the French monarchy, and the dangers which threatened
that of Great Britain. The expensiveness of the government was the true ground of the oppression
of the people. The king, the nobility, the priesthood, the army, and above all, the navy. All
this machinery lessens the number of productive, and increases the number of unproductive hands
in the nation.

The United States had already advanced full far enough in this system. In addition to the civil
list, they had funded a debt on the principles of duration, had raised an army at an immense
expense, and now a proposition was made for a navy.

The system of governing by debts, was the most refined system of tyranny. It seemed to be a
contrivance devised by politicians to succeed the old system of feudal tenures. Both were tyrannical,
but the objects of their tyranny were different. The one operated on the person, the other
operates on the pockets of the individual. The feudal lord was satisfied with the acknowledgment
of the tenant that he was a slave, and the rendition of a pepper corn as an evidence of it;
the product of his labour was left for his own support. The system of debts affords no such
indulgence. Its true policy is to devise objects of expense, and to draw the greatest possible
sum from the people in the least visible mode. No device can facilitate the system of debts
and expense so much as a navy; and they should hold the liberty of the American people at a
lower rate, should this policy be adopted.

Another great objection to the establishment of a navy was, that until the United States should
be able to contend with the great maritime powers on the ocean, it would be a hostage, to its
full value, for their good behaviour. It would increase rather than lessen their dependence.

In reply, it was said that if it had been the intention of the house to incur a vast expense
in the establishment of a navy for vain parade, there might be force in some of the objections
which had been made. But this was not the case. It was a measure, not of choice, but of necessity.
It was extorted by the pressure of unavoidable events.

It being universally admitted that their commerce required protection against the Algerine
corsairs, the question was, simply, whether the plan proposed in the bill was the best mode
of affording that protection.

To decide this question, it would be proper to consider the substitutes which had been offered;
and then to review the objections which had been made to the measure.

The substitutes were, first, to purchase a peace; and secondly, to subsidize other nations
to protect commerce.

On the first substitute, it was said that the late communications must satisfy every person
who had attended to them, that all hope of purchasing a peace must be abandoned, unless there
was a manifestation of some force which might give effect to negotiation. So long as the vessels
of the United States remained an easy and tempting prey to the cupidity of those corsairs,
it would be vain to expect that they would sell a peace for the price the government would
be willing to give, or that a peace would be of any duration. If the executive had experienced
such difficulties while the Algerine cruisers had captured only one or two vessels, and were
confined to the Mediterranean by a Portuguese squadron, how much less prospect was there of
success after they had captured a considerable number of ships, were likely to capture many
more, and were at liberty to cruise on the Atlantic to the very coasts of the United States?
Even that little prospect of success would be diminished, when the dey of Algiers should understand
that the United States would take no measures to protect their trade, and were afraid of the
expense of a small armament.

It was to be understood that they did not rely solely on the operations of the armament. They
still looked forward to negotiation, and were willing to provide the means for purchasing a
peace. But the former measure was necessary to give success to the latter, and the armament
might be employed to advantage should negotiation fail.

The other substitute was to subsidize foreign powers. The national dishonour of depending upon
others for that protection which the United States were able to afford themselves, was strongly
urged. But there were additional objections to this project. Either the nations in contemplation
were at peace or at war with the regency of Algiers. If the former, it was not to be expected
that they would relinquish that peace for any indemnification the United States could make
them. If the latter, they had sufficient inducements to check the depredations of their enemies
without subsidies. Such a protection would be hazardous, as it would be, at any time, in the
power of the nation that should be employed, to conclude a truce with Algiers, and leave the
trade of the United States at the mercy of her corsairs. While the expense of protection was
perpetually to be incurred, it would never furnish the strength which that expense ought to give.

With a navy of her own, America might co-operate to advantage with any power at war with Algiers,
but it would be risking too much to depend altogether on any foreign nation.

To the argument that the force was incompetent to the object, it was answered, that, from the
documents before them, and from the diligent inquiries of a large committee, the number and
strength of the Algerine corsairs had been ascertained, and the armament contemplated in the
bill was believed to be sufficient. If gentlemen thought differently, it was surprising that
they did not move to augment it.

The expense of the frigates had been strongly urged. But the saving in insurance, in ships
and cargoes, and in the ransom of seamen, was more than equivalent to this item. "But are not
the slavery of our fellow citizens, and the national disgrace resulting from it, to be taken
into the account? these are considerations beyond all calculation. Who can, after reading the
affecting narratives of the unfortunate, sit down contented with cold calculations and syllogisms?
their narratives ought to excite every possible exertion, not only to procure the release of
the captured, but to prevent the increase of the number of these unhappy victims."

That a bill providing six frigates, to exist during the war with the Algerines, should excite
apprehensions of a large permanent navy, and of an immense debt, was truly astonishing. But
even if the bill had not contained a clause enabling the President to discontinue the armament
provided peace should be concluded with the regency of Algiers, the weight of the objection
was denied. America was peculiarly fitted for a navy; she abounded in all kinds of naval resources,
and had within herself, those means which other nations were obliged to obtain from abroad.
Her situation, and the dispositions of a considerable proportion of her citizens, evinced still
more the propriety of a naval establishment. Perhaps the country was not yet mature for such
an establishment to any great extent. But the period was not far distant when it would be.
The United States had an increasing population, much individual wealth, and considerable national
resources. It was not believed that the expense of equipping a small naval armament for the
protection of their commerce, would be insupportable.

It was, however, matter of surprise, that gentlemen who had deemed the improvement of American
navigation, as a source of defence, an object of so much importance as to be anxious to wage
an immediate commercial war with Great Britain for that purpose, should avow such a fixed determination
against resorting to that resource in any degree whatever, under circumstances the most urgent.

The original resolution was carried only by a majority of two voices; but as the bill advanced,
several members who were accustomed to vote in the opposition gave it their support; and, on
the final question, a majority of eleven appeared in its favour. The other branch of the legislature
concurred, and it received the cordial assent of the President.

Pending these discussions, the irritations in which they commenced were greatly aggravated
by accounts, that captures of American vessels by British cruisers were made to an extent altogether
unprecedented; and early in March, an authentic paper was received which proved that those
captures were not unauthorized.

On the sixth of November, 1793, additional instructions had been issued to the ships of war
and privateers of Great Britain, requiring them to stop and detain all ships, laden with goods
the produce of any colony belonging to France, or carrying provisions or other supplies to
any such colony, and to bring the same, with their cargoes, to legal adjudication, in the British
courts of admiralty.

These instructions made a serious impression on the most reflecting and moderate men in the
United States. It was believed that they originated in a spirit of hostility which must lead
to war; and that it had now become the part of prudence to prepare for that event.

On the 12th of March, Mr. Sedgewick moved several resolutions, the objects of which were to
raise a military force, and to authorize the President to lay an embargo. The armament was
to consist of fifteen thousand men, who should be brought into actual service in case of war
with any European power, but not until war should break out. In the mean time, they were to
receive pay while assembled for the purpose of discipline, which was not to exceed twenty-four
days in each year.

After stating the motives which led to the introduction of these resolutions, they were laid
on the table for the consideration of the members. Two days afterwards, a motion was made to
take up that which related to an embargo; but this motion was negatived for the purpose of
resuming the consideration of the commercial regulations which had been offered by Mr. Madison.
On the motion of Mr. Nicholas, those resolutions were amended so as to subject the manufactures
of Great Britain alone, instead of those of all nations having no commercial treaties with
the United States, to the proposed augmentation of duties. They were again debated with great
earnestness, but no decision on them was made.

In addition to the objections urged against them as forming a commercial system in time of
peace, they were said to be particularly inapplicable to the present moment. If, as was believed,
the United States were about to be forced into a war, the public counsels ought to be directed
to measures of defence. In that event, the resolutions would, at best, be useless. But the
greater the danger of war, the more incumbent was it on the government to unite public opinion
in support of it; and this would best be effected by observing a line of conduct which would
furnish no just cause of hostility. The commercial discriminations proposed were of a hostile
and irritating nature, might render war certain, would be considered by many as unnecessary,
and might impair that unanimity in which the great strength of the country consisted. It was
submitted to the gentlemen to decide whether it was wise to press their system through, with
so small a majority as was in its favour.

The resolutions were defended on the principle, that though not in themselves contributing
to the national defence, they would not prevent the adoption of such other measures as the
state of things might render necessary. If war should take place, they could do no harm. But
war must at some time be succeeded by peace: and they would form a valuable basis for negotiation.[15]

     [Footnote 15: In the course of this debate the resolutions
     were still considered as calculated to promote the
     interests, not of the United States, but of France. Mr. Ames
     said they had French stamped upon the very face of them.
     This expression produced a warm retort from Colonel Parker.
     He wished there was a stamp on the forehead of every person
     to designate whether he was for France or Britain. For
     himself he would not be silent and hear that nation abused
     to whom America was indebted for her rank as a nation. He
     was firmly persuaded that but for the aid of France in the
     last war, those gentlemen now on the floor who prided
     themselves in abusing her, would not have had an opportunity
     in that place of doing it. This sentiment produced a clap in
     the galleries. This indecorum was severely reprobated, and a
     motion was made to clear the galleries. Although the debate
     shows that the degree of sensibility excited by this
     disorder was extremely different in the different parties,
     it was justified by none, and the galleries were cleared.]

[Sidenote: An embargo law.]

On the 21st of March, Mr. Sedgewick's motion authorizing the President to lay an embargo was
negatived by a majority of two voices; but in a few days, the consideration of that subject
was resumed, and a resolution passed, prohibiting all trade from the United States to any foreign
port or place for the space of thirty days, and empowering the President to carry the resolution
into effect.

This resolution was accompanied with vigorous provisional measures for defence, respecting
the adoption of which, no considerable division of sentiment was avowed.

While the measures of congress indicated that expectation of war, a public document made its
appearance which seemed to demonstrate that Great Britain also was preparing for that event.
This was the answer of Lord Dorchester, on the 10th of February, to a speech delivered by the
deputies of a great number of Indian tribes assembled at Quebec. In this answer, his lordship
had openly avowed the opinion, founded, as he said, on the conduct of the American people,
that a war between Great Britain and the United States, during the present year, was probable,
and that a new line between the two nations must then be drawn by the sword.

This document was not authentic; but it obtained general belief, and contributed to confirm
the opinion that war was scarcely to be avoided.

On the 27th of March, Mr. Dayton moved a resolution for sequestering all debts due to British
subjects, and for taking means to secure their payment into the treasury, as a fund out of
which to indemnify the citizens of the United States for depredations committed on their commerce
by British cruisers, in violation of the laws of nations.

The debate on this resolution was such as was to be expected from the irritable state of the
public mind. The invectives against the British nation were uttered with peculiar vehemence,
and were mingled with allusions to the exertions of the government for the preservation of
neutrality, censuring strongly the system which had been pursued.

Before any question was taken on the proposition for sequestering British debts, and without
a decision on those proposed by Mr. Madison, Mr. Clarke moved a resolution, which in some degree
suspended the commercial regulations that had been so earnestly debated. This was to prohibit
all intercourse with Great Britain until her government should make full compensation for all
injuries done to the citizens of the United States by armed vessels, or by any person or persons
acting under the authority of the British king; and until the western posts should be delivered
up.[16]

     [Footnote 16: A few days before the motions of Mr. Dayton
     and Mr. Clarke, a report was made by the secretary of state
     relative to the vexations of American commerce committed by
     the officers and cruisers of the belligerent powers. It was
     made from materials collected in an inquiry which had been
     instituted by the President before the meeting of congress.
     In this report, after detailing the numerous complaints
     which were made against Great Britain, the secretary
     proceeded to notice those which were brought against other
     nations. Against France, he said, it was urged that her
     privateers harassed the American trade no less than those of
     the British. That their courts of admiralty were guilty of
     equal oppression. That they had violated the treaty between
     the two nations. That a very detrimental embargo had
     detained a number of American vessels in her ports, and that
     the government had discharged a specie contract with
     assignats. The effect of this report seems to have been to
     excite a suspicion that the secretary of state was not
     sufficiently attached to liberty and to France.]

On the fourth of April, before any decision was made on the several propositions which have
been stated, the President laid before congress a letter just received from Mr. Pinckney, the
minister of the United States at London, communicating additional instructions to the commanders
of British armed ships, which were dated the eighth of January. These instructions revoked
those of the sixth of November; and, instead of bringing in for adjudication all neutral vessels
trading with the French islands, British cruisers were directed to bring in those only which
were laden with cargoes the produce of the French islands, and were on a direct voyage from
those islands to Europe.

The letter detailed a conversation with Lord Grenville on this subject, in which his lordship
explained the motives which had originally occasioned the order of the sixth of November, and
gave to it a less extensive signification than it had received in the courts of vice admiralty.

It was intended, he said, to be temporary, and was calculated to answer two purposes. One was,
to prevent the abuses which might take place in consequence of the whole of the St. Domingo
fleet having gone to the United States; the other was, on account of the attack designed upon
the French West India islands by the armament under Sir John Jarvis and Sir Charles Grey; but
it was now no longer necessary to continue the regulations for those purposes. His lordship
added, that the order of the sixth of November did not direct the confiscation of all vessels
trading with the French islands, but only that they should be brought in for legal adjudication;
and he conceived that no vessel would be condemned under it, which would not have been previously
liable to the same sentence.

The influence of this communication on the party in the legislature which was denominated federal,
was very considerable. Believing that the existing differences between the two nations still
admitted of explanation and adjustment, they strenuously opposed all measures which were irritating
in their tendency, or which might be construed into a dereliction of the neutral character
they were desirous of maintaining; but they gave all their weight to those which, by putting
the nation in a posture of defence, prepared it for war, should negotiation fail.

On the opposite party, no change of sentiment or of views appears to have been produced. Their
system seems to have been matured, and not to have originated in the feelings of the moment.
They adhered to it therefore with inflexible perseverance; but seemed not anxious to press
an immediate determination of the propositions which had been made. These propositions were
discussed with great animation; but, notwithstanding an ascertained majority in their favour,
were permitted to remain undecided, as if their fate depended on some extrinsic circumstance.

Meanwhile, great exertions were made to increase the public agitation, and to stimulate the
resentments which were felt against Great Britain. The artillery of the press was played with
unceasing fury on the minority of the house of representatives; and the democratic societies
brought their whole force into operation. Language will scarcely afford terms of greater outrage
than were employed against those who sought to stem the torrent of public opinion, and to moderate
the rage of the moment. They were denounced as a British faction, seeking to impose chains
on their countrymen. Even the majority was declared to be but half roused; and to show little
of that energy and decision which the crisis required.

Unequivocal evidence, it was said, had been obtained of the liberticide intentions of Great
Britain; and only the successes of freedom against tyranny, the triumphs of their magnanimous
French brethren over slaves, had been the means of once more guaranteeing the independence
of this country. The glorious example of France ought to animate the American people to every
exertion to raise their prostrate character; and every tie of gratitude and interest should
lead them to cement their connexion with that great republic. The proclamation of neutrality,
though admitted to have originated in the best motives on the part of the President, was declared
to be not only questionable in a constitutional point of view, but eventually to have proved
impolitic. Being falsely construed by Great Britain into a manifestation of a pusillanimous
disposition, it served to explain the aggressions of that nation. Experience now urged the
abandonment of a line of conduct, which had fed the pride and provoked the insults of their
unprincipled and implacable enemy; and was derogatory to the honour, inconsistent with the
interest, and hostile to the liberties of their country.

Their tameness under British aggressions was declared to furnish just cause of offence to France;
since every infringement of right submitted to by a neutral, inflicted a correspondent injury
on the nation at war with the offending power.

The proceedings of the legislature continued to manifest a fixed purpose to pursue the system
which had been commenced; and the public sentiment seemed to accord with that system. That
the nation was advancing rapidly to a state of war, was firmly believed by many intelligent
men, who doubted the necessity, and denied the policy of abandoning the neutral position which
had been thus long maintained. In addition to the extensive calamities which must, in any state
of things, result to the United States from a rupture with a nation which was the mistress
of the ocean, and which furnished the best market for the sale of their produce, and the purchase
of manufactures of indispensable necessity, there were considerations belonging exclusively
to the moment, which, though operating only in a narrow circle, were certainly entitled to
great respect.

That war with Britain, during the continuance of the passionate and almost idolatrous devotion
of a great majority of the people to the French republic, would throw America so completely
into the arms of France as to leave her no longer mistress of her own conduct, was not the
only fear which the temper of the day suggested. That the spirit which triumphed in that nation,
and deluged it with the blood of its revolutionary champions, might cross the Atlantic, and
desolate the hitherto safe and peaceful dwellings of the American people, was an apprehension
not so entirely unsupported by appearances, as to be pronounced chimerical. With a blind infatuation,
which treated reason as a criminal, immense numbers applauded a furious despotism, trampling
on every right, and sporting with life, as the essence of liberty; and the few who conceived
freedom to be a plant which did not flourish the better for being nourished with human blood,
and who ventured to disapprove the ravages of the guillotine, were execrated as the tools of
the coalesced despots, and as persons who, to weaken the affection of America for France, became
the calumniators of that republic. Already had an imitative spirit, captivated with the splendour,
but copying the errors of a great nation, reared up in every part of the continent self created
corresponding societies, who, claiming to be the people, assumed a control over the government,
and were loosening its bands. Already were the mountain,[17] and a revolutionary tribunal,
favourite toasts; and already were principles familiarly proclaimed which, in France, had been
the precursors of that tremendous and savage despotism, which, in the name of the people, and
by the instrumentality of affiliated societies, had spread its terrific sway over that fine
country, and had threatened to extirpate all that was wise and virtuous. That a great majority
of those statesmen who conducted the opposition would deprecate such a result, furnished no
security against it. When the physical force of a nation usurps the place of its wisdom, those
who have produced such a state of things no longer control it.

     [Footnote 17: A well known term designating the most violent
     party in France.]

These apprehensions, whether well or ill founded, produced in those who felt them, an increased
solicitude for the preservation of peace. Their aid was not requisite to confirm the judgment
of the President on this interesting subject. Fixed in his purpose of maintaining the neutrality
of the United States, until the aggressions of a foreign power should clearly render neutrality
incompatible with honour; and conceiving, from the last advices received from England, that
the differences between the two nations had not yet attained that point, he determined to make
one decisive effort, which should either remove the ostensible causes of quarrel, or demonstrate
the indisposition of Great Britain to remove them.

To those who believed the interests of the nation to require a rupture with England, and a
still closer connexion with France, nothing could be more unlooked for, or more unwelcome,
than this decisive measure. That it would influence the proceedings of congress could not be
doubted; and it would materially affect the public mind was probable. Evincing the opinion
of the executive that negotiation, not legislative hostility, was still the proper medium for
accommodating differences with Great Britain, it threw on the legislature a great responsibility,
if they should persist in a system calculated to defeat that negotiation. By showing to the
people that their President did not yet believe war to be necessary, it turned the attention
of many to peace; and, by suggesting the probability, rekindled the almost extinguished desire,
of preserving that blessing.

Scarcely has any public act of the President drawn upon his administration a greater degree
of censure than this. That such would be its effect, could not be doubted by a person who had
observed the ardour with which opinions that it thwarted were embraced, or the extremity to
which the passions and contests of the moment had carried all orders of men. But it is the
province of real patriotism to consult the utility, more than the popularity of a measure;
and to pursue the path of duty, although it may be rugged.

In the senate, the nomination was approved by a majority of ten voices; and, in the house of
representatives, it was urged as an argument against persevering in the system which had been
commenced. On the 18th of April, a motion for taking up the report of the committee of the
whole house on the resolution for cutting off all commercial intercourse with Great Britain,
was opposed, chiefly on the ground that, as an envoy had been nominated to the court of that
country, no obstacle ought to be thrown in his way. The adoption of the resolution would be
a bar to negotiation, because it used the language of menace, and manifested a partiality to
one of the belligerents which was incompatible with neutrality. It was also an objection to
the resolution that it prescribed the terms on which alone a treaty should be made, and was
consequently an infringement of the right of the executive to negotiate, and an indelicacy
to that department.

In support of the motion, it was said, that the measure was strictly within the duty of the
legislature, they having solely the right to regulate commerce. That, if there was any indelicacy
in the clashing of the proceedings of the legislature and executive, it was to the latter,
not to the former, that this indelicacy was to be imputed. The resolution which was the subject
of debate had been several days depending in the house, before the nomination of an envoy extraordinary
had been made. America having a right, as an independent nation, to regulate her own commerce,
the resolution could not lead to war; on the contrary, it was the best means of bringing the
negotiation to a happy issue.

The motion for taking up the report was carried in the affirmative. Some embarrassment was
produced by an amendment offered by Mr. Smith of South Carolina, who proposed to add another
condition to the restoration of intercourse between the two countries. This was, compensation
for the negroes carried away in violation of the treaty of peace. The house avoided this proposition
by modifying the resolutions so as to expunge all that part of it which prescribed the conditions
on which the intercourse might be restored. A bill was brought in conforming to this resolution,
and carried by a considerable majority. In the senate, it was lost by the casting vote of the
Vice President. The system which had been taken up in the house of representatives was pressed
no further.

The altercations between the executive and the minister of the French republic, had given birth
to many questions which had been warmly agitated in the United States, and on which a great
diversity of sentiment prevailed.

The opinion of the administration that the relations produced by existing treaties, and indeed
by a state of peace independent of treaty, imposed certain obligations on the United States,
an observance of which it was the duty of the executive to enforce, had been reprobated with
extreme severity. It was contended, certainly by the most active, perhaps by the most numerous
part of the community, not only that the treaties had been grossly misconstrued, but also that,
under any construction of them, the interference of the executive acquired the sanction of
legislative authority; that, until the legislature should interpose and annex certain punishments
to infractions of neutrality, the natural right possessed by every individual to do any act
not forbidden by express law, would furnish a secure protection against those prosecutions
which a tyrannical executive might direct for the crime of disregarding its illegal mandates.
The right of the President to call out the militia for the detention of privateers about to
violate the rules he had established, was, in some instances, denied; attempts to punish those
who had engaged, within the United States, to carry on expeditions against foreign nations,
were unsuccessful; and a grand jury had refused to find a bill of indictment against Mr. Duplaine,
for having rescued, with an armed force, a vessel which had been taken into custody by an officer
of justice. Of consequence, however decided the opinion of the executive might be with respect
to its constitutional powers and duties, it was desirable to diminish the difficulties to be
encountered in performing those duties, by obtaining the sanction of the legislature to the
rules which had been established for the preservation of neutrality. The propriety of legislative
provision for the case was suggested by the President at the commencement of the session, and
a bill was brought into the senate, "in addition to the act for punishing certain crimes against
the United States." This bill prohibited the exercise, within the American territory, of those
various rights of sovereignty which had been claimed by Mr. Genet, and subjected any citizen
of the United States who should be convicted of committing any of the offences therein enumerated,
to fine and imprisonment. It also prohibited the condemnation and sale within the United States,
of prizes made from the citizens or subjects of nations with whom they were at peace.

Necessary as this measure was, the whole strength of the opposition in the senate was exerted
to defeat it. Motions to strike out the most essential clause were successively repeated, and
each motion was negatived by the casting vote of the Vice President. It was only by his voice
that the bill finally passed.[18]

     [Footnote 18: Previous to taking the question on this bill,
     a petition had been received against Mr. Gallatin, a senator
     from the state of Pennsylvania, who was determined not to
     have been a citizen a sufficient time to qualify him under
     the constitution for a seat in the senate. This casual
     circumstance divided the senate, or the bill would probably
     have been lost.]

In the house of representatives also, this bill encountered a serious opposition. The sections
which prohibited the sale of prizes in the United States, and that which declared it to be
a misdemeanour to accept a commission from a foreign power within the territory of the United
States, to serve against a nation with whom they were at peace, were struck out; but that which
respected the acceptance of commissions was afterwards reinstated.

In the course of the session, several other party questions were brought forward, which demonstrated,
at the same time, the strength, and the zeal of the opposition. The subject of amending the
constitution was revived; and a resolution was agreed to in both houses for altering that instrument,
so far as to exempt states from the suits of individuals. While this resolution was before
the senate, it was also proposed to render the officers of the bank, and the holders of stock,
ineligible to either branch of the legislature; and this proposition, so far as respected officers
in the bank, was negatived by a majority of only one vote.[19] A bill to sell the shares of
the United States in the bank was negatived by the same majority.

     [Footnote 19: A clause in the resolution as proposed, which
     was understood to imply that the act for incorporating the
     bank was unconstitutional, was previously struck out by the
     same majority.]

[Sidenote: Inquiry into the conduct of the secretary of the treasury terminates honourably to him.]

In both houses inquiries were set on foot respecting the treasury department, which obviously
originated in the hope of finding some foundation for censuring that officer, but which failed
entirely. In a similar hope, as respected the minister of the United States at Paris, the senate
passed a vote requesting the President to lay before that body, his correspondence with the
French republic, and also with the department of state.[20]

     [Footnote 20: See note No. VIII. at the end of the volume.]

The preparations for an eventual war, which the aspect of public affairs rendered it imprudent
to omit, and a heavy appropriation of a million, which, under the title of foreign intercourse,
was made for the purpose of purchasing peace from Algiers, and liberating the Americans who
were in captivity, created demands upon the treasury which the ordinary revenues were insufficient
to satisfy.

That the imposition of additional taxes had become indispensable, was a truth too obvious to
be controverted with the semblance of reason; but the subjects of taxation afforded at all
times an ample field for discussion.

The committee of ways and means reported several resolutions for extending the internal duties
to various objects which were supposed capable of bearing them, and also proposed an augmentation
of the impost on foreign goods imported into the United States, and a direct tax. It was proposed
to lay a tax on licenses to sell wines and spirituous liquors, on sales at auction, on pleasure
carriages, on snuff manufactured, and on sugar refined in the United States, and also to lay
a stamp duty.

[Sidenote: Internal taxes laid.]

The direct tax was not even supported by the committee. Only thirteen members voted in its
favour. The augmentation of the duty on imposts met with no opposition. The internal duties
were introduced in separate bills, that each might encounter only those objections which could
be made to itself; and that the loss of one might not involve the loss of others. The resolution
in favour of stamps was rejected: the others were carried, after repeated and obstinate debates.
The members of the opposition were in favour of raising the whole sum required by additional
burdens on trade, and by direct taxes.

While these measures were depending before congress, memorials and resolutions against them
were presented by the manufacturers, which were expressed in terms of disrespect that evidenced
the sense in which numbers understood the doctrine, that the people were sovereign, and those
who administered the government, their servants. This opportunity for charging the government
with tyranny and oppression, with partiality and injustice, was too favourable not to be embraced
by the democratic societies, those self proclaimed watchful sentinels over the rights of the
people. A person unacquainted with those motives which, in the struggle of party, too often
influence the conduct of men, would have supposed a direct tax to be not only in itself more
eligible, but to be more acceptable to the community than those which were proposed. To the
more judicious observers of the springs of human action, the reverse was known to be the fact.

The friends of the administration supported the proposed system against every objection to
it, because they believed it to be more productive, and less unpopular, than a direct tax.
It is not impossible that what recommended the system to one party, might constitute a real
objection to it with those who believed that the public interest required a change[21] in the
public councils.

     [Footnote 21: The declaration was not unfrequently made that
     the people could only be roused to a proper attention to the
     violation of their rights, and to the prodigal waste of
     their money, by perceiving the weight of their taxes. This
     was concealed from them by the indirect, and would be
     disclosed to them by the direct, system of taxation.]

On the ninth of June, this active and stormy session was closed by an adjournment to the first
Monday in the succeeding November.

[Sidenote: Congress adjourns.]

The public was not less agitated than the legislature had been, by those interesting questions
which had occasioned some of the most animated and eloquent discussions that had ever taken
place on the floor of the house of representatives. Mr. Madison's resolutions especially, continued
to be the theme of general conversation; and, for a long time, divided parties throughout the
United States. The struggle for public opinion was ardent; and each party supported its pretensions,
not only with those arguments which each deemed conclusive, but also by those reciprocal criminations
which, perhaps, each, in part, believed.

The opposition declared that the friends of the administration were an aristocratic and corrupt
faction, who, from a desire to introduce monarchy, were hostile to France, and under the influence
of Britain; that they sought every occasion to increase expense, to augment debt, to multiply
the public burdens, to create armies and navies, and, by the instrumentality of all this machinery,
to govern and enslave the people: that they were a paper nobility, whose extreme sensibility
at every measure which threatened the funds, induced a tame submission to injuries and insults,
which the interests and honour of the nation required them to resist.

The friends of the administration retorted, that the opposition was prepared to sacrifice the
best interests of their country on the altar of the French revolution. That they were willing
to go to war for French, not for American objects: that while they urged war they withheld
the means of supporting it, in order the more effectually to humble and disgrace the government:
that they were so blinded by their passion for France as to confound crimes with meritorious
deeds, and to abolish the natural distinction between virtue and vice: that the principles
which they propagated, and with which they sought to intoxicate the people, were, in practice,
incompatible with the existence of government. That they were the apostles of anarchy, not
of freedom; and were consequently not the friends of real and rational liberty.

{1794}

That the most material of those legislative measures on which the two great parties of the
United States were divided, might be presented in one unbroken view, some transactions have
been passed over, which will now be noticed.

In that spirit of conciliation, which adopts the least irritating means for effecting its objects,
the President had resolved to bear with the insults, the resistance, and the open defiance
of Mr. Genet, until his appeal to the friendship and the policy of the French republic should
be fairly tried. Early in January, this resolution was shaken, by fresh proofs of the perseverance
of that minister, in a line of conduct, not to be tolerated by a nation, which has not surrendered
all pretensions to self government. Mr. Genet had meditated, and deliberately planned, two
expeditions to be carried on from the territories of the United States, against the dominions
of Spain; and had, as minister of the French republic, granted commissions to citizens of the
United States, who were privately recruiting troops for the proposed service. The first was
destined against the Floridas, and the second against Louisiana. The detail of the plans had
been settled. The pay, rations, clothing, plunder, and division of the conquered lands to be
allotted to the military; and the proportion of the acquisitions to be reserved to the republic
of France, were arranged. The troops destined to act against the Floridas were to be raised
in the three southern states, were to rendezvous in Georgia, were to be aided by a body of
Indians and were to co-operate with the French fleet, should one arrive on the coast. This
scheme had been the subject of a correspondence between the executive and Mr. Genet, but was
in full progress in the preceding December, when by the vigilance of the legislature of South
Carolina, it was more particularly developed, and some of the principal agents were arrested.

About the same time, intelligence less authentic, but wearing every circumstance of probability,
was received, stating that the expedition against Louisiana, which was to be carried on down
the Ohio from Kentucky, was in equal maturity.

[Sidenote: Genet recalled.]

This intelligence seemed to render a further forbearance incompatible with the dignity, perhaps
with the safety of the United States. The question of superseding the diplomatic functions
of Mr. Genet, and depriving him of the privileges attached to that character, was brought before
the cabinet; and a message to congress was prepared, communicating these transactions, and
avowing a determination to adopt that measure within ---- days, unless, in the mean time, one
or the other house should signify the opinion that it was not adviseable so to do. In this
state, the business was arrested by receiving a letter from Mr. Morris, announcing, officially,
the recall of this rash minister.

[Sidenote: Is succeeded by Mr. Fauchet.]

Mr. Fauchet, the successor of Mr. Genet, arrived in February, and brought with him strong assurances
that his government totally disapproved the conduct of his predecessor. He avowed a determination
to avoid whatever might be offensive to those to whom he was deputed, and a wish to carry into
full effect the friendly dispositions of his nation towards the United States. For some time,
his actions were in the spirit of these professions.

[Sidenote: Gouverneur Morris is recalled and is succeed by Mr. Monroe.]

Not long after the arrival of Mr. Fauchet, the executive government of France requested the
recall of Mr. Morris. With this request the president immediately complied; and Mr. Monroe,
a senator from Virginia, who had embraced with ardour the cause of the French republic, and
was particularly acceptable to the party in opposition, was appointed to succeed him.

The discontents which had been long fomented in the western country, had assumed a serious
and alarming appearance.

[Sidenote: Kentucky remonstrance.]

A remonstrance to the President and congress of the United States from the inhabitants of Kentucky,
respecting the navigation of the Mississippi, was laid before the executive, and each branch
of the legislature. The style of this paper accorded well with the instructions under which
it had been prepared. Several intemperate aspersions upon the legislative and executive departments,
accompanied with complaints that the course of the negotiations had not been communicated to
those who were interested in the event, and with threats obviously pointing to dismemberment,
were concluded with a declaration that nothing would remunerate the western people for the
suspension of this great territorial right; that they must possess it; that the god of nature
had given them the means of acquiring and enjoying it; and that to permit a sacrifice of it
to any other considerations, would be a crime against themselves and their posterity.

In the senate, the subject was referred to a committee, who reported, "that in the negotiation
now carrying on at Madrid between the United States and Spain, the right of the former to the
free navigation of the Mississippi is well asserted and demonstrated, and their claim to its
enjoyment is pursued with all the assiduity and firmness which the magnitude of the subject
demands; and will doubtless continue to be so pursued until the object shall be obtained, or
adverse circumstances shall render the further progress of the negotiation impracticable. That
in the present state of the business, it would be improper for congress to interfere. But in
order to satisfy the citizens of the United States more immediately interested in the event
of this negotiation, that the United States have uniformly asserted their right to the free
use of the navigation of the river Mississippi, and have employed and will continue to pursue
such measures as are best adapted to obtain the enjoyment of this important territorial right,
the committee recommend that it be resolved by the senate--

"That the President of the United States be, and he hereby is requested to cause to be communicated
to the executive of the state of Kentucky,[22] such part of the existing negotiation between
the United States and Spain relative to this subject, as he may deem adviseable, and consistent
with the course of the negotiation."

     [Footnote 22: Two months previous to the passage of this
     resolution, the secretary of state had, by direction of the
     President, given the governor the most solemn assurances on
     this point.]

In the house of representatives also, a resolution was passed, expressing the conviction of
the house, that the executive was urging the claim of the United States to the navigation of
the Mississippi, in the manner most likely to prove successful.

Had the measures pursued in the western country been dictated, exclusively, by a wish to obtain
an important good, these resolutions would have allayed the ferment which had been excited.
The effect which must be produced on Spain by the insinuation that the continuance of their
connexion with the Atlantic states depended on obtaining the object they sought, was too apparent
to escape the notice of men endowed with an ordinary share of intelligence. But when the real
motives for human action are latent, it is vain to demonstrate the unreasonableness of those
which are avowed.

To estimate these resolutions accurately, it will be necessary to view in connexion with them,
the military preparations which were making in that country, under the authority of France.

In October, 1793, it was alleged by the Spanish commissioners, that four Frenchmen had left
Philadelphia, empowered by the minister of the French republic to prepare an expedition, in
Kentucky, against New Orleans. This fact was immediately communicated by Mr. Jefferson to the
governor of that state, with a request that he would use those means of prevention which the
law enabled him to employ. Binding to good behaviour was particularly recommended. This letter
was accompanied by one from the secretary of war, conveying the request of the President, that,
if preventive means should fail, effectual military force should be employed to arrest the
expedition; and General Wayne was ordered to hold a body of troops at the disposal of the governor,
should he find the militia insufficient for his purpose.

The governor had already received information, that a citizen of Kentucky was in possession
of a commission appointing him Commander-in-chief of the proposed expedition; and that the
Frenchmen alluded to in the letter of Mr. Jefferson, had arrived, and, far from affecting concealment
declared, that they only waited for money which they expected soon to receive, in order to
commence their operations.

The following extract of a letter from the governor, on this subject, exhibits a curious specimen
of the conclusions to which gentlemen were conducted by the course of political reasoning which
prevailed at the day.

After stating the facts above alluded to, he says, "I have great doubts, even if they do attempt
to carry their plan into execution, (provided they manage their business with prudence,) whether
there is any legal authority to restrain or punish them, at least before they have actually
accomplished it. For if it is lawful for any one citizen of this state to leave it, it is equally
so for any number of them to do it. It is also lawful to carry with them any quantity of provisions,
arms, and ammunition; and if the act is lawful in itself, there is nothing but the particular
intention with which it is done that can possibly make it unlawful. But I know of no law which
inflicts a punishment on intention only; or any criterion by which to decide what would be
sufficient evidence of that intention, if it was a proper subject for legal censure.

"I shall, upon all occasions, be averse to the exercise of any power which I do not consider
myself as clearly and explicitly invested with, much less would I assume power to exercise
it against men whom I consider as friends and brethren, in favour of a man whom I view as an
enemy and a tyrant. I shall also feel but little inclination to take an active part in punishing
or restraining any of my fellow citizens for a supposed intrusion only, to gratify or remove
the fears of the minister or a prince who openly withholds from us an invaluable right, and
who secretly instigates against us a most savage and cruel enemy."

Upon the receipt of this extraordinary letter, the President directed General Wayne to establish
a military post at Fort Massac, on the Ohio, for the purpose of stopping by force, if peaceful
means should fail, any body of armed men who should be proceeding down that river.

This precaution appears to have been necessary. The preparations for the expedition were, for
some time, carried on with considerable activity; and there is reason to believe that it was
not absolutely relinquished, until Spain ceased to be the enemy of France.[23]

     [Footnote 23: Intercepted letters were laid before the
     President, showing that this expedition had been
     communicated to some members of the national convention and
     approved. It was stated that Mr. Genet, with the rank of
     major general, was to be Commander-in-chief of all forces
     raised on the American continent, and to direct their
     movements.]

The proceedings of the legislature of South Carolina embarrassed those who had planned the
invasion of the Floridas, but did not entirely disconcert them. In April, a French sloop of
war arrived on the confines of Georgia and East Florida, with a small body of troops, who were
landed on one of the islands on the coast, south of the St. Mary, and who declared themselves
to be part of a larger force, which might soon be expected. Upon their arrival, several small
corps of Americans who had engaged to serve the republic of France, assembled in Georgia, for
the purpose, as was universally understood, of co-operating with the French against the neighbouring
dominions of Spain.

The interposition of government, and the inadequacy of the force to the object, disconcerted
this expedition. Its leader conducted his followers into the Indian country, and endeavoured
to make a settlement on their hunting grounds.

While these turbulent scenes were acting, the loud plaudits of France, which were dictated
by a passionate devotion to that country, were reechoed from every part of the American continent.
The friendship of that republic for the United States, her respect for their rights, the ingratitude
with which her continuing benefits were repaid, the injustice done her by the executive, its
tameness under British insults, were the inexhaustible themes of loud, angry, and unceasing
declamation. It required a firmness of mind, and a weight of character possessed only by the
chief magistrate, to maintain the ground he had taken, against such an assemblage of passions
and of prejudices.

It will be recollected that in the preceding year, the attempt to treat with the hostile Indians
had suspended the operations of General Wayne until the season for action had nearly passed
away. After the total failure of negotiation, the campaign was opened with as much vigour as
a prudent attention to circumstances would permit.

The Indians had expected an attempt upon their villages, and had collected in full force, with
the apparent determination of risking a battle in their defence. A battle was desired by the
American general; but the consequences of another defeat were too serious to warrant him in
putting more to hazard by precipitate movements, than the circumstances of the war required.
The negotiations with the Indians were not terminated till September, and it was then too late
to complete the preparations which would enable General Wayne to enter their country and to
hold it. He, therefore, contented himself with collecting his army and penetrating about six
miles in advance of Fort Jefferson into the uninhabited country, where he established himself
for the winter, in a camp called Greensville. After fortifying his camp, he took possession
of the ground on which the Americans had been defeated in 1791, where he erected Fort Recovery.
These positions afforded considerable protection to the frontiers, and facilitated the opening
of the ensuing campaign.

Seeing only the dark side of every measure adopted by the government, and not disinclined to
militia expeditions made at the expense of the United States, the people of Kentucky loudly
charged the President with a total disregard of their safety, pronounced the continental troops
entirely useless, declared that the Indians were to be kept in awe alone by militia, and insisted
that the power should be deposited with some person in their state, to call them out at his
discretion, at the charge of the United States.

Meanwhile, some steps were taken by the governor of Upper Canada which were well calculated
to increase suspicions respecting the dispositions of Great Britain.

It was believed by the President, not without cause,[24] that the cabinet of London was disposed
to avail itself of the non-execution of that article of the treaty of peace, which stipulates
for the payment of debts, to justify a permanent detention of the posts on the southern side
of the great lakes, and to establish a new boundary line, whereby those lakes should be entirely
comprehended in Upper Canada. Early in the spring, a detachment from the garrison of Detroit
repossessed and fortified a position near fifty miles south of that station, on the Miamis
of the lakes, a river which empties into Lake Erie at its westernmost point.

     [Footnote 24: See note No. IX. at the end of the volume.]

This movement, the speech of Lord Dorchester, and other facts which strengthened the belief
that the hostile Indians were at least countenanced by the English, were the subjects of a
correspondence between the secretary of state and Mr. Hammond, in which crimination was answered
by recrimination, in which a considerable degree of mutual irritation was displayed, and in
which each supported his charges against the nation of the other, much better than he defended
his own. It did not, however, in any manner, affect the operations of the army.

The delays inseparable from the transportation of necessary supplies through an uninhabited
country, infested by an active enemy peculiarly skilled in partisan war, unavoidably protracted
the opening of the campaign until near midsummer. Meanwhile, several sharp skirmishes took
place, in one of which a few white men were stated to be mingled with the Indians.

On the 8th of August, General Wayne reached the confluence of the Au Glaize and the Miamis
of the lakes, where he threw up some works of defence, and protection for magazines. The richest
and most extensive settlements of the western Indians lay about this place.

The mouth of the Au Glaize is distant about thirty miles from the post occupied by the British
on the Miamis of the lakes, in the vicinity of which the whole strength of the enemy, amounting,
according to intelligence on which General Wayne relied, to rather less than two thousand men,
was collected. The continental legion was not much inferior in number to the Indians: and a
reinforcement of about eleven hundred mounted militia from Kentucky, commanded by General Scott,
gave a decided superiority of strength to the army of Wayne. That the Indians had determined
to give him battle was well understood; and the discipline of his legion, the ardour of all
his troops, and the superiority of his numbers, authorized him confidently to expect a favourable
issue. Yet, in pursuance of that policy by which the United States had been uniformly actuated,
he determined to make one more effort for the attainment of peace without bloodshed. Messengers
were despatched to the several hostile tribes who were assembled in his front, inviting them
to appoint deputies to meet him on his march, in order to negotiate a lasting peace.

On the 15th of August, the American army advanced down the Miamis, with its right covered by
that river; and on the 18th, arrived at the rapids. Here they halted on the 19th, in order
to erect a temporary work for the protection of the baggage, and to reconnoitre the situation
of the enemy.

The Indians were advantageously posted behind a thick wood, and behind the British fort.

[Sidenote: General Wayne defeats the Indians at the Miamis.]

At eight in the morning of the 20th, the American army advanced in columns: the legion with
its right flank covered by the Miamis: One brigade of mounted volunteers commanded by General
Todd was on the left; and the other under General Barbee was in the rear. A select battalion,
commanded by Major Price, moved in front of the legion, sufficiently in advance to give timely
notice for the troops to form in case of action.[25]

     [Footnote 25: An evasive answer having been returned to the
     pacific overture made from the Au Glaize, General Wayne was
     uncertain whether the Indians had decided for peace or war.]

After marching about five miles, Major Price received a heavy fire from a concealed enemy,
and was compelled to retreat.

The Indians had chosen their ground with judgment. They had advanced into the thick wood in
front of the British works which extends several miles west from the Miamis, and had taken
a position, rendered almost inaccessible to horse by a quantity of fallen timber which appeared
to have been blown up in a tornado. They were formed in three lines, within supporting distance
of each other; and, as is their custom, with a very extended front. Their line stretched to
the west, at right angles with the river, about two miles; and their immediate effort was to
turn the left flank of the American army.

On the discharge of the first rifle, the legion was formed in two lines, and the front was
ordered to advance with trailed arms, and rouse the enemy from his covert at the point of the
bayonet; then, and not until then, to deliver a fire, and to press the fugitives too closely
to allow them time to load after discharging their pieces. Soon perceiving the strength of
the enemy in front, and that he was endeavouring to turn the American left, the general ordered
the second line to support the first. The legion cavalry, led by Captain Campbell, was directed
to penetrate between the Indians and the river, where the wood was less thick and entangled,
in order to charge their left flank; and General Scott, at the head of the mounted volunteers,
was directed to make a considerable circuit, and to turn their right flank.

These orders were executed with spirit and promptitude; but such was the impetuosity of the
charge made by the first line of infantry, so entirely was the enemy broken by it, and so rapid
was the pursuit, that only a small part of the second line and of the mounted volunteers could
get into the action. In the course of one hour, the Indians were driven more than two miles,
through thick woods; when the pursuit terminated within gun shot of the British fort.

General Wayne remained three days on the banks of the Miamis, in front of the field of battle,
during which time the houses and cornfields above and below the fort, some of them within pistol
shot of it, were reduced to ashes. During these operations, a correspondence took place between
General Wayne and Major Campbell, the commandant of the fort, which is stated by the former
in such a manner as to show, that hostilities between them were avoided only by the prudent
acquiescence of the latter in this devastation of property within the range of his guns.

On the 28th, the army returned to Au Glaize by easy marches, destroying on its route all the
villages and corn within fifty miles of the river.

In this decisive battle, the loss of the Americans, in killed and wounded, amounted to one
hundred and seven, including officers. Among the dead was Captain Campbell, who commanded the
cavalry, and Lieutenant Towles of the infantry, both of whom fell in the first charge. General
Wayne bestowed great and well merited praise on the courage and alacrity displayed by every
part of the army.

The hostility of the Indians still continuing, their whole country was laid waste, and forts
were erected in the heart of their settlements, to prevent their return.

This seasonable victory rescued the United States from a general war with all the Indians north-west
of the Ohio. The Six Nations had discovered a restless uneasy temper; and the interposition
of the President, to prevent a settlement which Pennsylvania was about to make at Presqueisle,
seemed rather to suspend the commencement of hostilities, than to establish permanent pacific
dispositions among those tribes. The battle of the 20th of August, however, had an immediate
effect; and the clouds which had been long gathering in that quarter, were instantly dissipated.

In the south too, its influence was felt. In that quarter, the inhabitants of Georgia and the
Indians seemed equally disposed to war. Scarcely was the feeble authority of the government
competent to restrain the aggressions of the former, or the dread of its force sufficient to
repress those of the latter. In this doubtful state of things, the effect of a victory could
not be inconsiderable.

About this time, the seditious and violent resistance to the execution of the law imposing
duties on spirits distilled within the United States, had advanced to a point in the counties
of Pennsylvania lying west of the Alleghany mountains, which required the decisive interposition
of government.

[Sidenote: Insurrection in the Western parts of Pennsylvania.]

Notwithstanding the multiplied outrages committed on the persons and property of the revenue
officers, and of those who seemed willing to submit to the law, yet, in consequence of a steady
adherence to the system of counteraction adopted by the executive, it was visibly gaining ground,
and several distillers in the disaffected country were induced to comply with its requisites.
The opinion, that the persevering efforts of the administration would ultimately prevail, derived
additional support from the passage of an act by the present congress, containing those provisions
which had been suggested by the chief of the treasury department. The progress of this bill,
which became a law on the fifth of June, could not have been unknown to the malcontents, nor
could its probable operation have been misunderstood. They perceived that the certain loss
of a market for the article, added to the penalties to which delinquents were liable, might
gradually induce a compliance on the part of distillers, unless they could, by a systematic
and organized opposition, deprive the government of the means it employed for carrying the
law into execution.

On the part of the executive, this open defiance of the laws, and of the authority of the government,
was believed imperiously to require, that the strength and efficacy of those laws should be
tried. Against the perpetrators of some of the outrages which had been committed, bills of
indictment had been found in a court of the United States, upon which process was directed
to issue; and at the same time, process was also issued against a great number of non-complying
distillers.

The marshal repaired in person to the country which was the scene of these disorders, for the
purpose of serving the processes. On the 15th of July, while in the execution of his duty,
he was beset on the road by a body of armed men, who fired on him, but fortunately did him
no personal injury. At daybreak, the ensuing morning, a party attacked the house of General
Nevil, the inspector; but he defended himself resolutely, and obliged the assailants to retreat.

Knowing well that this attack had been preconcerted, and apprehending that it would be repeated,
he applied to the militia officers and magistrates of the county for protection. The answer
was, that "owing to the too general combination of the people to oppose the revenue system,
the laws could not be executed so as to afford him protection: that should the posse comitatus
be ordered out to support the civil authority, they would favour the party of the rioters."

On the succeeding day, the insurgents re-assembled to the number of about five hundred, to
renew their attack on the house of the inspector. That officer, finding that no protection
could be afforded by the civil authority, had applied to the commanding officer at Fort Pitt,
and had obtained a detachment of eleven men from that garrison, who were joined by Major Kirkpatrick.
Successful resistance to so great a force being obviously impracticable, a parley took place,
at which the assailants, after requiring that the inspector[26] and all his papers should be
delivered up, demanded that the party in the house should march out and ground their arms.
This being refused, the parley terminated, and the assault commenced. The action lasted until
the assailants set fire to several adjacent buildings, the heat from which was so intense that
the house could no longer be occupied. From this cause, and from the apprehension that the
fire would soon be communicated to the main building, Major Kirkpatrick and his party surrendered
themselves.

     [Footnote 26: The inspector had left the house and secreted
     himself. The demand of the papers was acceded to.]

The marshal and Colonel Pressly Nevil were seized on their way to General Nevil's house, and
detained until two the next morning. The marshal, especially, was treated with extreme rudeness.
His life was frequently threatened, and was probably saved by the interposition of some leading
individuals who possessed more humanity, or more prudence, than those with whom they were associated.
He could obtain his liberty only by entering into a solemn engagement, which was guaranteed
by Colonel Nevil, to serve no more process on the western side of the Alleghany mountains.

The marshal and inspector having both retired to Pittsburg, the insurgents deputed two of their
body, one of whom was a justice of the peace, to demand that the former should surrender all
his process, and that the latter should resign his office; threatening, in case of refusal,
to attack the place, and seize their persons. These demands were not acceded to; but Pittsburg
affording no security, these officers escaped from the danger which threatened them, by descending
the Ohio; after which, they found their way by a circuitous route to the seat of government.

The perpetrators of these treasonable practices, being desirous to ascertain their strength,
and to discover any latent enemies who might remain unsuspected in the bosom of the disaffected
country, despatched a party which stopped the mail from Pittsburg to Philadelphia, cut it open,
and took out the letters which it contained. In some of these letters, a direct disapprobation
of the violent measures which had been adopted was avowed; and in others, expressions were
used which indicated unfriendly dispositions towards them. Upon acquiring this intelligence,
delegates were deputed from the town of Washington to Pittsburg, where the writers of the offensive
letters resided, to demand the banishment of the offenders. A prompt obedience to this demand
was unavoidable; and the inhabitants of Pittsburg, who were convened on the occasion, engaged
to attend a general meeting of the people, who were to assemble the next day in Braddock's
field, in order to carry into effect such further measures as might be deemed adviseable with
respect to the excise and its friends. They also determined to elect delegates to a convention
which was to meet, on the 14th of August, at Parkinson's ferry.

Affidavits attesting this serious state of things were laid before the President.

The opposition had now reached to a point which seemed to forbid the continuance of a temporizing
system. The efforts at conciliation, which, for more than three years, the government had persisted
to make, and the alterations repeatedly introduced into the act for the purpose of rendering
it less exceptionable, instead of diminishing the arrogance of those who opposed their will
to the sense of the nation, had drawn forth sentiments indicative of designs much deeper than
the evasion of a single act. The execution of the laws had at length been resisted by open
force, and a determination to persevere in these measures was unequivocally avowed. The alternative
of subduing this resistance, or of submitting to it was presented to the government.

The evidence which had been transmitted to the President was laid before one of the associate
justices, who gave the certificate, which enabled the chief magistrate to employ the militia
in aid of the civil power.

The executive being now authorized to adopt such measures as the crisis might require, the
subject was again seriously considered in the cabinet; and the governor of Pennsylvania was
also consulted respecting it. To avoid military coercion, if obedience to the laws could be
produced by other means, was the universal wish; and therefore, all concurred in advising the
appointment of commissioners from the governments of both the union, and the state, who should
warn the deluded insurgents of the impending danger, and should convey a full pardon for past
offences, upon the condition of future submission. But, respecting ulterior and eventual measures,
a difference of opinion prevailed. The act already mentioned, made it the duty of the President,
previous to the employment of military force, to issue his proclamation, commanding the insurgents
to disperse within a limited time. The secretary of state (and the governor of Pennsylvania
is understood to have concurred with him) was of opinion, that this conciliatory mission should
be unaccompanied by any measure which might wear the appearance of coercion. He was alarmed
at the strength of the insurgents, at their connexion with other parts of the country, at the
extensive-ness of the prevailing discontents with the administration, and at the difficulty
and expense of bringing the militia into the field. The governor of Pennsylvania having declared
his opinion, that the militia of that state, who could be drawn forth, would be incompetent
to enforce obedience, the aid of the neighbouring states would consequently be necessary. The
secretary of state feared that the militia of the neighbouring states would refuse to march;
and that, should he be mistaken in this, their compliance with the orders of the executive
might be not less fatal than their disobedience. The introduction of a foreign militia into
Pennsylvania might greatly increase the discontents prevailing in that state. His apprehensions
of a failure, in the attempt to restore tranquillity by coercive means, were extreme; and the
tremendous consequences of a failure were strongly depicted. From the highly inflamed state
of parties, he anticipated a civil war, which would pervade the whole union, and drench every
part of it with the blood of American citizens.

The secretary of the treasury, the secretary of war, and the attorney general, were of opinion
that the President was bound by the most high and solemn obligations to employ the force which
the legislature had placed at his disposal, for the suppression of a criminal and unprovoked
insurrection. The case contemplated by congress had clearly occurred; and the President was
urged by considerations the most awful, to perform the duty imposed on him by the constitution,
of providing "that the laws be faithfully executed." The long forbearance of government, and
its patient endeavours to recall the deluded people to a sense of their duty and interest by
appeals to their reason, had produced only increase of violence, and a more determined opposition.
Perseverance in that system could only give a more extensive range to disaffection, and multiply
the dangers resulting from it.

Those who were of opinion that the occasion demanded a full trial of the ability of the government
to enforce obedience to the laws, were also of opinion, that policy and humanity equally dictated
the employment of a force which would render resistance desperate. The insurgent country contained
sixteen thousand men able to bear arms; and the computation was, that they could bring seven
thousand into the field. If the army of the government should amount to twelve thousand men,
it would present an imposing force which the insurgents would not venture to meet.

It was impossible that the President could hesitate to embrace the latter of these opinions.
That a government entrusted to him should be trampled under foot by a lawless section of the
union, which set at defiance the will of the nation, as expressed by its representatives, was
an abasement to which neither his judgment nor his feelings could submit. He resolved, therefore,
to issue the proclamation, which, by law, was to precede the employment of force.

On the same day, a requisition was made on the governors of New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland,
and Virginia, for their several quotas of militia to compose an army of twelve thousand[27]
men; who were to be immediately organized, and prepared to march at a minute's warning.

     [Footnote 27: This requisition was afterwards augmented to
     fifteen thousand.]

While steps were taking to bring this force into the field, a last essay was made to render
its employment unnecessary. Three distinguished and popular citizens of Pennsylvania were deputed
by the government to be the bearers of a general amnesty for past offences, on the sole condition
of future obedience to the laws.

It having been deemed adviseable that the executive of the state should act in concert with
that of the United States, Governor Mifflin also issued a proclamation, and appointed commissioners
to act with those of the general government.

Meanwhile, the insurgents omitted nothing which might enlarge the circle of disaffection. Attempts
were made to embark the adjacent counties of Virginia in their cause, and their violence was
extended to Morgantown, at which place an inspector resided, who saved himself by flight, and
protected his property by advertising on his own door that he had resigned his office. They
also made similar excursions into the contiguous counties of Pennsylvania, lying east of the
Alleghany mountains, where numbers were ready to join them. These deluded men, giving too much
faith to the publications of democratic societies, and to the furious sentiments of general
hostility to the administration, and particularly to the internal taxes, with which the papers
in the opposition abounded, seem to have entertained the opinion, that the great body of the
people were ready to take up arms against their government, and that the resistance commenced
by them would spread throughout the union, and terminate in a revolution.

The convention at Parkinson's ferry had appointed a committee of safety consisting of sixty
members, who chose fifteen of their body to confer with the commissioners of the United States,
and of the state of Pennsylvania. This committee of conference was not empowered to conclude
on any thing. They could only receive and report the propositions which might be made to them.

Men of property and intelligence, who had contributed to kindle the flame under the common
error of being able to regulate its heat, now trembled at the extent of the conflagration.
It had passed the limits they had assigned to it, and was no longer subject to their control.

The committee of conference expressed themselves unanimously in favour of accepting the terms
offered by the government, and exerted themselves in the committee of safety to obtain a decision
to the same effect. In that committee, the question whether they would submit peaceably to
the execution of the law, retaining expressly the privilege of using all constitutional means
to effect its repeal, was debated with great zeal. The less violent party carried it by a small
majority; but, not thinking themselves authorized to decide for their constituents on so momentous
a question, they afterwards resolved that it should be referred to the people.

This reference resulted in demonstrating that, though many were disposed to demean themselves
peaceably, yet a vast mass of opposition remained, determined to obstruct the re-establishment
of civil authority.

From some causes, among which was disaffection to the particular service, the prospect of bringing
the quota of troops required from Pennsylvania into the field, was at first unpromising. But
the assembly, which had been summoned by the governor to meet on the first of September, expressed
in strong terms its abhorrence of this daring attempt to resist the laws, and to subvert the
government of the country; and a degree of ardour and unanimity was displayed by the people
of other states, which exceeded the hopes of the most sanguine friends of the administration.
Some feeble attempts were indeed made to produce a disobedience to the requisition of the President,
by declaring that the people would never be made the instruments of the secretary of the treasury
to shed the blood of their fellow citizens; that the representatives of the people ought to
be assembled before a civil war was commenced; and by avowing the extravagant opinion that
the President could not lawfully call forth the militia of any other state, until actual experiment
had ascertained the insufficiency of that of Pennsylvania. But these insidious suggestions
were silenced by the general sense of the nation, which loudly and strongly proclaimed that
the government and laws must be supported. The officers displayed an unexampled activity; and
intelligence from every quarter gave full assurance that, with respect to both numbers and
time, the requisitions of the President would be punctually observed.

The governor of Pennsylvania compensated for the defects in the militia law of that state by
his personal exertions. From some inadvertence, as was said, on the part of the brigade inspectors,
the militia could not be drafted, and consequently the quota of Pennsylvania could be completed
only by volunteers. The governor, who was endowed with a high degree of popular elocution,
made a circuit through the lower counties of the state, and publicly addressed the militia,
at different places where he had caused them to be assembled, on the crisis in the affairs
of their country. So successful were these animating exhortations, that Pennsylvania was not
behind her sister states in furnishing the quota required from her.

The troops of New Jersey and Pennsylvania were directed to rendezvous at Bedford, and those
of Maryland and Virginia at Cumberland, on the Potomac.[28] The command of the expedition had
been conferred on Governor Lee of Virginia; and the governors of New Jersey and Pennsylvania
commanded the militia of their respective states under him.

     [Footnote 28: The spirit of disaffection was rapidly
     spreading, and had it not been checked by this vigorous
     exertion of the powers of the government, it would be
     difficult to say what might have been its extent. Even while
     the militia were assembling, it broke out in more than one
     county in Pennsylvania, and showed itself in a part of
     Maryland.]

The President, in person, visited each division of the army; but, being confident that the
force employed must look down all resistance, he left the secretary of the treasury to accompany
it, and returned himself to Philadelphia, where the approaching session of congress required
his presence.

[Sidenote: Quelled by the prompt and vigorous measures of the government.]

From Cumberland and Bedford, the army marched in two divisions into the country of the insurgents.
The greatness of the force prevented the effusion of blood. The disaffected did not venture
to assemble in arms. Several of the leaders who had refused to give assurances of future submission
to the laws were seized, and some of them detained for legal prosecution.

But although no direct and open opposition was made, the spirit of insurrection was not subdued.
A sour and malignant temper displayed itself, which indicated, but too plainly, that the disposition
to resist had only sunk under the pressure of the great military force brought into the country,
but would rise again should that force be withdrawn. It was, therefore, thought adviseable
to station for the winter, a detachment to be commanded by Major General Morgan, in the centre
of the disaffected country.

Thus, without shedding a drop of blood, did the prudent vigour of the executive terminate an
insurrection, which, at one time, threatened to shake the government of the United States to
its foundation. That so perverse a spirit should have been excited in the bosom of prosperity,
without the pressure of a single grievance, is among those political phenomena which occur
not unfrequently in the course of human affairs, and which the statesman can never safely disregard.
When real ills are felt, there is something positive and perceptible to which the judgment
may be directed, the actual extent of which may be ascertained, and the cause of which may
be discerned. But when the mind, inflamed by supposititious dangers, gives a full loose to
the imagination, and fastens upon some object with which to disturb itself, the belief that
the danger exists seems to become a matter of faith, with which reason combats in vain. Under
a government emanating entirely from the people, and with an administration whose sole object
was their happiness, the public mind was violently agitated with apprehensions of a powerful
and secret combination against liberty, which was to discover itself by the total overthrow
of the republican system. That those who were charged with these designs were as destitute
of the means, as of the will to effect them, did not shake the firm belief of their existence.
Disregarding the apparent partiality of the administration for France, so far as that partiality
was compatible with an honest neutrality, the zealots of the day ascribed its incessant labours
for the preservation of peace, to a temper hostile to the French republic; and, while themselves
loudly imprecating the vengeance of heaven and earth on one of the belligerents, and openly
rejoicing in the victories of the other; while impetuously rushing into a war with Britain,
and pressing measures which would render accommodation impracticable; they attributed a system
calculated to check them in this furious career, not to that genuine American spirit which
produced it, but to an influence which, so far as opinions are to depend on facts, has at no
time insinuated itself into the councils of the United States.

In popular governments, the resentments, the suspicions, and the disgusts, produced in the
legislature by warm debate, and the chagrin of defeat; by the desire of gaining, or the fear
of losing power; and which are created by personal views among the leaders of parties, will
infallibly extend to the body of the nation. Not only will those causes of dissatisfaction
be urged which really operate on the minds of intelligent men, but every instrument will be
seized which can effect the purpose, and the passions will be inflamed by whatever may serve
to irritate them. Among the multiplied evils generated by faction, it is perhaps not the least,
that it has a tendency to abolish all distinction between virtue and vice; and to prostrate
those barriers which the wise and good have erected for the protection of morals, and which
are defended solely by opinion. The victory of the party becomes the great object; and, too
often, all measures are deemed right or wrong, as they tend to promote or impede it. The attainment
of the end is considered as the supreme good, and the detestable doctrine is adopted that the
end will justify the means. The mind, habituated to the extenuation of acts of moral turpitude,
becomes gradually contaminated, and loses that delicate sensibility which instinctively inspires
horror for vice, and respect for virtue.

In the intemperate abuse which was cast on the principal measures of the government, and on
those who supported them; in the violence with which the discontents of the opponents to those
measures were expressed; and especially in the denunciations which were uttered against them
by the democratic societies; the friends of the administration searched for the causes of that
criminal attempt which had been made in the western parts of Pennsylvania, to oppose the will
of the nation by force of arms. Had those misguided men believed that this opposition was to
be confined within their own narrow limits, they could not have been so mad, or so weak as
to have engaged in it.

The ideas of the President on this subject were freely given to several of his confidential
friends. "The real people" he said, "occasionally assembled in order to express their sentiments
on political subjects, ought never to be confounded with permanent self-appointed societies,
usurping the right to control the constituted authorities, and to dictate to public opinion.
While the former was entitled to respect, the latter was incompatible with all government,
and must either sink into general disesteem, or finally overturn the established order of things."

[Sidenote: Meeting of congress.]

In his speech, at the opening of congress, the President detailed at considerable length the
progress of opposition to the laws, the means employed both by the legislature and executive
to appease the discontents which had been fomented,[29] and the measures which he had finally
taken to reduce the refractory to submission.

     [Footnote 29: The impression, he said, made by this
     moderation on the discontented, did not correspond with what
     it deserved.

The President could not omit this fair occasion, once more to press on congress a subject which
had always been near his heart.

After mentioning the intelligence from the army under the command of General Wayne, and the
state of Indian affairs, he again called the attention of the house of representatives to a
subject scarcely less interesting than a system of defence against external and internal violence.

He referred to subsequent communications for certain circumstances attending the intercourse
of the United States with foreign nations.

To this unequivocal approbation of the policy adopted by the executive with regard to foreign
nations, no objections were made. The clause respecting democratic societies was seriously
opposed; but the party in favour of the administration had been strengthened in the senate
by recent events, and the address reported by the committee was agreed to without alteration.

The same spirit did not prevail in the house of representatives. In that branch of the legislature,
the opposition party continued to be the most powerful, and the respect of their leaders for
the person and character of the chief magistrate was visibly diminishing. His interference
with a favourite system was not forgotten, and the mission of Mr. Jay still rankled in their
bosoms.

The address prepared by the committee, to whom the speech was referred, omitted to notice those
parts which respected self created societies, the victory of General Wayne, and the policy
observed by the executive in its intercourse with foreign nations. On a motion being made by
Mr. Dayton to amend it, by inserting a clause which should express the satisfaction of the
house at the success of the army under General Wayne, Mr. Madison said, that it had been the
wish of the committee who framed the address, to avoid the minutia of the speech: but as a
desire was manifested to amplify particular parts, it might not be amiss to glance at the policy
observed towards foreign nations. He therefore moved to amend the amendment by adding the words,
"solicitous also as we are for the preservation of peace with all nations, we can not otherwise
than warmly approve of a policy in our foreign transactions, which keeps in view as well the
maintenance of our national rights, as the continuance of that blessing." Mr. Hillhouse wished
the word your to be substituted for the article a, that the answer might point, not to an abstract
policy, but to that of the executive, and thus have a direct application to the speech. This
motion produced a warm discussion, which terminated in a request that Mr. Madison would withdraw
his amendment; the friends of the administration being of opinion, that it was more eligible
to pass over that part of the speech in silence, than to answer it in terms so equivocal as
those to which alone the house seemed willing to assent.

A proposition was then made by Mr. Fitzsimmons to introduce into the address, a clause declaring,
that "in tracing the origin and progress of the insurrection, they (the house of representatives)
entertain no doubt that certain self created societies and combinations of men, careless of
consequences, and disregarding truth, by disseminating suspicions, jealousies, and accusations
of the government, have had an influence in fomenting this daring outrage against the principles
of social order, and the authority of the laws."

This attempt to censure certain organized assemblages of factious individuals, who, under the
imposing garb of watchfulness over liberty, concealed designs subversive of all those principles
which preserve the order, the peace, and the happiness of society, was resisted by the whole
force of the opposition. A very eloquent and animated debate ensued, which terminated in the
committee, by striking out the words "self created societies;" forty-seven voting for, and
forty-five against expunging them. The question was resumed in the house; and, the chairman
of the committee being opposed in sentiment to the speaker, who was now placed in the chair,
the majority was precisely changed, and the words were reinstated. This victory, however, if
it may be termed one, was soon lost. A motion for confining the censure to societies and combinations
within the four western counties of Pennsylvania and the adjacent country, succeeded by the
casting vote of the speaker, upon which, the friends of the amendment gave it up, and the address
was voted without expressing any sentiment on the subject.

This triumph over the administration revived, for a moment, the drooping energies of these
pernicious societies. But it was only for a moment. The agency ascribed to them by the opinion
of the public, as well as of the President, in producing an insurrection which was generally
execrated, had essentially affected them; and while languishing under this wound, they received
a deadly blow from a quarter whence hostility was least expected.

The remnant of the French convention, rendered desperate by the ferocious despotism of the
Jacobins, and of the sanguinary tyrant who had made himself their chief; perceiving that the
number of victims who were immolated as his caprice might suggest, instead of satiating, could
only stimulate his appetite for blood, had, at length, sought for safety by boldly confronting
danger; and, succeeding in a desperate attempt to bring Robespierre to the guillotine, had
terminated his reign of terror. The colossean power of the clubs, which had been abused to
an excess that gives to faithful history the appearance of fiction, fell with that of their
favourite member, and they sunk into long merited disgrace. The means by which their political
influence had been maintained were wrested from them; and, in a short time, their meetings
were prohibited. Not more certain is it that the boldest streams must disappear, if the fountains
which fed them be emptied, than was the dissolution of the democratic societies of America,
when the Jacobin clubs were denounced by France. As if their destinies depended on the same
thread, the political death of the former was the unerring signal for that of the latter; and
their expiring struggles, incapable of deferring their fate, only attested the reluctance with
which they surrendered their much abused power.

Notwithstanding the disagreement between the executive and one branch of the legislature concerning
self created societies, and the policy observed towards foreign nations, the speech of the
President was treated with marked respect; and the several subjects which it recommended, engaged
the immediate attention of congress. A bill was passed authorizing the President to station
a detachment of militia in the four western counties of Pennsylvania; provision was made to
compensate those whose property had been destroyed by the insurgents, should those who had
committed the injury be unable to repair it: and an appropriation exceeding one million one
hundred thousand dollars was made to defray the expenses occasioned by the insurrection.

Many of the difficulties which had occurred in drawing out the militia were removed, and a
bill was introduced to give greater energy to the militia system generally; but this subject
possessed so many intrinsic difficulties, that the session passed away without effecting any
thing respecting it.

A bill for the gradual redemption of the national debt was more successful. The President had
repeatedly and earnestly recommended to the legislature the adoption of measures which might
effect this favourite object; but, although that party which had been reproached with a desire
to accumulate debt as a means of subverting the republican system had uniformly manifested
a disposition to carry this recommendation into effect, their desire had hitherto been opposed
by obstacles they were unable to surmount. Professions of an anxious solicitude to discharge
the national engagements, without providing the means of actual payment, might gratify those
who consider words as things, but would be justly estimated by men, who, neither condemning
indiscriminately, nor approving blindly, all the measures of government, expect that, in point
of fact, it shall be rightly and honestly administered. On the friends of the administration,
therefore, it was incumbent to provide real, substantial funds, which should attest the sincerity
of their professions. This provision could not be made without difficulty. The duty on imported
articles, and on tonnage, though rapidly augmenting, could not, immediately, be rendered sufficiently
productive to meet, alone, the various exigencies of the treasury, and yield a surplus for
the secure establishment of a permanent fund to redeem the principal of the debt. Additional
sources of revenue must therefore be explored, or the idea of reducing the debt be abandoned.
New taxes are the never failing sources of discontent to those who pay them, and will ever
furnish weapons against those who impose them, too operative not to be seized by their antagonists.
In a government where popularity is power, it requires no small degree of patriotism to encounter
the odium which, however urgently required, they seldom fail to excite. Ready faith is given
to the declaration that they are unjust, tyrannical, and unnecessary; and no inconsiderable
degree of firmness is requisite to persevere in a course attended with so much political hazard.
The opposition made to the internal taxes, which commenced in congress, had extended itself
through the community. Although only the act imposing duties on spirits distilled within the
United States had been resisted by force, yet such a degree of irritation was manifested against
the whole system, as to evince the repugnance with which a large portion of the people saw
it go into operation. The duties on refined sugars, and manufactured tobacco, especially, were
censured in terms which would authorize an opinion that a defect of power, rather than of will,
to resist the execution of the law, confined some of its opponents to remonstrances. Nothing
could be more unfriendly than this spirit, to the reduction of the debt.

The reports of the secretary of the treasury having suggested the several steps which had been
taken by congress in the system of internal taxation, he was justly considered as its author.
The perseverance which marked the character of this officer, gave full assurance that no clamour
would deter him from continuing to recommend measures which he believed to be essential to
the due administration of the finances. That the establishment of public credit on a sound
basis was all important to the character and prosperity of the United States, constituted one
of those political maxims to which he invariably adhered; and to effect it completely, seems
to have been among the first objects of his ambition. He had bestowed upon this favourite subject
the most attentive consideration; and while the legislature was engaged in the discussions
of a report made by a select committee on a resolution moved by Mr. Smith, of South Carolina,
purporting that further provision ought to be made for the reduction of the debt, addressed
a letter to the house of representatives, through their speaker, informing them that he had
digested and prepared a plan on the basis of the actual revenues, for the further support of
public credit, which he was ready to communicate.

This comprehensive and valuable report presented the result of his laborious and useful investigations,
on a subject equally intricate and interesting.

This was the last official act of Colonel Hamilton. The accusations brought against him in
the last session of the second congress had postponed the execution of this design, until opportunity
should be afforded for a more full investigation of his official conduct; but he informed the
President that, on the close of the session, to meet in December, 1793, he should resign his
situation in the administration. The events which accumulated about that time, and which were,
he said in a letter to the President, of a nature to render the continuance of peace in a considerable
degree precarious, deferred his meditated retreat. "I do not perceive," he added, "that I could
voluntarily quit my post at such a juncture, consistently with considerations either of duty
or character; and therefore, I find myself reluctantly obliged to defer the offer of my resignation.

"But if any circumstances should have taken place in consequence of the intimation of an intention
to resign, or should otherwise exist, which serve to render my continuance in office in any
degree inconvenient or ineligible, I beg leave to assure you, sir, that I should yield to them
with all the readiness naturally inspired by an impatient desire to relinquish a situation,
in which, even a momentary stay is opposed by the strongest personal and family reasons, and
could only be produced by a sense of duty or reputation."

[Sidenote: Resignation of Colonel Hamilton.]

{1795}

Assurances being given by the President, of the pleasure with which the intelligence, that
he would continue at his post through the crisis, was received, he remained in office until
the commencement of the ensuing year. On the 1st of December, immediately on his return from
the western country, the dangers of domestic insurrection or foreign war having subsided, he
gave notice that he should on the last day of January give in his resignation.

Seldom has any minister excited the opposite passions of love and hate in a higher degree than
Colonel Hamilton. His talents were too pre-eminent not to receive from all the tribute of profound
respect; and his integrity and honour as a man, not less than his official rectitude, though
slandered at a distance, were admitted to be superior to reproach, by those enemies who knew him.

But with respect to his political principles and designs, the most contradictory opinions were
entertained. While one party sincerely believed his object to be the preservation of the constitution
of the United States in its original purity; the other, with perhaps equal sincerity, imputed
to him the insidious intention of subverting it. While his friends were persuaded, that as
a statesman, he viewed all foreign nations with an equal eye; his enemies could perceive in
his conduct, only hostility to France and attachment to her rival.

It was his fortune to hold a conspicuous station in times which were peculiarly tempestuous,
and under circumstances peculiarly unfavourable to the fair action of the judgment. In the
midst of prejudices against the national debt, which had taken deep root, and had long been
nourished, he was called to the head of a department, whose duty it was to contend with those
prejudices, and to offer a system which, in doing justice to the creditor of the public, might
retrieve the reputation of his country. While the passions were inflamed by a stern contest
between the advocates of a national, and of state governments, duties were assigned to him,
in the execution of which there were frequent occasions to manifest his devotion to the former.
When a raging fever, caught from that which was desolating France, and exhibiting some of its
symptoms, had seized the public mind, and reached its understanding, it was unfavourable to
his quiet, and perhaps to his fame, that he remain uninfected by the disease. He judged the
French revolution without prejudice; and had the courage to predict that it could not terminate
in a free and popular government.

Such opinions, at such a time, could not fail to draw a load of obloquy upon a man whose frankness
gave them publicity, and whose boldness and decision of character insured them an able and
steady support. The suspicions they were calculated to generate, derived great additional force
from the political theories he was understood to hold. It was known that, in his judgment,
the constitution of the United States was rather chargeable with imbecility, than censurable
for its too great strength; and that the real sources of danger to American happiness and liberty,
were to be found in its want of the means to effect the objects of its institution;--in its
being exposed to the encroachments of the states,--not in the magnitude of its powers. Without
attempting to conceal these opinions, he declared his perfect acquiescence in the decision
of his country; his hope that the issue would be fortunate; and his firm determination, in
whatever might depend upon his exertions, to give the experiment the fairest chance for success.
No part of his political conduct has been perceived, which would inspire doubts of the sincerity
of these declarations. His friends may appeal with confidence to his official acts, to all
his public conduct, for the refutation of those charges which were made against him while at
the head of the treasury department, and were continued, without interruption, till he ceased
to be the object of jealousy.

In the esteem and good opinion of the President, to whom he was best known, Colonel Hamilton
at all times maintained a high place. While balancing on the mission to England, and searching
for a person to whom the interesting negotiation with that government should be confided, the
mind of the chief magistrate was directed, among others, to this gentleman.[30] He carried
with him out of office,[31] the same cordial esteem for his character, and respect for his
talents, which had induced his appointment.

     [Footnote 30: The apprehensions entertained by the
     opposition that Colonel Hamilton would be appointed on the
     embassy to England were extreme. Among the letters to
     General Washington, are some from members of each branch of
     the legislature, advising against the mission generally, and
     dissuading him from the appointment of Colonel Hamilton
     particularly, in terms which manifest a real opinion that
     the best interests of the nation would be sacrificed by such
     an appointment. Colonel Hamilton himself recommended Mr.
     Jay.]

     [Footnote 31: See note No. X. at the end of the volume.]

[Sidenote: Is succeeded by Mr. Wolcott.]

The vacant office of secretary of the treasury was filled by Mr. Wolcott, of Connecticut, a
gentleman of sound judgment, who was well versed in its duties. He had served as comptroller
for a considerable time, and in that situation, had been eminently useful to the head of the
department.

The report of the select committee recommended additional objects for internal taxation, and
that the temporary duties already imposed should be rendered permanent. The opposition made
to this important part of the system was so ardent, and so persevering, that, though the measure
was taken up early in the session, the bill did not pass the house of representatives until
late in February. Not only were the taxes proposed by the friends of the administration encountered
successively by popular objections, urged with all the vehemence of passion, and zeal of conviction,
but it was with extreme difficulty that the duties on sugar refined, and tobacco manufactured,
within the United States, could be rendered permanent. When gentlemen were urged to produce
a substitute for the system they opposed, a direct tax was mentioned with approbation; but
no disposition was shown to incur the responsibility of becoming the patrons of such a measure.
At length, by the most persevering exertions of the federal party, the bill was carried through
the house; and thus was that system adopted, which, if its operations shall not be disturbed,
and if no great accumulations of debt be made, will, in a few years, discharge all the engagements
of the United States.

On the third of March, this important session was ended. Although the party hostile to the
administration had obtained a small majority in one branch of the legislature, several circumstances
had occurred to give great weight to the recommendations of the President. Among these may
be reckoned the victory obtained by General Wayne, and the suppression of the western insurrection.
In some points, however, which he had pressed with earnestness, his sentiments did not prevail.
One of these was a bill introduced into the senate for preserving peace with the Indians, by
protecting them from the intrusions and incursions of the whites.

From the commencement of his administration, the President had reviewed this subject with great
interest, and had permitted scarcely a session of congress to pass away, without pressing it
on the attention of the legislature. It had been mentioned in his speech at the commencement
of the present session, and had been further enforced by a message accompanying a report made
upon it by the secretary of war. The following humane sentiments, extracted from that report,
are characteristic of the general views of the administration.

"It seems that our own experience would demonstrate the propriety of endeavouring to preserve
a pacific conduct in preference to a hostile one with the Indian tribes. The United States
can get nothing by an Indian war; but they risk men, money, and reputation. As we are more
powerful and more enlightened than they are, there is a responsibility of national character
that we should treat them with kindness, and even with liberality."

The plan suggested in this report was, to add to those arrangements respecting trade, which
were indispensable to the preservation of peace, a chain of garrisoned posts within the territory
of the Indians, provided their assent to the measure should be obtained; and to subject all
those who should trespass on their lands to martial law. A bill founded on this report passed
the senate, but was lost, in the house of representatives, by a small majority.

[Sidenote: Resignation of General Knox.]

This report preceded the resignation of the secretary of war but a few days. This valuable
officer, too, was driven from the service of the public, by the scantiness of the compensation
allowed him.

On the 28th of December, 1794, he addressed a letter to the President giving him official notice
that, with the year, his services as secretary for the department of war would cease. This
resolution had long before been verbally communicated.

"After having served my country," concluded the letter, "near twenty years, the greater portion
of the time under your immediate auspices, it is with extreme reluctance I find myself constrained
to withdraw from so honourable a situation.

[Sidenote: Is succeeded by Colonel Pickering.]

Colonel Pickering, a gentleman who had filled many important offices through the war of the
revolution; who had discharged several trusts of considerable confidence under the present
government; and who at the time was postmaster general, was appointed to succeed him.

[Sidenote: Treaty between the United States and Great Britain.]

From his arrival in London on the 15th of June, Mr. Jay had been assiduously and unremittingly
employed on the arduous duties of his mission. Many and intricate were the points to be discussed.
On some of them an agreement was found to be impracticable; but, at length, a treaty was concluded,
which Mr. Jay declared to be the best that was attainable, and which he believed it for the
interests of the United States to accept.[32] Indeed it was scarcely possible to contemplate
the evidences of extreme exasperation which were given in America, and the nature of the differences
which subsisted between the two countries, without feeling a conviction that war was inevitable,
should this attempt to adjust those differences prove unsuccessful.

     [Footnote 32: In a private letter to the President, of the
     same date with the signature of the treaty, Mr. Jay said "to
     do more was impossible. I ought not to conceal from you,
     that the confidence reposed in your personal character was
     visible and useful throughout the negotiation.

     "If there is not a good disposition in the far greater part
     of the cabinet and nation towards us, I am exceedingly
     mistaken. I do not mean an ostensible and temporizing, but a
     real good disposition.--I wish it may have a fair trial."]

On Monday, the 8th of June, the senate, in conformity with the summons of the President, convened
in the senate chamber, and the treaty, with the documents connected with it, were submitted
to their consideration.

On the 24th of June, after a minute and laborious investigation, the senate, by precisely a
constitutional majority, advised and consented to its conditional ratification. In the meantime,
his private affairs required that he should visit Mount Vernon.

So restless and uneasy was the temper respecting foreign nations, that no surprise ought to
be excited at the anxiety which was felt on the negotiation of a treaty with Great Britain,
nor at the means which were used, before its contents were known, to extend the prejudices
against it.

Great umbrage was taken at the mysterious secrecy in which the negotiation had been involved.
That the instrument itself was not immediately communicated to the public, and that the senate
deliberated upon it with closed doors, were considered as additional evidences of the contempt
in which their rulers held the feelings and understandings of the people, and of the monarchical
tendencies of the government. Crowned heads, it was loudly repeated, who were machinating designs
subversive of the rights of man, and the happiness of nations, might well cover with an impenetrable
veil, their dark transactions; but republics ought to have no secrets. In republics, those
to whom power was delegated, being the servants of the people, acting solely for their benefit,
ought to transact all national affairs in open day. This doctrine was not too absurd for the
extravagance of the moment.

The predetermined hostility to the treaty increased in activity, as the period for deciding
its fate approached. On its particular merits, no opinion could be formed, because they were
unknown; but on the general question of reconciliation between the two countries, a decisive
judgment was extensively made up. The sentiments called forth by the occasion demonstrated,
that no possible adjustment of differences with Great Britain, no possible arrangement which
might promise a future friendly intercourse with that nation, could be satisfactory. The President
was openly attacked; his whole system strongly condemned; and the mission of Mr. Jay, particularly,
was reprobated in terms of peculiar harshness. That a treaty of amity and commerce should have
been formed, whatever might be its principles, was a degrading insult to the American people;
a pusillanimous surrender of their honour; and an insidious injury to France. Between such
a compact, and an alliance, no distinction was taken. It was an abandonment of the ancient
ally of the United States, whose friendship had given them independence, and whose splendid
victories still protected them, for a close connexion with her natural enemy, and with the
enemy of human liberty.

The pretended object of the mission, it was said, was a reparation for wrongs, not a contaminating
connexion with the most faithless and corrupt court in the world. The return of the envoy without
that reparation, was a virtual surrender of the claim. The honour of the United States required
a peremptory demand of the immediate surrender of the western posts, and of compensation for
the piratical depredations committed on their commerce; not a disgraceful and humiliating negotiation.
The surrender, and the compensation, ought to have been made instantly; for no reliance could
be placed in promises to be performed in future.

That the disinclination formerly manifested by Great Britain, to give the stability and certainty
of compact to the principles regulating the commercial intercourse between the two countries,
had constituted an important item in the catalogue of complaints against that power: that the
existence, or non-existence of commercial treaties had been selected as the criterion by which
to regulate the discriminations proposed to be made in the trade of foreign nations; that,
in the discussion on this subject, the favourers of commercial hostility had uniformly supported
the policy of giving value to treaties with the United States; these opinions were instantly
relinquished by the party which had strenuously asserted them while urged by their leaders
in congress; and it was imputed as a crime to the government, and to its negotiator, that he
had proceeded further than to demand immediate and unconditional reparation of the wrongs sustained
by the United States.

The most strenuous and unremitting exertions to give increased energy to the love which was
openly avowed for France, and to the detestation which was not less openly avowed for England,[33]
were connected with this course of passionate declamation.

     [Footnote 33: See note No. XI. at the end of the volume.]

Such was the state of parties when the senate advised the ratification of the treaty. Although
common usage, and a decent respect for the executive, and for a foreign nation, not less than
a positive resolution, required that the seal of secrecy should not be broken by the senate,
an abstract of this instrument, not very faithfully taken, was given to the public; and on
the 29th of June, a senator of the United States transmitted a copy of it to the most distinguished
editor of the opposition party in Philadelphia, to be communicated to the public through the
medium of the press.

If the negotiation itself had been acrimoniously censured; if amicable arrangements, whatever
might be their character, had been passionately condemned; it was not to be expected that the
treaty would assuage these pre-existing irritations.

In fact, public opinion did receive a considerable shock, and men uninfested by the spirit
of faction felt some disappointment on its first appearance. In national contests, unless there
be an undue attachment to the adversary country, few men, even among the intelligent, are sensible
of the weakness which may exist in their own pretensions, or can allow their full force to
the claims of the other party. If the people at large enter keenly into the points of controversy
with a foreign power, they can never be satisfied with any equal adjustment of those points,
unless other considerations, stronger than abstract reason, afford that satisfaction; nor will
it ever be difficult to prove to them, in a case unassisted by the passions, that in any practicable
commercial contract, they give too much, and receive too little.

On no subject whatever have considerations, such as these, possessed more influence than in
that which was now brought before the American people. Their operation was not confined to
those whose passions urged them to take part in the war, nor to the open enemies of the executive.
The friends of peace, and of the administration, had generally received impressions unfavourable
to the fair exercise of judgment in the case, which it required time and reflection to efface.
Even among them, strong prejudices had been imbibed in favour of France, which the open attempts
on the sovereignty of the United States had only weakened; and the matters of controversy with
Great Britain had been contemplated with all that partiality which men generally feel for their
own interests. With respect to commerce also, strong opinions had been preconceived. The desire
to gain admission into the British West India islands, especially, had excited great hostility
to that colonial system which had been adopted by every country in Europe; and sufficient allowances
were not made for the prejudices by which that system was supported.

That a treaty involving a great variety of complicated national interests, and adjusting differences
of long standing, which had excited strong reciprocal prejudices, would require a patient and
laborious investigation, both of the instrument itself, and of the circumstances under which
it was negotiated, before even those who are most conversant in diplomatic transactions could
form a just estimate of its merits, would be conceded by all reflecting men. But an immense
party in America, not in the habit of considering national compacts, without examining the
circumstances under which that with Great Britain had been formed, or weighing the reasons
which induced it; without understanding the instrument, and in many instances without reading
it, rushed impetuously to its condemnation; and, confident that public opinion would be surprised
by the suddenness, or stormed by the fury of the assault, expected that the President would
be compelled to yield to its violence.

In the populous cities, meetings of the people were immediately summoned, in order to take
into their consideration, and to express their opinions respecting an instrument, to comprehend
the full extent of which, a statesman would need deep reflection in the quiet of his closet,
aided by considerable inquiry. It may well be supposed that persons feeling some distrust of
their capacity to form, intuitively, a correct judgment on a subject so complex, and disposed
only to act knowingly, would be unwilling to make so hasty a decision, and consequently be
disinclined to attend such meetings. Many intelligent men, therefore, stood aloof, while the
most intemperate assumed, as usual, the name of the people; pronounced a definitive and unqualified
condemnation of every article in the treaty; and, with the utmost confidence, assigned reasons
for their opinions, which, in many instances, had only an imaginary existence; and in some,
were obviously founded on the strong prejudices which were entertained with respect to foreign
powers. It is difficult to review the various resolutions and addresses to which the occasion
gave birth, without feeling some degree of astonishment, mingled with humiliation, at perceiving
such proofs of the deplorable fallibility of human reason.

The first meeting was held in Boston. The example of that city was soon followed by New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Charleston; and, as if their addresses were designed at least
as much for their fellow citizens as for their President, while one copy was transmitted to
him, another was committed to the press. The precedent set by these large cities was followed,
with wonderful rapidity, throughout the union; and the spirit in which this system of opposition
originated sustained no diminution of violence in its progress.

On the 18th of July, at Baltimore, on his way to Mount Vernon, the President received the resolutions
passed by the meeting at Boston, which were enclosed to him in a letter from the select men
of that town. The answer to this letter and to these resolutions evinced the firmness with
which he had resolved to meet the effort that was obviously making, to control the exercise
of his constitutional functions, by giving a promptness and vigour to the expression of the
sentiments of a party, which might impose it upon the world as the deliberate judgment of the
public.

Addresses to the chief magistrate, and resolutions of town and country meetings, were not the
only means which were employed to enlist the American people against the measure which had
been advised by the senate. In an immense number of essays, the treaty was critically examined,
and every argument which might operate on the judgment or prejudice of the public, was urged
in the warm and glowing language of passion. To meet these efforts by counter efforts, was
deemed indispensably necessary by the friends of that instrument; and the gazettes of the day
are replete with appeals to the passions, and to the reason, of those who are the ultimate
arbiters of every political question. That the treaty affected the interests of France not
less than those of the United States, was, in this memorable controversy, asserted by the one
party, with as much zeal as it was denied by the other. These agitations furnished matter to
the President for deep reflection, and for serious regret; but they appear not to have shaken
the decision he had formed, or to have affected his conduct otherwise than to induce a still
greater degree of circumspection in the mode of transacting the delicate business before him.
On their first appearance, therefore, he resolved to hasten his return to Philadelphia, for
the purpose of considering, at that place rather than at Mount Vernon, the memorial against
the provision order, and the conditional ratification of the treaty. In a private letter to
the secretary of state, of the 29th of July, accompanying the official communication of this
determination, he stated more at large the motives which induced it. These were, the violent
and extraordinary proceedings which were taking place, and might be expected, throughout the
union; and his opinion that the memorial, the ratification, and the instructions which were
framing, were of such vast magnitude as not only to require great individual consideration,
but a solemn conjunct revision. Whether she believed or disbelieved these tales, their effect,
he said, would be nearly the same. How should it be otherwise?

In a letter of the third of August, written to the same gentleman, in which he stated the increasing
extent of hostility to the treaty, the President added:

"All these things do not shake my determination with respect to the proposed ratification,
nor will they, unless something more imperious and unknown to me, should, in the opinion of
yourself and the gentlemen with you, make it adviseable for me to pause."

[Sidenote: Conditionally ratified by the president.]

In the afternoon of the 11th of August the President arrived in Philadelphia; and on the next
day, the question respecting the immediate ratification of the treaty was brought before the
cabinet. The secretary of state maintained, singly, the opinion, that, during the existence
of the provision order,[35] and during the war between Britain and France, this step ought
not to be taken. This opinion did not prevail. The resolution was adopted to ratify the treaty
immediately, and to accompany the ratification with a strong memorial against the provision
order, which should convey, in explicit terms, the sense of the American government on that
subject. By this course, the views of the executive were happily accomplished. The order was
revoked, and the ratifications of the treaty were exchanged.

     [Footnote 35: Previous to the reception of the account of
     this order, the opinion of the secretary had been in favour
     of ratifying the treaty.]

[Sidenote: The treaty unpopular in the United States.]

The President was most probably determined to adopt this course by the extreme intemperance
with which the treaty was opposed, and the rapid progress which this violence was apparently
making. It was obvious that, unless this temper could be checked, it would soon become so extensive,
and would arrive at such a point of fury, as to threaten dangerous consequences. It was obviously
necessary either to attempt a diminution of its action by rendering its exertions hopeless,
and by giving to the treaty the weight of his character and influence, or to determine ultimately
to yield to it. A species of necessity therefore seems to have been created for abandoning
the idea, if it was ever taken up, of making the ratification of the treaty dependent on the
revocation of the provision order.

The soundness of the policy which urged this decisive measure was proved by the event. The
confidence which was felt in the judgment and virtue of the chief magistrate, induced many,
who, swept away by the popular current, had yielded to the common prejudices, to re-examine,
and discard opinions which had been too hastily embraced; and many were called forth by a desire
to support the administration in measures actually adopted, to take a more active part in the
general contest than they would otherwise have pursued. The consequence was, that more moderate
opinions respecting the treaty began to prevail. But as I have hitherto found no better guide
than upright intentions, and close investigation, I shall adhere to them while I keep the watch,
leaving it to those who will come after me, to explore new ways, if they like, or think them
better."

[Sidenote: Charge against the president rejected.]

If the ratification of the treaty increased the number of its open advocates, it seemed also
to give increased acrimony to the opposition. Such hold had the President taken of the affections
of the people, that even his enemies had deemed it generally necessary to preserve, with regard
to him, external marks of decency and respect. Previous to the mission of Mr. Jay, charges
against the chief magistrate, though frequently insinuated, had seldom been directly made;
and the cover under which the attacks upon his character were conducted, evidenced the caution
with which it was deemed necessary to proceed. That mission visibly affected the decorum which
had been usually observed towards him; and the ratification of the treaty brought sensations
into open view, which had long been ill concealed. His military and political character was
attacked with equal violence, and it was averred that he was totally destitute of merit, either
as a soldier, or a statesman. The calumnies with which he was assailed were not confined to
his public conduct; even his qualities as a man were the subjects of detraction. That he had
violated the constitution in negotiating a treaty without the previous advice of the senate,
and in embracing within that treaty subjects belonging exclusively to the legislature, was
openly maintained, for which an impeachment was publicly suggested; and that he had drawn from
the treasury for his private use, more than the salary annexed to his office, was asserted
without a blush.[36] This last allegation was said to be supported by extracts from the treasury
accounts which had been laid before the legislature, and was maintained with the most persevering
effrontery.

     [Footnote 36: See the Aurora from August to December, 1795.
     See, in particular, a series of essays, signed "A Calm
     Observer," published from the 23d of October to the 5th of
     November, 1795.]

Though the secretary of the treasury denied that the appropriations made by the legislature
had ever been exceeded, the atrocious charge was still confidently repeated; and the few who
could triumph in any spot which might tarnish the lustre of Washington's fame, felicitated
themselves on the prospect of obtaining a victory over the reputation of a patriot, to whose
single influence, they ascribed the failure of their political plans. With the real public,
the confidence felt in the integrity of the chief magistrate remained unshaken; but so imposing
was the appearance of the documents adduced, as to excite an apprehension that the transaction
might be placed in a light to show that some indiscretion, in which he had not participated,
had been inadvertently committed.

This state of anxious suspense was of short duration. The late secretary of the treasury, during
whose administration of the finances this peculation was said to have taken place, came forward
with a full explanation of the fact. It appeared that the President himself had never touched
any part of the compensation annexed to his office, but that the whole was received, and disbursed,
by the gentleman who superintended the expenses of his household. That it was the practice
of the treasury, when a sum had been appropriated for the current year, to pay it to that gentleman
occasionally, as the situation of the family might require. The expenses at some periods of
the year exceeded, and at others fell short of the allowance for the quarter; so that at some
times money was paid in advance on account of the ensuing quarter, and at others, that which
was due at the end of the quarter was not completely drawn out. The secretary entered into
an examination of the constitution and laws to show that this practice was justifiable, and
illustrated his arguments by many examples in which an advance on account of money appropriated
to a particular object, before the service was completed, would be absolutely necessary. However
this might be, it was a transaction in which the President personally was unconcerned.[37]

     [Footnote 37: Gazette of the United States, 16th November,
     1795.]

When possessed of the entire fact, the public viewed, with just indignation, this attempt to
defame a character which was the nation's pride. Americans felt themselves involved in this
atrocious calumny on their most illustrious citizen; and its propagators were frowned into silence.

[Sidenote: Mr. Randolph resigns. Is succeeded by Colonel Pickering.]

[Sidenote: Colonel McHenry appointed secretary of war.]

On the 19th of August, the secretary of state had resigned[38] his place in the administration,
and some time elapsed before a successor was appointed.[39] At length, Colonel Pickering was
removed to the department of state, and Mr. M'Henry, a gentleman who had served in the family
of General Washington, and in the congress prior to the establishment of the existing constitution,
was appointed to the department of war. By the death of Mr. Bradford, a vacancy was also produced
in the office of attorney general, which was filled by Mr. Lee, a gentleman of considerable
eminence at the bar, and in the legislature of Virginia.

     [Footnote 38: See note No. XII. at the end of the volume.]

     [Footnote 39: See note No. XIII. at the end of the volume.]

Many of those embarrassments in which the government, from its institution, had been involved,
were now ended, or approaching their termination.

The opposition to the laws, which had so long been made in the western counties of Pennsylvania,
existed no longer.

[Sidenote: Treaty with the Indians north-west of the Ohio.]

On the third of August, a definitive treaty was concluded by General Wayne with the hostile
Indians north-west of the Ohio, by which the destructive and expensive war which had long desolated
that frontier, was ended in a manner perfectly agreeable to the United States. An accommodation
had taken place with the powerful tribes of the south also; and to preserve peace in that quarter,
it was only necessary to invest the executive with the means of restraining the incursions
which the disorderly inhabitants of the southern frontier frequently made into the Indian territory;
incursions, of which murder was often the consequence.

Few subjects had excited more feeling among the people, or in the government of the United
States, than the captivity of their fellow citizens in Algiers. Even this calamity had been
seized as a weapon which might be wielded with some effect against the President. Overlooking
the exertions he had made for the attainment of peace, and the liberation of the American captives;
and regardless of his inability to aid negotiation by the exhibition of force, the discontented
ascribed the long and painful imprisonment of their unfortunate brethren to a carelessness
in the administration respecting their sufferings, and to that inexhaustible source of accusation,--its
policy with regard to France and Britain.

[Sidenote: Treaty with Algiers.]

After the failure of several attempts to obtain a peace with the regency of Algiers, a treaty
was, at length, negotiated on terms which, though disadvantageous, were the best that could
be obtained.

The exertions of the executive to settle the controversy with Spain respecting boundary, and
to obtain the free use of the Mississippi, had been unavailing. A negotiation in which Mr.
Short and Mr. Carmichael were employed at Madrid, had been protracted by artificial delays
on the part of the Spanish cabinet, until those ministers had themselves requested that the
commission should be terminated.

[Sidenote: Treaty with Spain.]

At length, Spain, embarrassed by the war in which she was engaged, discovered symptoms of a
temper more inclined to conciliation, and intimated to the secretary of state, through her
commissioners at Philadelphia, that a minister, deputed on the special occasion, of higher
rank than Mr. Short, who was a resident, would be able to expedite the negotiation. On receiving
this intimation, the President, though retaining a high and just confidence in Mr. Short, nominated
Mr. Pinckney, in November, 1794, as envoy extraordinary to his Catholic Majesty. Mr. Pinckney
repaired in the following summer to Madrid, and a treaty was concluded on the 20th of October,
in which the claims of the United States, on the important points of boundary, and the Mississippi,
were fully conceded.

Thus were adjusted, so far as depended on the executive, all those external difficulties with
which the United States had long struggled; most of which had originated before the establishment
of the existing government, and some of which portended calamities that no common share of
prudence could have averted.

[Sidenote: Meeting of Congress.]

Although the signature of the treaties with Spain and Algiers had not been officially announced
at the meeting of congress, the state of the negotiations with both powers was sufficiently
well understood to enable the President with confidence to assure the legislature, in his speech
at the opening of the session, that those negotiations were in a train which promised a happy
issue.

[Sidenote: President's speech.]

After expressing his gratification at the prosperous state of American affairs, the various
favourable events which have been already enumerated were detailed in a succinct statement,
at the close of which he mentioned the British treaty, which, though publicly known, had not
before been communicated officially to the house of representatives.

In the senate, an address was reported which echoed back the sentiments of the speech.

In this house of representatives, as in the last, the party in opposition to the administration
had obtained a majority. This party was unanimously hostile to the treaty with Great Britain;
and it was expected that their answer to the speech of the President would indicate their sentiments
on a subject which continued to agitate the whole American people. The answer reported by the
committee contained a declaration, that the confidence of his fellow citizens in the chief
magistrate remained undiminished.

On a motion, to strike out the words importing this sentiment, it was averred, that the clause
asserted an untruth. It was not true that the confidence of the people in the President was
undiminished. By a recent transaction it had been considerably impaired; and some gentlemen
declared that their own confidence in him was lessened.

By the friends of the administration, the motion was opposed with great zeal, and the opinion
that the confidence of the people in their chief magistrate remained unshaken, was maintained
with ardour. But they were outnumbered.

To avoid a direct vote on the proposition, it was moved, that the address should be recommitted.
This motion succeeded, and, two members being added to the committee, an answer was reported
in which the clause objected to was so modified as to be free from exception.

That part of the speech which mentioned the treaty with Great Britain was alluded to in terms
which, though not directly expressive of disapprobation, were sufficiently indicative of the
prevailing sentiment.

Early in the month of January the President transmitted to both houses of congress a message,
accompanying certain communications from the French government which were well calculated to
cherish those ardent feelings that prevailed in the legislature.

It was the fortune of Mr. Monroe to reach Paris, soon after the death of Robespierre, and the
fall of the Jacobins. On his reception as the minister of the United States, which was public,
and in the convention, he gave free scope to the genuine feelings of his heart; and, at the
same time, delivered to the President of that body, with his credentials, two letters addressed
by the secretary of state to the committee of public safety. These letters were answers to
one written by the committee of safety to the congress of the United States. The executive
department being the organ through which all foreign intercourse was to be conducted, each
branch of the legislature had passed a resolution directing this letter to be transmitted to
the President, with a request, that he would cause it to be answered in terms expressive of
their friendly dispositions towards the French republic.

So fervent were the sentiments expressed on this occasion, that the convention decreed that
the flag of the American and French republics should be united together, and suspended in its
own hall, in testimony of eternal union and friendship between the two people. To evince the
impression made on his mind by this act, and the grateful sense of his constituents, Mr. Monroe
presented to the convention the flag of the United States, which he prayed them to accept as
a proof of the sensibility with which his country received every act of friendship from its
ally, and of the pleasure with which it cherished every incident which tended to cement and
consolidate the union between the two nations.

[Sidenote: Mr. Adet succeeds Mr. Fauchet.]

The committee of safety, disregarding the provisions of the American constitution, although
their attention must have been particularly directed to them by the circumstance that the letter
to congress was referred by that body to the executive, again addressed the legislature in
terms adapted to that department of government which superintends its foreign intercourse,
and expressive, among other sentiments, of the sensibility with which the French nation had
perceived those sympathetic emotions with which the American people had viewed the vicissitudes
of her fortune. Mr. Adet, who was to succeed Mr. Fauchet at Philadelphia, and who was the bearer
of this letter, also brought with him the colours of France, which he was directed to present
to the United States. He arrived in the summer; but probably in the idea that these communications
were to be made by him directly to congress, did not announce them to the executive until late
in December.

{1796}

The first day of the new year was named for their reception; when the colours were delivered
to the President, and the letter to congress also was placed in his hands.

To answer this speech was a task of some delicacy. It was necessary to express feelings adapted
to the occasion, without implying sentiments with respect to the belligerent powers, which
might be improper to be used by the chief magistrate of a neutral country.

The address of Mr. Adet, the answer of the President, and the colours of France, were transmitted
to congress with the letter from the committee of safety.

The letter to congress having come from the committee of safety, which, under the revolutionary
system, was the department that was charged with foreign intercourse; and a constitution having
been afterwards adopted in France, by which an executive directory was established, to which
all the foreign relations of the government were confided, an attempt was made to amend this
resolution, by substituting the directory for the representatives of the people. But this attempt
failed; after which the resolution passed unanimously.

In the senate also a resolution was offered, expressive of the sensations of that house, and
requesting the President to communicate them to the proper organ of the French republic. An
amendment was moved to vary this resolution so as to express the sentiment to the President,
and omit the request that it should be communicated to the French republic. The complimentary
correspondence between the two nations, had, it was said, reached a point, when, if ever, it
ought to close. This amendment, though strenuously combated by the opposition, was adopted.

In February, the treaty with Great Britain was returned, in the form advised by the senate,
ratified by his Britannic Majesty. The constitution declaring a treaty, when made, the supreme
law of the land, the President announced it officially to the people in a proclamation, requiring
from all persons its observance and execution; a copy of which was transmitted to each house
on the 1st of March.

The party which had obtained the majority in one branch of the legislature, having openly denied
the right of the President to negotiate a treaty of commerce, was not a little dissatisfied
at his venturing to issue this proclamation before the sense of the house of representatives
had been declared on the obligation of the instrument.

On the 7th of March, he amended this resolution by adding the words, "excepting such of the
said papers as any existing negotiation may render improper to be disclosed."

After some debate, Mr. Madison proposed to modify the amendment of Mr. Livingston, so as to
except such papers, as in the judgment of the President, it might be inconsistent with the
interest of the United States at this time to disclose. This proposition was rejected by a
majority of ten voices, and the discussion of the original resolution was resumed.

The debate on this question was animated, vehement, and argumentative; all the party passions
were enlisted in it; and it was protracted until the 24th of March, when the resolution was
carried in the affirmative by sixty-two to thirty-seven voices. The next day, the committee
appointed to present it to the chief magistrate reported his answer, which was, "that he would
take the resolution into consideration."

The situation in which this vote placed the President was peculiarly delicate. In an elective
government, the difficulty of resisting the popular branch of the legislature is at all times
great, but is particularly so when the passions of the public have been strongly and generally
excited. The popularity of a demand for information, the large majority by which that demand
was supported, the additional force which a refusal to comply with it would give to suspicions
already insinuated, that circumstances had occurred in the negotiation which the administration
dared not expose, and that the President was separating himself from the representatives of
the people, furnished motives, not lightly to be over-ruled, for yielding to the request which
had been made.

But these considerations were opposed by others which, though less operative with men who fear
to deserve the public favour by hazarding its loss, possess an irresistible influence over
a mind resolved to pursue steadily the path of duty, however it may abound with thorns.

That the future diplomatic transactions of the government might be seriously and permanently
affected by establishing the principle that the house of representatives could demand as a
right, the instructions given to a foreign minister, and all the papers connected with a negotiation,
was too apparent to be unobserved. Nor was it less obvious that a compliance with the request
now made, would go far in establishing this principle. The form of the request, and the motives
which induced it, equally led to this conclusion. It left nothing to the discretion of the
President with regard to the public interests; and the information was asked for the avowed
purpose of determining whether the house of representatives would give effect to a public treaty.

It was also a subject for serious reflection, that in a debate unusually elaborate, the house
of representatives had claimed a right of interference in the formation of treaties, which,
in the judgment of the President, the constitution had denied them. Duties the most sacred
requiring that he should resist this encroachment on the department which was particularly
confided to him, he could not hesitate respecting the course it became him to take; and on
the 30th of March he returned the following answer to the resolution which had been presented
to him. Amidst all the agitations and irritations of party, a sincere respect, and real affection
for the chief magistrate, the remnant of former friendship, had still lingered in the bosoms
of some who had engaged with ardour in the political contests of the day. But, if the last
spark of this affection was not now extinguished, it was at least concealed under the more
active passions of the moment.

[Sidenote: Debates upon the treaty making power.]

A motion to refer the message of the President to a committee of the whole house, was carried
by a large majority. These resolutions take a position less untenable than had been maintained
in argument, and rather inexplicit on an essential part of the question. Disclaiming a power
to interfere in making treaties, they assert the right of the house of representatives, whenever
stipulations are made on subjects committed by the constitution to congress, to deliberate
on the expediency of carrying them into effect, without deciding what degree of obligation
the treaty possesses on the nation, so far as respects those points, previous to such deliberation.
After a debate in which the message was freely criticised, the resolutions were carried, fifty-seven
voting in the affirmative, and thirty-five in the negative.

In the course of the month of March, the treaties with his Catholic majesty, and with the Dey
of Algiers, had been ratified by the President, and were laid before congress.

This motion produced a warm altercation. The members of the majority complained loudly of the
celerity with which it had been made, and resented the attempt to blend together four treaties
in the same resolution, after the solemn vote entered upon their journals, declaratory of their
right to exercise a free discretion over the subject, as an indignity to the opinions and feelings
of the house.

After a discussion manifesting the irritation which existed, the resolution was amended, by
changing the word "treaties" from the plural to the singular number, and by striking out the
words "Dey and Regency of Algiers, the King of Great Britain, and certain Indian tribes north-west
of the river Ohio," so that only the treaty with the King of Spain remained to be considered.

Mr. Gallatin then objected to the words "provision ought to be made by law," as the expression
seemed to imply a negative of the principle laid down in their resolution, that the house was
at perfect liberty to pass, or not to pass, any law for giving effect to a treaty. In lieu
of them, he wished to introduce words declaring the expediency of passing the necessary laws.
This amendment was objected to as an innovation on the forms which had been invariably observed;
but it was carried; after which, the words "with good faith," were also discarded.

The resolution thus amended was agreed to without a dissenting voice; and then, similar resolutions
were passed respecting the treaties with Algiers, and with the Indians north-west of the Ohio.
The friends of that instrument urged an immediate decision of the question. On a subject which
had so long agitated the whole community, the judgment of every member, they believed, was
completely formed; and the hope to make converts by argument was desperate. In fact, they appeared
to have entertained the opinion that the majority would not dare to encounter the immense responsibility
of breaking that treaty, without previously ascertaining that the great body of the people
were willing to meet the consequences of the measure. But the members of the opposition, though
confident of their power to reject the resolution, called for its discussion.

The minority soon desisted from urging an immediate decision of the question; and the spacious
field which was opened by the propositions before the house, seemed to be entered with equal
avidity and confidence by both parties.

At no time perhaps have the members of the national legislature been stimulated to great exertions
by stronger feelings than impelled them on this occasion. Never has a greater display been
made of argument, of eloquence, and of passion; and never has a subject been discussed in which
all classes of their fellow citizens took a deeper interest.

To those motives which a doubtful contest for power, and for victory, can not fail to furnish,
were added others of vast influence on the human mind. Those who supported the resolution,
declaring the expediency of carrying the treaty into effect, firmly believed that the faith
of the nation was pledged, and that its honour, its character, and its constitution, depended
on the vote about to be given. They also believed that the best interests of the United States
required an observance of the compact as formed. In itself, it was thought as favourable as
the situation of the contracting parties, and of the world, entitled them to expect; but its
chief merit consisted in the adjustment of ancient differences, and in its tendency to produce
future amicable dispositions, and friendly intercourse. If congress should refuse to perform
this treaty on the part of the United States, a compliance on the part of Great Britain could
not be expected. The posts on the great lakes would still be occupied by their garrisons; no
compensation would be made for American vessels illegally captured; the hostile dispositions
which had been excited would be restored with increased aggravation; and that these dispositions
must lead infallibly to war, was implicitly believed. They also believed that the political
subjugation of their country would be the inevitable consequence of a war with Britain, during
the existing impassioned devotion of the United States to France.

The opposite party was undoubtedly of opinion that the treaty contained stipulations really
injurious to the United States. Several favourite principles to which they attached much importance,
were relinquished by it; and some of the articles relative to commerce, were believed to be
unequal in their operation. Nor ought the sincerity with which their opinion on the constitutional
powers of the house had been advanced, to be questioned. In the fervour of political discussion,
that construction which, without incurring the imputation of violating the national faith,
would enable the popular branch of the legislature to control the President and senate in making
treaties, may have been thought the safe and the correct construction. But no consideration
appears to have had more influence than the apprehension that the amicable arrangements made
with Great Britain, would seriously affect the future relations of the United States with France.

Might a conjecture on this subject be hazarded, it would be that, in the opinion of many intelligent
men, the preservation of that honest and real neutrality between the belligerent powers, at
which the executive had aimed, was impracticable; that America would probably be forced into
the war; and that the possibility of a rupture with France was a calamity too tremendous not
to be avoided at every hazard.

As had been foreseen, this animated debate was on a subject too deeply and immediately interesting
to the people, not to draw forth their real sentiments. The whole country was agitated; meetings
were again held throughout the United States; and the strength of parties was once more tried.

The fallacy of many of the objections to the treaty had been exposed, the odium originally
excited against it had been diminished, the belief that its violation would infallibly precipitate
the nation into a war, if not universal, was extensive. These considerations brought reflecting
men into action; and the voice of the nation was pronounced unequivocally with the minority
in the house of representatives.

This manifestation of the public sentiment was decisive with congress. On the 29th of April
the question was taken in the committee of the whole, and was determined, by the casting vote
of the chairman, in favour of the expediency of making the necessary laws. The resolution was
finally carried, fifty-one voting in the affirmative, and forty-eight in the negative.

That necessity to which a part of the majority in the house of representatives had reluctantly
yielded, operated on no other subject; nor did it affect the strength of parties. Their opinion
respecting that system of policy which ought to be observed in their external relations, remained
the same; and their partialities and prejudices for and against foreign nations, sustained
no diminution.

With regard to internal affairs also, the same spirit was retained.

So excessive had been the jealousy entertained by the opposition against a military force of
any kind, that, even under the pressure of the Algerine war, the bill providing a naval armament
could not be carried through the house without the insertion of a section suspending all proceedings
under the act, should that war be terminated. The event which was to arrest the executive in
the prosecution of this work having occurred, not a single frigate could be completed, without
further authority from the legislature. This circumstance was the more important, as a peace
had not been concluded with Tunis, or Tripoli; and, of consequence, the Mediterranean could
not yet be safely navigated by the vessels of the United States. The President called the attention
of congress to this subject; and stated the loss which would accrue from the sudden interruption
of the work, and dispersion of the workmen. A bill to enable him to complete three, instead
of six frigates, was with difficulty carried through the house.

But, except the treaty with Great Britain, no subject was brought forward in which parties
felt a deeper interest, than on those questions which related to the revenue.

Notwithstanding the increasing productiveness of the duties on external commerce, this resource
had not yet become entirely adequate to the exigencies of the nation. To secure the complete
execution of the system for gradually redeeming the public debt, without disregarding those
casualties to which all nations are exposed, it was believed that some additional aids to the
treasury would be required. Upon the nature of these aids, much contrariety of opinion prevailed.
The friends of the administration were in favour of extending the system of indirect internal
taxation: but, constituting the minority in one branch of the legislature, they could carry
no proposition on which the opposition was united; and the party which had become the majority
in the house of representatives, had been generally hostile to that mode of obtaining revenue.
From an opinion that direct taxes were recommended by intrinsic advantages, or that the people
would become more attentive to the charges against the administration, should their money be
drawn from them by visible means, those who wished power to change hands, had generally manifested
a disposition to oblige those who exercised it, to resort to a system of revenue, by which
a great degree of sensibility will always be excited. The indirect taxes proposed in the committee
of ways and means were strongly resisted; and only that which proposed an augmentation of the
duty on carriages for pleasure was passed into a law.

[Sidenote: Congress adjourns.]

On the first day of June, this long and interesting session was terminated. No preceding legislature
had been engaged in discussions by which their own passions, or those of their constituents
were more strongly excited; nor on subjects more vitally important to the United States.

From this view of the angry contests of party, it may not be unacceptable to turn aside for
a moment, and to look back to a transaction in which the movements of a feeling heart discover
themselves, not the less visibly, for being engaged in a struggle with the stern duties of
a public station.

[Sidenote: The president endeavors to procure the liberation of Lafayette.]

No one of those foreigners who, during the war of the revolution, had engaged in the service
of the United States, had embraced their cause with so much enthusiasm, or had held so distinguished
a place in the affections of General Washington, as the Marquis de Lafayette. The attachment
of these illustrious personages to each other had been openly expressed, and had yielded neither
to time, nor to the remarkable vicissitude of fortune with which the destinies of one of them
had been chequered. For his friend, while guiding the course of a revolution which fixed the
anxious attention of the world, or while a prisoner in Prussia, or in the dungeon of Olmutz,
the President manifested the same esteem, and felt the same solicitude. The extreme jealousy,
however, with which the persons who administered the government of France, as well as a large
party in America, watched his deportment towards all those whom the ferocious despotism of
the Jacobins had exiled from their country, imposed upon him the painful necessity of observing
great circumspection in his official conduct, on this delicate subject. A formal interposition
in favour of the virtuous and unfortunate victim of their furious passions, would have been
unavailing. Without benefiting the person whom it would be designed to aid, it might produce
serious political mischief. But the American ministers employed at foreign courts were instructed
to seize every fair occasion to express, unofficially, the interest taken by the President
in the fate of Lafayette; and to employ the most eligible means in their power to obtain his
liberty, or to meliorate his situation. A confidential person[42] had been sent to Berlin to
solicit his discharge: but before this messenger had reached his destination, the King of Prussia
had delivered over his illustrious prisoner to the Emperor of Germany. Mr. Pinckney had been
instructed not only to indicate the wishes of the President to the Austrian minister at London,
but to endeavour, unofficially, to obtain the powerful mediation of Britain; and had at one
time flattered himself that the cabinet of St. James would take an interest in the case; but
this hope was soon dissipated.

This letter was transmitted to Mr. Pinckney to be conveyed to the Emperor through his minister
at London. How far it operated in mitigating immediately the rigour of Lafayette's confinement,
or in obtaining his liberation, remains unascertained.

CHAPTER IV.

{1796}

The confidential friends of the President had long known his fixed purpose to retire from office
at the end of his second term, and the people generally suspected it. In the apprehension that
the co-operation of external with internal causes might bring about such a crisis, he had yielded
to the representations of those who urged him to leave himself master of his conduct, by withholding
a public declaration of his intention, until the propriety of affording a reasonable time to
fix on a successor should require its disclosure. "If," said Colonel Hamilton in a letter on
this subject of the fifth of July, "a storm gathers, how can you retreat? this is a most serious
question."

The suspense produced in the public opinion by this silence on the part of the chief magistrate,
seemed to redouble the efforts of those who laboured to rob him of the affection of the people,
and to attach odium to the political system which he had pursued. As passion alone is able
successfully to contend with passion, they still sought, in the hate which America bore to
Britain, and in her love to France, for the most powerful means with which to eradicate her
love to Washington. Amongst the various artifices employed to effect this object, was the publication
of those queries which had been propounded by the President to his cabinet council, previous
to the arrival of Mr. Genet. This publication was intended to demonstrate the existence of
a disposition in the chief magistrate unfriendly to the French republic, of "a Machiavellian
policy, which nothing but the universal sentiment of enthusiastic affection displayed by the
people of the United States, on the arrival of Mr. Genet, could have subdued." Some idea of
the intemperance of the day may be formed from the conclusion of that number of a series of
virulent essays, in which these queries were inserted, and from recollecting that it was addressed
to a man who, more than any other, had given character as well as independence to his country;
and whose life, devoted to her service, had exhibited one pure undeviating course of virtuous
exertion to promote her interests.

It is in these words: "The foregoing queries were transmitted for consideration to the heads
of departments, previously to a meeting to be held at the President's house. The text needs
no commentary. It has stamped upon its front in characters brazen enough for idolatry to comprehend,
perfidy and ingratitude. To doubt in such a case was dishonourable, to proclaim those doubts
treachery. For the honour of the American character and of human nature, it is to be lamented
that the records of the United States exhibit such a stupendous monument of degeneracy. It
will almost require the authenticity of holy writ to persuade posterity that it is not a libel
ingeniously contrived to injure the reputation of the saviour of his country."

As this state paper was perfectly confidential, and had been communicated only to the cabinet
ministers, Mr. Jefferson thought proper to free himself from any possible suspicion of having
given it publicity, by assuring the President that this breach of confidence must be ascribed
to some other person.

"But enough of this--I have already gone further in the expression of my feelings than I intended."

Of the numerous misrepresentations and fabrications which, with unwearied industry, were pressed
upon the public in order to withdraw the confidence of the nation from its chief, no one marked
more strongly the depravity of that principle which justifies the means by the end, than the
republication of certain forged letters, purporting to have been written by General Washington
in the year 1776.

These letters had been originally published in the year 1777, and in them were interspersed,
with domestic occurrences which might give them the semblance of verity, certain political
sentiments favourable to Britain in the then existing contest.

But the original fabricator of these papers missed his aim. It was necessary to assign the
manner in which the possession of them was acquired; and in executing this part of his task,
circumstances were stated so notoriously untrue, that, at the time, the meditated imposition
deceived no person.

In the indefatigable research for testimony which might countenance the charge that the executive
was unfriendly to France, and under the influence of Britain, these letters were drawn from
the oblivion into which they had sunk, it had been supposed forever, and were republished as
genuine. The silence with which the President treated this as well as every other calumny,
was construed into an acknowledgment of its truth; and the malignant commentators on this spurious
text, would not admit the possibility of its being apocryphal.

Those who laboured incessantly to establish the favourite position that the executive was under
other than French influence, reviewed every act of the administration connected with its foreign
relations, and continued to censure every part of the system with extreme bitterness. Not only
the treaty with Great Britain, but all those measures which had been enjoined by the duties
of neutrality, were reprobated as justly offensive to France; and no opinion which had been
advanced by Mr. Genet, in his construction of the treaties between the two nations, was too
extravagant to be approved. The ardent patriot can not maintain the choicest rights of his
country with more zeal than was manifested in supporting all the claims of the French republic
upon the United States. These discussions were not confined to the public prints. In almost
every assemblage of individuals, whether for social or other purposes, this favourite theme
excluded all others; and the pretensions of France were supported and controverted with equal
earnestness. The opposing parties, mutually exasperated by unceasing altercations, cherished
reciprocal suspicions of each other, and each charged its adversary with being under a foreign
influence.[44] Those who favoured the measures adopted by America were accused as the enemies
of liberty, the enemies of France, and the tools of Britain. In turn, they charged their opponents
with disseminating principles subversive of all order in society; and with supporting a foreign
government against their own.

     [Footnote 44: See note No. XIV. at the end of the volume.]

Whatever might be the real opinion of the French government on the validity of its charges
against the United States, those charges were too vehemently urged, and too powerfully espoused
in America, to be abandoned at Paris. If at any time they were in part relinquished, they were
soon resumed.

For a time, Mr. Fauchet forbore to press the points on which his predecessor had insisted;
but his complaints of particular cases which grew out of the war, and out of the rules which
had been established by the executive were unremitting. The respectful language in which these
complaints were at first urged, soon yielded to the style of reproach; and in his correspondence
with the secretary of state, towards its close, he adopted the sentiments, without absolutely
discarding the manner of Mr. Genet.

Mr. Adet, the successor of Mr. Fauchet, arrived at Philadelphia, while the senate was deliberating
on the treaty of amity with Great Britain.

In the observations he made on that instrument, when submitted to his consideration by order
of the President, he complained particularly of the abandonment of the principle that free
ships should make free goods; and urged the injustice, while French cruisers were restrained
by treaty from taking English goods out of American bottoms, that English cruisers should be
liberated from the same restraint. No demonstration could be more complete than was the fallacy
of this complaint. But the American government discovered a willingness voluntarily to release
France from the pressure of a situation in which she had elected to place herself.

[Sidenote: Hostile measures of France against the United States.]

In the anxiety which was felt by the President to come to full and immediate explanations on
this treaty, the American minister at Paris had been furnished, even before its ratification,
and still more fully afterwards, with ample materials for the justification of his government.
But, misconceiving[45] the views of the administration, he reserved these representations to
answer complaints which were expected, and omitted to make them in the first instance, while
the course to be pursued by the Directory was under deliberation. Meanwhile, his letters kept
up the alarm which had been excited with regard to the dispositions of France; and intelligence
from the West Indies served to confirm it. Through a private channel, the President received
information that the special agents of the Directory in the islands were about to issue orders
for the capture of all American vessels, laden in the whole or in part with provisions, and
bound for any port within the dominions of the British crown.

     [Footnote 45: See Monroe's View.]

[Sidenote: Mr. Monroe recalled and General Pinckney appointed to succeed him.]

Knowing well that the intentions of the executive towards the French republic had been at all
times friendly, and entertaining a strong conviction that its conduct was liable to no just
objection, the President had relied with confidence on early and candid communications, for
the removal of any prejudices or misconceptions, which the passions of the moment might have
occasioned. That the French government would be disappointed at the adjustment of those differences
which had threatened to embroil the United States with Great Britain, could not be doubted;
but as neither this adjustment, nor the arrangements connected with it, had furnished any real
cause of complaint, he cherished the hope that it would produce no serious consequences, if
the proper means of prevention should be applied in time. He was therefore dissatisfied with
delays which he had not expected; and seems to have believed that they originated in a want
of zeal to justify a measure, which neither the minister himself nor his political friends
had ever approved. To insure an earnest and active representation of the true sentiments and
views of the administration, the President was inclined to depute an envoy extraordinary for
the particular purpose, who should be united with the actual minister; but an objection drawn
from the constitution was suggested to this measure. During the recess of the senate, the President
can only fill up vacancies; and the appointment of a minister when no vacancy existed, might
be supposed to transcend his powers. From respect to this construction of the constitution,
the resolution was taken to appoint a successor to Colonel Monroe. The choice of a person in
all respects qualified for this mission was not without its difficulty. While a disposition
friendly to the administration was a requisite not to be dispensed with, it was also desirable
that the person employed should have given no umbrage to the French government. No individual
who had performed a conspicuous part on the political theatre of America, fitted both branches
of this description. All who had openly sustained with zeal and with talents, the measures
of the American government, had been marked as the enemies of France, and were on this account
to be avoided.

For this critical and important service, the President, after some deliberation, selected General
Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, of South Carolina, an elder brother of Mr. Thomas Pinckney, the
late[46] minister of the United States at London. No man in America was more perfectly free
from exception than this gentleman. Having engaged with ardour in that war which gave independence
to his country, he had, in its progress, sustained from the British army indignities to his
person, and injuries to his fortune, which are not easily forgotten. In the early part of the
French revolution, he had felt and expressed all the enthusiasm of his countrymen for the establishment
of the republic; but, after the commencement of its contests with the United States, he stood
aloof from both those political parties which had divided America. Restrained by the official
situation of his brother during the negotiations which had been carried on with England, he
had forborne to express any opinion respecting the treaty in which those negotiations terminated,
and had consequently taken no part with those who approved, or with those who condemned that
instrument. No man, therefore, who had not declared himself unfriendly to the principles he
would be deputed to support, could be less objectionable to France.

     [Footnote 46: At his own request, Mr. Pinckney had been
     recalled; and Mr. King, a gentleman whose talents have been
     universally acknowledged, and whose services will be long
     recollected with approbation, had succeeded him.]

To the President he was recommended by an intimate knowledge of his worth; by a confidence
in the sincerity of his personal attachment to the chief magistrate; by a conviction that his
exertions to effect the objects of his mission would be ardent and sincere; and that, whatever
might be his partialities for France, he possessed a high and delicate sense of national as
well as individual honour, was jealous for the reputation of his country, and tenacious of
its rights.

In July, immediately after the appointment of General Pinckney, letters were received from
Colonel Monroe communicating the official complaints against the American government which
had been made to him in March by Mr. de La Croix, the minister of exterior relations, together
with his answer to those complaints.

In this answer the American minister had effectually refuted the criminations of Mr. de La
Croix; and the executive was satisfied with it. But the Directory had decided on their system,
and it was not by reasoning, however conclusive, that this decision was to be changed.

As the time for electing the chief magistrate approached, the anxiety of the public respecting
the person in office, seemed to increase. In states where the electors are chosen by the people,
names of great political influence were offered for their approbation. The strong hold which
Washington had taken of the affections of his countrymen was, on this occasion, fully evinced.

Having long contemplated this event, and having wished to terminate his political course with
an act which might be at the same time suitable to his own character, and permanently useful
to his country, he had prepared for the occasion a valedictory address, in which, with the
solicitude of a person, who, in bidding a final adieu to his friends, leaves his affections
and his anxieties for their welfare behind him, he made a last effort to impress upon his countrymen
those great political truths which had been the guides of his own administration, and could
alone, in his opinion, form a sure and solid basis for the happiness, the independence, and
the liberty of the United States.

This interesting paper was published in September, at a time when hopes were entertained that
the discontents of France might be appeased by proper representations. It contains precepts
to which the American statesman can not too frequently recur, and though long, is thought too
valuable to be omitted or abridged.

[Sidenote: General Washington's valedictory address to the people of the United States in which
he declines being considered as a candidate for the presidency.]

TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES.

The sentiments of veneration with which this address was generally received, were manifested
in almost every part of the union. Some of the state legislatures directed it to be inserted
at large in their journals; and nearly all of them passed resolutions expressing their respect
for the person of the President, their high sense of his exalted services, and the emotions
with which they contemplated his retirement from office. Although the leaders of party might
rejoice at this event it produced solemn and anxious reflections in the great body even of
those who belonged to the opposition.

The person in whom alone the voice of the people could be united having declined a re-election,
the two great parties in America brought forward their respective chiefs; and every possible
effort was made by each, to obtain the victory. Mr. John Adams and Mr. Thomas Pinckney, the
late minister at London, were supported as President and Vice President by the federalists:
the whole force of the opposite party was exerted in favour of Mr. Jefferson.

Motives of vast influence were added, on this occasion, to those which usually impel men in
a struggle to retain or acquire power. The continuance or the change not only of those principles
on which the internal affairs of the United States had been administered, but of the conduct
which had been observed towards foreign nations, was believed to depend on the choice of a
chief magistrate. By one party, the system pursued by the existing administration with regard
to the belligerent powers, had been uniformly approved; by the other, it had been as uniformly
condemned. In the contests therefore which preceded the choice of electors, the justice of
the complaints which were made on the part of the French republic were minutely discussed,
and the consequences which were to be apprehended from her resentment, or from yielding to
her pretensions, were reciprocally urged as considerations entitled to great weight in the
ensuing election.

[Sidenote: The minister of France endeavors to influence the approaching election.]

In such a struggle, it was not to be expected that foreign powers could feel absolutely unconcerned.
In November, while the parties were so balanced that neither scale could be perceived to preponderate,
Mr. Adet addressed a letter to the secretary of state, in which he recapitulated the numerous
complaints which had been urged by himself and his predecessors, against the government of
the United States; and reproached that government, in terms of great asperity, with violating
those treaties which had secured its independence, with ingratitude to France, and with partiality
to England. These wrongs, which commenced with the "insidious" proclamation of neutrality,
were said to be so aggravated by the treaty concluded with Great Britain, that Mr. Adet announced
the orders of the Directory to suspend his ministerial functions with the federal government.

As if to remove all doubts respecting the purpose for which this extraordinary letter was written,
a copy was, on the day of its date, transmitted to a printer for publication.

Whatever motives might have impelled Mr. Adet to make this open and direct appeal to the American
people, in the critical moment of their election of a chief magistrate, it does not appear,
in any material degree, to have influenced that election. Many reflecting men, who had condemned
the course of the administration, could not approve this interference in the internal affairs
of the United States; and the opposite party, generally, resented it as an attempt to control
the operations of the American people in the exercise of one of the highest acts of sovereignty,
and to poison the fountain of their liberty and independence, by mingling foreign intrigue
with their elections. Viewing it as a fulfilment of their most gloomy prognostics respecting
the designs of France to establish an influence in the councils of America, they believed the
best interests of their country to require that it should be defeated; and their exertions
against the candidate Mr. Adet was understood to favour, were the more determined and the more
vigorous.

[Sidenote: The president's speech to congress.]

On the 7th of December, while this dubious and ardently contested election was depending, the
President, for the last time, met the national legislature in the senate chamber. His address
on the occasion was comprehensive, temperate, and dignified. In presenting a full and clear
view of the situation of the United States, and in recommending those great national measures,
in the utility of which he felt a confidence, no personal considerations could induce the omission
of those, to which open and extensive hostility had been avowed.

The speech next proceeded earnestly to recommend the establishment of national works for manufacturing
such articles as were necessary for the defence of the country; and also of an institution
which should grow up under the patronage of the public, and be devoted to the improvement of
agriculture. The advantages of a military academy,[47] and of a national university, were also
urged; and the necessity of augmenting the compensations to the officers of the United States,
in various instances, was explicitly stated.

In the house of representatives, a committee of five had been appointed to prepare a respectful
answer to the speech, three of whom were friends to the administration. Knowing well that the
several propositions it contained could not be noticed in detail, without occasioning a debate
in which sentiments opposed to those of the address would be expressed, probably by a majority
of the house; and hoping that the disposition would be general to avow in strong terms their
attachment to the person and character of the President, the committee united in reporting
an answer, which, in general terms, promised due attention to the various subjects recommended
to their consideration, but was full and explicit in the expression of attachment to himself,
and of approbation of his administration.

But the unanimity which prevailed in the committee did not extend to the house.

After amplifying and strengthening the expressions of the report which stated the regrets of
the house that any interruption should have taken place in the harmony which had subsisted
between the United States and France, and modifying those which declared their hopes in the
restoration of that affection which had formerly subsisted between the two republics, so as
to avoid any implication that the rupture of that affection was exclusively ascribable to France,
a motion was made by Mr. Giles to expunge from the answer the following paragraphs.

In support of this motion, after urging the indelicacy of exulting over the misfortunes of
others by contrasting our happiness with their misery, Mr. Giles said, that with respect to
the wisdom[48] and firmness of the President, he differed in opinion from the answer; and though
he might be singular, yet it being his opinion, he should not be afraid to avow it. He had
not that grateful conviction there mentioned, and if he were to come there and express it,
he should prove an inconsistent character. He should not go into a lengthy discussion on this
point, but if they turned their eyes to our foreign relations, there would be found no reason
to exult in the wisdom and firmness of the administration. He believed, on the contrary, that
it was from a want of wisdom and firmness that we were brought into our present critical situation.
If gentlemen had been satisfied with expressing their esteem of the patriotism and virtue of
the President, they might have got a unanimous vote; but they could not suppose that gentlemen
would so far forget self-respect as to join in the proposed adulation.

     [Footnote 48: Some objection has been made to the accuracy
     of this speech, as reported in the Daily Advertiser. The
     author has therefore deemed it proper to make some extracts
     from the Aurora, the leading paper of that party, of which
     Mr. Giles was a conspicuous member.

     Mr. Giles, after stating that "the want of wisdom and
     firmness" in the administration, "had conducted the affairs
     of the nation to a crisis which threatens greater calamities
     than any that has before occurred,"--remarks as
     follows:--"Another sentiment in the report he could not
     agree to. He did not regret the President's retiring from
     office. The people would truly be in a
     calamitous situation, if one man were essential to the
     existence of the government. He hoped the President
     would be happy in his retirement, and he hoped he would
     retire." He reverted again to that part of the report which
     declared the administration to have been wise and firm in
     its measures. "He had always disapproved," he repeated, "of
     the measures of that administration with respect to foreign
     relations, and many members of the house had also; he was
     therefore surprised that gentlemen should now come forward
     and wish him, in one breath, to disavow all his former
     opinions, without being previously convinced of having been
     in an error. For his own part, he conceived there was more
     cause than ever for adhering to his old opinion. The course
     of events had pointed out their propriety; and, if he was
     not much mistaken, a crisis was at hand which would confirm
     them. He wished, that while gentlemen were willing to
     compliment the President, they would have some respect for
     the feelings of others."--Aurora, December 15th, 1796.]

Mr. Giles said he was one of those citizens who did not regret the President's retiring from
office. He hoped he would retire to his country seat and enjoy all the happiness he could wish;
and he believed he would enjoy more there than in his present situation. He believed the government
of the United States would go on without him. The people were competent to their own government.
And although a clamour had been raised in all parts of the United States, more or less, from
apprehensions on the departure of the President from office, yet, not feeling these apprehensions
himself, he was perfectly easy on the occasion. He wished the President as much happiness as
any man; and hoping he would retire, he could not express any regrets at the event. And it
would be extraordinary, if gentlemen whose names in the yeas and nays are found in opposition
to certain prominent measures of the administration, should now come forward and approve those
measures. This could not be expected. He, for his part, retained the same opinions he had always
done with respect to those measures, nor should any influence under heaven prevent him from
expressing that opinion--an opinion in which he was confident, ere long, all America would
concur.[49]

     [Footnote 49: Dunlap and Claypole's Daily Advertiser,
     December 16th, 1796.]

This motion was opposed with great earnestness by the party which had supported the administration.
The advantages which had resulted from the constitution were said to be too obvious to be controverted;
and it was maintained that a comparison of the present situation of the United States with
its condition anterior to the adoption of that instrument, or with the condition of foreign
powers, was natural and proper. This comparison was made not for the purposes of exultation,
but of exciting just sentiments respecting their own conduct.

In reply to the observations respecting the President, it was said, that the whole course of
his administration had demonstrated the correctness with which the terms "wisdom and firmness"
were applied to it. Particular circumstances were stated in which these qualities had been
pre-eminently displayed; but the general impression which facts had made on the public mind
was considered as dispensing with the necessity of stating the particular facts themselves.

It might be true, they said, that there were many others who could fill with propriety and
advantage the presidential chair, but no man could fill it who possessed, in an equal degree,
the confidence of the people. The possession of this confidence enabled the chief magistrate
to perform the duties of his office in a manner greatly conducive to the interests of the nation,
and the loss of so valuable a public servant was certainly just cause of regret. With this
sentiment, the feelings of the community fully accorded. In every part of the United States,
the declarations of their constituents attested the regrets with which this event was contemplated
by them. Those gentlemen who did not participate in these feelings would have an opportunity
to record their names with their opinions. But those who did participate in them ought not
to be restrained from expressing them.

The motion to strike out was lost; after which the words "the spectacle of a whole nation,
the freest and most enlightened in the world," were amended, so as to read, "the spectacle
of a free and enlightened nation," and the answer was carried by a great majority.

{1797}

Early in the session, the President communicated to congress in a special message, the complaints
alleged by the representative of the French republic against the government of the United States.
These complaints embracing most of the transactions of the legislative and executive departments,
in relation to the belligerent powers, a particular and careful review of almost every act
of the administration, which could affect those powers, became indispensable. The principal
object for the mission of General Pinckney to Paris, having been to make full and fair explanations
of the principles and conduct of the American government, this review was addressed to that
minister. It presented a minute and comprehensive detail of all the points of controversy which
had arisen between the two nations; and defended the measures which had been adopted in America,
with a clearness, and a strength of argument, believed to be irresistible. To place the subject
in a point of view, admitting of no possible misunderstanding, the secretary of state had annexed
to his own full and demonstrative reasoning, documents, establishing the real fact in each
particular case, and the correspondence relating to it.

This letter, with its accompanying documents, was laid before congress.

Those who read these valuable papers will not be surprised, that the President should have
relied upon their efficacy in removing from the government of France, all impressions unfavourable
to the fairness of intention which had influenced the conduct of the United States; and in
effacing from the bosoms of the great body of the American people, all those unjust and injurious
suspicions which had been entertained against their own administration. Should their immediate
operation on the executive of France disappoint his hopes, he persuaded himself that he could
not mistake their influence in America; and he felt the most entire conviction that the accusations
against the United States would cease, with the evidence that those accusations were countenanced
and supported by a great portion of the American people.

These documents were communicated to the public; but, unfortunately, their effect at home was
not such as had been expected, and they were consequently inoperative abroad. The fury of political
controversy seemed to sustain no diminution; and the American character continued to be degraded
by reciprocal criminations, which the two great parties made upon each other, of being under
a British, and a French influence.

The measures particularly recommended by the President in his speech, at the opening of the
session, were not adopted; and neither the debates in Congress, nor the party publications
with which the nation continued to be agitated, furnished reasonable ground for the hope, that
the political intemperance which had prevailed from the establishment of the republican form
of government in France, was about to be succeeded by a more conciliatory spirit.

The President contemplated with a degree of pleasure[50] seldom felt at the resignation of
power, his approaching retirement to the delightful scenes of domestic and rural life.

     [Footnote 50: See note No. XV. at the end of the volume.]

It was impossible to be absolutely insensible to the bitter invectives, and malignant calumnies
of which he had long been the object. Yet in one instance only, did he depart from the rule
he had prescribed for his conduct regarding them. Apprehending permanent injury from the republication
of certain spurious letters which have been already noticed, he, on the day which terminated
his official character, addressed to the secretary of state the following letter.

[Sidenote: He denies the authenticity of certain spurious letters published as his in 1776.]

"Dear Sir,

"At the conclusion of my public employments, I have thought it expedient to notice the publication
of certain forged letters which first appeared in the year 1777, and were obtruded upon the
public as mine. They are said by the editor to have been found in a small portmanteau that
I had left in the care of my mulatto servant named Billy, who, it is pretended, was taken prisoner
at Fort Lee, in 1776. The period when these letters were first printed will be recollected,
and what were the impressions they were intended to produce on the public mind. It was then
supposed to be of some consequence to strike at the integrity of the motives of the American
Commander-in-chief, and to paint his inclinations as at variance with his professions and his
duty--another crisis in the affairs of America having occurred, the same weapon has been resorted
to, to wound my character and deceive the people.

     G.W.

     June 18th, 1776.

     To John Parke Custis, Esqr., at the Hon Benedict Calvert's
     Esqr., Mount Airy, Maryland.

     G.W.

     New York, July 16th, 1776.

     To Mr. Lund Washington.

     G.W.

"At the time when these letters first appeared, it was notorious to the army immediately under
my command, and particularly to the gentlemen attached to my person, that my mulatto man Billy
had never been one moment in the power of the enemy. It is also a fact that no part of my baggage,
or any of my attendants, were captured during the whole course of the war. Accept, &c. &c."

On that day, the members of the senate, conducted by the Vice President, together with the
officers of the general and state governments, and an immense concourse of citizens, convened
in the hall of the house of representatives, in which the oaths were administered to the President.

The sensibility which was manifested when General Washington entered, did not surpass the cheerfulness
which overspread his own countenance, nor the heartfelt pleasure with which he saw another
invested with the powers that had so long been exercised by himself.[51]

     [Footnote 51: See note No. XVI. at the end of the volume.]

[Sidenote: General Washington retires to Mount Vernon.]

After the solemnities of the occasion had been concluded, and he had paid to his successor
those respectful compliments which he believed to be equally due to the man and to the office,
he hastened[52] to that real felicity which awaited him at Mount Vernon, the enjoyment of which
he had long impatiently anticipated.

     [Footnote 52: See note No. XVII. at the end of the volume.]

The same marks of respect and affection for his person, which had on all great occasions been
manifested by his fellow citizens, still attended him. His endeavours to render his journey
private were unavailing; and the gentlemen of the country through which he passed, were still
ambitious of testifying their sentiments for the man who had, from the birth of the republic,
been deemed the first of American citizens. Long after his retirement, he continued to receive
addresses from legislative bodies, and various classes of citizens, expressive of the high
sense entertained of his services.

Notwithstanding the extraordinary popularity of the first President of the United States, scarcely
has any important act of his administration escaped the most bitter invective.

[Sidenote: Political situation of the United States at this period.]

On the real wisdom of the system which he pursued, every reader will decide for himself. Time
will, in some measure, dissipate the prejudices and passions of the moment, and enable us to
view objects through a medium which represents them truly.

Without taking a full review of measures which were reprobated by one party and applauded by
the other, the reader may be requested to glance his eye at the situation of the United States
in 1797, and to contrast it with their condition in 1788. Funds for the gradual payment of
the debt had been provided; a considerable part of it had been actually discharged; and that
system which is now operating its entire extinction, had been matured and adopted. The agricultural
and commercial wealth of the nation had increased beyond all former example. The numerous tribes
of warlike Indians, inhabiting those immense tracts which lie between the then cultivated country
and the Mississippi, had been taught, by arms and by justice, to respect the United States,
and to continue in peace. This desirable object having been accomplished, that humane system
was established for civilizing, and furnishing them with the conveniences of life which improves
their condition, while it secures their attachment.

Abroad, the differences with Spain had been accommodated; and the free navigation of the Mississippi
had been acquired, with the use of New Orleans as a place of deposit for three years, and afterwards,
until some other equivalent place should be designated. Those causes of mutual exasperation
which had threatened to involve the United States in a war with the greatest maritime and commercial
power in the world, had been removed; and the military posts which had been occupied within
their territory, from their existence as a nation, had been evacuated. Treaties had been formed
with Algiers and with Tripoli, and no captures appear to have been made by Tunis; so that the
Mediterranean was opened to American vessels.

This bright prospect was indeed, in part, shaded by the discontents of France. Those who have
attended to the particular points of difference between the two nations, will assign the causes
to which these discontents are to be ascribed, and will judge whether it was in the power of
the President to have avoided them, without surrendering the real independence of the nation,
and the most invaluable of all rights --the right of self-government.

Such was the situation of the United States at the close of Washington's administration. Their
circumstances at its commencement will be recollected; and the contrast is too striking not
to be observed.

That this beneficial change in the affairs of America is to be ascribed exclusively to the
wisdom which guided the national councils will not be pretended. That many of the causes which
produced it originated with the government, and that their successful operation was facilitated,
if not secured, by the system which was adopted, will scarcely be denied. To estimate that
system correctly, their real influence must be allowed to those strong prejudices, and turbulent
passions, with which it was assailed.

Accustomed in the early part of his life to agricultural pursuits, and possessing a real taste
for them, General Washington was particularly well qualified to enjoy, in retirement, that
tranquil felicity which he had anticipated. Resuming former habits, and returning to ancient
and well known employments, he was familiar with his new situation, and therefore exempt from
the danger of that disappointment which is the common lot of those who, in old age, retire
from the toils of business, or the cares of office, to the untried pleasures of the country.
A large estate, which exhibited many proofs of having been long deprived of the attentions
of its proprietor, in the management and improvement of which he engaged with ardour, an extensive
correspondence, and the society of men and books, gave employment to every hour which was equally
innocent and interesting, and furnished ground for the hope that the evening of a life which
had been devoted to the public service, would be as serene, as its mid-day had been brilliant.

Though devoted to these occupations, an absolute indifference to public affairs would have
been incompatible with that love of country which had influenced all his conduct. Feeling strong
impressions in favour of that system, with regard to foreign powers, which had been adopted
by himself, and which was faithfully pursued by his successor, he could not be inattentive
to the immense, and continued exertions, made by a powerful party to overturn it. Yet for a
time, he sought to abstract himself from these political contests, and to diminish the interest
which his feelings impelled him to take in them. His letters abound in paragraphs not unlike
the following. "I have confidence however in that Providence which has shielded the United
States from the evils that have hitherto threatened them; and, as I believe the major part
of the people of this country to be well affected to its constitution and government, I rest
satisfied that, should a crisis ever arise to call forth the sense of the community, it will
be strong in support of the honour and dignity of the nation. Therefore, however much I regret
the opposition which has for its object the embarrassment of the administration, I shall view
things in the 'calm light of mild philosophy,' and endeavour to finish my course in retirement
and ease."

But the designs of France were soon manifested in a form which, to the veteran soldier and
statesman of Mount Vernon, appeared to be too dangerous as well as unequivocal, to admit the
preservation of this equanimity.

[Sidenote: The French government refuses to receive General Pinckney as minister.]

In the executive of that republic, General Pinckney encountered dispositions of a very different
character from that amicable and conciliatory temper which had dictated his mission. After
inspecting his letter of credence, the Directory announced to him their haughty determination
"not to receive another minister plenipotentiary from the United States, until after the redress
of grievances demanded of the American government, which the French republic had a right to
expect from it." This message was succeeded, first by indecorous verbal communications, calculated
to force the American minister out of France, and afterwards, by a written mandate to quit
the territories of the republic.

This act of hostility was accompanied with another which would explain the motives for this
conduct, if previous measures had not rendered all further explanation unnecessary.

On giving to the recalled minister his audience of leave, the president of the directory addressed
a speech to him, in which terms of outrage to the government, were mingled with expressions
of affection for the people of the United States; and the expectation of ruling the former,
by their influence over the latter, was too clearly manifested not to be understood. To complete
this system of hostility, American vessels were captured wherever found; and, under the pretext
of their wanting a document, with which the treaty of commerce had been uniformly understood
to dispense, they were condemned as prize.

[Sidenote: Congress is convened.]

[Sidenote: President's speech.]

This serious state of things demanded a solemn consideration. On receiving from General Pinckney
the despatches which communicated it, the President issued his proclamation requiring congress
to meet on the 15th day of June. The firm and dignified speech delivered by the chief magistrate
at the commencement of the session, exhibited that sensibility which a high minded and real
American might be expected to feel, while representing to the national legislature the great
and unprovoked outrages of a foreign government.

"Retaining still the desire which had uniformly been manifested by the American government
to preserve peace and friendship with all nations, and believing that neither the honour nor
the interest of the United States absolutely forbade the repetition of advances for securing
these desirable objects with France, he should," he said, "institute a fresh attempt at negotiation,
and should not fail to promote and accelerate an accommodation on terms compatible with the
rights, duties, interests, and honour of the nation." But while he should be making these endeavours
to adjust all differences with the French republic by amicable negotiation, he earnestly recommended
it to congress to provide effectual measures of defence.

[Sidenote: Three envoys extraordinary deputed to negotiate with France.]

To carry into effect the pacific dispositions avowed in the speech, three envoys extraordinary
were appointed, at the head of whom General Pinckney was placed. Their instructions conformed
to the public language of the President. Peace and reconciliation were to be pursued by all
means, compatible with the honour and the faith of the United States; but no national engagements
were to be impaired; no innovation to be permitted upon those internal regulations for the
preservation of peace which had been deliberately and uprightly established; nor were the rights
of the government to be surrendered.

The debates in the house of representatives, on the answer to the speech, were long and earnest.
To expressions approving the conduct of the executive with regard to foreign nations, the opposition
was ardent, but unsuccessful. On the third of June, an answer was agreed to which contained
sentiments worthy of an American legislature, and for which several of the leaders of the opposition
voted.

The speech of the President was well adapted to the occasion, and to the times. It was calculated
to rouse those indignant feelings which a high spirited people, insulted and injured by a foreign
power, can never fail to display, if their judgment be not blinded, or their sensibility to
external wrongs blunted, by invincible prejudices. He relied principally on the manifestation
of these feelings for the success of the negotiation; and on their real existence, for the
defence of the national rights, should negotiation fail. His endeavours were not absolutely
unsuccessful. Some impression was made on the mass of the people; but it was too slight to
be productive of the advantages expected from it. The conduct of France was still openly defended;
and the opinion, that the measures which had been adopted by the executive of the United States
furnished that republic with just cause of war, was still publicly maintained, and indefatigably
circulated. According to these opinions, America could entitle herself to peace, only by retracing
the steps she had taken, and yielding to the demands of her justly offended but generous and
magnanimous ally.

Still jealous for the honour, as well as confident of the importance, of his country, and retaining
that full conviction respecting the propriety of its measures which had induced their adoption,
General Washington could not repress the solicitude with which he contemplated passing events.
His confidential letters disclose the strong feelings of his own bosom, but betray no apprehensions
that the French government would press its present system to extremities. He firmly believed
that the hostile attitude it had assumed was to be, exclusively, ascribed to the conduct of
those Americans who had been the uniform advocates of all the pretensions of France, and who
were said to be supported by a real majority of the people; and confidently expected that,
under the old pretext of magnanimous forbearance, the executive directory would, slowly, and
gradually, recede from its present system, so soon as the error in which it originated should
become manifest. The opinion he had always entertained of the good sense and patriotism of
his fellow citizens, silenced every doubt respecting the manner in which they would act, when
their real situation should be perceived by themselves.

{1798}

For a considerable length of time, no certain intelligence reached the United States respecting
the negotiation at Paris. At length, in the winter of 1798, letters were received from the
American envoys, indicating an unfavourable state of things; and, in the spring, despatches
arrived which announced the total failure of the mission.

History will scarcely furnish the example of a nation, not absolutely degraded, which has received
from a foreign power such open contumely, and undisguised insult, as were, on this occasion,
suffered by the United States in the persons of their ministers.

[Sidenote: Their treatment.]

It was insinuated that their being taken from the party[53] which had supported the measures
of their own government furnished just cause of umbrage; and, under slight pretexts, the executive
directory delayed to accredit them as the representatives of an independent nation. In this
situation, they were assailed by persons, not indeed invested with formal authority, but exhibiting
sufficient evidence of the source from which their powers were derived, who, in direct and
explicit terms, demanded money from the United States as the condition which must precede,
not only the reconciliation of America to France, but any negotiation on the differences between
the two countries.

     [Footnote 53: Two of them were of the party denominated
     federal; the third was arranged with the opposition.]

That an advance of money by a neutral to a belligerent power would be an obvious departure
from neutrality, though an insuperable objection to this demand, did not constitute the most
operative reason for repelling it. Such were the circumstances under which it was made, that
it could not be acceded to without a surrender of the real independence of the United States;
nor without being, in fact, the commencement of a system, the end of which it was impossible
to foresee.

A decided negative was therefore given to the preliminary required by these unofficial agents;
but they returned to the charge with wonderful perseverance, and used unwearied arts to work
upon the fears of the American ministers for their country, and for themselves. The immense
power of France was painted in glowing colours, the humiliation of the house of Austria was
stated, and the conquest of Britain was confidently anticipated. In the friendship of France
alone, it was said, could America look for safety; and the fate of Venice was held up to warn
her of the danger which awaited those who incurred the displeasure of the great republic. The
ministers were assured that, if they believed their conduct would be approved in the United
States, they were mistaken. The means which the Directory possessed, in that country, to excite
odium against them, were great, and would unquestionably be employed.

This degrading intercourse was at length interrupted by the positive refusal of the envoys
to hold any further communication with the persons employed in it.

Meanwhile, they urged the object of their mission with persevering but unavailing solicitude.
The Directory still refused to acknowledge them in their public character; and the secretary
of exterior relations, at unofficial visits which they made him, renewed the demand which his
agents had unsuccessfully pressed.

Finding the objections to their reception in their official character insurmountable, the American
ministers made a last effort to execute the duties assigned to them. In a letter addressed
to the secretary of exterior relations, they entered at large into the explanations committed
to them by their government, and illustrated, by a variety of facts, the uniform friendliness
of its conduct to France.[54] Notwithstanding the failure of this effort, and their perfect
conviction that all further attempts would be equally unavailing, they continued, with a passiveness
which must search for its apology in their solicitude to demonstrate to the American people
the real views of the French republic, to employ the only means in their power to avert the
rupture which was threatened, and which appeared to be inevitable.

     [Footnote 54: It is a remarkable fact, that the answer of
     the French minister to this letter, an answer which
     criminated the American government in bitter terms, was in
     the possession of a printer in Philadelphia who had
     uniformly supported the pretensions of that republic, before
     it reached the American government.]

During these transactions, occasion was repeatedly taken to insult the American government;
open war was continued to be waged by the cruisers of France on American commerce; and the
flag of the United States was a sufficient justification for the capture and condemnation of
any vessel over which it waved.

At length, when the demonstration became complete, that the resolution of the American envoys
was not less fixed, than their conduct had been guarded and temperate, various attempts were
made to induce two of them, voluntarily, to relinquish their station; on the failure of which,
they were ordered to quit the territories of the republic. As if to aggravate this national
insult, the third, who had been selected from that party which was said to be friendly to France,
was permitted to remain, and was invited to resume the discussions which had been interrupted.

The despatches communicating these events were laid before congress, and were afterwards published.
The indignation which they excited was warm and extensive. The attempt to degrade the United
States into a tributary nation was too obvious to be concealed; and the resentment produced,
as well by this attempt as by the threats which accompanied it, was not confined to the federalists.
For the moment, a spirit was roused on which an American may reflect with pride, and which
he may consider as a sure protection from external danger. In every part of the continent,
the favourite sentiment was "millions for defence, not a cent for tribute."

The disposition still existed to justify France, by criminating the American government, by
contending that her intentions were not really hostile, that her conduct was misrepresented
by men under British influence, who wished for war, or had been deceived by unauthorized intriguers;
that, admitting it to be otherwise, she only demanded those marks of friendship which, at a
critical moment, she had herself afforded; that the real interests of the United States required
a compliance with this demand; that it would cost more money to resist than to yield to it;
that the resistance would infallibly be ineffectual; and that national honour was never secured
by national defeat. Neither these sentiments, nor the arguments which were founded on them,
accorded with the general feeling; and it required the co-operation of other causes to establish
the influence of those who urged them.

[Sidenote: Measures of hostility adopted by the American government against France.]

In congress, vigorous measures were adopted for retaliating injuries which had been sustained,
and for repelling those which were threatened. Amongst these was a regular army.

Addresses[55] to the executive from every part of the United States attested the high spirit
of the nation, and the answers of the President were well calculated to give it solidity and
duration.

     [Footnote 55: Having heard that the President contemplated a
     tour as far south as the district of Columbia, General
     Washington invited him to Mount Vernon, and concluded his
     letter with saying: "I pray you to believe that no one has
     read the various approbatory addresses which have been
     presented to you with more heartfelt satisfaction than I
     have done, nor are there any who more sincerely wish that
     your administration of the government may be easy, happy and
     honourable to yourself, and prosperous to the country."]

No sooner had a war become probable, to the perils of which no man could be insensible, than
the eyes of all were directed to General Washington, as the person who should command the American
army. He alone could be seen at the head of a great military force without exciting jealousy;
he alone could draw into public service, and arrange properly the best military talents of
the nation; and he more than any other, could induce the utmost exertions of its physical strength.

Indignant at the unprovoked injuries which had been heaped upon his country, and convinced
that the conflict, should a war be really prosecuted by France with a view to conquest, would
be extremely severe, and could be supported, on the part of America, only by a persevering
exertion of all her force, he could not determine, should such a crisis arrive, to withhold
those aids which it might be in his power to afford, should public opinion really attach to
his services that importance which would render them essential. His own reflections appear
to have resulted in a determination not to refuse once more to take the field, provided he
could be permitted to secure efficient aid by naming the chief officers of the army, and to
remain at home until his service in the field should be required by actual invasion.

The opinion that prudence required preparations for open war, and that General Washington must
once more be placed at the head of the American armies, strengthened every day; and on the
22d of June, the President addressed him a letter in which that subject was thus alluded to.
There will be more efficacy in it than in many an army." The following extract from his reply
to the President will exhibit the course of his reflections relative to his appearance once
more at the head of the American armies.

"At the epoch of my retirement, an invasion of these states by any European power, or even
the probability of such an event in my days, was so far from being contemplated by me, that
I had no conception either that or any other occurrence would arise in so short a period which
could turn my eyes from the shades of Mount Vernon. The uncertainty however of the latter,
in my mind, creates my embarrassment; for I can not bring it to believe, regardless as the
French are of treaties, and of the laws of nations, and capable as I conceive them to be of
any species of despotism and injustice, that they will attempt to invade this country after
such a uniform and unequivocal expression of the determination of the people in all parts to
oppose them with their lives and fortunes. That they have been led to believe by their agents
and partisans among us that we are a divided people, that the latter are opposed to their own
government, and that the show of a small force would occasion a revolt, I have no doubt; and
how far these men (grown desperate) will further attempt to deceive, and may succeed in keeping
up the deception, is problematical. Without that, the folly of the Directory in such an attempt
would, I conceive, be more conspicuous, if possible, than their wickedness.

His letter to the secretary of war was more detailed and more explicit. "It can not," he said,
"be necessary for me to promise to you or to others who know my sentiments, that to quit the
tranquillity of retirement, and enter the boundless field of responsibility, would be productive
of sensations which a better pen than I possess would find it difficult to describe.

     1st.

     2dly. That the army now to be formed should be so appointed
     as to afford a well grounded hope of its doing honour to the
     country, and credit to him who commands it in the field.

"On each of these heads you must allow me to make observations."

General Washington then proceeded to detail his sentiments on those points on which his consent
to take command of the army must depend.

[Sidenote: General Washington appointed commander-in-chief of the American Army.]

Some casual circumstances delayed the reception of the letters of the President and secretary
of war for several days, in consequence of which, before the answer of General Washington reached
the seat of government, the President had nominated him to the chief command of all the armies
raised or to be raised in the United States, with the rank of Lieutenant General; and the senate
had unanimously advised and consented to his appointment.

"His opinion on all subjects would have great weight, and I wish you to obtain from him as
much of his reflections upon the times and the service as you can."

The communications between General Washington and the secretary of war appear to have been
full and unreserved. The impressions of the former respecting the critical and perilous situation
of his country had previously determined him to yield to the general desire, and accept the
commission offered him, provided he could be permitted to select for the high departments of
the army, and especially for the military staff, those in whom he could place the greatest
confidence. Being assured that there was every reason to believe his wishes in this respect
would not be thwarted, he gave to the secretary the arrangement[57] which he would recommend
for the principal stations in the army; and, on the 13th of July, addressed the following letter
to the President.

     [Footnote 57: The following is the list of generals, and of
     the military staff.

     Alexander Hamilton, Inspector.

     Charles C. Pinckney,               }
     Henry Knox, or, if either refuses  }  Major Generals.
     James Craik, Director of the Hospital.]

"I had the honour, on the evening of the 11th instant, to receive from the hands of the secretary
at war, your favour of the seventh, announcing that you had, with the advice and consent of
the senate, appointed me Lieutenant General and Commander-in-chief of the armies raised or
to be raised for the service of the United States.

From this period, General Washington intermingled the cares and attentions of office with his
agricultural pursuits. His solicitude respecting the organization of an army which he might
possibly be required to lead against an enemy the most formidable in the world, was too strong
to admit of his being inattentive to its arrangements. Yet he never did believe that an invasion
of the United States would actually take place. His conviction that it was not the interest
of France to wage an unprovoked war with America, and that the hostile measures which the executive
Directory had adopted originated in the opinion that those measures would overthrow the administration,
and place power in the hands of those who had uniformly supported all the pretensions of the
French republic, remained unshaken. As a necessary consequence of this conviction, he was persuaded
that the indignation which this system had excited, would effect its change. The only circumstance
that weakened this hope, arose from the persevering opposition which was still maintained in
congress, and from the evidence which was daily afforded that those party animosities, to which
he ascribed the present dangerous crisis, were far from being healed. Those who had embraced
the cause of France in the controversy between that nation and the United States, had been
overwhelmed by a flood of testimony which silenced them for a time, but which weakened them
more in appearance than in reality. They were visibly recovering both strength and confidence.
It is not therefore wonderful that General Washington should have expressed himself more freely
than had been his custom, respecting American parties, and that he should have exerted an influence
which he had not been in the habit of employing, to induce men whose talents he respected,
but who had declined political life, to enter into the national and state legislatures.

Events soon demonstrated that he had not calculated unreasonably on the effects of the spirit
manifested by his country. Although America, supplicating for peace, had been spurned with
contempt; although the executive Directory had rejected with insult her repeated and sincere
prayers to be permitted to make explanations, and had haughtily demanded a concession of their
arrogant and unfounded claims or the advance of pecuniary aids, as a preliminary to negotiation;--America,
in arms, was treated with some respect. Indirect pacific overtures were made, and a willingness
on the part of France, to accommodate the existing differences on reasonable terms, was communicated.

{1799}

The President, truly solicitous to restore that harmony and good understanding which the United
States had laboured so incessantly and so sincerely to preserve with their ancient ally, caught
at the overtures which were indirectly made, and again appointed three envoys extraordinary
and ministers plenipotentiary to the French republic. These gentlemen found the government
in the hands of a person who had taken no part in those transactions which had embroiled the
two countries, and who entered into negotiations with them which terminated in the amicable
adjustment of differences.

General Washington did not live to witness the restoration of peace.

[Sidenote: His death.]

On Friday the 13th of December, while attending to some improvements upon his estate, he was
exposed to a light rain, by which his neck and hair became wet. Not apprehending danger from
this circumstance, he passed the afternoon in his usual manner; but, in the night, was seized
with an inflammatory affection of the windpipe. The disease commenced with a violent ague,
accompanied with some pain in the upper and fore part of the throat, a sense of stricture in
the same part, a cough, and a difficult rather than a painful deglutition, which were soon
succeeded by fever, and a quick and laborious respiration.

Believing bloodletting to be necessary, he procured a bleeder who took from his arm twelve
or fourteen ounces of blood, but he would not permit a messenger to be despatched for his family
physician until the appearance of day. About eleven in the morning Doctor Craik arrived; and
perceiving the extreme danger of the case, requested that two consulting physicians should
be immediately sent for. The utmost exertions of medical skill were applied in vain. The powers
of life were manifestly yielding to the force of the disorder; speaking, which was painful
from the beginning, became almost impracticable: respiration became more and more contracted
and imperfect, until half past eleven on Saturday night; when, retaining the full possession
of his intellect, he expired without a struggle.

Believing at the commencement of his complaint, as well as through every succeeding stage of
it, that its conclusion would be mortal, he submitted to the exertions made for his recovery,
rather as a duty, than from any expectation of their efficacy. Some hours before his death,
after repeated efforts to be understood, he succeeded in expressing a desire that he might
be permitted to die without interruption. After it became impossible to get any thing down
his throat, he undressed himself and went to bed, there to die. To his friend and physician,
Doctor Craik, who sat on his bed, and took his head in his lap, he said with difficulty, "Doctor,
I am dying, and have been dying for a long time, but I am not afraid to die."

During the short period of his illness he economized his time, in arranging with the utmost
serenity those few concerns which required his attention; and anticipated his approaching dissolution
with every demonstration of that equanimity, for which his life was so uniformly, and singularly,
conspicuous.

The deep and wide spreading grief occasioned by this melancholy event, assembled a great concourse
of people for the purpose of paying the last tribute of respect to the first of Americans.
His body, attended by military honours and the ceremonies of religion, was deposited in the
family vault at Mount Vernon, on Wednesday, the 18th of December.

So short was his illness that, at the seat of government, the intelligence of his death preceded
that of his indisposition. It was first communicated by a passenger in the stage to an acquaintance
whom he met in the street, and the report quickly reached the house of representatives which
was then in session. The utmost dismay and affliction was displayed for a few minutes; after
which a member stated in his place, the melancholy information which had been received. This
information he said was not certain, but there was too much reason to believe it true. He therefore
moved an adjournment. Both houses adjourned until the next day.

The resolutions,[58] after a preamble stating the death of General Washington, were in the
following terms.

     [Footnote 58: These resolutions were prepared by General
     Lee, who happening not to be in his place when the
     melancholy intelligence was received and first mentioned in
     the house, placed them in the hands of the member who moved
     them.]

"Resolved, that this house will wait on the President in condolence of this mournful event.

"Resolved, that a committee, in conjunction with one from the senate, be appointed to consider
on the most suitable manner of paying honour to the memory of the MAN, first in war, first
in peace, and first in the hearts of his fellow citizens."

Immediately after the passage of these resolutions, a written message was received from the
President, accompanying a letter from Mr. Lear, which he said, "will inform you that it had
pleased Divine Providence to remove from this life our excellent fellow citizen, GEORGE WASHINGTON,
by the purity of his life, and a long series of services to his country, rendered illustrious
through the world. It remains for an affectionate and grateful people, in whose hearts he can
never die, to pay suitable honour to his memory."

To the speaker and members of the house of representatives who waited on him in pursuance of
the resolution which has been mentioned, he expressed the same deep-felt and affectionate respect
"for the most illustrious and beloved personage America had ever produced." If a Trajan found
a Pliny, a Marcus Aurelius can never want biographers, eulogists, or historians."

These resolutions passed both houses unanimously, and those which would admit of immediate
execution were carried into effect. The whole nation appeared in mourning. The funeral procession
was grand and solemn, and the eloquent oration, which was delivered on the occasion by General
Lee, was heard with profound attention and with deep interest.

Throughout the United States, similar marks of affliction were exhibited. In every part of
the continent funeral orations were delivered, and the best talents of the nation were devoted
to an expression of the nation's grief.

The monument, however, has not been erected. That the great events of the political as well
as military life of General Washington should be commemorated, could not be pleasing to those
who had condemned, and who continued to condemn, the whole course of his administration. This
resolution, although it passed unanimously, had many enemies. That party which had long constituted
the opposition, and which, though the minority for the moment, nearly divided the house of
representatives, declared its preference for the equestrian statue which had been voted by
congress at the close of the war. The division between a statue and a monument was so nearly
equal, that the session passed away without an appropriation for either. The public feelings
soon subsided, and those who possessed the ascendancy over the public sentiment employed their
influence to draw odium on the men who favoured a monument; to represent that measure as a
part of a general system to waste the public money; and to impress the idea that the only proper
monument to the memory of a meritorious citizen, was that which the people would erect in their
affections.

General Washington was rather above the common size, his frame was robust, and his constitution
vigorous--capable of enduring great fatigue, and requiring a considerable degree of exercise
for the preservation of his health. His exterior created in the beholder the idea of strength,
united with manly gracefulness. When called a second time to command the armies of the United
States, a change of circumstances had taken place, and he meditated a corresponding change
of conduct. In modelling the army of 1798, he sought for men distinguished for their boldness
of execution, not less than for their prudence in counsel, and contemplated a system of continued
attack. "The enemy," said the General in his private letters, "must never be permitted to gain
foothold on our shores."

NOTES.

NOTE--No. I. See Page 9.

The following are copies of these interesting questions, and of the letter which enclosed them.

Philadelphia, 18th April, 1793.

SIR,--The posture of affairs in Europe, particularly between France and Great Britain, place
the United States in a delicate situation, and require much consideration of the measures which
will be proper for them to observe in the war between those powers. With a view to forming
a general plan of conduct for the executive, I have stated and enclosed sundry questions to
be considered preparatory to a meeting at my house to-morrow, where I shall expect to see you
at 9 o'clock, and to receive the result of your reflections thereon.

Ques.

Ques. II. Shall a minister from the republic of France be received?

Ques. III. If received, shall it be absolutely or with qualifications; and if with qualifications,
of what kind?

Ques.

Ques. V. If they have the right, is it expedient to do either? and which?

Ques. VI. If they have an option, would it be a breach of neutrality to consider the treaties
still in operation?

Ques. VII.

Ques.

Ques. IX. If of a mixed and equivocal character, does the guarantee in any event apply to such
a war?

Ques. X. What is the effect of a guarantee, such as that to be found in the treaty of alliance
between the United States and France?

Ques.

Ques.

Ques. XIII.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. II. See Page 15.

The official letter announcing to the convention the appointment of Mr. Genet, contained a
communication of a very delicate nature, which was immediately made public. That the French
government had not mingled with its desire to separate America from Britain, a willingness
to see the United States acquire a degree of strength which might render them truly independent,
and formidable to their neighbours, though well known to congress, had been concealed from
the people at large. It seems, therefore, to have been apprehended by the leaders of the revolution
in France, that some remnant of that affection which had been so lavishly expressed for their
fallen monarch while exercising sovereign power, might still be cherished in the American bosom,
and might obstruct the endeavours they were about to make to produce a more intimate connexion
between the two nations. It might be supposed that such sentiments, if they existed, would
be effectually destroyed by a disclosure of the motives which had influenced the conduct of
those by whom the aids so highly valued had been granted. The letter alluded to contains this
passage: "From the instructions that were given by the former ministry to the agents in that
country (America) which the executive council caused to be laid before them, they have seen
with indignation, that at the very time when the good people of America expressed to us their
friendship and gratitude in the most affectionate manner, Vergennes and Montmorin thought,
that it was not suitable to France to give to America all the consistence of which it was capable,
because it would acquire a strength which it might probably abuse. They, therefore, enjoined
on their agents a passive conduct in regard to that nation, and to speak of nothing but the
personal views of the king for its prosperity. The operations of war were directed by the same
Machiavellian maxims. The same duplicity was employed in the negotiations of peace; in which,
when signed, the people for whom we had taken up arms were altogether neglected." The official
letter brought by Mr. Genet, to the executive of the United States, conveyed in less explicit
terms the same idea; and to prove the correctness of these allegations, he communicated copies
of official documents expressing in plain terms the solicitude of France and Spain to exclude
the United States from the Mississippi; their jealousies of the growing power and ambition
of this country; and the wish of France, expressed while the question was pending, that the
constitution might not be adopted, as it "suits France that the United States should remain
in their present state, because if they should acquire the consistence of which they are susceptible,
they would soon acquire a force or a power which they would be very ready to abuse." The minister
of the king, however, was directed not to avow the inclination of his sovereign on this point.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. III. See Page 40.

Of the excessive and passionate devotion which was felt for the French republic, and of the
blind and almost equally extensive hostility to the measures of the administration, the gazettes
of the day are replete with the most abundant proof. As an example of this spirit, the following
toasts are selected, because they were given at a festival made by persons of some distinction,
at which the governor of Pennsylvania and the minister of France were present.

To commemorate the 14th of July, the anniversary of the destruction of the Bastille, the officers
of the 2d regiment of Philadelphia militia assembled at Weed's ferry. Eighty-five rounds were
discharged from the artillery in honour of the eighty-five departments of France, and the following
toasts were given:

1st. The fourteenth day of July; may it be a sabbath in the calendar of freedom, and a jubilee
to the European world.

2d. The tenth of August; may the freemen who offered up their lives on the altar of liberty
be ever remembered as martyrs, and canonized as saints.

3d. May the Bastille of despotism throughout the earth be crumbled into dust, and the Phoenix
of freedom grow out of the ashes.

4th. Nerve to the arm, fortitude to the heart, and triumph to the soul struggling for the rights
of man.

5th. May no blind attachment to men lead France to the precipice of that tyranny from which
they have escaped.

6th. May the sister republics of France and America be as incorporate as light and heat, and
the man who endeavours to disunite them be viewed as the Arnold of his country.

7th. May honour and probity be the principles by which the connexions of free nations shall
be determined; and no Machiavellian commentaries explain the text of treaties.

8th. The treaty of alliance with France: may those who attempt to evade or violate the political
obligations and faith of our country be considered as traitors, and consigned to infamy.

9th. The citizen soldiers, before they act may they know and approve the cause, and may remorse
attend the man that would think of opposing the French while they war for the rights of man.

10th. The youth of the Paris legion; may the rising generation of America imitate their heroism
and love of country.

11th. The republics of France and America; may the cause of liberty ever be a bond of union
between the two nations.

12th. A dagger to the bosom of that man who makes patriotism a cover to his ambition, and feels
his country's happiness absorbed in his own.

13th. May French, superior to Roman or Grecian virtue, be the electric fluid of freedom, that
shall animate and quicken the earth.

14th. Union and mutual confidence to the patriots of France; confusion and distress to the
counsels of their enemies.

15th. May the succeeding generation wonder that such beings as kings were ever permitted to exist.

Volunteer from the chair.

The rule of proportion; as France acted with respect to America, so may America act with respect
to France!

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. IV. See Page 47.

Of the sensibility of the president to the calumnies against his administration with which
the press abounded, and of their new direction against him personally, his correspondence furnishes
but few evidences.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. V. See Page 48.

They are as follows:

1st. The original arming and equipping of vessels in the ports of the United States by any
of the belligerent parties, for military service, offensive or defensive, is deemed unlawful.

2d. Equipments of merchant vessels, by either of the belligerent parties in the ports of the
United States, purely for the accommodation of them as such, is deemed lawful.

3d. Equipments in the ports of the United States of vessels of war in the immediate service
of the government of any of the belligerent parties, which if done to other vessels would be
of a doubtful nature as being applicable either to commerce or war, are deemed lawful, except
those which shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of France, coming with
their prizes into the ports of the United States pursuant to the seventeenth article of our
treaty of amity and commerce with France.

4th. Equipments of any of the vessels of France, in the ports of the United States, which are
doubtful in their nature as being applicable to commerce or war, are deemed lawful.

6th. Equipments of every kind in the ports of the United States, of privateers of the powers
at war with France, are deemed unlawful.

7th. Equipments of vessels in the ports of the United States, which are of a nature solely
adapted to war, are deemed unlawful; except those stranded or wrecked, as mentioned in the
eighteenth article of our treaty with France, the sixteenth of our treaty with the United Netherlands,
the ninth of our treaty with Prussia, and except those mentioned in the nineteenth article
of our treaty with France, the seventeenth of our treaty with the United Netherlands, the eighteenth
of our treaty with Prussia.

8th. Vessels of either of the parties, not armed, or armed previous to their coming into the
ports of the United States, which shall not have infringed any of the foregoing rules, may
lawfully engage or enlist therein their own subjects or citizens, not being inhabitants of
the United States, except privateers of the powers at war with France, and except those vessels
which shall have made prize, &c.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. VI. See Page 64.

The earnestness as well as force with which the argument against this measure was pressed on
the British cabinet, and the extreme irritation it produced on the public mind, contrasted
with the silence of the executive respecting a much more exceptionable decree of the national
convention, and the composure of the people of the United States under that decree, exhibits
a striking proof of the difference with which not only the people, but an administration, which
the phrensy of the day accused of partiality to England, contemplated at that time the measures
of the two nations.

On the 9th of May, 1793, the national convention passed a decree relative to the commerce of
neutrals; the first article of which is in these words: "The French ships of war and privateers
may stop and bring into the ports of the republic, such neutral vessels as are loaded, in whole
or in part either with provisions belonging to neutrals and destined for enemy ports, or with
merchandise belonging to enemies."

On the 23d of May, in consequence of the remonstrances of Mr. Morris, the convention declared,
"that the vessels of the United States are not comprised in the regulations of the decree of
the 9th of May." On the 28th of the same month the decree of the 23d was repealed, and on the
first of July it was re-established. But on the 27th of July it was again repealed, and thus
the decree of the 9th of May was left in full operation against the vessels of the United States.

So far was this regulation from affecting the sentiments of America for France, that its existence
was scarcely known.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. VII. See Page 90.

Before these resolutions were offered, the strength of parties was in some measure tried in
a fuller house than that which had elected the speaker.

A rule had been entered into by a former congress providing, that on the discussion of confidential
communications from the president, the house should be cleared of all persons except the members
and clerk. On taking up a confidential message relative to the truce between Portugal and Algiers,
the doors as usual were closed. The next day when the subject was resumed, Mr. Nicholas expressed
his opinion that there was no necessity for shutting the galleries; upon which the rule was
mentioned with a request that it should be read. Mr. Madison moved a reconsideration of this
rule. In the course of the debate on the motion, it was said by its advocates that secrecy
in a republican government wounds the majesty of the sovereign people--that this government
is in the hands of the people--and that they have a right to know all the transactions relative
to their own affairs. This right ought not to be infringed incautiously, for such secrecy tends
to diminish the confidence of the people in their own government.

In reply to these remarks it was said, that because this government is republican, it will
not be pretended that it can have no secrets. The President of the United States is the depositary
of secret transactions. His duty may lead him to communicate them to the members of the house,
and the success, safety, and energy of the government may depend on keeping those secrets inviolable.
The people have a right to be well governed. They have interests as well as rights, and it
is the duty of the legislature to take every possible measure to promote those interests. To
discuss the secret transactions of the government publicly, was the ready way to sacrifice
the public interest, and to deprive the government of all foreign information. Afterwards the
rule was amended so far as to leave it in the discretion of the house, after receiving a confidential
message, to debate upon it in private or in public.

Among the resolutions reported from the committee of the whole house on this occasion, was
one for appointing a committee to report the naval force which would be necessary for the protection
of the commerce of the United States against the Algerine corsairs, together with an estimate
of the expense. It was moved to amend this resolution by adding, "and the ways and means for
defraying the same." This motion revived the old party question of calling on the secretary
of the treasury to report ways and means. The amendment was carried, Ayes 46. Noes 44.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. VIII. See Page 147.

The private correspondence of Mr. Morris with the president exhibits a faithful picture, drawn
by the hand of a master, of the shifting revolutionary scenes which with unparalleled rapidity
succeeded each other in Paris. With the eye of an intelligent, and of an unimpassioned observer,
he marked all passing events, and communicated them with fidelity. He did not mistake despotism
for freedom, because it was sanguinary, because it was exercised by those who denominated themselves
the people, or because it assumed the name of liberty. Sincerely wishing happiness and a really
free government to France, he could not be blind to the obvious truth that the road to those
blessings had been mistaken. It was expected by his enemies that the correspondence which was
asked for would disclose something which might be deemed offensive to the rulers of the republic,
and consequently furnish additional matter for charging the administration with unfriendliness
to France.

The resolution requesting all the correspondence, not even excluding that which the president
might think proper to withhold, involved considerations of some delicacy, respecting which
it was proper that the rights of the executive should be precisely understood. It was, therefore,
laid before the cabinet, and, in conformity with their advice, the President sent a message
to the senate informing them that he had examined the correspondence they requested, and had
caused it to be copied, except in those particulars which in his judgment, for public considerations,
ought not to be communicated; which copies he transmitted to them. The nature of these papers,
he added, manifested the propriety of their being received as confidential.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. IX. See Page 164.

This opinion derived fresh confirmation from a notification transmitted in August, 1794, by
the governor of Upper Canada to Captain Williamson, who was establishing a settlement on the
Great Sodus, a bay of lake Ontario, about twenty miles from Oswego, and within the state of
New York. Captain Williamson not being at the place, Lieutenant Sheaff, the bearer of the message,
addressed a letter to him, in which he said, that he had come with instructions from the lieutenant
governor of Upper Canada to demand by what authority an establishment had been ordered at that
place, and to require that such a design be immediately relinquished for the reasons stated
in the written declaration accompanying the letter.

The written declaration was in these words:

"I am commanded to declare that, during the inexecution of the treaty of peace between Great
Britain and the United States, and until the existing differences respecting it shall be mutually
and finally adjusted, the taking possession of any part of the Indian territory, either for
the purposes of war or sovereignty, is held to be a direct violation of his Britannic majesty's
rights, as they unquestionably existed before the treaty, and has an immediate tendency to
interrupt, and in its progress to destroy that good understanding which has hitherto subsisted
between his Britannic majesty and the United States of America. I, therefore, require you to
desist from any such aggression."

In the same spirit, complaints had been made as early as 1792, of encroachments made by the
people of Vermont on a country confessedly within the territorial line of the United States,
but inhabited by persons said to live under the protection of the British garrisons.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. X. See Page 205.

     On receiving the resignation of the secretary, the
     President addressed a letter to him expressive of the sense
     he entertained of his services. This letter is not found in
     the letter book, but its purport may be collected from the
     following answer.

Philadelphia, February 3d, 1795.

"Whatever may be my destination hereafter, I entreat you to be persuaded (not the less for
my having been sparing in professions) that I shall never cease to render a just tribute to
those eminent and excelling qualities which have been already productive of so many blessings
to your country--that you will always have my fervent wishes for your public and personal felicity,
and that it will be my pride to cultivate a continuance of that esteem, regard and friendship,
of which you do me the honour to assure me."

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XI. See Page 216.

1st.

2d.

3d. The republic of France; may her navy clear the ocean of pirates, that the common highway
of nations may no longer, like the highways of Great Britain, be a receptacle for robbers.

4th.

5th. The republic of France; may her example in the abolition of titles and splendour be a
lesson to all republics to destroy those leavens of corruption.

6th.

7th.

8th.

9th. The republic of Holland; may that fortitude which sustained her in the dire conflict with
Philip II. and the success that crowned her struggles, be multiplied upon her, in the hour
of her regeneration.

10th.

11th.

12th.

13th.

14th. The republic of America; may the alliance formed between her and France acquire vigour
with age, and that man be branded as the enemy of liberty who shall endeavour to weaken or
unhinge it.

15th.

It was not in Philadelphia alone that this temper was manifested. In every part of the United
States, the love of France appeared to be a passion much more active with immense numbers,
than that of America. Her victories were celebrated with enthusiasm, her heroes were toasted
on public occasions, and moderation with regard to England was deemed a crime not readily to
be pardoned.

General Washington received an invitation to attend this feast in the following terms.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XII. See Page 231.

A letter addressed to his government in October, 1794, by the minister of the French republic
was intercepted by the captain of a British frigate and forwarded to Mr. Hammond, by whom it
was delivered about the last of July to the secretary of the treasury, who, on the arrival
of the President in Philadelphia, placed it in his hands. This letter alluded to communications
from Mr. Randolph which, in the opinion of the President, were excessively improper. The ecclaircissements
which the occasion required were followed by the resignation of the secretary. For the purpose,
he alleged, of vindicating his conduct, he demanded a sight of a confidential letter which
had been addressed to him by the President, and which was left in the office. His avowed design
was to give this as well as some others of the same description to the public in order to support
the allegation, that in consequence of his attachment to France and to liberty, he had fallen
a victim to the intrigues of a British and an aristocratic party. The answer given to this
demand was a license which few politicians in turbulent times could allow to a man who had
possessed the unlimited confidence of the person giving it.

As the asperity with which Mr. Randolph spoke of the President on other occasions as well as
in his vindication, was censured by many, it may rescue the reputation of that gentleman from
imputations which might be injurious to it to say that, some time before his death, he had
the magnanimity to acknowledge the injustice of those imputations. A letter to the honourable
Bushrod Washington, of July 2d, 1810, a copy of which was transmitted by Mr. Randolph to the
author, contains the following declarations among others of similar import. My life will I
hope be sufficiently extended for the recording of my sincere opinion of his virtues and merit,
in a style which is not the result of a mind merely debilitated by misfortune, but of that
Christian philosophy on which alone I depend for inward tranquillity."

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XIII. See Page 231.

This place was offered to Mr. Henry, a gentleman of eminent talents, great influence, and commanding
eloquence. He had led the opposition to the constitution in Virginia, but, after its adoption,
his hostility had in some measure subsided. He was truly a personal friend of the President,
and had lately manifested a temper not inimical to the administration. The chief magistrate
was anxious to engage him in the public service, but was aware of the embarrassments which
must result from placing in so confidential a station, a person whose opinions might lead him
to thwart every measure of the executive. It was, therefore, necessary to come to some explanations
with Mr. Henry on this subject, and the letter which invited him into the department of state
opened the way for this explanation by stating truly the views and character of the administration.

"I am satisfied these sentiments can not be otherwise than congenial to your own. Your aid,
therefore, in carrying them into effect would be flattering and pleasing to me."

This accurate chart of the road he was invited to travel, presented in itself no impediments
which to Mr. Henry appeared insurmountable. By private considerations alone was he restrained
from proceeding in it.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XIV. See Page 272.

The course of the war in Europe had brought the two parties into opposition on a point on which
no difference had originally existed between them, which gave more countenance to the charge
that the advocates of the American government were unfriendly to France than it could justly
claim when first made. Those who in 1793 had supported the proclamation of neutrality, and
the whole system connected with it, were then, generally speaking, ardent and sincere in their
wishes for the success of the French arms. But as the troops of the republic subdued Belgium
and Holland; as they conquered Italy, and established the complete influence of France over
the monarchy of Spain, this union of sentiment gradually disappeared. By one party it was contended
that America could feel no interest in seeing Europe subjected to any one power. That to such
a power, the Atlantic would afford no impassable barriers; and that no form of government was
a security against national ambition. They, therefore, wished this series of victories to be
interrupted; and that the balance of Europe should not be absolutely overturned. Additional
strength was undoubtedly given to this course of reasoning by the aggressions of France on
the United States.

In the opinion of the opposite party, the triumphs of France were the triumphs of liberty.
In their view every nation which was subdued, was a nation liberated from oppression. The fears
of danger to the United States from the further aggrandizement of a single power were treated
as chimerical, because that power being a republic must, consequently, be the friend of republics
in every part of the globe, and a stranger to that lust of domination which was the characteristic
passion of monarchies. Shifting with address the sentiment really avowed by their opponents,
they ridiculed a solicitude for the existence of a balance of power in Europe, as an opinion
that America ought to embark herself in the crusade of kings against France in order to preserve
that balance.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XV. See Page 326.

The following extract from a letter written to General Knox the day before the termination
of his office, exhibits the sentiments with which he contemplated this event, and with which
he viewed the unceasing calumnies with which his whole administration continued to be aspersed.

"Although the prospect of retirement is most grateful to my soul, and I have not a wish to
mix again in the great world, or to partake in its politics, yet I am not without my regrets
at parting with (perhaps never more to meet) the few intimates whom I love. Among these, be
assured you are one."

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XVI. See Page 329.

In the speech delivered by the President on taking the oaths of office, after some judicious
observations on the constitution of his country, and on the dangers to which it was exposed,
that able statesman thus spoke of his predecessor.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XVII. See Page 330.

To testify their love for the person who had for eight years administered the government of
the United States, the merchants of Philadelphia had prepared a splendid banquet for the day,
to which the general, several officers of rank in the late army, the heads of departments,
foreign ministers, and other persons of distinction were invited.

In the rotundo in which it was given, an elegant compliment was prepared for the principal
guest, which is thus described in the papers of the day.

"Upon entering the area the general was conducted to his seat.

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE--No. XVIII. See Page 348.

     (All footnotes on pages covered by Note No. XVIII are
     references to the correspondence of Thomas Jefferson.)

A letter from Mr. Jefferson to Mr. Mazzei, an Italian who had passed some time in the United
States, was published in Florence, and republished in the Moniteur, with some severe strictures
on the conduct of the United States, and a remark "that the French government had testified
its resentment by breaking off communication with an ungrateful and faithless ally until she
shall return to a more just and benevolent conduct. No doubt," adds the editor, "it will give
rise in the United States to discussions which may afford a triumph to the party of good republicans,
the friends of France.

"Some writers, in disapprobation of this wise and necessary measure of the Directory, maintain
that, in the United States, the French have for partisans only certain demagogues who aim to
overthrow the existing government. But their impudent falsehoods convince no one, and prove
only, what is too evident, that they use the liberty of the press to serve the enemies of France."

Mr. Jefferson, in his correspondence,[59] has animadverted on the preceding note with such
extreme bitterness, as to impose on its author the necessity of entering into some explanations.
Censure from a gentleman who has long maintained an unexampled ascendency over public opinion,
can not be entirely disregarded.

     [Footnote 59: Vol. iv. p. 402.]

The offence consists in the reference to the letter written by him to Mr. Mazzei, which was
published in Florence, and republished in Paris by the editor of the Moniteur, then the official
paper of the Directory. In this letter, Mr. Jefferson says, a paragraph was interpolated which
makes him charge his own country with ingratitude and injustice to France.

By the word "country," Mr. Jefferson is understood to allude to the government, not to the
people of America.

This letter, containing the sentence now alleged to be interpolated, was published throughout
the United States in the summer of 1797. It became immediately, as may well be supposed, the
subject of universal conversation. The writer, and the individual to whom it particularly alludes,
filled too large a space in the public mind for such a paper not to excite general attention
and deep interest. It did excite both.

Had it been fabricated, Mr. Jefferson, it was supposed, could not have permitted it to remain
uncontradicted. It came in a form too authentic, the matter it contained affected his own reputation
and that of the illustrious individual who is its principal subject, too vitally to permit
the imputation to remain unnoticed. It would not, it could not have remained unnoticed, if
untrue. Yet its genuineness was never questioned by Mr. Jefferson, or by any of his numerous
friends. Not even to General Washington, as is now avowed, was it ever denied. Had it been
denied to him, his strong sense of justice and of right would have compelled him to relieve
the reputation of the supposed writer from a charge of such serious import.

It was, of course, universally received as a genuine letter. An open avowal of it could not
have added to the general conviction.

The letter having this irresistible claim on the general confidence, no one part of it was
entitled to less credit than every other. The interpolation of a particular sentence was neither
suggested nor suspected. The whole was published in Europe and republished in America as the
letter of Mr. Jefferson, with his name subscribed. The genuineness of no part of it was ever
called into question. How then could the public or any individual have ventured to select a
particular sentence, and to say--this is spurious?

Had it been suggested by Mr. Jefferson or his confidential friends that the letter was in general
his, but that one sentence was fabricated, there is not perhaps an individual in the United
States who would have pointed to that which censured the conduct of our government towards
France, as the fabricated sentence. That which placed the then chief magistrate at the head
of the "Anglican, monarchical, and aristocratical party which had sprung up," would have been
much more probably selected. This conjecture is hazarded because, at the date of the letter,[60]
Mr. Jefferson shared the confidence of General Washington, and was on terms of intimate professed
friendship with him; while his censures of the conduct of the United States towards France
were open and unreserved. The sentence there said to be interpolated would, if really written
by him, have involved no imputation on his sincerity,--would have consisted perfectly with
his general declarations. These declarations were so notorious, especially after the mission
of Mr. Jay to Great Britain, and the reception of the treaty negotiated by him, that there
was perhaps not an individual in the United States, at all conversant with public affairs,
to whom they were unknown. Without reference to other proofs, sufficient evidence of this fact
is furnished by that portion of his correspondence which has been selected for publication.
Some examples will be quoted.

     [Footnote 60: April, 1796.]

In a letter of the 27th of April, 1795,[61] he says, "I sincerely congratulate you on the great
prosperities of our two first allies, the French and the Dutch.[62] If I could but see them
now at peace with the rest of their continent, I should have little doubt of dining with Pichegru
in London next autumn; for I believe I should be tempted to leave my clover for a while, to
go and hail the dawn of republicanism in that island."

     [Footnote 61: Vol. iii. p. 313.]

     [Footnote 62: Holland, it will be remembered, had been
     conquered by Pichegru.]

In a letter of September 21st, 1795,[63] after speaking of the discussions in the papers concerning
the treaty, and alluding to the efforts made to give it effect as the boldest act of Hamilton
and Jay to undermine the government, he says, "a bolder party stroke was never struck. For
it certainly is an attempt by a party who find they have lost their majority in one branch
of the legislature, to make a law by the aid of the other branch and of the executive, under
colour of a treaty, which shall bind up the hands of the adverse branch from ever restraining
the commerce of their patron nation."

     [Footnote 63: Vol. iii. p. 316.]

On the 30th of November, 1795,[64] he says, "I join with you in thinking the treaty an execrable
thing." "I trust the popular branch of the legislature will disapprove of it, and thus rid
us of this infamous act, which is really nothing more than an alliance between England and
the Anglo men of this country, against the legislature and people of the United States."

     [Footnote 64: Vol. iii. p. 317.]

On the 21st of December, 1795,[65] speaking of a contemporary member of the cabinet, he says,
"The fact is that he has generally given his principles to the one party and his practice to
the other, the oyster to one, and the shell to the other. Unfortunately, the shell was generally
the lot of his friends, the French and Republicans, and the oyster of their antagonists."

     [Footnote 65: Vol. iii. p. 319.]

On the 21st of March, 1796,[66] he says, "The British treaty has been formally at length laid
before congress. All America is a tiptoe to see what the house of representatives will decide
on it." Speaking of the right of the legislature to determine whether it shall go into effect
or not, and of the vast importance of the determination, he adds, "It is fortunate that the
first decision is to be made in a case so palpably atrocious as to have been predetermined
by all America."

     [Footnote 67: Vol. iii. p. 324.]

On the 12th of June, 1796,[68] he says, "Congress have risen.

     [Footnote 68: Vol. iii. p. 328.]

On the 22d of January, 1797,[69] he says, "I sincerely deplore the situation of our affairs
with France. War with them and consequent alliance with Great Britain will completely compass
the object of the executive council from the commencement of the war between France and England;
taken up by some of them from that moment; by others more latterly."

     [Footnote 69: Vol. iii. p. 347.]

On the 17th of June, 1797,[70] he says, "I have always hoped that the popularity of the late
President being once withdrawn from active effect, the natural feelings of the people towards
liberty would restore the equilibrium between the executive and legislative departments which
had been destroyed by the superior weight and effect of that popularity; and that their natural
feelings of moral obligation would discountenance the unnatural predilection of the executive
in favour of Great Britain. But, unfortunately, the preceding measures had already alienated
the nation who were the object of them, and the reaction has on the minds of our citizens an
effect which supplies that of the Washington popularity.

     [Footnote 70: Vol. iii. p. 347]

"P.S. Since writing the above we have received a report that the French Directory has proposed
a declaration of war against the United States to the Council of Ancients, who have rejected
it. Thus we see two nations who love one another affectionately, brought by the ill temper
of their executive administrations to the very brink of a necessity to imbrue their hands in
the blood of each other."

On the 14th of February, 1799,[71] he says, "The President has appointed, and the senate approved,
Rufus King, to enter into a treaty of commerce with the Russians, at London, and William Smith
(Phocion) envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to go to Constantinople to make
one with the Turks. So that as soon as there is a coalition of Turks, Russians, and English
against France, we seize that moment to countenance it as openly as we dare, by treaties which
we never had with them before. All this helps to fill up the measure of provocation towards
France, and to get from them a declaration of war which we are afraid to be the first in making."

     [Footnote 71: Vol. iii. p. 418.]

If these sentiments, in perfect coincidence with the pretensions of France, and censuring the
neutral course of the American government, were openly avowed by Mr. Jefferson; if, when they
appeared embodied in a letter addressed to a correspondent in Europe, and republished throughout
the United States, they remained, even after becoming the topic of universal interest and universal
excitement, totally uncontradicted, who could suspect that any one sentence, particularly that
avowing a sentiment so often expressed by the writer, had been interpolated?

Yet Mr. Jefferson, unmindful of these circumstances, after some acrimonious remarks on Colonel
Pickering, has said,[72] "and even Judge Marshall makes history descend from its dignity, and
the ermine from its sanctity, to exaggerate, to record, and to sanction this forgery."

     [Footnote 72: Vol. iv. p. 402.]

The note itself will best demonstrate the inaccuracy of this commentary. To this text an appeal
is fearlessly made.

This unmerited invective is followed by an accusation not less extraordinary. It is made a
cause of crimination that the author has copied the remark of the Parisian editor, instead
of the letter itself.

To remove this reproach, he will now insert the letter, not as published in Europe, and transferred
from the French to the American papers, but as preserved and avowed by Mr. Jefferson, and given
to the world by his grandson. It is in these words.

"I will forward the testimonials, &c."

     [Footnote 73: Vol. iii. p. 327.]

The reader is requested to pause, to reflect on the state of things at the date of this letter,
and to ask himself if its inevitable tendency be not to strengthen the impression in the Directory
of France which had influenced its conduct towards the United States?--If it be not in the
same spirit with the interpolated sentence, carried to a greater extreme, and calculated to
produce the same effect?--If the editor who made the interpolation might not reasonably suppose
that he was only applying expressly to France a sentiment already indicated in terms too plain
to be misunderstood?

France and Great Britain were then waging deadly war against each other. In this mortal conflict,
each sought to strengthen herself, or weaken her adversary by any influence to be acquired
over foreign powers--by obtaining allies when allies were attainable, or securing neutrality
where co-operation was not to be expected. The temper with which the American people contemplated
this awful spectacle can not be forgotten. The war of our revolution, in which France fought
by the side of America against Great Britain, was fresh in their recollection. Her unexamined
professions of republicanism enlisted all their affections in her favour, and all their antipathies
against the monarchs with whom she was contending. Feelings which were believed to be virtuous,
and which certainly wore the imposing garb of patriotism, impelled them with almost irresistible
force against that wise neutrality which the executive government had laboured to preserve,
and had persisted in preserving with wonderful and unexampled firmness. France might, not unreasonably,
indulge the hope that our government would be forced out of its neutral course, and be compelled
to enter into the war as her ally. The letter to Mazzei could scarcely fail to encourage this hope.

The suggestion had been repeatedly made, and France not only countenanced but acted on it,
that the American people were ready to take part with her, and were with difficulty restrained
by their government. That the government had fallen into the hands of an English party who
were the more closely attached to their favourite nation, because they were unfriendly to republicanism,
and sought to assimilate the government of the United States to that of England. Partiality
to England was ingratitude to France. Monarchical propensities were of course anti-republican,
and led to a system of policy separating the United States from republican France, and connecting
them with her monarchical enemies.

These sentiments were expressed in the interpolated sentence; and are intimated in terms perhaps
more offensive, certainly not to be mistaken, in the letter as avowed.

Review its language.

Could this party have been friendly--must it not have been hostile to France? It was not only
monarchical and aristocratical,--it was Anglican also. Consequently it was anti-Gallican. But
it did not comprehend the mass of the people. Who then composed this odious Anglican, monarchical,
aristocratical party?

The executive then and at least one other branch of the legislature were Anglican. The judiciary,
a department not absolutely insignificant in a maritime war, was also Anglican. But the executive,
being the organ of intercourse with foreign nations, is considered by them as essentially the
government. This being thought Anglican, its course being such as to induce the writer to brand
it with this odious epithet, ought it to excite surprise that an editor, the organ of the French
government, made the strictures upon it which are quoted in the note? Are not those strictures
as applicable to the letter now avowed as to the interpolated sentence?

     [Footnote 74: It was announced by Mr. Adet in the crisis of
     the first contest for the Presidency between Mr. Adams and
     Mr. Jefferson.]

The letter, without the aid of the interpolated sentence, could not fail to cherish this sentiment.
It states explicitly an unequivocal division and a decided hostility between those who administered
the government, and the great body of land holders, who, in this country, are the people. The
first were Anglican and monarchical, the last were republican, and, in the language of the
Moniteur, "the friends of France." What so certain to produce or continue the rupture of communication
mentioned by the editor as the opinion that this statement was true? If we could doubt, our
doubts are removed by the declaration that it would produce "discussions in the United States
which may afford a triumph to the party of good republicans, the friends of France;" and by
the declaration of Mr. Adet.

The interpolated sentence then does not vary the import of the letter, nor change the impression
it made in France, and must make on the mind of the reader.

Were it otherwise, Mr. Jefferson should have directed his reproaches towards himself for the
countenance his silent acquiescence gave to the opinion that the whole letter was genuine--not
towards the great body of his countrymen who yielded implicit faith to this imposing testimony.

Could such a letter from such a personage be entirely overlooked by the biographer of Washington?
Having assumed the task of delineating the character, and detailing the actions and opinions
of the great soldier and statesman of America, an essential part of which was to be looked
for in the difficulties and the opposition he encountered and overcame, could a transaction
which contains such strong intrinsic evidence of those difficulties and that opposition be
passed over in total silence? These questions were revolved in his mind while engaged in this
part of the work; and the result to which his judgment conducted him was a conviction that,
though he might forbear to make those strictures on the letter which the relative situation
of the writer and the individual so seriously criminated seemed to invite, his duty required
him to notice it so far as it indicated the violence of party spirit at the time, the extreme
to which it was carried, the dangers to which it led, and the difficulties which the wise and
firm mind of Washington was doomed to encounter.

The remarks of the French editor were quoted because they have a strong tendency, especially
when connected with subsequent events, to explain the motives by which the Directory was actuated
in its aggressions on the United States, and to justify the policy of the Washington administration.
These remarks did not grow out of the interpolated sentence, nor were they confined to it.
They apply to the whole letter. That sentence is not cited, nor is any particular allusion
made to it, in the note which is charged with "exaggerating, recording, and sanctioning the
forgery." How then could Mr. Jefferson deliberately make the charge?

In the same letter he endeavours to convey the opinion that the harsh and injurious strictures
made to Mazzei were not intended for General Washington, and that this distinguished individual
never applied them to himself.

The evidence in support of this proposition is not derived from the person whose opinion Mr.
Jefferson undertakes to state. The writer says,[75] "I do affirm that there never passed a
word, written or verbal, directly or indirectly, between General Washington and myself on the
subject of that letter." If his observations on this point are to be considered as reasoning
rather than assertion, they may be freely examined.

     [Footnote 75: Vol. iv. p. 401.]

At the head of the list of those composing the "Anglican, monarchical, aristocratical party,"
the letter places "the executive." "Against us are the executive, the judiciary, two out of
three branches of the legislature, all the officers of government, all who want to be officers,"
&c.

The letter speaks in the present tense, and the term "executive" can describe only the then
actual President. Consequently, it designates General Washington as expressly as if he had
been named.

If this positive evidence could be strengthened by auxiliary proof, it is furnished by the
same sentence. "All officers of government, all who want to be officers," are included in the
enumeration of those composing the party opposed to "the main body of citizens who remained
true to republican principles."

By whom were these Anglican, monarchical, and aristocratical officers selected? By General
Washington. To him alone were they indebted for their appointments. To whom did those "who
wanted to be officers" look for the gratification of their wishes? To the same person. Would
every individual in search of office enlist himself in a party so odious to "the main body
of our citizens," and "the whole landed interest," if he did not think the road leading directly
to that which he sought?

As if willing to keep out of view what can not be explained away, Mr. Jefferson turns our attention
to other passages supposed to be more equivocal. He insists[76] that the letter saying "that
two out of the three branches of the legislature were against us, was an obvious exception
of him; it being well known that the majorities in the two branches of the senate and representatives
were the very instruments which carried, in opposition to the old and real republicans, the
measures which were the subjects of condemnation in this letter."

     [Footnote 76: Vol. iv. p. 405.]

But did these measures obtain the force of laws by the mere act of the senate and house of
representatives? Did not the President assent to them? If he did, how could the expression
"two out of three branches of the legislature" be an obvious exception of him? But the letter
speaks of the then existing legislature. "Against us are two out of three branches of the legislature."
The fact is notorious that the house of representatives was, at the date of the letter, opposed
to the administration. Mr. Jefferson himself gives us this information. He could not have intended
to exclude the President by the phrase "two out of three branches of the legislature." "Now
this expression also was perfectly understood by General Washington. He knew that I meant it
for the Cincinnati generally; and that from what had passed between us at the commencement
of that institution, I could not mean to include him."

     [Footnote 78: Vol. iv. p. 404.]

In the letter to Mazzei these words obviously designate distinguished individuals, not whole
classes of men, many of whom were unknown.

In addition to this apparent allusion to individuals, it may be asked, could Mr. Jefferson
mean to say that every officer engaged in the war of our revolution (for almost every one of
them was a member of the Cincinnati) was an apostate who had gone over to the heresies he was
describing? Could he mean to say that all those who had passed their prime of manhood in the
field fighting the battles of American independence, and of republicanism against England,
had become apostates from the cause to which their lives had been devoted, and the vile instruments
of the power it was their pride and boast to have overthrown? That they were in a body following
their ancient chief in a course directly opposite to that glorious career by which they had
elevated their country to its high rank among the nations of the earth?

There is other evidence that he could not have intended to fix this foul stigma on the officers
of the revolution. They were far from being united in support of the administration. In Virginia
certainly, a large number, perhaps a majority of the Cincinnati were opposed to it. Two[79]
of them in congress at the time, and were among the most zealous supporters of Mr. Jefferson,
and of that system of measures which he termed republican. The very letter under discussion
contains an assertion incompatible with this construction of these terms. "The whole landed
interest is republican." At the date of this letter there were few if any members of the Cincinnati
in the south who were not also land holders. In the southern region generally, the army of
our revolution was officered by land holders and their sons.

     [Footnote 79: Colonels Cabell and Par.]

But if the writer of the letter could have intended to designate the members of the Cincinnati
as "Samsons in the field," could he also have alluded to them as "Solomons in council?" Were
the brave and hardy men who passed their youth, not in college, not in study, but under arms,
suddenly converted, all of them, into "Solomons in council?" That some of them were entitled
to this appellation is acknowledged with pride and pleasure, but as a class, it could not fit
them. It is difficult to treat the proposition seriously.

It is impossible for the intelligent reader to concur with Mr. Jefferson in the conclusion
he draws from these premises, when he says,[80] "General Washington then understanding perfectly
what and whom I meant to designate in both phrases, and that they could not have any application
or view to himself, could find in neither any cause of offence to himself."

     [Footnote 80: Vol. iv. p. 406.]

But were it otherwise, had Mr. Jefferson been as successful in the opinion of others as he
would seem to be in his own, in proving that the phrases on which he reasons do not comprehend
General Washington, what would be gained? Would it follow that the word "executive" did not
mean the President, or that it excluded General Washington who was President when the letter
was written, and had been President during the whole time while the laws were enacted, and
the measures carried into execution, which he so harshly criminates? If the word "executive"
must mean him, does it palliate the injury to be assured that the writer did not class him
among "Samsons in the field" or "Solomons in council?"

It is matter of some surprise to find a letter written so late as June, 1824, on the political
paragraph contained in the letter to Mazzei, the following averment.[81] "In this information
there was not one word which would not then have been or would not now be approved by every
republican in the United States, looking back to those times."

This unpleasant subject is dismissed. If the grave be a sanctuary entitled to respect, many
of the intelligent and estimable friends of Mr. Jefferson may perhaps regret that he neither
respected it himself, nor recollected that it is a sanctuary from which poisoned arrows ought
never to be shot at the dead or the living.

END OF VOLUME V.

