Deborah's face fell. "But, child, the minister's away with the Doctor. An' what good could
he be doin' if he was here, I'd like to know? He's that poor himself."

"Oh, I don't know what he'd do, but I know he'd do something. He's that kind of a man," declared
the nurse, with such conviction that, against their judgment, Deborah and Denny took heart.

"And he's not so far away but that he can be reached," added Hope.

That afternoon the dilapidated old hack from Corinth to Gordon's Mills carried a passenger.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

A FISHERMAN

"'Humph!' grunted the other, 'I've noticed that there's a lot of unnecessary things that have
to be done.'"

In the crisis of Deborah's trouble, Hope had turned to Dan impulsively, as the one woman turns
to the one man. When she was powerless in her own strength to meet the need she looked confidently
to him.

But now that she was actually on the way to him, with Corinth behind and the long road over
the hills and through the forests before, she had time to think, while the conscious object
of her journey forced itself on her thinking.

The thing that the young woman had so dimly foreseen, for herself, of her friendship with this
man, she saw now more clearly, as she realized how much she had grown to depend upon him--upon
the strength of his companionship. How she had learned to watch for his coming, and to look
often toward the corner window of the house on the other side of the garden! But, after all--she
asked herself--was her regard for him more than a natural admiration for his strong character,
as she had seen it revealed in the past months? Their peculiar situation had placed him more
in her thoughts than any man had ever been before. Was not this all? The possibility had not
yet become a certainty. The revelation of Hope Farwell to herself was yet to come.

The hack, with its one passenger, arrived at Gordon's Mills about four o'clock, and Miss Farwell,
climbing down from the ancient vehicle in front of the typical country hotel, inquired for
Dr. Oldham.

The slouchy, slow-witted proprietor of the place passed her inquiry on to a group of natives
who lounged on the porch, and one, whose horse was hitched in front of the blacksmith shop
across the way, gave the information that he had seen the Doctor and the big parson at the
mouth of the creek as he came past an hour before. He added that he "reckoned they wouldn't
be in 'til dark, fer they was a-ketchin' a right smart of bass."

"Is it far from here?" asked the nurse.

"Somethin' less than a mile, ain't hit, Bill?"

Bill "'lowed hit war about that. Mile an' a quarter to Bud Jones', Bud called hit."

"And the road?"

"Foller the creek--can't miss it." This from the chorus. And Miss Farwell set out, watched
by every eye on the place until she disappeared around the first bend.

As she drew near the river, the banks of which are marked by a high bluff on the other side,
the young woman felt a growing sense of embarrassment. What would Mr. Matthews think of her
coming to him in such a way? And Dr. Oldham--. Already she could feel the keen eyes of the
old physician, with their knowing twinkle, fixed upon her face. The Doctor always made you
feel that he knew so much more about you than you knew about yourself.

Coming to the river at the mouth of the creek, she saw them, and half hidden by the upturned
roots of a fallen tree, she stood still. They were on the downstream side of the creek; Dan,
with rubber boots that came to his hips, standing far out on the sandy bar, braced against
the current, that tugged and pulled at his great legs; the Doctor farther down, on the bank.

Miss Farwell watched Dan with the curious interest a woman always feels when watching a man
who, while engaged in a man's work or play, is unconscious of her presence.

She saw the fisherman as he threw the line far out, with a strong, high swing of his long arm.
And as she looked, a lusty bass--heavy, full of fight--took the hook, and she saw the man stand
motionless, intent, alert, at the instant he first felt the fish. Then she caught the skillful
turn of his wrist as he struck--quick and sure; watched, with breathless interest as--bracing
himself--the fisherman's powerful figure became instinct with life. With the boiling water
grasping his legs, clinging to him like a tireless wrestler seeking the first unguarded moment;
and with the plunging, tugging, rushing giant at the other end of the silken line--fighting
with every inch of his spring--steel body for freedom, Dan made a picture to bring the light
of admiration to any woman's eyes. And Hope Farwell was very much a woman.

Slowly, but surely, the strength and skill of the fisherman prevailed. The master of the waters
came nearer the hand of his conqueror. The young woman held her breath while the fish made
its last, mad attempt, and then--when Dan held up his prize for the Doctor, who--on the bank--had
been in the fight with his whole soul, she forgot her embarrassment, and--springing into full
view upon the trunk of the fallen tree--shouted and waved her congratulations.

Dan almost dropped the fish.

The Doctor, whose old eyes were not so quick to recognize the woman on the log, was amazed
to see his companion go splashing, stumbling, ploughing through the water toward the shore.

"Hope--Miss Farwell!" gasped Dan, floundering up the bank, the big fish still in his hand,
the shining water streaming from his high boots, his face glowing with healthful exercise--a
something else, perhaps. "What good fortune brings you here?"

At his impetuous manner, and the eagerness that shone in his eyes, and sounded in his voice,
the woman's face had grown rosy red, but by the time the fisherman had gained a place by her
side the memory of her mission had driven every other thought from her mind. Briefly she told
him of Deborah's trouble, and a few moments later the Doctor--crossing the creek higher up--joined
them. As they talked Hope saw all the light and joy go from Dan's face, and in its place came
a look of sadness and determination that made her wonder.

"Doctor," he said, "I am going back to Corinth with Miss Farwell tonight. We'll get a team
and buggy at the Mills."

The old man swore heartily. Why had not the foolish Irishwoman let them know her situation
before? Still swearing he drew from his pocket a book and hastily signed a check. "Here, Dan,"
he said, "use this if you have to. You understand--don't hesitate if you need it."

Reluctantly the younger man took the slip of paper. "I don't think it will be needed," he responded.
"It ought not to be necessary for you to do this, Doctor."

"Humph!" grunted the other, "I've noticed that there's a lot of unnecessary things that have
to be done. Hustle along, you two. I'm going back after the mate to that last one of yours."

On the way back to the hotel Dan told the nurse that the check would mean much to the Doctor
if it were used at this particular time. "But," he added thoughtfully, again, "I don't think
it will be used."

They stopped long enough at the hotel for a hurried lunch, then--with a half-broken team and
a stout buggy--started, in the gathering dusk for Corinth.

As the light went out of the sky and the mysterious stillness of the night came upon them,
they, too, grew quiet, as if no words were needed. They seemed to be passing into another world--a
strange dream-world where they were alone. The things of everyday, the common-place incidents
and happenings of their lives, seemed to drift far away. They talked but little. There was
so little to say. Once Dan leaned over to tuck the lap robe carefully about his companion,
for the early spring air was chill when the sun went down.

So they rode until they saw the lights of the town; then it all came back to them with a rush.
The woman drew a long breath.

"Tired?" asked Dan, and there was that in his voice that brought the tears to the gray eyes--tears
that he could not see, because of the dark.

"Not a bit," she answered cheerfully, in spite of the hidden tears. "Will you see Judge Strong
tonight?" She had not asked him what he was going to do.

"Yes," he said, and when they reached the big brown house he drew the horses to a walk. "I
think, if you are not too tired, I had better stop now. I will not be long."

There was now something in his voice that made her heart jump with sudden fear, such as she
had felt at times when Dr. Miles, at the hospital, had told her to prepare to assist him in
an operation. But in her voice no fear showed itself.

He hitched the team, and--leaving her waiting in the buggy--went up to the house. She heard
him knock. The door opened, sending out a flood of light. He entered. The door closed.

She waited in the dark.

CHAPTER XXIX.

A MATTER OF BUSINESS

"'You say, sir, that some things are inevitable. You are right.'"

At the church prayer meeting, that evening, Judge Strong prayed with a fervor unusual even
for him, and in church circles the Elder was rated mighty in prayer. In fact the Judge's religious
capital was mostly invested in good, safe, public petitions to the Almighty--such investments
being rightly considered by the Judge as "gilt-edged," for--whatever the returns--it was all
profit.

Theoretically the Judge's God noted "even the sparrow's fall," and in all of his public religious
exercises, the Judge stated that fact with clearness and force. Making practical application
of his favorite text the Judge never killed sparrows. His everyday energies were spent in collecting
mortgages, acquiring real estate, and in like harmless pursuits, that were--so far as he had
observed--not mentioned in the Word, and presumably, therefore, were passed over by the God
of the sparrow.

So the Judge prayed that night, with pious intonations asking his God for everything he could
think of for himself, his church, his town and the whole world. And when he could think of
no more blessings, he unblushingly asked God to think of them for him, and to give them all
abundantly--more than they could ask or desire. Reminding God of his care for the sparrow,
he pleaded with him to watch over their beloved pastor, "who is absent from his flock in search
of--ah, enjoying--ah, the beauties of Nature--ah, and bring him speedily back to his needy
people, that they may all grow strong in the Lord."

Supplementing his prayer with a few solemn reflections, as was expected from an Elder of the
church, the Judge commented on the smallness of the company present; lamented the decline of
spirituality in the churches; declared the need for the old Jerusalem gospel, and the preaching
of the truth as it is in Christ Jesus; scored roundly those who were absent, seeking their
own pleasure, neglecting their duties while the world was perishing; and finished with a plea
to the faithful to assist their worthy pastor--who, unfortunately, was not present with them
that evening--in every way possible. Then the Judge went home to occupy the rest of the evening
with some matters of business.

In the Strong mansion the room known as the library is on the ground floor in a wing of the
main building. As rooms have a way of doing, it expresses unmistakably the character of its
tenant. There is a book-case, with a few spick-and-span books standing in prim, cold rows behind
the glass doors--which are always locked. The key is somewhere, no doubt. There are no pictures
on the walls, save a fancy calendar--presented with the compliments of the Judge's banker,
a crayon portrait of the Judge's father--in a cheap gilt frame, and another calendar, compliments
of the Judge's grocer.

The furniture and appointments are in harmony; a table, with a teachers' Bible and a Sunday
school quarterly, a big safe wherein the Judge kept his various mortgages and papers of value,
and the Judge's desk, being most conspicuous. It is a significant comment on the Elder's business
methods that, in the top right-hand drawer of his desk, he keeps a weapon ready for instant
use, and that the window shades are always drawn when the lamps are lighted.

Sitting at his desk the Judge heard the front doorbell ring and his wife direct someone to
the library. A moment later he looked up from his papers to see Dan standing before him.

The Judge was startled. He had thought the young man far away. Then, too, the Judge had never
seen the minister dressed in rough trousers, belted at the waist; a flannel shirt under a torn
and mud-stained coat; and mud-spattered boots that came nearly to his hips. The slouch hat
in the visitor's hand completed the picture. Dan looked big in any garb. As the Judge saw him
that night he seemed a giant, and this giant had the look of one come in haste on business
of moment.

What was it that made the Judge reach out impulsively toward that top right-hand drawer.

Forcing his usual dry, mirthless laugh, he greeted Dan with forced effusiveness, urging him
to take a chair, declaring that he hardly knew him, that he thought he was at Gordon's Mills
fishing. Then he entered at once into a glowing description of the splendid prayer meeting
they had held that evening, in the minister's absence.

Ignoring the invitation to be seated, Dan walked slowly to the center of the room, and standing
by the table, looked intently at the man at the desk. The patter of the Judge's talk died away.
The presence of the man by the table seemed to fill the whole room. The very furniture became
suddenly cheap and small. The Judge himself seemed to shrink, and he had a sense of something
about to happen. Swiftly he reviewed in his mind several recent deals. What was it?

"Well," he said at last, when Dan did not speak, "won't you sit down?"

"Thank you, no," answered Dan. "I can stop only a minute. I called to see you about that mortgage
on Widow Mulhall's home."

"Ah! Well?"

"I want to ask you, sir, if it is not possible for you to reconsider the matter and grant her
a little more time."

The man at the desk answered curtly, "Possibly, sir, but it would not be business. Do you--ah,
consider this matter as coming under the head of your--ah, pastoral duties?"

Dan ignored the question, as he earnestly replied, "I will undertake to see that the mortgage
is paid, sir, if you will give me a little time."

To which the other answered coldly, "My experience with ministers' promises to pay has not
been reassuring, and, as an Elder in the church, I may say that we do not employ you to undertake
the payment of other people's debts. The people might not understand your interest in the Widow's
affairs."

Again Dan ignored the other's answer, though his face went white, and his big hands crushed
the slouch hat with a mighty grip. He urged what it would mean to Deborah and her crippled
son to lose their little home and the garden--almost their only means of support. But the face
of the Judge expressed no kindly feeling. He was acting in a manner that was fully legitimate.
He had considered it carefully. As for the hardship, some things in connection with business
were inevitable.

As the Elder answered Dan's arguments and pleadings, the minister's face grew very sad, and
his low, slow voice trembled at times. When the uselessness of his efforts were too evident
for him to continue the conversation he turned sadly toward the door.

Something caused the Judge to say, "Don't go yet, Brother Matthews. You see, being a minister,
there are some things that you don't understand. You are making a mistake in--" He caught his
breath. Instead of leaving the room, Dan was closing and locking the door.

He came back in three quick strides. This time he placed his hat on the table. When he spoke
his voice was still low--intense--shaken with feeling.

"You say, sir, that some things are inevitable. You are right."

There was that in his manner now that made the man in the chair tremble. He started to speak,
but Dan silenced him.

"You have said quite enough, sir. Don't think that I have not fully considered this matter.
I have. It is inevitable. Turn to your desk there and write a letter to Mrs. Mulhall granting
her another year of time."

The Judge tried to laugh, but his dry lips made a strange sound. With a quick movement he jerked
open the top right-hand drawer, but before he could lay hand on the weapon, Dan leaped to within
easy striking distance.

"Shut that drawer!"

The Judge obeyed.

"Now write!"

"I'll have the law on you! I'll put you out of the Christian ministry! I'll have you arrested
if you assault me. I'll--"

"I have considered all that, too," said Dan. "Try it, and you will stir up such a feeling that
the people of this community will drive you out of the country. You can't do it and live in
Corinth, Judge Strong. You have too much at stake in this town to risk it. You won't have me
arrested for this; you can't afford it, sir. Write that letter and no one but you and I will
ever know of this incident. Refuse, or fail to keep the promise of your letter, and no power
on earth shall prevent me from administering justice! You who would rob that crippled boy of
his garden--"

The man shuddered. Suddenly he opened his mouth to call. But Dan, reading his purpose in his
eyes, had him by the throat before he could utter a sound.

This was enough.

With the letter in his pocket Dan stood silently regarding his now cowering victim, and his
deep voice was full of pain as he said, in that slow way, "I regret this incident, Brother
Strong, more than I can say. I have no apology to make. It was inevitable. You have my word
that no one shall know, from me, what has occurred here this evening. When you think it all
over you will not carry the matter further. You cannot afford it. You will see that you cannot
afford it."

When the Judge lifted his head he was alone.

"Did I keep you waiting too long?" asked Dan, when he had again taken his place by Miss Farwell's
side.

"Oh no! But tell me: is it all right?"

"Yes, it's all right. Judge Strong has kindly granted our friends another year. That will give
us time to do something."

Arriving at the house he gave Hope the letter for Deborah. "And here," he said, "is something
for you." From under the buggy seat he drew the big bass.

When Dan returned to Gordon's Mills with the team the next morning, he gave back the Doctor's
check, saying simply, "The Judge listened to reason and decided that he would not press the
case." And that was all the explanation he ever made though it was by no means the end of the
matter.

Dan himself did not realize what he had done. He did not realize how potent were the arguments
that he had used to convince the Judge.

The young minister had at last furnished the motive for which the Ally waited!

CHAPTER XXX.

THE DAUGHTER OP THE CHURCH

"Thus the Ally has something for everybody."

Dan was right. Judge Strong could not afford to make public the facts connected with the young
man's visit to him that evening. He could not afford it for more reasons than Dan knew. The
arguments with which the minister had backed up his personal influence were stronger than he
realized. The more the Judge thought about the whole matter the more he was inclined to congratulate
himself that he had been saved from a step far more dangerous than he had ever before ventured.
He saw where, in his desire to possess all, he had come perilously near losing everything.
But these reflections did not make the Elder feel one whit kindlier towards Dan.

While the Judge was held both by his fear of Dan and by his own best interests, from moving
openly against the man who had so effectually blocked his well-laid plans for acquiring another
choice bit of Corinth real estate, there were other ways, perfectly safe, by which he might
make the minister suffer.

Judge Strong had not been a ruling elder in the church for so many years without learning the
full value of the spirit that makes Corinth its home.

While the Elder himself feared the Ally as he feared nothing else, he was a past master in
the art of directing its strength to the gaining of his own ends. His method was extremely
simple: the results certain.

When he learned of Hope's trip to Gordon's Mills and the long ride in the night alone with
Dan, the Judge fairly hugged himself. It was all so easy!

In the two days preceding the next weekly meeting of the Ladies' Aid Society, it happened,
quite incidentally, that the Elder had quiet, confidential talks with several of the most active
workers in the congregation. The Judge in these talks did not openly charge the minister with
wrong conduct, with any neglect of his duties, or with any unfaithfulness to the doctrines.
No indeed! The Judge was not such a bungler in the art of directing the strength of the Ally
in serving his own ends. But nevertheless, each good sister, when the interview was ended,
felt that she had been trusted with the confidence of the very inside of the innermost circle;
felt her heart swell with the responsibility of a state secret of vast importance; and her
soul grow big with a righteous determination to be worthy.

That was a Ladies' Aid meeting to be remembered. There had been nothing like it since the last
meeting of its kind. For of course, every sister who had talked with the Judge was determined
that every other sister should understand that she was on the innermost inside; and every other
sister who had talked with the Judge was equally fired with the same purpose; and the sisters
who had not talked quietly with the Judge were extraordinarily active in creating the impression
that they knew even more than those who had. So that altogether things were hinted, half revealed
and fully told about Dan and Miss Farwell that would have astonished even Judge Strong himself,
had he not known just how it would be.

The Sunday following it seemed almost as if Dan had wished to help the Judge in his campaign,
for while there was much in his sermon about widows and orphans, there was not a word of the
old Jerusalem gospel.

Monday evening Judge Strong and his wife called upon Elder Jordan and his family, and the two
church fathers held a long and important conference, with the church mothers and the church
daughter assisting.

The Judge said very little. Indeed he seemed reluctant to discuss the grave things that were
being said in the community about their pastor. But it was easy to see that he was earnestly
concerned for the welfare of the church and the upbuilding of the cause in Corinth. Nathan
himself was led to introduce the subject. The Judge very skillfully and politely gave the women
opportunities. He agreed most heartily with Elder Jordan that Dan's Christian character was
above reproach, and that it was very unfortunate that there should be any criticism by the
public. Such things so weakened the church influence in the community! He regretted, however,
that their pastor in his sermons did not dwell more upon first principles and the fundamental
doctrines of the church. His sermons were good, but the people needed to be taught the true
way of salvation. Dan was young: perhaps he would learn the foolishness of taking up these
new ideas of the church's mission and work, that were sapping the very foundations of Christianity.

Nathaniel Jordan, because of the very goodness of his heart and his deeply religious nature,
had learned to love Dan, and to believe in him, even while he was forced--by his whole life's
training--to question the wisdom of the young man's preaching. And while he was deeply pained
by the things the sisters reported, he found, as the Judge intended, that Elder Strong's attitude
was in close harmony with his own.

Thus the Ally has something for everybody. Those who did not doubt Dan's character questioned
his preaching; and those who cared but little what he preached found much to question in his
conduct.

But there was one in the company that evening who contributed nothing to the discussion, save
now and then a word in defense of Dan. And everything that Charity said was instantly and warmly
endorsed by the Judge.

When Judge and Mrs. Strong at last bade their friends good night and left Nathaniel and his
wife to cultivate the seed the Ally had so skilfully planted, Charity retired at once to her
room, but not to sleep. Not for nothing had this young woman been reared in such close touch
with the inner circle of the ruling classes in Memorial Church. This was by no means the first
conference of its kind that she had been permitted to attend. Her whole life experience enabled
her to judge to a day, almost, the length of any minister's stay in Corinth. Few had stayed
more than a year.

There was Rev. Swanson--who was too old; and Rev. Wilson--it was his daughter; and Rev. Jones--it
was his wife; and Rev. George--it was his son; and it was Rev. Kern--who did not get on with
the young people; and Rev. Holmes--who was too young, and got on with the young people too
well. Charity always thought that she might have--. If he had only been permitted to stay another
three months! And Rev. Colby--it was because he had neither wife nor sons nor daughters. Charity
was sure she might have--. If only he had been given more time! And now--Dan!

The poor girl cried bitterly in the dark and in her tears determined upon desperate measures.

CHAPTER XXXI.

THE REALITY

"'Faith,' said Deborah, who, in the kitchen, heard their merry talk and laughter. 'It must
be the garden as does it.'"

"Who shall say that the Irishwoman had not the truth of the whole matter?"

The incident of Deborah's trouble brought Hope to a fuller dependence upon Dan than she had
ever before known. The long ride alone in the hack, with her mind so filled with thoughts of
her big friend, his greeting of her and his quick response to her appeal in Deborah's behalf,
with the drive home in the night by his side, and the immediate success of his call upon the
Judge had all led the young woman much nearer a full realization of herself and a complete
understanding of her feeling for Dan than she knew. But one touch more was needed to make the
possibility which she had long foreseen a reality.

The touch needed came early in the afternoon of the day following the Judge's call upon Elder
Jordan. Miss Farwell, with Grace and Denny, was in the garden, making ready for the first early
seed. At Dan's urgent request a much larger space had been prepared this year and they were
all intensely interested in what was to be, they declared, the best and largest garden that
Denny had ever grown.

Denny with his useless, twisted arm swinging at his side, and his poor, dragging leg, was marking
off the beds and rows, the while he kept up a ceaseless, merry chatter with the two young women
who assisted him by carrying the stakes and lines.

Any one would have thought they were the happiest people in all Corinth, and perhaps they were,
though from all usual standards they had little enough to be joyous over. Denny with his poor,
crippled body, forever barred from the life his whole soul craved, yearning for books and study
with all his heart, but forced to give the last atom of his poor strength in digging in the
soil for the bare necessities of life, denied even a pittance to spend for the volumes he loved;
Grace Conner marred in spirit and mind, as was Denny in body, by the cruel, unjust treatment
of those to whom she had a right to look first for sympathy and help; and the nurse, who was
sacrificing a successful and remunerative career in the profession she loved, to carry the
burden of this one, who in the eyes of the world, had no claim whatever upon her. What had
they to be joyous over that sunny afternoon in the garden?

The three merry workers were expecting Dan. But Dan did not come. And it may have been because
Hope turned her eyes so often toward the corner window, that she failed to see the young woman
who turned in at their own gate. Then Deborah's voice called from the kitchen for Miss Hope,
and the nurse went into the house.

"It's someone to see you," said the widow with an air of great mystery. "I tuck her into your
room, where she's waitin' for you. Dear heart, but the day has brung the roses to your cheeks,
and the sunshine is in your two eyes. Sure, I can't think what she'd be wantin'. I hope 'tis
nothin' to make ye the less happy than ye are."

"Oh you, with your blarney!" returned the young woman playfully, and then, with a note of eagerness
in her voice, "Who is it, do you know her?"

"Sure I do, and so will you when you see her. Go on in child; don't be standin' here, maybe
it's the job you've been lookin' for come at last. I can't think that any of them would be
sendin' for you, though the good Lord knows the poor creature herself looks to need a nurse
or somethin'."

She pushed Hope from the kitchen, and a moment later the young woman entered her own room to
find Miss Charity Jordan.

Hope Harwell was a beautiful woman--beautiful with the beauty of a womanhood unspoiled by vain
idleness, empty pleasures or purposeless activity. Perhaps because of her interest and care
for the girl, to whom she was filling the place of both mother and elder sister, perhaps because
of something else that had come into her life--the past few months, in spite of her trials,
had added much to that sweet atmosphere of womanliness that enveloped her always. The deep,
gray eyes seemed deeper still and a light was in their depths that had not been there before.
In her voice, too, there was a new note--a richer, fuller tone, and she moved and laughed as
one whose soul was filled with the best joys of living.

Charity arose to her feet when Miss Farwell entered. The nurse greeted her, but the poor girl
who had spent an almost sleepless night, stood regarding the woman before her with a kind of
envying wonder. What right had this creature to be so happy while she a Christian was so miserable?

To Charity there were only two kinds of people--those who belonged to the church and those
who belonged to the world. Those of the world were strangers--aliens. The life they lived,
their pleasures, their ambitions, their loves, were all matters of conjecture to this daughter
of the church. They were, to her, people to save--never people to be intimate with; nor were
they to be regarded without grave suspicion until they were saved. She wondered, sometimes,
what they were like if one were to really know them. As she had thought about it the night
before in the dark, it was a monstrous thing that a woman of this other world should have ensnared
their minister--her minister.

Charity was a judge of preachers. She saw in Dan the ability to go far. She felt that no position
in the church was too high for him to reach, no honor too great for him to attain, if only
he might be steadied and inspired and assisted by a competent helper--one thoroughly familiar
with every detail of the denominational machinery, and acquainted with every denominational
engineer.

Thus to be robbed of the high place in life for which she had fitted herself, and to which
she had aspired for years, by an alien to the church was maddening--if only Charity had possessed
the capacity for being maddened. What right had this creature who never entered a church--what
right had she even to the friendship of a minister--a minister such as Dan? And to ruin his
reputation! To cause him to be sent away from Corinth! To wreck his career! To deprive him
of a companion so fitly qualified to help him realize to the full his splendid ambition! Small
wonder that the daughter of the church had determined upon a desperate measure.

Left alone when Deborah had gone to call Miss Farwell, Charity had examined the nurse's room
with interest and surprise. The apartment bore no testimony to an unholy life. Save that it
was in every way a poorer place than any room in the Jordan house, it might have been Charity's
own. There was even a Bible, well worn at that, lying on a table by which a chair was drawn
as if the reader had but just laid the book aside.

And now this woman stood before her. This woman with the deep, kind eyes, the soft, calm voice,
her cheeks glowing with healthful outdoor exercise, and her air of sweet womanliness.

The nurse spoke the second time.

"I am Miss Farwell. You are Miss Jordan, I believe. I see you pass the house frequently. Won't
you be seated, please, you seem to be in trouble."

Poor Charity! Dropping weakly into a chair she burst into bitter tears. Then before Miss Farwell
could recover from her surprise, the caller exclaimed, "I came to see you about our minister,
Reverend Matthews."

The color in the nurse's cheeks deepened.

"But why should you come to me about Mr. Matthews? I know nothing of your church affairs, Miss
Jordan."

"I know that you do not," the other returned bitterly. "You have never been to hear him preach.
You know nothing--nothing of what it means to him--to me, to all of us, I mean. How could you
know anything about it?"

This passionate outburst and the sight of Charity's crimson face and embarrassed manner caused
the color to disappear from the nurse's cheeks. After a moment she said coolly, "Do you not
think it would be well for you to explain clearly just what you mean and why you come to me?"

In her effort to explain Charity's words came tumbling recklessly, impetuously out, in all
sorts of disorder. She charged the nurse with ruining the minister's work, with alienating
him from his people, with injuring the Memorial Church and the cause of Christ in Corinth,
with making him the talk of the town.

"What is he to you," she finished. "What can he ever be to you? You would not dare to think
of marrying a minister of the gospel--you a woman of the world. He belongs to us, he does not
belong to you, and you have no right to take him from us." Then she pleaded with her to--as
she put it--let their pastor alone, to permit him to stay in Corinth and go on to the great
future that she was so sure awaited him.

As the girl talked the other woman sat very still with downcast face, save now and then when
Charity's disordered words seemed to carry a deeper meaning than appeared upon the surface.
Then the gray eyes were lifted to study the speaker's face, doubtfully, wonderingly, questioningly.

In her painful excitement Charity was telling much more than she realized. And more, Charity
was not only laying bare her own heart to the nurse, but she was revealing Hope Farwell to
herself. That young woman was stirred as she had never been before.

When her visitor had talked herself out the nurse said quietly, "Miss Jordan, it is not at
all necessary that I should reply to the things you have said, but you must answer me one question.
Has Mr. Matthews ever, either by word or by his manner towards you, given you reason to feel
that you, personally, have any right whatever to say these things to me?"

It was so frank, so direct, and withal so womanly and kind, and so unexpected--that Charity
hung her head.

"Tell me please, Miss Jordan. After all that you have said, you must."

The answer came in a whisper. "No."

"Thank you." There was that in the nurse's voice that left the other's heart hopeless, and
robbed her of power to say more. She rose and moved toward the door.

The nurse accompanied her to the porch. "Miss Jordan." Charity paused. "I am very sorry. I
fear you will never understand how--how mistaken you are. I--I shall not harm either your church
or--your minister. Believe me, I am very, very sorry."

Miss Farwell could not return to the garden. He would be there. She could not meet him just
yet. She must be alone. She must go somewhere to think this thing out.

Stealing from the house, she slipped away down the street. Without her conscious will, her
feet led her toward the open country, to Academy Hill, to the grassy knoll under the oak in
the old Academy yard.

The possibility had become a reality, and all the pain that she had foreseen, was hers. But
with the pain was a great gladness.

Miss Farwell need not have fled from meeting Dan in the garden that afternoon. Dan was not
in the garden. While the nurse, in her room, was greeting Miss Charity, Elder Jordan, who had
stopped on his way home from the post office was knocking at the door of the minister's study.

CHAPTER XXXII.

THE BARRIER

"As he looked at the figure so immovable, so hideously rigid and fixed in the act of proclaiming
an issue that belonged to a dead age, he felt as if his heart would burst with wild rage at
the whole community, people and church."

The Elder's visit to Dan was prompted not alone by the church situation, as he had come to
look upon it in the conference with Judge Strong the evening before, but by the old man's regard
for the young minister himself. Because of this he had said nothing to his brother official
of his purpose, wishing to make his visit something more than an official call in the interest
of the church. Nathaniel felt that alone he could talk to Dan in a way that would have been
impossible in the presence of Judge Strong, and in this he was not mistaken.

In the months of his work in Corinth, Dan had learned to love this old church father, whose
faithfulness to the dead past and to the obsolete doctrines of his denomination, was so large
an element in his religion. It was impossible not to recognize that, so far as the claims of
his creed would permit, Elder Jordan was a true Christian man--gentle, tolerant, kind in all
things, outside the peculiar doctrine of the founders of his sect.

It was impossible for the minister and his Elder to see life from the same point of view. They
belonged to different ages. The younger man, recognizing this, honored his elder brother for
his fidelity to the faith of his fathers, and saw in this very faith, a virtue to admire. The Fox
and the Lion

When first the Fox saw the Lion he was terribly frightened, and ran
away and hid himself in the wood.

Next time however he came near the King of Beasts he stopped at a safe distance and watched him
pass by. The third time they came near one another the Fox went straight up to the Lion and
passed the time of day with him, asking him how his family were, and when he should have the
pleasure of seeing him again; then turning his tail, he parted from the Lion without much ceremony.

Familiarity
breeds contempt.

The Lion and the Statue

A Man and a Lion were discussing the relative
strength of men and lions in general.

The Man contended that he and his fellows were stronger than lions by reason of their greater
intelligence. "Come now with me," he cried, "and I will soon prove that I am right." So he took
him into the public gardens and showed him a statue of Hercules overcoming the Lion and tearing
his mouth in two.

"That is all very well," said the Lion, "but proves nothing, for it was a man who made the statue."

We
can easily represent things as we wish them to be.

The Tree and the Reed

"Well, little one," said a Tree to a Reed that was growing at its
foot, "why do you not plant your feet deeply in the ground, and raise
your head boldly in the air as I do?"

"I am contented with my lot," said the Reed. "I may not be so grand, but I think I am safer."

"Safe!"
sneered the Tree. "Who shall pluck me up by the roots or bow my head to the ground?" But it
soon had to repent of its boasting, for a hurricane arose which tore it up from its roots,
and cast it a useless log on the ground, while the little Reed, bending
to the force of the wind, soon stood upright again when the storm
had passed over.

Obscurity often brings safety.

The Wolf in Sheep's Clothing

A Wolf found great difficulty in getting at the sheep owing to the vigilance of the shepherd
and his dogs. But one day it found the skin of a sheep that had been flayed and thrown aside,
so it put it on over its own pelt and strolled down among the sheep.

The Lamb that belonged to the sheep, whose skin the Wolf was wearing, began to follow the Wolf
in the Sheep's clothing; so, leading the Lamb a little apart, he soon made a meal off her, and
for some time he succeeded in deceiving the sheep, and enjoying hearty meals.

Appearances are deceptive.

The Man and the Wooden God

In the old days men used to worship sticks and stones and idols, and
prayed to them to give them luck.

It happened that a Man had often prayed to a wooden idol he had received from his father, but
his luck never seemed to change. He prayed and he prayed, but still he remained as unlucky as ever.
One day in the greatest rage he went to the Wooden God, and with
one blow swept it down from its pedestal.

The idol broke in two, and what did he see? An immense number of coins flying all over the
place.

The Fisher

A Fisher once took his bagpipes to the bank of a river, and played upon them with the hope of making
the fish rise; but never a one put his nose out of the water. So he cast his net into the river and soon
drew it forth filled with fish. Then he took his bagpipes again, and, as he played, the fish leapt
up in the net.

"Ah, you dance now when I play," said he.

"Yes," said an old Fish:

"When you are in a man's power you must do as he bids you."

The Young Thief and His Mother

A young Man had been caught in a daring act of theft and had been condemned to be executed for
it. He expressed his desire to see his Mother, and to speak with
her before he was led to execution, and of course this was granted.

When his Mother came to him he said: "I want to whisper to you,"
and when she brought her ear near him, he nearly bit it off.

All the bystanders were horrified, and asked him what he could mean by such brutal and inhuman
conduct.

"It is to punish her," he said. "When I was young I began with stealing little things, and
brought them home to Mother. Instead of rebuking and punishing me, she laughed and said: "It will
not be noticed." It is because of her that I am here to-day."

"He is right, woman," said the Priest; "the Lord hath said:

"Train up a child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not depart therefrom."

The Man and His Two Wives

In the old days, when men were allowed to have many wives, a middle-aged
Man had one wife that was old and one that was young; each loved him
very much, and desired to see him like herself.

Now the Man's hair was turning grey, which the young Wife did not like, as it made him look
too old for her husband.

So every night she used to comb his hair and pick out the white ones. But the elder Wife saw
her husband growing grey with great pleasure, for she did not like to be mistaken for his mother.
So every morning she used to arrange his hair and pick out as many of the black ones as she could.
The consequence was the Man soon found himself entirely bald.

Yield to all and you will soon have nothing to yield.

The Nurse and the Wolf

"Be quiet now," said an old Nurse to a child sitting on her lap. "If you make that noise again I
will throw you to the Wolf."

Now it chanced that a Wolf was passing close under the window as this was said. So he crouched
down by the side of the house and waited.

"I am in good luck to-day," thought he. "It is sure to cry soon, and a daintier morsel I haven't
had for many a long day."

So he waited, and he waited, and he waited, till at last the child
began to cry, and the Wolf came forward before the window, and looked
up to the Nurse, wagging his tail.

But all the Nurse did was to shut down the window and call for help,
and the dogs of the house came rushing out.

"Ah," said the Wolf as he galloped away,

"Enemies promises were made to be broken."

The Tortoise and the Birds

A Tortoise desired to change its place of residence, so he asked an
Eagle to carry him to his new home, promising her a rich reward for
her trouble.

The Eagle agreed and seizing the Tortoise by the shell with her talons soared aloft. On their
way they met a Crow, who said to the Eagle: "Tortoise is good eating."

"The shell is too hard," said the Eagle in reply. "The rocks will soon crack the shell," was
the Crow's answer; and the Eagle, taking the hint, let fall the Tortoise
on a sharp rock, and the two birds made a hearty meal of the Tortoise.

Never soar aloft on an enemy's pinions.

The Two Crabs

One fine day two Crabs came out from their home to take a stroll on the sand. "Child," said the
mother, "you are walking very ungracefully.

Example is the best precept.

The Ass in the Lion's Skin

An Ass once found a Lion's skin which the hunters had left out in the sun to dry. He put it
on and went towards his native village. All fled at his approach, both men and animals, and
he was a proud Ass that day.

In his delight he lifted up his voice and brayed, but then every
one knew him, and his owner came up and gave him a sound cudgelling
for the fright he had caused.

And shortly afterwards a Fox came up to him and said: "Ah, I knew you by your voice."

Fine clothes may disguise, but silly words will disclose a fool.

The Two Fellows and the Bear

Two Fellows were travelling together
through a wood, when a Bear rushed out upon them.

One of the travellers happened to be in front, and he seized hold of the branch of a tree,
and hid himself among the leaves.

The other, seeing no help for it, threw himself flat down upon the ground, with his face in
the dust.

The Bear, coming up to him, put his muzzle close to his ear, and sniffed and sniffed. But at last
with a growl he shook his head and slouched off, for bears will not touch dead meat. Then the
fellow in the tree came down to his comrade, and, laughing, said
"What was it that Master Bruin whispered to you?"

"He told me," said the other,

"Never trust a friend who deserts you at a pinch."

The Two Pots

Two Pots had been left on the bank of a river, one of brass, and one
of earthenware.

When the tide rose they both floated off down the stream. Now the earthenware pot tried its best to
keep aloof from the brass one, which cried out: "Fear nothing, friend,
I will not strike you."

"But I may come in contact with you," said the other, "if I come too
close; and whether I hit you, or you hit me, I shall suffer for it."

The strong and the weak cannot keep company.

The Four Oxen and the Lion

A Lion used to prowl about a field in which Four Oxen used to dwell. Many a time he tried to
attack them; but whenever he came near they turned their tails to one another, so that whichever
way he approached them he was met by the horns of one of them.

At last, however, they fell a-quarrelling among themselves, and each went off to pasture alone
in a separate corner of the field. Then the Lion attacked them one by one and soon made an end of
all four.

United we stand, divided we fall.

The Fisher and the Little Fish

It happened that a Fisher, after fishing all day, caught only a little fish. "Pray, let me go,
master," said the Fish.

"I am much too small for your eating just now. If you put me back into the river I shall soon grow,
then you can make a fine meal off me."

"Nay, nay, my little Fish," said the Fisher, "I have you now.

I may not catch you hereafter."

A little thing in hand is worth more than a great thing in prospect.

Avaricious and Envious

Two neighbours came before Jupiter and prayed him to grant their hearts'
desire.

Now the one was full of avarice, and the other eaten up with envy. So to punish them both,
Jupiter granted that each might have whatever he wished for himself, but only on condition that
his neighbour had twice as much. The Avaricious man prayed to have a room full of gold. No
sooner said than done; but all his joy was turned to grief when he found that his neighbour
had two rooms full of the precious metal.

Then came the turn of the Envious man, who could not bear to think
that his neighbour had any joy at all.

So he prayed that he might have one of his own eyes put out, by which
means his companion would become totally blind.

Vices are their own punishment.

The Man and the Satyr

A Man had lost his way in a wood one bitter winter's night. As he was roaming about, a Satyr came
up to him, and finding that he had lost his way, promised to give him a lodging for the night,
and guide him out of the forest in the morning. As he went along to the Satyr's cell, the Man
raised both his hands to his mouth and kept on blowing at them.

"What do you do that for?" said the Satyr.

"My hands are numb with the cold," said the Man, "and my breath warms them."

After this they arrived at the Satyr's home, and soon the Satyr put a smoking dish of porridge before
him. But when the Man raised his spoon to his mouth he began blowing
upon it.

"And what do you do that for?" said the Satyr.

"The porridge is too hot, and my breath will cool it."

"Out you go," said the Satyr.

"I will have nought to do with a man who can blow hot and cold with
the same breath."

The Goose With the Golden Eggs

One day a countryman going to the nest of his Goose found there an egg all yellow and glittering. When
he took it up it was as heavy as lead and he was going to throw it
away, because he thought a trick had been played upon him.

But he took it home on second thoughts, and soon found to his delight that it was an egg of
pure gold. Every morning the same thing occurred, and he soon became rich by selling his eggs.
As he grew rich he grew greedy; and thinking to get at once all the gold the Goose could give, he
killed it and opened it only to find nothing.

Greed oft o'er reaches itself.

The Labourer and the Nightingale

A Labourer lay listening to a Nightingale's song throughout the summer night. So pleased was
he with it that the next night he set a trap for it and captured it. "Now that I have caught
thee," he cried, "thou shalt always sing to me."

"We Nightingales never sing in a cage." said the bird.

"Then I'll eat thee." said the Labourer. "I have always heard say that a nightingale on toast
is dainty morsel."

"Nay, kill me not," said the Nightingale; "but let me free, and I'll tell thee three things far
better worth than my poor body." The Labourer let him loose, and he flew up to a branch of a
tree and said: "Never believe a captive's promise; that's one thing. Then again: Keep what
you have. And third piece of advice is: Sorrow not over what is lost forever." Then the song-bird
flew away.

The Fox, the Cock, and the Dog

One moonlight night a Fox was prowling about a farmer's hen-coop,
and saw a Cock roosting high up beyond his reach.

"Good news, good news!" he cried.

"Why, what is that?" said the Cock.

"King Lion has declared a universal truce. No beast may hurt a bird henceforth, but all shall dwell
together in brotherly friendship."

"Why, that is good news," said the Cock; "and there I see some one coming, with whom we can share
the good tidings." And so saying he craned his neck forward and looked afar off.

"What is it you see?" said the Fox.

"It is only my master's Dog that is coming towards us. What, going so soon?" he continued, as
the Fox began to turn away as soon as he had heard the news.

"Will you not stop and congratulate the Dog on the reign of universal peace?"

"I would gladly do so," said the Fox, "but I fear he may not have heard of King Lion's decree."

Cunning
often outwits itself.

The Wind and the Sun

The Wind and the Sun were disputing which was the stronger. Suddenly they saw a traveller coming
down the road, and the Sun said: "I see a way to decide our dispute.

Kindness effects more than severity.

The Miser and His Gold

Once upon a time there was a Miser who used
to hide his gold at the foot of a tree in his garden; but every week
he used to go and dig it up and gloat over his gains. A robber, who
had noticed this, went and dug up the gold and decamped with it. When
the Miser next came to gloat over his treasures, he found nothing
but the empty hole. He tore his hair, and raised such an outcry that
all the neighbours came around him, and he told them how he used to
come and visit his gold. "Did you ever take any of it out?" asked
one of them.

"Nay," said he, "I only came to look at it."

"Then
come again and look at the hole," said a neighbour; "it will do you
just as much good."

Wealth unused might as well not exist.

The Fox
and the Mosquitoes

A Fox after crossing a river got its tail entangled
in a bush, and could not move. A number of Mosquitoes seeing its plight
settled upon it and enjoyed a good meal undisturbed by its tail. A
hedgehog strolling by took pity upon the Fox and went up to him: "You
are in a bad way, neighbour," said the hedgehog; "shall I relieve
you by driving off those Mosquitoes who are sucking your blood?"

"Thank
you, Master Hedgehog," said the Fox, "but I would rather not."

"Why,
how is that?" asked the hedgehog.

"Well, you see," was the answer,
"these Mosquitoes have had their fill; if you drive these away, others
will come with fresh appetite and bleed me to death."

The One-Eyed
Doe

A Doe had had the misfortune to lose one of her eyes, and could
not see any one approaching her on that side. So to avoid any danger
she always used to feed on a high cliff near the sea, with her sound
eye looking towards the land. By this means she could see whenever
the hunters approached her on land, and often escaped by this means.
But the hunters found out that she was blind of one eye, and hiring
a boat rowed under the cliff where she used to feed and shot her from
the sea. "Ah," cried she with her dying voice,

"You cannot escape
your fate."

The Hare and the Tortoise

The Hare was once boasting
of his speed before the other animals. "I have never yet been beaten,"
said he, "when I put forth my full speed. I challenge any one here
to race with me."

The Tortoise said quietly, "I accept your challenge."

"That
is a good joke," said the Hare; "I could dance round you all the way."

"Keep
your boasting till you've beaten," answered the Tortoise. "Shall we
race?"

So a course was fixed and a start was made. The Hare darted
almost out of sight at once, but soon stopped and, to show his contempt
for the Tortoise, lay down to have a nap. The Tortoise plodded on
and plodded on, and when the Hare awoke from his nap, he saw the Tortoise
just near the winning-post and could not run up in time to save the
race. Then said the Tortoise:

"Plodding wins the race."

The Old
Man and Death

An old labourer, bent double with age and toil, was
gathering sticks in a forest. At last he grew so tired and hopeless
that he threw down the bundle of sticks, and cried out: "I cannot
bear this life any longer. Ah, I wish Death would only come and take
me!"

As he spoke, Death, a grisly skeleton, appeared and said to
him: "What wouldst thou, Mortal? I heard thee call me."

"Please,
sir," replied the woodcutter, "would you kindly help me to lift this
faggot of sticks on to my shoulder?"

We would often be sorry if our
wishes were gratified.

The Hare With Many Friends

A Hare was very
popular with the other beasts who all claimed to be her friends. But
one day she heard the hounds approaching and hoped to escape them
by the aid of her many Friends. So, she went to the horse, and asked
him to carry her away from the hounds on his back. But he declined,
stating that he had important work to do for his master. "He felt
sure," he said, "that all her other friends would come to her assistance."
She then applied to the bull, and hoped that he would repel the hounds
with his horns. The bull replied: "I am very sorry, but I have an
appointment with a lady; but I feel sure that our friend the goat
will do what you want." The goat, however, feared that his back might
do her some harm if he took her upon it. The ram, he felt sure, was
the proper friend to apply to. So she went to the ram and told him
the case. The ram replied: "Another time, my dear friend. I do not
like to interfere on the present occasion, as hounds have been known
to eat sheep as well as hares." The Hare then applied, as a last hope,
to the calf, who regretted that he was unable to help her, as he did
not like to take the responsibility upon himself, as so many older
persons than himself had declined the task. By this time the hounds
were quite near, and the Hare took to her heels and luckily escaped.

He
that has many friends, has no friends.

The Lion in Love

A Lion once
fell in love with a beautiful maiden and proposed marriage to her
parents. The old people did not know what to say. They did not like
to give their daughter to the Lion, yet they did not wish to enrage
the King of Beasts. At last the father said: "We feel highly honoured
by your Majesty's proposal, but you see our daughter is a tender young
thing, and we fear that in the vehemence of your affection you might
possibly do her some injury. Might I venture to suggest that your
Majesty should have your claws removed, and your teeth extracted,
then we would gladly consider your proposal again." The Lion was so
much in love that he had his claws trimmed and his big teeth taken
out. But when he came again to the parents of the young girl they
simply laughed in his face, and bade him do his worst.

Love can tame
the wildest.

The Bundle of Sticks

An old man on the point of death
summoned his sons around him to give them some parting advice. He
ordered his servants to bring in a faggot of sticks, and said to his
eldest son: "Break it." The son strained and strained, but with all
his efforts was unable to break the Bundle. The other sons also tried,
but none of them was successful. "Untie the faggots," said the father,
"and each of you take a stick." When they had done so, he called out
to them: "Now, break," and each stick was easily broken. "You see
my meaning," said their father.

Union gives strength.

The Lion,
the Fox, and the Beasts

The Lion once gave out that he was sick unto
death and summoned the animals to come and hear his last Will and
Testament. So the Goat came to the Lion's cave, and stopped there
listening for a long time. Then a Sheep went in, and before she came
out a Calf came up to receive the last wishes of the Lord of the Beasts.
But soon the Lion seemed to recover, and came to the mouth of his
cave, and saw the Fox, who had been waiting outside for some time.
"Why do you not come to pay your respects to me?" said the Lion to
the Fox.

"I beg your Majesty's pardon," said the Fox, "but I noticed
the track of the animals that have already come to you; and while
I see many hoof-marks going in, I see none coming out. Till the animals
that have entered your cave come out again I prefer to remain in the
open air."

It is easier to get into the enemy's toils than out again.

The
Ass's Brains

The Lion and the Fox went hunting together. The Lion,
on the advice of the Fox, sent a message to the Ass, proposing to
make an alliance between their two families. The Ass came to the place
of meeting, overjoyed at the prospect of a royal alliance. But when
he came there the Lion simply pounced on the Ass, and said to the
Fox: "Here is our dinner for to-day. Watch you here while I go and
have a nap. Woe betide you if you touch my prey." The Lion went away
and the Fox waited; but finding that his master did not return, ventured
to take out the brains of the Ass and ate them up. When the Lion came
back he soon noticed the absence of the brains, and asked the Fox
in a terrible voice: "What have you done with the brains?"

"Brains,
your Majesty! it had none, or it would never have fallen into your
trap."

Wit has always an answer ready.

The Eagle and the Arrow

An
Eagle was soaring through the air when suddenly it heard the whizz
of an Arrow, and felt itself wounded to death. "Come boy," he said, "don't you think
we better go fishing?"

The minister smiled back at him. "I wish I could, Doctor; I need it, all right. But you see
there's that convention tomorrow."

"Humph!" grunted the Doctor, as he seated himself. "Heard who's going?"

Dan named a few of his church people. The Doctor grunted again. They were nearly all of the
inner circle, the Judge's confidantes in matters of the church.

"Judge Strong is going too," offered the Doctor.

Dan said nothing.

"Uh-huh; told me this evening." The old man chuckled. "I rather thought I'd go myself."

"You!" Dan said in surprise.

The other's eyes twinkled. "Yes, me; why not? I've never been to one of these affairs, but
for that matter neither have you. I don't suppose they would put me out. Anyway I have some
business in the city and I thought it would be fine for us to go up together. Martha's tickled
to death! Thinks I'll get it sure if I can only hear some of the really big preachers."

Dan laughed, well-pleased. He could not know of the real motive that prompted the Doctor's
strange interest in this great meeting of church men.

The next morning at an early hour they were off: Dan, the old Doctor, some six or eight of
the active women leaders of the congregation, Charity, and Judge Strong. The Ally went also.
There was no little surprise expressed, in a half-jesting manner, by the company, at the presence
of Dr. Oldham, and there was much putting together of heads in whispered consultation as to
what it might mean. The Judge and his competent associates, with the Ally, kept very much together
and left Dan and his friend as much to themselves. Whenever the young minister, prompted by
his thoughts of the last few hours, approached the group there was a significant hush, while
his pleasantries were met by very formal, and as evidently forced, monosyllables, which very
soon sent him back to his seat again with a face that made the old Doctor say things under
his breath.

"Look here, Dan," said the old physician, as they neared their destination, "I understand that
at these meetings the visiting delegates are always entertained at the homes of the local church
people. I'm not a delegate, so I go to a hotel. You come with me; be my guest. Tell 'em you
have already accepted an invitation to stop with a friend. Don't worry, they'll be glad enough
to have one less to care for, and I want you."

The young man eagerly accepted.

At the meeting was the usual gathering of the usual types. There were the leaders, regularly
appointed by the denomination, who were determined to keep that which had been committed to
them, at any cost; and to this end glorified, in the Lord's service, the common, political
methods of distributing the places of conspicuous honor and power, upon program and committee,
among those friends and favorites who could be depended upon to respond most emphatically,
or who were--in the vernacular--"safe." Equally active, with methods as familiar but not equally
in evidence--for one must be careful--were the would-be leaders, who--"for the glory of Christ"--sought
these same seats of the mighty, and who were assisted by those who aspired to become their
friends and favorites--joint heirs in their success should they succeed. Then there were the
self-constituted leaders who pushed and pulled and scrambled to the front; content if they
could, only for the moment, be thought by the multitude to be something more than they were;
who were on their feet instantly to speak upon every question with ponderous weight of words,
and were most happy if they could fill some vacant chair on the platform. There were the heresy
hunters who sniffed with hound-like eagerness for the scent of doctrinal weakness in the speeches
of their brothers; and upon every proposed movement of the body, guarded with bulldog fidelity,
the faith of their fathers. There were also the young preachers who came to look with awe on
the doings of the great ones, to learn how it was done and to watch for a possible opening
whereby they might snatch their bit of glory here on earth.

Many there were of this latter class who, from the highest religious motives, had answered
the call to the ministry as to something sacred and holy, even as had Dan. These young men,
though they knew it not, were there to learn how their leaders--while theoretically depending
upon God for their strength and guidance in managing the affairs of the church--depended actually
upon the very methods which, when used by the world in its affairs, they stamped ungodly.

Mostly those on the firing line were ministers, though here and there a prominent woman leader
pushed to the front. The rest were brothers and sisters, mainly sisters; who like other mortals,
always backed their favorites in the race that was set before them all. These prayed sincerely
and devoutly that somehow, in ways beyond their bewildered ken, the good God would bless the
efforts that were being made for righteousness and truth, hoping thus for heavenly results
from very worldly methods.

Judge Strong was an old campaigner. A heavy contributor to the general work and missionary
funds to which the leaders looked for the practical solution of their modest bread and butter
problems, he had the ears of them all. Nor was the Elder slow to use his advantage. He could
speak his mind with frankness here, for these great men of the church lived far from Corinth
and, while knowing much of the Elder--the church man, knew nothing of the Judge--the citizen
and neighbor. More than this such reports as the Elder had to make must, in the very nature
of things, for the good of the cause, be strictly private.

While the Judge was holding these little confidential chats with the leaders, and the leaders
were holding equally confidential chats with their friends and favorites, and these in turn
were doing as they had been done by, the Elder's assistants, assigned to various church homes
in the city, were confidentially exchanging confidences with their hostesses. And this is the
simple truth of the whole matter, and the way it all came about.

Dan was introduced to the secretary. "Ah--yes, Brother Matthews of Corinth! Glad to meet you.
Ah, excuse me I--ah, see a brother over there with whom I must speak."

Dan was presented to the treasurer. "Oh yes, I have heard of you--at Corinth. Why, hello, Brother
Simpkins"--catching a passing preacher by the arm--"glad to see you! How are you and how is
the work?"

Dan introduced himself to one or two of those whom he had hungered to see, those who were noted
in the church papers for their broad wisdom and saintly character, and somehow Dan felt rebuked
for his forwardness when each, from his pedestal, looked at him and said, "Oh yes; Brother
Matthews! I have heard of you, Brother Matthews!"

During the forenoon session of the second day the order of business was reports of the churches.
In response to roll call, one after the other, the representatives of the various congregations
would tell what they had done and what they were going to do. Dr. Oldham remarked later, "No
one told what they had failed to do, or what they were not going to do."

As a rule the ministers reported for their own churches, save when some delegate whom the pastor
knew to be peculiarly qualified, was present. Generally speaking the ministers consider the
value of such a report to be greatly increased if it can be given by some such member. The
minister himself always sees that the report is properly prepared.

Judge Strong, without consulting Dan, responded to the call for the Memorial Church. There
was a distinct hush, and heads went forward in interest. The Elder regretted to report that,
while they had held their regular services every Sabbath, and their preacher was the most popular
preacher in Corinth, the conversions for some reason had not been as numerous as in some previous
years. But Memorial Church could be depended upon to remedy that very soon, for they were contemplating
a great revival meeting to begin as soon as a competent evangelist could be secured. [Loud
applause from the professional evangelists present.] They felt that a series of good old Jerusalem
gospel sermons would put them again to the front in the matter of additions. [Loud applause
from the defenders of the faith.]

Dan listened in silent amazement. This was the first he had heard of a meeting in Corinth.
The Doctor saw the boy's face grow burning red.

The Elder continued his report, touching every department of the church in like vein, and finished
by "regretting exceedingly that their offering for the missionary, and for the general work
for the present year, had fallen short of previous years." The Judge did not explain that he
had subtracted from his part in the church offering an amount exceeding the shortage, which
amount he had added to his usual personal subscription. As for the regular expenses of the
congregation, he went on, they had been cared for.

"And," remarked the state secretary in a loud voice, rising instantly as the Judge sat down,
"I want you all to know that Judge Strong's personal contribution to our funds is larger this
year than ever before. We who know Brother Strong's splendid Christian generosity will understand
how the regular expenses of Memorial Church have been paid." Whereupon the leaders-who-were
and the leaders-who-would-like-to-be joined with one accord in loud applause.

Not a preacher there but understood exactly what the Elder's report signified.

Following the reports of the churches came the introductions of the new pastors. Skilfully
the preachers were marshaled upon the platform, Big Dan towering at the foot of the line. Stunned
and embarrassed as he was by the Judge's report, the boy would not have gone forward at all,
had not the Doctor fairly pushed him into the aisle. The old philosopher told himself grimly
that the lad might as well get all that was coming to him. In the ceremony that followed Dan
got it.

One after the other the ministers were introduced by the secretary, who had a glowing word
for each. "Brother Williams who has done such marvelous work at Baxter." [Loud applause for
Brother Williams.] "Brother Hardy who is going to do a wonderful work at Wheeler." [Louder
applause for Brother Hardy.] And so on down the line. Not one, from big church or little, from
city pulpit or country district, but secured the boosting comment and the applause; for this
was Christian enthusiasm.

Dan's turn came at last. His face was now white.

"And this," shouted the secretary, "is Brother Matthews, the present pastor of our church at
Corinth." There was a hush still and significant; for this was church policy.

After a moment's silence the secretary continued, "Please sing hymn three-hundred and one:

'Blest be the tie that binds Our hearts in Christian love.'

Everybody sing!" And the denominational papers agreed that they made a joyful noise unto the Lord.

Were the high officials and their mates on this ship of salvation to be blamed? Not a bit of
it! The Elder's report made Dan "unsafe"--and he was. They were right. More than this, the
Lord needed the Judge's influence--and money.

When the young minister came back to his seat his old friend thought his face the saddest he
had ever seen.

At lunch the Doctor told Dan that he was going to call upon several friends that afternoon,
and among them mentioned the superintendent of a famous steel plant in the city. Agreeing to
meet at dinner in the evening they parted, Dan going alone to the convention building. At the
door he paused.

Several ministers, chatting gaily with friends passing in for the opening of the afternoon
session, looked curiously at the stalwart, irresolute figure standing there alone. Two or three
greeted him with a word. All were sorry for him; for not one but understood the meaning of
the incidents of the morning.

An hour later the superintendent of the great steel works greeted, with admiring eyes, the
big clean-looking fellow and wondered at the look of sadness on his face.

"I am in the city with my friend, Dr. Oldham," explained Dan. "I expected to find him here.
He told me at lunch that he was coming."

"Oldham in town? Good!" exclaimed the man of affairs. "Of course he would look me up, but he
hasn't been here yet. Glad to meet any friend of the Doctor's. Sit down, Mr. Matthews; he'll
be in presently, no doubt. Or perhaps while you're waiting, you would care to look about."
At Dan's eager reply he touched a bell and, to the man who appeared, he said, "Jack, show Mr.
Matthews around. A friend of my friend, Dr. Oldham."

And so the Doctor found the boy standing in the very heart of the great plant, where the brawny
workmen, naked to the waist--their bodies shining with sweat and streaked with grime, wrestled
with the grim realities of life.

For a little while the Doctor watched him; then, tapping him on the shoulder, shouted in his
ear, above the roar of the furnace, the hissing of steam and the crash and clank of iron and
steel. "Almost as good as a fishing trip, heh Dan?"

Back in the office again the superintendent introduced them to a gray-haired, smooth faced,
portly gentleman--the president of the steel company, a well-known capitalist. The great man
repeated Dan's name, looking him over the while.

"Matthews. By your name and your build, sir, you are related to the Grant Matthews who owns
Dewey Bald."

"He is my father, sir," returned Dan, delighted.

"Ah yes. Through my interests in the lead and zinc industry, I am familiar with your part of
the country, sir. I have met your father several times. It is not easy to forget such a man."

Dan now remembered the president's name, having heard it in connection with the mines on Jake
creek, near his home.

The capitalist continued, "I have tried several times to persuade your father to open up that
hill of his. He has a fortune in that mountain, sir, a fortune! Are you interested in mining,
Mr. Matthews?"

"Not directly, sir."

"No? Well, if your people should ever decide to develop that property come to me; I know what
it is. We would be glad to talk it over with you. Good-bye, sir; glad to have met you. Good
day, Doctor." And he was gone.

The Doctor and Dan dined with the genial superintendent and his family that evening and the
next morning set out for Corinth.

CHAPTER XXXVI.

GOOD-BYE

"But the big house for Dr. Harry is still empty when he returns from his long drives; empty
save for his dreams."

When Hope Farwell dismissed Dan that afternoon in the old Academy yard, because she feared
both for her lover and for herself, she had not for a moment questioned what Dan's decision
would be. With all the gladness that their love had brought, there was in her heart no hope;
for she exacted of herself the same fidelity to her religious convictions that she demanded
of Dan. It would be as wrong for her to accept the church as for him to reject it. So she had
gone to the limit of her strength for his sake. But when she reached again the privacy of her
room, her woman nature had its way. With the morning, strength returned again--strength and
calmness. Quietly she went about; for, while she had left the whole burden of decision upon
Dan, her heart was with her lover in his fight.

At the appointed hour she left her friends in the garden and went into the house as she had
planned. She did not expect him but she had said that she would wait his coming. Her heart
beat painfully as the slow minutes passed, bringing by his absence, proof that she had not
misjudged him. Then she went outside and looking up saw him standing at his window; smiling,
she even beckoned to him. She wished to make the victory certain, final and complete. Very
quietly she returned to her room. She did not again enter the garden.

And now the young woman was conscious that she also had a part to do. For every reason she
must not remain in Corinth. She explained her plans to Grace, for she could not leave the girl,
and the two commenced to make their simple preparations for the journey. Feeling that her strength
was not equal to the strain which another meeting with Dan would occasion, there was no one
left to bid good-bye save Deborah and Denny and--Dr. Abbott.

Dr. Abbott's faithful Jim was waiting, ready for a long trip into the country, when Miss Farwell
reached the physician's home. Harry himself, dressed for the drive, met her at the door.

"You were just answering a call," said the nurse. "I will not keep you, Doctor."

"Not answering a call, just making a visit," he said, "and there is no need at all for me to
hurry, Miss Farwell." He led her to the library.

"I came to tell you good-bye," she said. "I could not go away without thanking you, Dr. Abbott,
for all your kindness to me."

The strong hands of the physician, so firm and sure in their professional duties, trembled,
as the man placed his hat and gloves on the table.

"To tell me 'good-bye,'" he repeated blankly.

"Yes," she answered, "I cannot remain longer in Corinth."

Harry's face flushed.

"Miss Farwell you do not know how sorry I am for my failure to--"

She interrupted, "Please don't Doctor. I know how you have tried," her eyes filled, "and I
know all that you have done. You understand it has been for Grace--" she paused. "Grace will
go with me. I am sure Dr. Miles will find her a place in the hospital."

"Yes," he said, "I understand. I will--will see you again some day, Miss Farwell."

"I shall never return to Corinth, Doctor," she answered with a shudder. "If you come to the
city, though, I shall always be glad to see you." The words were as frank as from one man to
another.

Harry was thinking of his friend, the minister, of the meeting in the night, and Dan's plea
to be taken to the doctor's home, where he had remained until late the evening before he left
for the church convention. Why was she leaving Corinth while Dan was away attending the convention?
Did she know that he was gone? What did it all mean? Could it be--! He started from his chair.

"I may see you again, then? You will be glad to see me, Miss Farwell? Hope--tell me, surely
you know what I would say! I would have said it long ago but you would not let me. Tell me
if there is any chance for me--ever?"

She had risen to her feet and into her face there came a look of tender sadness. She did not
turn away, and the man, looking into those gray eyes, knew that she spoke truly when she said,
"I am sorry, Dr. Abbott, oh so sorry! No, there can never be, for you more than my regard and
friendship." Her voice trembled. "I know how it hurts because for me--for us--too, there is
no chance."

Then Harry Abbott understood.

She left him in the library. Outside she paused a moment to bestow a good-bye caress upon the
doctor's horse and then she quickly went away.

Other helpers have now taken the place of the faithful old Mam Liz and Uncle George, for these
true souls have gone to the Master of all who truly serve.

Dr. Harry will never leave Corinth. When the old Doctor berates him roughly for wearing himself
out for those who never express their appreciation, and from whom he can never hope to receive
a fee, he laughingly retorts in kind, charging the Doctor himself with having consigned to
him such unprofitable patients. He will never give up his patients; neither will he give up
his dreams.

Miss Farwell's plans for the girl, whose life she had reclaimed, did not fail. Dr. Miles, when
he heard her story, gladly helped Grace to a place in the school where she might fit herself
for her chosen ministry; for, said the famous physician, "The best nurses in the world are
those who have themselves suffered. No amount of professional skill can make up for a lack
of human sympathy and love."

As Dan, home from the convention, was turning wearily in at his gate, Deborah, from the garden,
called to him. By her manner as she came slowly to the fence, Dan knew the good soul was troubled.

"It's a heavy heart I have, Mr. Matthews," she said; "for she's clean gone, an' Denny an' me's
that lonesome we don't know what to do."

Dan's big hand gripped the fence.

"Gone," he repeated blankly. He did not need to ask who was gone.

"Yes sir, gone--yesterday evenin' be the train, leavin' her kindest regards and best wishes
to you."

CHAPTER XXXVII.

RESULTS

"When he had finished his letter, he bowed his face in his hands and wept."

Dan could not--or perhaps it should be written would not--understand rightly his experience
at the church convention. Sadly puzzled and surprised by the spirit and atmosphere of that
meeting to which he had gone with such confidence, and sorely hurt by his reception, he had
no thought of the real reason for it all. He only blamed himself the more for being so out
of harmony--for failing so grievously to find the key that should put him in tune.

In the great steel works among the sweating, toiling men; with the superintendent of the plant,
under whose hand men and machinery were made to serve a great world's need; and with the president
whose brain and genius was such a power in the financial and industrial world Dan had felt
a spirit of kinship. Amid those surroundings he had been as much at home as if he were again
in his native hills, and for the hour had forgotten his fellow churchmen and their ministries.
But as their train drew nearer and nearer Corinth, the Doctor saw by his companion's face,
and by his fits of brooding silence, that the minister was feeling again the weight of his
troublesome burden.

By this and by what he had seen at the convention, the old physician knew that the hour in
Dan's life for which he watched with such careful, anxious interest, was drawing near.

With Hope gone out of his life he turned to his work with grim, desperate, determination. What,
indeed, had he now to which he might turn but his work? He realized that now he must find in
this work for which he had made the supreme sacrifice of his life, the only thing that would,
to him, justify his choice--the choice that had cost both him and the woman he loved so much
suffering. His ministry had now become something more to him than a chosen life work. To those
high motives that had led him to the service of the church, he added now the price he had paid
in giving up the woman who had grown so much into his life. He must find that in his ministry
which would make the great price paid, not in vain.

So, with all the strength of his great nature, he threw himself with feverish energy into what
had, in spite of himself, come to be a too-empty ministry. Crushing every feeling of being
misunderstood, and unjustly criticized; permitting himself no thought that there were under
the surface treacherous currents working for his overthrow; blaming himself always and others
never, when he felt a lack of warmth or sympathy in his people; yielding for the time even
his own conviction as to his teaching, and striving to shape his sermons to the established
lines of the Elders, he fought to put himself into his work.

And always, at the beck and call of Dan's real masters, that other servant of the church--that
spirit that lives in Corinth--wrought the will of those whose ally it is.

That last meeting of Dan and Hope in the Academy yard, as if by appointment; the sudden departure
of the nurse so soon after; and Dan's too-evident state of mind, were all skilfully used to
give color to the ugly whispered reasons for the nurse's leaving town so hurriedly.

The old Doctor knowing, watching, waited for the hour he knew would come; understanding Dan
as he had always understood him; wisely recognizing the uselessness of doing aught but let
him go his own strong, hard, way. And Dr. Harry also, knowing the malignant power that was
forcing the end, and conscious what the end would be, watched silently, hopelessly, helplessly,
as many a time he had watched the grim drawing near of that one whose certain coming his professional
knowledge enabled him to recognize, while giving him no power to stay.

Memorial Church was all astir, and on the tiptoe of expectancy, preparing--they said--for the
greatest revival ever held in Corinth. The professional evangelist selected by the Elder, whose
choice was, as a matter of course, approved by his fellow officials and congregation, had sent
full instructions for the proper advertising of himself, and--as his instructions stated--"the
working up of the meeting." Dan ignoring the slight to himself in the matter of calling the
evangelist, did everything in his power to carry out his part of the instructions.

The evangelist arrived. Royally received by the Elders and the inner circle, he was escorted
in triumph to the Strong mansion, which was to be his home during the meeting, and within the
hour began his professional duty of "setting the church in order, and gathering a mighty harvest
of souls."

This evangelist was a good one, of his kind. His kind is that type of professional soul-winner
evolved by the system whereby the church pays for the increase of its flock at so much per
head, inasmuch as the number of his calls, and the amount of his hire depend upon the number
of additions per meeting to the evangelist's credit. A soul-winner with small meetings to his
credit receives a very modest compensation for his services, and short notices in the church
papers. But the big fellows--those who have hundreds of souls per meeting, come higher, much
higher; also they have more space given them in the papers, which helps them to come higher
still. Souls may have depreciated in value since Calvary, but one thing is sure, the price
of soul-winners has gone away up since the days of Paul and his fellow ministers.

Preaching every night and conducting afternoon meetings, calling at the homes of the people,
directing the efforts of the members of the inner circle, sometimes with Dan--oftener without
him--fully informed and instructed by the Judge, whose guest he was and to whom he looked for
a larger part of his generous salary, the evangelist made himself no small power in the church
of Corinth. Assisted always by the skill and strength of the Ally, the effectiveness of his
work from the standpoint of Elder Strong and the inner circle at least, was assured.

That was a great meeting; a mighty revival, far reaching in its influence and results! So the
denominational papers had it from Judge Strong's report, written while the services were still
in progress, and edited by the evangelist. And the papers published a greater truth than they
knew. There were influences of which they were ignorant, and the results reached ends they
dreamed not of.

Night after night--Dan heard the evangelist with harsh words and startling roughness of expression,
declare the awful, eternal disaster that would befall every soul that did not accept the peculiar
brand of salvation which he and his church alone offered. He listened to the long arguments
planned to prove the rightness, and therefore righteousness, of the evangelist himself and
his denominational way, and the equal wrongness, and therefore unrighteousness, of every other
minister and church not of his way. Then as he heard these utterances most emphatically and
enthusiastically indorsed by his Elders and people as the old Jerusalem gospel, the conviction
grew upon him that his preaching would never be acceptable to Memorial Church.

And what place is there in the scheme of things as they are for the unacceptable preaching
of any gospel? What gospel can a preacher deliver in order to be acceptable to his peculiar
church save that church's peculiar gospel? Dan was not one to ask the oft repeated question
of the ministry, "What must I preach in order that I may be saved?"

In the semi-secret workers meetings; in the still more private planning of the committees;
in the jubilant reports of the uneasiness of the other churches; and in the satisfying accounts
of the awakened opposition and answering sermons of the other preachers; in the evidence of
the general stirring up of the community; and in the schemes for further advertising and boosting
the evangelist and the cause, Dan felt himself growing ever more and more out of harmony--felt
himself more and more alone.

In those days the sadness of his face grew fixed; his color lost its healthy freshness; strange
lines, that did not belong to his young manhood, appeared; and the brown eyes that were wont
to look at you so openly, hopefully, expectantly, with laughter half-hidden in their depths,
were now doubting, questioning, fearful, full of pain.

The Doctor saw, and silently "stood by." Dr. Harry saw and wished that it was all over.

Then came a letter from the officials of the Chicago church of which Dr. Miles was a member.
The letter asked if Dan would consider a call to that congregation. Again and again Dan read
the letter. What should he do? He could not stay in Corinth. The sense of failure haunted him,
while he was unable to fix upon the reason for it. He condemned himself for committing unknown
offenses. Could he honestly go to another church? How should he answer the letter? He could
not answer it at once--perhaps in a few days!

While he hesitated the meeting drew to its triumphant close. After one last, mighty, farewell
effort, the evangelist departed to some other grand harvest of souls, to some other church
that needed "setting in order." His work was well done! So well done that he was justified,
perhaps, in making another substantial increase in his stated weekly "terms."

That night when the farewell meeting was over, and the last "good-bye" and "God bless you"
had been said to the evangelist, Dan stood alone in his study, by the window that looked out
upon Denny's garden. He was very tired. Never before in his life had he known such weariness.
He felt that in the past few weeks he had neglected the garden down there. For Denny and Deborah
he had planned that the little plot of ground should be more profitable that year than it had
ever been before. He would not neglect it longer. There at least were visible, actual returns
for his labor. Tomorrow he would spend in the garden.

But to-night--

Seating himself at his writing table he wrote the Chicago church that he could not consider
their call. And then in that little room where he had made for his ministry the supreme sacrifice
of his life; surrounded by the silent witnesses of his struggle and victory, he penned his
resignation as the pastor of Memorial Church.

Dan Matthews will never outlive the suffering of that hour. He had lost the woman he loved
with all the might of his strong passionate manhood. When she had waited and beckoned him to
come, he had chosen his ministry. And now--God pity him!--now he had lost that for which he
had sacrificed both himself and the woman he loved.

When he had finished his letter, he bowed his face in his hands and wept.

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

A HANDFUL OF GOLD

"'I fear it is more his church than mine, sir.'"

Rising early the next morning Dan looked from his window to see a stranger already at work
in the garden. He was tall, raw-boned, having the figure and dress of a laborer. A few minutes
later Dan was introduced by the delighted Deborah to her brother Mike McGowan, who had arrived
the afternoon before from somewhere in the west. All the morning the two men worked side by
side with crippled Denny.

Returning to his self-appointed task in the afternoon, Dan was met by the brawny Irishman who
in a towering rage, was just leaving the house.

"Parson," he roared, "'tis a good man ye are, if ye be only a protestant preacher--a damn good
man sir, beggin' your pardon! But you've got a danged poor kind of a boss, thot'll be lookin'
more like he ought to when I git through with him."

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Dan stopping with his back to the gate, thus blocking the way,
for he saw that the stranger was bent on violence to someone. "Whom do you mean, by my boss?"

"Who do I mane? And who should I mane, but him that runs the thing yonder they call a church,
beggin' your pardon, sir. 'Tis the Elder, as you call him--Judge Strong. I'll judge him, if
I can coax him widin reach of my two hands." He shook his huge, hairy fists in the air. "It's
not strong but wake he'll be when I git through wid him. Leave me pass, if you please, sir."

Dan held his place. "Come, come McGowan," he said, "let's go into the house and you tell me
about this."

Deborah, who with Denny was standing in the doorway, called out to them, "That's right Mr.
Matthews. Come on in Mike, and talk it over quiet like; let the minister tell ye what to do.
It's him that'll save us a sight o' trouble that nobody wants. Come in sir! Come on Mike, come
with the minister."

The wrathful Irishman hesitated. Dan laid a hand on his arm and together they went into the
cottage.

"'Twas this way sir," said McGowan, "I was sayin' to Debby and Denny here at dinner what a
danged fine man I took ye for after workin' wid ye all mornin' in the garden, an' then she
up an' tells me 'bout you fixin' up the mortgage fer them an' how they niver could find out
how you fixed it with the Judge. 'The mortgage' says I, 'what mortgage is that, Debby?' 'The
mortgage on the place, of course,' says she. 'Don't you mind, I was tellin' you 'bout it when
ye was here before?' 'Do I mind' says I, 'I should think I did,' and wid that it all come out
sir, and this is the way of it.

"When I come from Colorado that time Jack was killed I found Debby here, widout even money
enough to pay for a mass, to say nothin' of the buryin', bein' as they had put iverythin' into
the little place here, d'ye see? Well I had a run o' luck the week before, which is neither
here nor there, but I had money. I knowed from experience that it wouldn't shtay by me long
anyway, an' so I thought I'd kinda fix things up fer Debby an' the kid here, while I could,
d'ye see?

"Well when 'twas all over, I paid the undertaker's bills an' iverythin' like that, an' then
the very day I left I went to that damn thief, beggin' your pardon, an' paid off that mortgage
in good, hard cash. Explainin' to him, d'ye see, that I wanted the papers all fixed up straight
and clear and turned over to Debby here, as a kind of a surprise, d'ye see, after I was gone
an' she would be feelin' down-hearted bein' left by her man and me besides. The Judge bein',
as I knew, the main guy in the big church, I niver thought but that'd be all right, d'ye see?
Well sir, I went away that very day as tickled as a boy over the thing an' niver thought nothin'
about not gettin' a letter about it from her, 'cause ye see wid me on the move so, most of
the letters I git from Debby niver find me at all. An' here she's tillin' me now that she's
niver heard nothin' 'bout it from the Judge an' she's been payin' the interest right along,
an' would a been turned out by him if it han't a bin fer you, sir. An' me wid no writin' nor
nothin' to show for the good money I paid him. Now, ain't that a hell of a thing, sir? What
kin I do save bate the face off him onless he fixes it up right an' gives back ivery cint he's
had off her besides?"

As he listened to the Irishman's story, the new, drawn lines in Dan's face deepened. He sat
with bowed head as though he himself were being charged with theft. When the tale was finished
there was silence in the little room for several minutes. Then Dan raised his head and the
others saw that in his eyes, as though he had received a mortal hurt.

"Tell me, Mr. McGowan," he said. "Are you sure there is not some mistake somewhere? It is very
hard for me to believe, that an Elder of the church--would--" his voice broke.

The Irishman's rough tones were softened as he answered, "An' how could there be any mistake,
sir, wid me givin' him the hard cash out of me own pocket after his tellin' me how much it
was, an' his promise to fix it up all right fer Debby when I'd explained the surprise I'd meant
fer her?"

"You paid him the money, you say?"

"That I did sir--gold. Ye see I happened to have that draft--jest a thousand an' I turned it
in here at the bank. I remember how the feller at the winder tried to make me take thim dirty
bills an' I would not, as neither would you if you lived as long in the west as I have, sir,
an' got used to the good, clean gold. 'It's the gold or nothin' I'll have' says I to him, 'clean
money to pay a clean debt' an' we had some words over it--his bein' on the other side o' the
winder, ye see, where he could talk to me. An even eight hundred and fifty I gave the Judge,
one hundred and forty I paid the undertaker and the other tin I gave to Denny here as I was
leavin'. The priest I paid out of some I had in me belt."

"Come," said Dan, "we must go to the bank."

In the rear room of the little country bank, Dan introduced the Irishman to the cashier, Colonel
Dunwood.

"I think I have met Mr. McGowan before," said the Colonel with a smile. "Mrs. Mulhall's brother
are you not? You were here when Jack was killed."

"I was, sir. Glad to meet you again, sir."

"Do you remember cashing a draft for Mr. McGowan, Colonel?" asked Dan.

The banker laughed heartily. "I should say I did--a thousand dollars in gold. I was glad the
counter was between us, when I tried to persuade him to take paper. Why sir, not in twenty
years in this state would you find a man who would even accept the gold, let alone fighting
for it!"

Then Dan explained briefly the situation.

When he had finished the Colonel sprang to his feet with an oath. "And that explains something
that puzzled us here in the bank, for many a day. Wait a minute."

He left the room to return with a slip of paper. "Can you tell me the exact date on which you
cashed the draft?" he said to McGowan.

"It was the day after the funeral. I disremember the date, but 'twould be easy to find."

The banker nodded, "Our books show that I paid you the money the sixteenth. And here," he laid
the slip of paper before them, "is a deposit slip made out and signed by Judge Strong dated
the seventeenth, showing that on that date he deposited eight hundred and fifty dollars in
gold. That is what puzzled us, Mr. Matthews--that the Judge should deposit that amount of gold,
there being, you see so little gold handled here. It makes it very easy to trace. I'll illustrate."
He turned to Mike. "Did you spend any more of the gold in Corinth?"

McGowan told him about paying the undertaker. After a moment the Colonel triumphantly laid
before them a deposit slip made out by the undertaker dated a day later, showing an item of
one hundred and forty dollars in gold.

"You see," he said, "how easy it is."

"Colonel Dunwood," said Dan, "would this be sufficient evidence before a jury to--" He hesitated.

The Colonel let fly another oath, "Yes sir, and before any jury you could get together in this
county it wouldn't take half this to send that damned, long-faced, sniveling, hypocrite where
he belongs. He is one of our best customers, too, but I reckon this bank can get along without
his dirty money. I beg your pardon, sir; I forgot he is an Elder in your church."

Dan smiled sadly, "I fear it is more his church than mine, sir." And they left the banker to
puzzle over the minister's remark.

That evening Dan went again to the home of Judge Strong. He had persuaded McGowan to let him
act in the matter, for he feared that the Irishman's temper would complicate things and make
it more difficult to secure Deborah's rights by creating some feeling in the community against
the little family.

Dan found the Judge in his library. Very quietly, sadly indeed, he told the story. The Elder,
righteously indignant, stormed at the minister, denying everything; accusing Dan of being an
impudent meddler; threatening him with dismissal from, the church and the denomination; accusing
him even, with unlawful interest in the affairs of the widow, and taunting him with the common
reports as to his relations with Miss Farwell and her companion.

Dan with a look of sadness growing deeper on his face listened, without a word until the final
insinuation; then he checked the other sharply, and his voice had the ring of metal in it as
he said slowly, "Judge Strong you shall answer to me later for this insult to these good women.
Just now you will not mention them again. I am here in the interests of Mr. McGowan. Confine
your remarks to that subject."

Then he laid before the Judge the evidence he had obtained at the bank and pointed out its
damaging strength. The man was frightened now, but still he obstinately denied having received
any money in payment of the mortgage. Dan pleaded with him, urging even the cause of the church,
telling also how McGowan had agreed to do nothing further if the Judge would simply make restitution.

The Judge answered arrogantly that he had been a faithful member, and an Elder in the Memorial
Church, too long to be harmed by the charges of a stranger, a wandering ruffian, who had nothing
but his word to show that he had paid him a sum of money. "And as for you, young man," he added,
"I may as well tell you now that your time is about up in Corinth, and I'll take mighty good
care that you don't get another church in our brotherhood either. I'll show you that preachers
get along better when they attend to their own affairs."

Dan's final words, as he stood by the door, were, "I cannot believe Judge Strong, that you
will force my friends to take this matter into the courts. But we will certainly do so if I
do not receive from you by tomorrow noon the proper papers and a check for every cent you have
taken from Mrs. Mulhall."

Until late in the night after Dan's departure, Judge Strong still sat at his desk, deep in
thought. Occasionally he rose to walk the floor.

When the Judge had received that money from McGowan he had had no thought but regret at losing
the property he coveted. With Deborah and Denny left alone in the world, he knew that in time
the place would be sure to come to him. He had only to wait. This wild Irish brick-layer--and
who knows what beside--who was he to block the Elder's plans with his handful of gold?

The gold! How well the Judge remembered that day, and how when Mike was gone, he had sat contemplating
the shining pieces! What a fool the man was to carry such stuff on his person! The careful
Judge never dreamed that the money had come from his own bank. The Irishman was going away
on the morrow. Planning gleefully to surprise his sister, he had told no one. He would wander
far. It would be years before he would return, if he ever came back. By that time the property
would be--

It was seemingly all too easy. The Judge's character was not a character to resist such an
opportunity. The gold alone perhaps would not have won, but the gold and the place--the place
he had planned for and felt so certain of owning--that was too much!

And now this big sad-faced preacher--the Irishman again, and the bank! The more the Judge thought
over Dan's quiet words, the more he saw the danger.

So it came about, that the next morning Dan, waiting in his study, received a visitor--the
good old Elder--Nathaniel Jordan.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE VICTORY OF THE ALLY

"So the old Doctor found him in the late afternoon--his great strength shaken by rage and doubt;
found him struggling like a beast in the trap."

Nathaniel was greatly agitated as he faced the minister in the doorway. He moved unsteadily
across the room, stumbling toward the chair Dan offered, and his hand shook so violently that
his cane rattled against the window ledge, where he attempted to lay it--rattled and fell to
the floor. He jumped in his seat at the sound. Dan picked up the cane and placed it on the
table. Then the Elder found his voice--thin and trembling--and said, "I came about--about Brother
Strong, you know."

"Yes," said Dan, a great pity for this good old man in his heart. "Did Judge Strong send anything?"

The Elder fumbled in his pocket and drew out an envelope. He extended it with shaking fingers
to Dan, who opened it and examined the contents. Slowly he replaced them in the envelope and,
looking at his visitor, waited.

Again the Elder found his voice and said with a little more self-control, "A bad business,
Brother Matthews; too bad, too bad; poor Brother Strong!"

He shook his head sadly. Dan looked at him curiously, but made no reply.

"Poor Brother Strong," the Elder repeated. "Brother Matthews, I want to ask you to use your
influence with these people to keep this sad affair from getting out. Do you think they will
insist on--ah, on bringing action against Brother Strong now--now that he has--ah, complied
with your request?"

"And why," asked Dan, "should you wish the matter kept secret?"

The Elder gazed at him blankly. "Why? Why, on account of the church, of course. Judge Strong
is one of our leading members--an Elder. He has been for years. It would ruin us--ruin us!"

"But," said Dan coolly, "he is a thief. You must know that he stole this money. Here--," he
stretched forth his hand, holding the envelope, "here is his confession of guilt."

The Elder's voice trembled again. "Brother Matthews! Brother Matthews! I--I protest! Such language,
applied to an Elder is unchristian; you know the scripture?"

"Is it not true?" persisted Dan.

"Ahem! Brother Strong may have made a mistake, may--ah, have done wrong, but the church--the
church; we must think of the good name of the cause! Coming so soon after the revival, too!"

"Am I to understand, then, that the church will keep this man in his place as an Elder; that
you will protect him when you know his true character?"

At the question the other stared blankly. "Why--why how could we get along without him?"

"How can you get along with him?" asked Dan.

"But there isn't a man in Corinth who has done so much for us and for the missionary cause!
No, no, we must be more careful, Brother Matthews."

"Then for the sake of his contributions and his position in the community the church will shield
him from the results of his crime?"

The Elder squirmed uneasily in his chair.

"Is that what you mean?" insisted Dan.

"Why--I--I don't think, Brother Matthews, for the good of our cause in Corinth, that it would
be good policy to make this matter public and so create a great stir. Brother Strong has made
restitution. We must be charitable, brother, and forgiving. You must not think too--too hard
of him. Are these people determined to push this matter?"

"Oh, no," said Dan, "not at all. They want only that which belongs to them. You may rest easy;
as I told the Judge last night, this will end the matter. It was under that promise that he
made restitution, as you call it. I was simply asking to know how the church would look upon
such a thing when it touches an Elder. You have explained it clearly--policy!"

The Elder stiffened. It was remarkable how quickly he revived under Dan's assurance that the
danger was past! Very dignified now, as became one in his position, he said, "Ahem, ahem! I
fear, Brother Matthews, that you are not--ah--not entirely in harmony with our brotherhood
in many things."

Dan was silent.

"Ahem! The tone of your sermons has been I may say--ah, questioned by a good many of us, and
your attitude toward the board has not been quite as cordial as we feel we have a right to expect."

"Do you speak from personal experience, sir?"

"Oh, no--no indeed, Brother Matthews; but--ah, Brother Strong has felt for some time past that
you have treated him rather coldly."

Dan waited.

"A lack of harmony between a pastor and his Elder is very bad--ah, very bad. Ahem! Ahem! And
so, considering everything we--Brother Str--that is the board have thought best that your relations
with the Memorial Church should discontinue."

"And when was this action taken?" asked Dan quietly.

"The day before the meetings closed. We wished to have the benefit of Brother Sigman's advice
before he left. He met with us and we considered the whole matter quite carefully and prayerfully.
I was appointed to tell you. I should add that there is no doubt but the people will concur
in the board's decision. Many of the members, I may say, were seen before we took action."

Dan glanced toward his desk where, in the envelopes, lay his resignation and his answer to
the Chicago church. In the excitement of McGowan's trouble he had neglected to mail them.

"Of course," he questioned, quietly curious now, "the board will give me a letter?"

"Ahem! We--ah, discussed that also," said the Elder. "Brother Strong and the Evangelist--and,
I may say, the entire board feel that we cannot consistently do so."

"May I ask why?"

"Ahem! Your teaching, Brother Matthews, does not seem to be in harmony with the brotherhood.
We cannot endorse it, and the talk in the community about your conduct has been very damaging;
very!"

"Is it charged that my teaching has been false to the principles of Christianity as taught
by Christ?"

"I cannot discuss that part, Brother Matthews. It is not such teaching as the churches of our
brotherhood want."

"Does the church, sir, believe that my character is bad?"

"No, sir--no, sir! No one really believes that, but you have been--ah, injudicious. There has
been so much talk, you know--"

"Who has talked?" Dan interrupted.

The Elder continued, "These things follow a minister all his life. We cannot recommend a man
of bad repute to our sister churches; it would reflect upon us."

"For the same reason that you keep in a high office in the church a man who is an unrepentant
thief?" said Dan.

The Elder rose. "Really, Brother Matthews, I cannot listen to such words about our Elder!"

"I beg your pardon, sir," said Dan huskily. "I was thinking aloud. Please tell me one thing
more. I have here a letter from a church in Chicago asking me to consider a call. Have the
Elders received a letter from them?"

"Ahem! Yes, we considered it at that same meeting."

"And you have written them?"

"We could not recommend you. I am sorry, Brother Matthews."

"I believe you are," said Dan slowly. "Thank you."

When the Elder was gone Dan turned sadly back to his little study; the study that had come
to stand so for everything to which he had devoted his life with such holy purpose, for which
he had sacrificed so much.

Slowly he went to his desk and looked down upon the work scattered over it. Taking up the two
letters he tore them slowly into fragments and dropped them into the waste basket. Then as
slowly he turned to his books, touching many of the familiar volumes with a caressing hand.
Then he went to the table where lay his church papers and the missionary pamphlets and reports.
The envelope from Judge Strong caught his eye.

Mechanically he took his hat and went to carry the message to his friends on the other side
of the garden. From across the street the old Doctor hailed him but he did not hear.

Delivering the envelope, with a few brief words, the minister left his friends and wandered
on down the street in a bewildered, dazed fashion, scarce knowing where he went, or why; until
he turned in through the gap in the tumble-down fence to the old Academy yard.

But he could not stay there. The place was haunted, he could not stay! He turned his face toward
the open country, but the fields and woodlands had no call for him that day. It was his little
study that called; his books, his work.

As one goes to sit beside the body of a dear friend, conscious that the friend he loved is
not there, yet unable to leave the form wherein the spirit had lived, so Dan went back to his
room, his desk, his books, his papers--that which had been his work.

And now the deep passions of the man stirred themselves--awoke. Wild anger, mad rage, seized
and shook him. His whole sense of justice was outraged. This was not Christianity, this thing
that had caught him in its foul snare! And if the church was not Christian what was Christianity?
Was there, indeed, such a thing? Was it all such a hollow mockery?

And the Doctor saw that the hour for which he had waited had come.

Dan needed him--needed him badly!

CHAPTER XL.

THE DOCTOR'S GLASSES

"'There is no hatred, lad, so bitter as that hatred born of a religious love; no falsehood
so vile as the lie spoken in defense of truth; no wrong so harmful as the wrong committed in
the name of righteousness; no injustice so terrible as the injustice of those who condemn in
the name of the Saviour of the world!'"

When Dan, forced into something of his habitual self-control and calmness by the presence of
his old friend, began telling the Doctor of the action of the church the other checked him
abruptly with, "I know all about that, lad."

"You know!" ejaculated Dan.

"Certainly I know. Isn't Martha one of the elect? I reckon everybody in the whole town but
you knew it before noon of the day after the meeting."

Dan muttered something about being a blind fool and the old Doctor answered, "Humph! The fools
are they who see too much, boy. Such blindness as yours is a gift of the gods; for Heaven's
sake don't let any quack fit you out with glasses!"

Dan threw himself wearily into a chair and there was a spirit of recklessness in his reply,
as though he were letting go of himself again. "How is a blind man to recognize a quack? I
would to God I had your glasses!"

"Perhaps," said the Doctor deliberately, "I might lend them to you, just for once, you know."

"Well then," said the other, sitting up suddenly, "let me have them! How do you see this thing?
What have I done or not done? For what shall I blame myself? What fatal error have I made that,
with the best of motives, with the--," he hesitated, then--"I can say it to you, Doctor, and
I will--with the sacrifice of the dearest thing in the world to me, I am cast out in this fashion?
If I can find a reason for it, I can bear it."

"It is your blindness, boy. You could not help it; you were born blind. I have always known
this would come."

"You have always known this would come?" repeated Dan questioningly.

"Yes, I have always known, because for half a century, boy, I have observed the spirit of this
institution. Mind, I do not say the spirit of the people in the institution. Strong people,
Dan, sometimes manage to live in mighty sickly climates. The best people in the world are sometimes
held by evil circumstances which their own best intentions have created. The people in the
church are the salt of the earth. If it were not for their goodness the system would have rotted
long ago. The church, for all its talk, doesn't save the people; the people save the church.
And let me tell you, Dan, the very ones in the church who have done the things you have seen
and felt, at heart respect and believe in you."

Dan broke forth in such a laugh as the Doctor had never heard from his lips. "Then why?"

"Because," said the old man, "it is their religion to worship an institution, not a God; to
serve a system, not the race. It is history, my boy. Every reformation begins with the persecution
of the reformer and ends with the followers of that reformer persecuting those who would lead
them another step toward freedom. Misguided religious people have always crucified their saviors
and always will!"

Dan was silent, awed by the revelation of his old friend's mind.

"What then, as you see it--what can I do?" demanded Dan.

The Doctor changed his tone. His reply was more a question than an answer. "There are other
churches?"

Dan laughed bitterly. "They have taken care of that, too." He began to tell of the call to
Chicago and the Elders' refusal to give him a letter, but again the Doctor interrupted him.
"Yes, I know about that, too."

"Well," demanded Dan almost angrily.

"Well," answered the other easily, "there are still other churches."

"You mean--."

"I mean that you are not the only preacher who has been talked about by his church, and branded
by his official board with the mark of the devil in the name of the Lord. It's easy enough!
Go farther, get a little obscure congregation somewhere, stay long enough to get a letter,
not long enough to make another name; try another in the same fashion. Lay low, keep quiet,
stay away from conventions, watch your chance, and--when the time is ripe--make a hit with
the state workers in some other state. You know how! It's all easy enough!"

Dan leaped to his feet. "Good God, Doctor! I have done nothing wrong. Why should I skulk, and
hide, and scheme to conceal something I never did, for the privilege of serving a church that
doesn't want me? Is this the ministry?"

"It seems to be a large part of it," answered the other deliberately. "My boy, it's the things
that preachers have not done that they try hardest to hide. As to why, I must confess that
I am a little near-sighted myself sometimes."

"I can't, I can't do it, Doctor!"

"Humph! I didn't suppose you could," came dryly from the old man.

Dan did not heed but went on in a hopeless tone to tell the Doctor how he had written his resignation,
and had declined to consider the call to Chicago. "Don't you see that I couldn't take a church
if one were offered me now?" he asked. "Don't you understand what this has done for me? It's
not the false charges. It's not that! It's--it's the thing, whatever it is, that has made this
action of the church possible. I am forced to doubt, not alone the church, but everything--the
people, myself, God, Christ, Christianity, life itself; everything! How can I go on with a
work, in which I cannot say to myself with truth that I believe?" His voice ended in a groan.

And the old man, who knew the lad so well felt as though he were gazing upon the big, naked
soul. Then, indeed, the Doctor knew that the hour had come.

There are those who, capable of giving but little to life, demand of life much in return. To
such weak natures doubt means not much. But souls like this one, capable of giving themselves
to the last atom of their strength, demand no small returns in convictions as to the worthiness
of the cause to which they contribute. To such, doubt is destruction. It was because Dan had
believed so strongly, so wholly in the ministry of the church that he had failed. Had he not
accepted so unreservedly, and given himself so completely to the ministry as it was presented
to him in theory, had he in some degree doubted, he would have been able to adjust himself
to the actual conditions. He would have succeeded.

For while, theoretically, the strength of the church is in its fidelity to the things in which
it professes to believe; practically and actually the strength of the church of today is in
its tacit acceptance of its unbeliefs. Strange things would befall us if we should ever get
the habit of insisting that our practice square with our preaching; if churches should make
this the test of fellowship--that men must live their doctrines, rather than teach them--that
they must live their beliefs rather than confess them--that they must live their faiths, rather
than profess them.

Dan's was not a nature that could preach things in which he only half believed to a people
whose belief he knew to be no stronger than his own. It was with these things in mind that
the Doctor had waited for this moment in Dan's life, for the old man realized, as the young
man could not, what such moments mean.

Rising and going to the window overlooking the garden the Doctor called to Dan, "Come here, boy!"

Together they stood looking down on the little plot of ground with its growing vegetables,
where Denny, with his helpless, swinging arm, and twisted, dragging foot, was digging away,
his cheery whistle floating up to them. The physician spoke with a depth of feeling he had
never betrayed before, while Dan, troubled as he was, listened in wonder to his friend, who
had always been so reticent in matters such as this.

"Dan," he said, "you wished for my glasses. 'Tis always a mighty dangerous thing to try to
see through another man's eyes, but here are mine." He pointed below.

"Down there I see religion--Christianity--what you will, but religion; living, growing, ever-changing,
through the season-ages; lying dormant sometimes, it may be, but always there; yielding to
each season the things that belong to that season; depending for its strength and power upon
the Great Source of all strength and power; depending as truly upon man's efforts, upon his
cultivation and care. There is variety, harmony, law, freedom. There is God! Something for
all--potatoes, peas, turnips, cabbage. If you do not care for lettuce, perhaps radishes will
satisfy. And there, boy, in the midst of his church, ministering to the needs of his congregation,
and thus ministering to men--is my minister: crippled, patient Denny, who gives his frail strength
to keep the garden growing.

"And look you, boy, at the great rock in the very center of the field! How often Denny has
wished it out of his way! I caught the poor lad digging, one time, to find, if he could, how
deep it is in the earth, and how big. For three days I watched him. Then he gave it up. It
is beyond his strength and he wisely turned to devote his energies to the productive soil around
it.

"There is a rock in every garden, Dan. Religion grows always about the unknowable. But Denny's
ministry has naught to do with the rock, it has to do with the growing things about it. So
religion is in the knowable things not in the unknowable; there such men as you, lad, must
find it. And the rock, boy, was not put in the garden by men. It belongs to the earth itself."

While the Doctor was speaking his eyes had been fixed on the crippled boy in the garden. He
turned now, for the first time, to face the young man by his side. Dan's eyes had that wide,
questioning look. The old physician moved to the other window.

"Now come, see what men have done." He pointed to the cast-iron monument. "These people will
tell you that was erected to commemorate the life of my friend. His was a warm, tender, loving
spirit--a great, ever-growing soul. What can that hard, cold, immovable mass tell of him? How
can that thing--perpetuating an issue that belongs to a past age, that has nothing to do with
the life of today--how can that thing speak of the great heart that loved and gave itself always
to men?

"Through my glasses that is the church! How can an institution, or a system of theological
beliefs--with cast-iron prejudices, cast-iron fidelity to issues long past and forgotten, cast-iron
unconcern of vital issues of the life of today and cast-iron want of sympathy with the living
who toil and fight and die on every side--how can such speak the great loving, sympathetic,
helpful spirit of Him whose name only it bears, as that bears only the name of my friend?

"But would the people of this town, out of love for my dead friend, tear down that monument
if Denny should leave his garden to argue with them about it? Why, they would tell him that
it is because of their love for the statesman that they keep it there and they believe it--and
it is true. Well, then, let them keep their monument and let Denny work in his garden! And
don't you see, Dan, that the very ones who fight for the cast-iron monument must depend at
last for their lives and strength upon the things that Denny grows in his garden. Now boy,
that's the first and only time I ever preached."

CHAPTER XLI

THE FINAL WORD

"'This closes my ministry as you understand it. It by no means closes my ministry as I have
come to understand it.'"

Dan's farewell sermon was to be given in the evening. John Gardner, who--true to the promise
he had made when he challenged the minister, after that sermon on "Fellowship of Service"--had
become a regular attendant, was present in the morning.

In the afternoon the farmer called on Dan in his study.

"Look here, Dan," he said. "You are making the mistake of your life."

"You're wrong, John. I made that mistake nearly two years ago," he answered.

"I mean in leaving Corinth as you are leaving it."

"And I mean in coming to Corinth as I came to it."

"But wait a minute; let me tell you! You have done a lot of good in this town; you don't know--."

"So have you done a lot of good, John; you don't know either."

The farmer tried again. "You have helped me more than you know."

"I'm glad, John, because you have helped me more than you know."

"Oh, come; you know what I mean!"

"Well, don't you know what I mean?"

"Yes, I think I do. I've been listening pretty close to your sermons and so have a lot of others.
I have managed to talk with a good many church people since it was known that you were going;
just common plugs in the congregation, like me, you know." Dan smiled. "We all understand what
you have been driving at in your preaching, and we know pretty well what the bosses think about
it, and why they have let you out. No one takes any stock in that foul gossip, not even Strong
himself. Now what I came to say is this: a lot of us want you to stay. Why can't we have another
church for our people right here in Corinth? There's enough of us to back you, and we mean
business."

Dan shook his head sadly.

"Thank you, John," he said simply. "It is useless for me to try to tell you how much good this
does me; but I can't accept. I have thought of the possibility you mention, but I can't do
it. You do not need another church in Corinth. You have more than you need now."

Nor could any argument move him.

"Well," said the farmer, when at last he gave it up and rose to say good-bye, "I suppose I'll
keep right on being a church member, but I reckon I'll have to find most of my religion in
my work."

"And that," said Dan, as he gripped his friend's hand, "is the best place I know of to look
for it. If you cannot find God in your everyday work, John, you'll not find Him on Sunday at
the church."

That farewell sermon is still talked about in Corinth or rather--it should be said--is still
remembered, for it was one of those sermons of which, while little could be said, much could
never be forgotten. And the picture of the big lad, whose strong, clean-looking body drooped
so as if in great weariness; whose frank open countenance was marked with drawn lines; in whose
clear brown eyes were shadows of trouble and pain; whose voice betrayed the sadness of a mighty
soul, will also remain long in the memory of those who were there that evening.

The place was crowded. The triumphant Judge and his friends of the inner circle were there
in force, striving in vain to hide, with pious expression of countenance, the satisfaction
and pride they felt in their power. The other members were there, curious to hear what Dan
would say; wondering how much he knew of the methods that had brought about his dismissal;
a little sorry for him; a little indignant; and with a feeling of impotence withal that made
their sorrow and indignation of no worth whatever. With identically the same emotions as the
members, except that it felt free to express them more freely, the world was there. To a portion
of the congregation Dan stood in the peculiar position of a friend whom, as an individual,
they loved and trusted, but whom, as a preacher, they were forced to regard as unsafe and dangerous.

It would not do to report all he said, for much of his sermon was not fashioned for the printed
page.

But his final words were: "It is not the spirit of wealth, of learning, or of culture that
can make the church of value, or a power for good in the world, but the spirit of Christ only.
It is not in fidelity to the past but in fidelity to the present that the church can be Christian.
It is not the opinion of man, but the eternal truths of God that can make it a sacred, holy
thing. It is holy to the degree that God is in it. God is as truly in the fields of grain,
in the forests, in the mines, and in those laws of Nature by which men convert the product
of field and forest and mine into the necessities of life. Therefore these are as truly holy
as this institution. Therefore, again, the ministry of farm, and mine, and factory, and shop;
of mill, and railroad, and store, and office, and wherever men toil with strength of body or
strength of mind for that which makes for the best life of their kind--that ministry is sacred
and holy.

"Because I believe these things I am, from this hour, no longer a professional preacher, hired
by and working under the direction of any denomination or church leaders. This closes my ministry
as you understand it. It by no means closes my ministry as I have come to understand it."

When he had finished they crowded around him to express regret at his going--sorry that he
was leaving the ministry; the church needed men of his great ability--prayed God to bless him
wherever he should go--all this and much more, with hand-shaking and many tears from the very
people who had made it impossible for him to stay. For this is the way of us all!

As quickly as he could Dan left the church, and with the Doctor walked toward home. The two
made no exchange of words, until they reached the monument, where they paused to stand silently
contemplating the cast-iron figure. At last Dan turned with a smile. "It is very good cast-iron,
I suppose, Doctor."

Then, as if dismissing the whole matter, he took his old friend's arm and, with a joyous ring
in his voice that had not been there for many months, said, "Doctor, you'll do me one favor
before I leave, won't you?"

"What?"

"Go fishing with me tomorrow. There is something, still, before I can leave Corinth--. I do
not know how--Will you go?"

CHAPTER XLII.

JUSTICE

"The last shadow of his Corinthian ministry had been lifted from his soul."

Early the next morning Dan and the old Doctor set out for Wheeler's Ford. It was the nearest
point, and while the fishing was not so good as at other places they knew the spot was what
they wanted. This was one of the days when they would go fishing--but not for fish.

Leaving their rig by the roadside near the fence, the two friends wandered away up the stream;
casting their hooks now and then at the likely places; taking a few fish; pausing often to
enjoy the views of silver water, over-hanging trees, wooded bluffs, rocky bank or grassy slope,
that changed always with the winding of the creek.

Returning to the rig for their lunch and to give the old horse his generous allowance, they
went downstream in the afternoon, this time leaving their rods behind.

"Really, you know," said the Doctor, "the tackle is such a bother on this kind of a fishing
trip." At which sage remark Dan's laugh rang out so freely that the woods on the other side
of the little valley gave back the merry sound.

Dan felt strangely light-hearted and free that day. The Doctor thought the lad was more like
himself than he had been for months. The truth is that Dan's gladness was akin to the gladness
of home-coming. He felt as one who, having been for long years in a foreign land, returns to
his own country and his own people. He was again a man among his fellow-men, with no barrier
between him and his kind. Once more he was in the world to which he belonged, and it was a
good world.

There was, too, a strange, delightful feeling of nearness to her--the woman he loved. He had
had no word since she left Corinth, nor did he know where she was. He would never find her
again, perhaps, but he no longer belonged to a world separate and apart from her world. He
felt nearer to her even than when they were together that last time in the old Academy yard.

Dan was conscious, too, of a sense of freedom--of a broader, fuller life than he had ever known.
Through the old Doctor's timely words, setting his thoughts into new channels, he had come
out of his painful experience with a certain largeness of vision that made him stronger. He
had found himself. He did not know yet what he would do; he had plans dimly formed, but nothing
fixed. What did it matter? Somewhere he felt his garden waited for him; he would find his work.
He was free from the deadening influence of the cast-iron monument and that, for the moment,
was enough. So far as his Corinthian ministry was concerned only one shadow, out of all the
dark cloud of his troubled experience remained. When that was lifted he would turn his back
upon Corinth forever, but until then he did not feel free to go.

They were lying on the grassy bank of a woodland pasture, where a herd of cattle grazed or
lay contentedly in the shade of the scattered trees.

"Heigh-ho," said the Doctor, "I believe I will go with you, lad."

For some time they had been silent and it was almost as though the old man had spoken to his
companion's thoughts.

"Go where?" asked Dan, turning over on his side and half-raising himself on his elbow.

"Why home to Mutton Hollow, of course. You'll be leaving pretty soon now, I reckon."

"I suppose so," mused Dan vaguely. "But I'm not going home."

The old Doctor sat up. "Not going home!"

Dan smiled. "Not just yet," he answered. "I want to run about a little first."

"Uh-huh," the Doctor nodded. "Want to get your hair dry and your shirt on right side out before
you face the folks."

Dan laughed. "Perhaps I want to look for my garden," he said.

"Good!" ejaculated the other, now very much in earnest. "Let me help you, lad. You know what
I have always hoped for you. My profession needs--."

Dan interrupted gently, "No. No Doctor, not that. I have a notion--but there--it's all too
vague yet to even discuss. When I am ready to go home I'll write you and you can meet me there.
Will you?"

The old man hid his disappointment, answering heartily, "Sure I will! I'll be there when you
arrive, to help kill the fatted calf." He did not tell Dan of a letter from his mother urging
him, for certain reasons, to visit them, or that he had already promised her to be with them
when Dan should return.

The shadows were beginning to stretch toward the river, and the cattle were moving slowly in
the direction of the farmyard, hidden somewhere beyond the fringe of timber, when the two friends
went leisurely back to the road to find their rig and start for home.

Climbing the fence they paused and--seated on the top rail--watched a team and buggy just coming
down the opposite bank of the stream to cross the ford. Midway the horses stopped to drink.

"By George," muttered the Doctor, "it's our friend the Judge!"

The same instant, Dan recognized the man in the buggy. With the recognition all the brightness
went out of his face--as a cloud, all the sadness returned.

"Doctor," Dan said, slipping down from the fence as he spoke, "excuse me a minute. I must speak
to that man."

The Doctor kept his place on the fence, while Dan stepped into the road. The team, when they
had left the ford, stopped as they reached him.

"How do you do, Doctor?" called the man in the buggy in a loud voice; then to Dan, "Well, sir,
what do you want now?"

Dan stood near the horses' heads, his eyes fixed on their driver, and the Judge, seeing the
sorrow in his face, misunderstood, as always.

"Judge Strong," said Dan. "You are the only man in the world with whom I am not at peace. I
cannot be content to leave Corinth, sir, with anything between us."

The crafty Judge thought he understood. He took Dan's words, with his manner, as an acknowledgment
of defeat; an act of submission. The Elder had not believed that the young man had really wished
to leave the ministry. He was quite sure now that the preacher, recognizing at last the power
that had thrust him from his position and place in the church, wished to sue for peace, that
the same power might help him to another position. So this big upstart was tamed at last, was he?

The Doctor, sitting on the fence and hearing every low-spoken word, held a different view of
the situation.

"Well," said the Judge haughtily.

Dan hesitated. "I--I wished to ask a favor, sir; one that I feel sure a Christian could not
refuse."

Now the Judge was confident of his position and power. He grew still more dignified and looked
at Dan with the eye of a master.

"Well, out with it. It is growing late and I must be going."

"You will remember, sir, that the last time I called on you in your home, you made certain
grave charges against three women who are my friends."

"I repeated only the common--"

"Wait, please," interrupted Dan. "This is a matter between you and me. I understand that you
were angry and spoke hastily. Won't you please retract those words now?" Dan's voice was almost
pleading in its sad slowness; his eyes were on the Judge with an anxious, appealing look. Disappointed
at the request so different from that which he had expected, the Judge angrily answered, "Stand
out of my way; I have no time for this, sir!"

But quietly, carelessly it seemed, Dan laid one hand on the back of the nearest horse, almost
touching the rein, and moved a step or two closer to the buggy.

"Sir, I am sure you do not understand. Miss Farwell and I--I had hoped to make her my wife.
We--we parted because of the church."

The Doctor on the fence felt a lump in his throat at the pain in the boy's voice. Dan continued,
"I am telling you, sir, so that you will understand. Surely you cannot refuse to take back
your words under the circumstances."

"Oh, I see," sneered the Judge. "You lost the girl because of the church and then you lost
the church! A fine mess you made of your pious interference with other people's business, didn't
you?" And then he laughed. Looking straight into those sad, pleading eyes--he laughed.

"The damned fool," muttered the old Doctor on the fence.

"Am I to understand that you refuse to retract your words after my explanation?" Dan's tone
was mildly doubtful.

The Judge was well pleased at what he had heard.

"I have absolutely nothing to take back, sir." He laughed again. "Now if that is all, stand aside!"

But suddenly the light in Dan's eyes flashed red.

"No!" he cried, "that is not all!" With a long step he reached the side of the buggy.

The next moment the Judge found himself on the ground.

"Wh--what do you mean sir?" he roared. "Take your hands off of me!"

Dan's voice was trembling with rage, but he spoke deliberately.

"You unspeakable cur, I have felt sorry for you because of your warped and twisted nature;
because you seemed so incapable of being anything more than you are. I have given you a chance
to act like a man, and--you--you laugh at me! You escaped punishment for your theft from that
poor widow. You have escaped from God knows how many such crimes. But now, in the name of the
people you have tricked and robbed under the cover of business, in the name of the people you
have slandered and ruined under cover of the church, I'm going to give you what such a contemptible
rascal as you are, deserves."

The Judge was a large man, in the prime of life, but his natural weapons of warfare were those
of the fox, the coyote and their kin. Cornered, he made a show of resistance, but he was as
a child in the hands of the young giant, who thrashed him until he lay half-senseless, moaning
and groaning in pain, on the ground.

When Dan at last drew back the Doctor, who through it all had remained quietly seated on the
fence--an interested spectator--climbed down from his position and came slowly forward. Looking
the Judge over with a professional eye he turned to Dan with a chuckle.

"You made a mighty good job of it, lad; a mighty good job. Lord, how I envied you! Chuck him
into his buggy now, and I'll take him home. You can follow in our rig."

So they went home in the dusk of the evening. And the old Doctor told around town a tale of
how the Judge had met with an accident at Wheeler's Ford that would keep him in the house for
quite a spell.

Dan spent his last evening in Corinth with Dr. Harry and the next morning he left. The last
shadow of his Corinthian ministry had been lifted from his soul.

Corinth still talks of the great days that are gone, and the greater days that are to come,
while still the days that are, are dead days--shadowed by the cast-iron monument which yet
holds its place in the heart of the town, and makes of the community a fit home for the Ally.

Judge Strong has gathered to himself additional glory and honor by his continued activity and
prominence in Memorial Church and in his denomination, together with his contributions to the
various funds for state and national work.

Elder Jordan has been gathered to his fathers. But Nathaniel came to feel first, the supreme
joy of seeing his daughter Charity proudly installed as the assistant pastor to the last of
Dan's successors. They live at the old Jordan home and it is said he is the most successful
preacher that the Memorial Church has ever employed, and the prospects are he will serve for
many years to come.

Denny, through his minister friend, has received his education and--surrounded now by the books
he craved--cultivates another garden, wherein he bids fair to grow food for men quite as necessary
as cabbages or potatoes. Deborah is proud and happy with her boy; who, though he be crippled
in body, has a heart and mind stronger than given to many.

The Doctor seldom goes fishing now, though he still cultivates his roses and, as he says, meddles
in the affairs of his neighbors. And still he sits in his chair on the porch and watches the
world go by. Martha says that, more and more, the world, to the Doctor, means the doings of
that minister Dan Matthews.

It was a full month after Dan left Corinth when he wrote his old friend that he was going home.
The Doctor carefully packed his fishing tackle and started for Mutton Hollow.

CHAPTER XLIII.

THE HOME COMING

"Some things, thank God, are beyond the damning power of our improvements."

And now this story goes back again to the mountains to end where it began: back to where the
tree-clad ridges roll, like mighty green billows into the far distant sky; where the vast forests
lie all a-quiver in the breeze, shimmering in the sun, and the soft, blue haze of the late
summer lies lazily over the land.

Beyond Wolf ridge, all up and down Jake and Indian creeks, and even as near as Fall creek,
are the great lead and zinc mines. Over on Garber the heavily loaded trains, with engines puffing
and panting on the heavy grades, and waking the echoes with wild shrieks, follow their iron
way. But in the Mutton Hollow neighborhood, there are as yet no mines, with their unsightly
piles of refuse, smoke-grimed buildings, and clustering shanties, to mar the picture. Dewey
Bald still lifts its head in proud loneliness above the white sea of mist that still, at times,
rolls over the valley below. The paths are unaltered. From the Matthews house on the ridge,
you may see the same landmarks. The pines show black against the sunset sky. And from the Matthews
place--past the deerlick in the big, low gap past Sammy's Lookout and around the shoulder of
Dewey--looking away into the great world beyond, still lies the trail that is nobody knows how old.

So in life. With all the changes that time inevitably brings, with all our civilization, our
inventions and improvements, some things must remain unchanged. Some things--the great landmarks
in life and in religion, the hills, the valleys, the mists, must ever remain the same. Some
things, thank God, are beyond the damning power of our improvements.

In minor things the Matthews home itself is altered. But Dan's father and mother are still--in
spite of the years that have come--Young Matt and Sammy.

It was that best of all seasons in the Ozarks--October--the month of gold, when they were sitting
on the front porch in the evening with the old Doctor, who had arrived during the afternoon.

"Now, Doctor," said the mother, "tell us all about it." There was no uneasiness in her calm
voice, no shadow of worry in her quiet eyes. And the boy's father by her side was like her
in serene confidence. They knew from Dan's letters something of the trials through which he
had passed; they had assured him often of their sympathy. It never occurred to them to doubt
him in any way or to question the final outcome.

"Yes, Doctor," came the deep voice of the father. "We have had Dan's letters of course, but
the lad's not one to put all of his fight on paper. Let's have it as you saw it."

So the Doctor told them--told of the causes that had combined to put Dan on the rack, that
had driven him in spite of himself to change his views of the church and its ministry; told
of the forces that had been arrayed against him, how the lad had met these forces, and how
he had battled with himself--all that the Doctor had seen in the months of watching; all that
he knew of Dan, even to the time when Dan declared his doubt of everything, and to the chastising
of Judge Strong. He omitted nothing except the declaration he had heard Dan make to the Judge.

Several times the narrator was interrupted by the deep-voiced, hearty laugh of the father,
or with exclamations of satisfaction. Sometimes the Doctor was interrupted by a quick, eager
question from the mother, that helped to make the story clear. Many times they uttered half-whispered
exclamations of wonder, distress or indignation.

"When he left Corinth," said the Doctor in conclusion, "he told me that he had no clearly-defined
plans, though he hinted at something that he had in mind."

"But, Doctor, haven't you forgotten a very important part of your story?" the mother asked.

"What have I forgotten?" he questioned.

"Why, the girl of course. What is a story without a girl?" she laughed merrily.

To which the Doctor answered, "I reckon Dan will tell you about that himself."

At this they all joined in a hearty laugh.

The next day Dan arrived and after a brief time, given up to the joy of family reunion, he
took up the story where the Doctor had left off.

From Corinth Dan had gone directly to the president of the big steel works, whom he had met
at the time of the convention. With the assistance and advice of this man of affairs he had
been visiting the big mines and smelters and studying zinc and lead. He had worked out his
plan and had interested capital and had come home to consult with his parents concerning the
opening and development of the mine on Dewey Bald.

Then he talked to them of the power of wealth for good, of the sacredness of such a trust--talked
as they had never heard him talk before of the Grace Conners, and the crippled Dennys, who
needed elder brothers willing to acknowledge the kinship.

When he had finished his mother kissed him and his father said, "It is for this, son, that
mother and I have held the old hill yonder. It is a part of our religious belief that God put
the wealth in the mountains, not for us alone, but for all men. So it has been to us a sacred
trust, which we have never felt that we were fitted to administer. We have always hoped that
our first born would accept it as his life work--his ministry."

So Dan found his garden--and entered the ministry that has made his life such a blessing to men.

The next morning he saddled his mother's horse early. At breakfast she announced that she was
going over to the Jones ranch on the other side of Dewey. "And what are you planning to do
today?" she said to Dan as he followed her out of the house.

"I was going over to old Dewey myself," he answered. "I thought I would like to look the ground
over." He smiled down at her. "But now I'm going with you. Just wait a minute until I saddle
a horse."

She laughed at him. "Oh no, you're not."

"But, mother, I want to talk to you. "He melted it down," explained another.

"They allus does that.

He told me one day that if ever I found a gold breas'pin or a bracelet,
'which 'tain't noways likely you will,' sez he, 'fetch it to me, an'
I'll give you what's right for it.'"

So Nance's "find" was really worth money. More money, too, than she could earn in many days'
steady toil. What would it not buy! Food, clothing, warmth, everything, seemed within her reach
now that she held that source of wealth in her hand.

"'Tain't stealin', I hope," thought Nance.

"Course not. I don' know who it belongs to."

When alone, Nance took
out the thimble. What a dainty little thing it was! She tried it on
each of her hard, bony fingers, and laughed to see the poor grimy
things wearing a golden crown. I have always known it would come, and
I am glad, glad my boy--but--I--I think you'd better kiss me now." So she left him standing
at the fence and rode away alone down the old familiar path.

After dinner Dan set out.

CHAPTER XLIV.

THE OLD TRAIL

"... Those whose hearts and souls are big enough to follow the trail that is nobody knows how old."

Leaving the ridge just beyond the low gap, Dan made his way down the mountain side into the
deep ravine, below Sammy's Lookout, that opens into the hollow.

For an hour he roamed about, his mind upon his plans for the development of the wealth that
lay in the heart of the mountain. After a time, still intent upon his work, he scrambled up
the end of the little canyon, regained the ridge near the mouth of the cave, then climbed up
on the steep slope of Dewey to the top. From here he could follow with his eye a possible route
for the spur that should leave the railroad on Garber to the east, round the base of the mountain
and reach the mine through the little ravine on the west.

From the top he made his way slowly toward the Lookout, thinking from there to gain still another
view of the scene of his proposed operations and to watch the trail for the coming of his mother.

Drawing near the great ledge of rock that hangs so like a cornice on the mountain side, he
caught a glimpse--through the screen of trees and bushes--of a figure seated on the old familiar
spot. His mother must have come sooner than she intended, he thought, or else he had been longer
than he realized. He looked at his watch; it was early yet. Then going on a little, he suddenly
stopped--that was not his mother! He drew nearer and pushed aside a bush for a better view.

His heart leaped at sight of the familiar blue dress and its white trimming! The figure turned
slightly as if to look up the trail. The big fellow on the mountain side trembled.

"How like," he whispered half aloud, "God, how like--"

Softly as one fearing to dispel a welcome illusion he drew nearer--nearer--nearer. Suddenly
a dry bush on the ground snapped under his foot. She turned her face quickly toward him.

Then, springing to her feet Hope Farwell stood waiting with joy--lighted face, as Dan went
stumbling in wondering haste down the hill.

"I thought you were never coming," she said. "I have been waiting so long." And then for a
little while there was nothing more said that we have any right whatever to hear.

When he insisted upon an explanation of the miracle, she laughed merrily.

"Why it's like most miracles, I fancy, if only one knew about them--the most natural thing
that could happen after all. Dr. Miles came to me some two months ago, and said that he had
a patient whom he was sending into the mountains with a nurse, and asked me if I would take
the case. His lamentation, which he continued at intervals, ran in this strain--"Seventy-eight!--only
seventy-eight, and two teeth gone already!--lost one of them sixty years ago, and, as if that
were not enough, four years ago I must lose a second;--and now--ah!

I suppose I must part with another.

And then my eyes! one of my eyes is beginning to fail.

Lord help me! for, should it go on at this rate, I shall be in a
sad condition before many more years are over my head!"



"I suppose she told you all about it--my finish at Corinth--I mean, and my plans?" interrupted Dan.

"Yes," Hope replied.

"Then there's nothing more to do but--How is your patient?" he finished abruptly. "How long
must you stay with the case?"

She turned her head away. "My patient went home three days ago."

When the sun was touching the fringe of trees on the distant ridge, and the varying tints of
brown and gold, under the softening tone of the gray-blue haze that lies always over hollow
and hill, were most clearly revealed in the evening light--Dan and Hope followed the same path
that Young Matt and Sammy walked years before.

In the edge of the timber beyond the deerlick, the two young lovers found those other older
lovers, and were welcomed by them with the welcome that can only be given or received by those
whose hearts and souls are big enough to follow the trail that is nobody knows how old.