"You see!" remarked Cynthia. "There isn't anything wonderful here, and the air is simply horrid.
I hope you're satisfied. Do come back!"

"But we haven't seen a quarter of it yet! This is only the hall. Now for the room on the right!"
Joyce hauled open a pair of closed folding-doors, and held the candle above her head. If they
were searching for things strange and inexplicable, here at last was their reward! Both girls
gasped and stared incredulously, first at the scene before them, then at each other.

The apartment was a dining-room. More portraits and paintings shone dimly from the walls. A
great candelabrum hung from the ceiling, with sconces for nearly a hundred candles and ornamented
with glittering crystal pendants. An enormous sideboard occupied almost an entire end of the
room. In the middle, a long dining-table stood under the candelabrum.

But here was the singular feature. The table was still set with dishes, as though for a feast.
And the chairs about it were all pushed awry, and some were overturned. Napkins, yellowed with
age, were fallen about, dropped apparently in sudden forgetfulness. The china and glassware
stood just as they had been left, though every ancient vestige of food had long since been
carried away by the mice.

As plain as print, one could read the signs of some feasting party interrupted and guests hastily
leaving their places to return no more. The girls understood it in a flash.

"But why--why," said Joyce, speaking her thought aloud, "was it all left just like this? Why
weren't things cleared up and put away? What could have happened? Cynthia, this is the strangest
thing I ever heard of!" Cynthia only stared, and offered no explanation. Plainly, she was impressed
at last.

"Come on!" half whispered Joyce, "Let's see the room across the hall. I'm crazy to explore
it all!" Together they tiptoed to the other side of the hall. A kind of awe had fallen upon
them. There was more here than even Joyce had hoped or imagined. This was a house of mystery.

The apartment across the hall proved to be the drawing-room. Though in evident disarray it,
however, exhibited fewer signs of the strange, long-past agitation. In dimensions it was similar
to the dining-room, running from front to back of the house. Here, too, was another elaborate
candelabrum, somewhat smaller than the first, queer, spindle-legged, fiddle-backed chairs,
beautiful cabinets and tables, and an old, square piano, still open. The chairs stood in irregular
groups of twos and threes, chumming cozily together as their occupants had doubtless done,
and over the piano had been carelessly thrown a long, filmy silk scarf, one end hanging to
the floor. Upon everything the dust was indescribably thick and cobwebs hung from the ceiling.

"Do you know," spoke Joyce, in a whisper after they had looked a long time, "I think I can
guess part of an explanation for all this. There was a party here, long, long ago,--perhaps
a dinner-party. Folks had first been sitting in the drawing-room, and then went to the dining-room
for dinner. Suddenly, in the midst of the feast, something happened,--I can't imagine what,--but
it broke up the good time right away. Every one jumped up from the table, upsetting chairs
and dropping napkins. Perhaps they all rushed out of the room. Anyway, they never came back
to finish the meal. And after that, the owner shut the house and boarded it up and went away,
never stopping to clear up or put things to rights. Awfully sudden, that, and awfully queer!"

"Goodness, Joy! You're as good as a detective! How did you ever think all that out?" murmured
Cynthia, admiringly.

"Why, it's very simple," said Joyce. "The drawing-room is all right,--just looks like any other
parlor where a lot of people have been sitting, before it was put to rights. But the dining-room's
different. Something happened there, suddenly, and people just got their things on and left,
after that! Can't you see it? But what could it have been? Oh, I'd give my eyes to know, Cynthia!

"See here!" she added, after a moment's thought. "I've the loveliest idea! You just spoke of
detectives, and that put it into my head. Let's play we're detectives, like Sherlock Holmes,
and ferret out this mystery. It will be the greatest lark ever! We will come here often, and
examine every bit of evidence we can find, and gather information outside if we can, and put
two and two together, and see if we can't make out the whole story. Oh, it's gorgeous! Did
two girls ever have such an adventure before!" She clasped her hands ecstatically, first having
presented the candle to Cynthia, because she was too excited to hold it. Even the placid and
hitherto objecting Cynthia was fired by the scheme.

"Yes, let's!" she assented. "I'll ask Mother if she knows anything about this old place."

"No you won't!" cried Joyce, coming suddenly to earth. "This has got to be kept a strict secret.
Never dare to breathe it! Never speak of this house at all! Never show the slightest interest
in it! And we must come here often. Do you want folks to suspect what we are doing and put
a stop to it all? It's all right, really, of course. We're not doing any actual wrong or harming
anything. But they wouldn't understand."

"Very well, then," agreed Cynthia, meekly, cowed but bewildered. "I don't see, though, how
you're going to find out things if you don't ask."

"You must get at it in other ways," declared Joyce, but did not explain the process just then.

"This candle will soon be done for!" suddenly announced the practical Cynthia. "Why didn't
you bring a bigger one?"

"Couldn't find any other," said Joyce. "Let's finish looking around here and leave the rest
for another day." They began accordingly to walk slowly about the room, peering up at the pictures
on the walls and picking their way with care around the furniture without moving or touching
anything. Presently they came abreast of the great open fireplace. A heavy chair was standing
directly in front of it, but curiously enough, with its back to what must have been once a
cheery blaze. They moved around it carefully and bent to examine the pretty Delft tiles that
framed the yawning chimney-place, below the mantel. Then Joyce stepped back to look at the
plates and vases on the mantel. Suddenly she gave a little cry:

"Hello! That's queer! Look, Cynthia!" Cynthia, still studying the tiles, straightened up to
look where her companion had pointed. But in that instant the dying candle-flame sputtered,
flickered, and went out, leaving only a small mass of warm tallow in Cynthia's hand For a moment,
there was horrified silence. The heavy darkness seemed to cast a spell over even the irrepressible
Joyce. But not for long.

"Too bad!" she began. "Where are the matches, Cynthia? I handed them to you. We can light our
way out by them." Cynthia produced the box from the pocket of her sweater and opened it.

"Mercy! There are only three left!" she cried, feeling round in it.

"Never mind. They will light us out of this room and through the hall to the cellar stairs.
When we get there the window will guide us."

Cynthia struck the first match, and they hurriedly picked their way around the scattered furniture.
But the match went out before they reached the door. The second saw them out of the room and
into the long hall. The third, alas! broke short off at its head, and proved useless. Then
a real terror of the dark, unknown spaces filled them both. Breathless, frantic, they felt
their way along the walls, groping blindly for the elusive cellar door. At length Joyce's hand
struck a knob.

"Here it is!" she breathed. They pulled open the door and plunged through it, only to find
themselves in some sort of a closet, groping among musty clothes that were hanging there.

"Oh it isn't, it isn't!" wailed Cynthia. "Oh I'll never, never come into this dreadful house
again!" But Joyce had regained her poise.

"It's all right! Our door is just across the hall. I remember where it is now. She pulled the
shuddering Cynthia out of the closet, and felt her way across the wide hall space.

"Here it is! Now we are all serene!" she cried triumphantly, opening a door which they found
gave on a flight of steps. And as they crept down, a dim square of good, honest daylight sent
their spirits up with a bound. It was raining great pelting drops as they scrambled out and
scampered for Cynthia's veranda. But daylight, even if dismal with rain, had served to restore
them completely to their usual gaiety.

"By the way, Joyce," she said, as they stood on the porch shaking the rain from their skirts,
"what was it you were pointing at just when the candle went out? I didn't have time to see."

"Why, the strangest thing!" whispered Joyce. "There was a big picture hanging over the mantel.
But what do you think? It hung there with its face turned to the wall!"

CHAPTER III

AMATEUR DETECTIVES

While Cynthia was bending over her desk during study-hour, struggling with a hopelessly entangled
account in Latin of Cæsar and his Gallic Wars, her next neighbor thrust a note into her hand.
Glad of any diversion, she opened it and read:

     This afternoon for the B. U. H. How much pocket-money have you?

  J.

Cynthia had no difficulty in guessing the meaning of the initials, but she could not imagine
what pocket-money had to do with the matter, so she wrote back:

     All right. Only thirty cents. More next week.

  C.

She passed it along to Joyce at the other end of the room, and returned to Cæsar in a more
cheerful frame of mind. Joyce, she knew, would explain all mysteries later, and she was content
to wait.

Almost a week had passed since the first adventure of the Boarded-up House, and nothing further
had happened. Joyce and Cynthia were healthy, normal girls, full of interests connected with
their school, with outdoor affairs, and with social life, so they had much to occupy them beside
this curious quest on which they had become engaged. A fraternity meeting had occupied one
afternoon, dancing-school another, a tramping-excursion a third, and so on through the ensuing
week. Not once, however, in the midst of all these outside interests, had they forgotten their
strange adventure. When they were alone together they talked of it incessantly, and laid elaborate
plans for future amateur detective work.

"It's just like a story!" Joyce would exclaim. "And who would ever have thought of a story
in that old, Boarded-up House. And us in the midst of it!" Cynthia's first question that afternoon,
on the way home from high school, was:

"What did you ask about pocket-money for? I'm down pretty low on my allowance, but I don't
see what that's got to do with things." Joyce laughed.

"Well, I'm lower yet--ten cents to last till the month's out! But hasn't it struck you that
we've got to have candles--plenty of them--and matches, and a couple of candlesticks at least?
How else can we ever get about the place, pitch-dark as it all is? And if we tried to get them
from home, some one would suspect right away."

"Ten cents' worth of candles ought to last us quite a while," began the practical Cynthia;
"and ten cents more will buy a whole package of safety-matches. And for five cents we can get
a candlestick, but we'd better stop at one for the present, or we won't have a cent left between
us! Let's get them right now." While they were making their purchases, Cynthia had another idea.

"I'll tell you what, Joyce, I'm going to take along a dust-cloth and clean up around the window
where we get in. My sweater was just black with dirt and cobwebs last time, and Mother almost
insisted on an explanation. Fortunately she was called away for something, just then, and afterward
didn't think of it. I've washed the sweater since!"

"Good idea!" assented Joyce. "Momsie wanted to know how I'd torn mine and got it so mussy,
too. I told her I'd been chasing up Goliath,--which was really quite true, you know."

"I never can think of things to say that will be the truth and yet not give the whole thing
away!" sighed the downright Cynthia. "I wish I were as quick as you!"

"Never mind! You've got the sense, Cynthia! I never would have thought of the dust-cloth."

Getting into the Boarded-up House this time was accompanied by less difficulty than the first.
Before entering, Cynthia thoroughly dusted the window-ledge and as far about it as she could
reach, with the result that there was less, if any, damage to their clothes. Armed as they
were with plenty of candles and matches, there were no shudders either, or fears of the unknown
and the dark. Even Cynthia was keen for the quest, and Joyce was simply bursting with new ideas,
some of which she expounded to Cynthia as they were lighting their candles in the cellar.

"You know, Cyn, I've been looking at the place carefully from the outside. We haven't seen
a third of it yet,--no, not even a quarter! There's the wing off the parlor toward your house,
and the one off the dining-room toward mine. I suppose the kitchen must be in that one, but
I can't think what's in the other, unless it's a library. We must see these to-day. And then
there's all up-stairs."

"What I want to see most of all is the picture you spoke of that hangs in the parlor," said
Cynthia. "Do you suppose we could turn it around?"

"Oh, I'd love to, only I don't know whether we ought! And it's heavy, too. I hardly think we
could. Perhaps we might just try to peep behind it. You know, Cynthia, I realize we're doing
something a little queer being in this house and prying about. I'm not sure our folks would
approve of it. Only the old thing has been left so long, and there's such a mystery about it,
and we're not harming or disturbing anything, that perhaps it isn't so dreadful. Anyhow, we
must be very careful not to pry into anything we ought not touch. Perhaps then it will be all
right." Cynthia agreed to all this without hesitation. She, indeed, had even stronger feelings
than Joyce on the subject of their trespassing, but the joy of the adventure and the mystery
with which they were surrounding it, outweighed her scruples. When they were half-way up the
cellar steps, Joyce, who was ahead, suddenly exclaimed:

"Why, the door is open! Probably we left it so in our hurry the other day. We must be more
careful after this, and leave everything as we find it." They tiptoed along the hall with considerably
more confidence than on their former visit, pausing to hold their candles up to the pictures,
and peeping for a moment into the curiously disarranged dining-room.

But they entered the drawing-room first and stood a long while before the fireplace, gazing
at the picture's massive frame and its challenging wooden back. A heavy, ropelike cord with
large silk tassels attached the picture to its hook, and the cord was twisted, as if some one
had turned the picture about without stopping to readjust it.

"How strange!" murmured Cynthia. But Joyce had been looking at something else.

"Do you see that big chair with its back close to the mantel?" she exclaimed. "I've been wondering
why it stands in that position with its back to the fireplace. There was a fire there. You
can tell by the ashes and that half-burned log. Well, don't you see? Some one pulled that chair
close to the mantel, stepped on it, and turned the picture face to the wall. Now, I wonder why!"

"But look here!" cried Cynthia. "If some one else stood up there and turned the picture around,
why couldn't we do the same? We could turn it back after we'd seen it, couldn't we?" Joyce
thought it over a moment.

"I'll tell you, Cynthia (and I suppose you'll think me queer!), there are two reasons why I'd
rather not do it right now. In the first place, that silk cord it's hanging by may be awfully
rotten after all these years, and if we touch it, the whole thing may fall. And then, somehow,
I sort of like to keep the mystery about that picture till a little later,--till we've seen
the rest of the house and begun 'putting two and two together.' Wouldn't you?" Cynthia agreed,
as she was usually likely to do, and Joyce added:

"Now let's see what's in this next room. I think it must be a library. The door of it opens
right into this." Bent on further discovery, they opened the closed door carefully. It was,
as Joyce had guessed, a library. Book-shelves completely filled three sides of the room. A
long library table with an old-fashioned reading-lamp stood in the middle. The fourth side
of the room was practically devoted to another huge fireplace, and over the mantel hung another
portrait. It was of a beautiful young woman, and before it the girls stopped, fascinated, to
gaze a long while.

There was little or nothing in this room to indicate that any strange happening had transpired
here. A few books were strewn about as though they had been pulled out and thrown down hastily,
but that was all. The one thing that attracted most strongly was the portrait of the beautiful
woman--she seemed scarcely more than a girl--over the fireplace. The two explorers turned to
gaze at it afresh.

"There's one thing I've noticed about it that's different from the others," said Joyce, thoughtfully.
"It's fresher and more--more modern than the rest of the portraits in the drawing-room and
hall. Don't you think so?" Cynthia did.

"And look at her dress, those long, full sleeves and the big, bulging skirt! That's different,
too. And then her hair, not high and powdered and all fussed up, but low and parted smooth
and drawn down over her ears, and that dear little wreath of tiny roses! She almost seems to
be going to speak. And, oh, Cynthia, isn't she beautiful with those big, brown eyes! Somehow
I feel as if I just loved her--she's such a darling! And I believe she had more to do with
the queer things in this house than any of those other dead-and-alive picture-ladies. Tell
you what! We'll go to the public library to-morrow and get out a big book on costumes of the
different centuries that I saw there once. Then, by looking up this one, we can tell just about
what time she lived. What do you say?"

"As usual, you've thought of just the thing to do. I never would have," murmured Cynthia, still
gazing at the picture of the lovely lady. Suddenly Joyce started nervously:

"Hush! Do you hear anything? I'm almost certain I heard a sound in the other room!" They both
fell to listening intently. Yes, there was a sound, a strange, indefinable one like a soft
tiptoeing at long intervals, and even a curious, hoarse breathing. Something was certainly
outside in the drawing-room.

"What shall we do?" breathed Cynthia. "We can't get out of here without passing through that
room! Oh, Joyce!" They listened again. The sound appeared to be approaching the door. It was,
without doubt, a soft tiptoeing step. Suddenly there was the noise of a chair scraping on the
floor as if it had been accidentally brushed against. Both girls were now numb with terror.
They were caught as in a trap. There was no escape. They could only wait in racking suspense
where they were.

As they stared with the fascination of horror, the partially open door was pushed farther open
and a dim gray form glided around its edge. Joyce clutched Cynthia, gave one little shriek,
half-relief and half-laughter, and gasped:

"Oh, Cynthia! It's Goliath!"

CHAPTER IV

THE ROOM OF MYSTERY

It was, indeed, Goliath. He was an enormous cat, and his purr was as oversized as his body.
That was the hoarse sound that they had thought was heavy breathing. His footfalls too could
be distinctly heard when all else was quiet, and he had evidently rubbed against some light
article of furniture in the outer room and moved it. In the reaction of relief, Cynthia seized
Goliath, sat down on the floor, and--cried! having first deposited her candlestick carefully
on the table. Joyce did quite the opposite, and laughed hysterically for several minutes. The
tension of suspense and terror had been very real.

"How did he get in here?" sobbed Cynthia, at length.

"Why, through the window, of course. And he must have been in before we came. Don't you remember,
we found the door at the head of the cellar steps open? I closed it when we came up, so he
couldn't have got here afterward." Joyce bent down and scratched Goliath's fat jowls, at which
he purred the louder.

"Well, let's let him stay, since he's here," sighed Cynthia, wiping her eyes. "He'll be sort
of company!" So Goliath was allowed to remain, and the two girls, escorted by him, proceeded
on their voyage of discovery. Back across the drawing-room and hall they went, and through
the dining-room. There for a moment they stood, surveying anew the curious scene.

"Does it strike you as strange," Joyce demanded suddenly, "that there's no silver here, no
knives, forks, spoons, sugar-bowls, or--or anything of that kind? Yet everything else in china
or glass is left. What do you make of it?"

"Somebody got in and stole it," ventured Cynthia.

"Nonsense! Nobody's been here since, except ourselves, that's perfectly plain. No, the people
must have stopped long enough to collect it and put it away,--or take it with them. Cynthia,
why do you suppose they left in such a hurry?" But Cynthia, the unimaginative, was equally
unable to answer this query satisfactorily, so she only replied:

"I don't know, I'm sure!"

A room, however, beyond the dining-room was awaiting their inspection. In a corner of the latter,
two funny little steps led up to a door, and on opening it, they found themselves in the kitchen.
This bore signs of as much confusion as the neighboring apartment. Unwashed dishes and cooking
utensils lay all about, helter-skelter, some even broken, in the hurry with which they had
been handled. But, apart from this further indication of the haste with which a meal had been
abandoned unfinished, there was little to hold the interest, and the girls soon turned away.

"Now for up-stairs!" cried Joyce. "That's where I've been longing to get. We will find something
interesting there, I'll warrant." With Goliath scampering ahead, they climbed the white, mahogany-railed
staircase. On the upper floor they found a wide hall corresponding with the one below, running
from front to back, crossed by a narrower one connecting the wings with the main part of the
house. Turning to their left, they went down the narrow one, peering about them eagerly. The
doors of several bedrooms stood open.

Into the first they entered. The high, old-fashioned, four-post bed with its ruffled valance
and tester was still smoothly made up and undisturbed. The room was in perfect order. But Joyce's
eye was caught by two candlesticks standing on the mantel.

"Here's a find!" she announced. "We'll take these to use for our candles. They're nicer and
handier than our tin one. We will keep that for an emergency."

"But ought we disturb them?" questioned Cynthia.

"Oh, you are too particular! What earthly harm can it do? Here! Take this one and I'll carry
the other. This must have been a guest-room, and no one was occupying it when--it all happened.
Let's look in the one across the hall." This one also proved precisely similar, bed untouched
and furniture undisturbed. Another, close at hand, had the same appearance. They next ventured
down a narrower hall, over what was evidently the kitchen wing. On each side were bedrooms,
four in all, with sparse, plain furnishings and cot-beds. Each room presented a tumbled, unkempt
appearance.

"I guess these must have been the servants' rooms," remarked Cynthia.

"That's the first right guess you've made!" retorted Joyce, good-naturedly, as she glanced
about. "And they all left in a hurry, too, judging from the way things are strewn about. I
wonder--"

"What?" cried Cynthia, impatient at the long pause.

"Oh, nothing much! I just wonder whether they went off of their own accord, or were dismissed.
I can't tell. But one thing I can guess pretty plainly--they went right after the dinner-party
and didn't stay over another night. 'Cause why? Most of their beds are made, and they left
everything in a muss down-stairs. But come along. This isn't particularly interesting. I want
to get to the other end of the hall. Something different's over there!" They turned and retraced
their steps, emerging from the servants' quarters and passing again the rooms they had already
examined.

On the other side of the main hall they entered an apartment that was not a bedroom, but appeared
to have been used as a sitting-room and for sewing. An old-fashioned sewing-table stood near
one window. Two chairs and another table were heaped with material and with garments in various
stages of completion. An open work-box held dust-covered spools. But still there was nothing
special in the room to challenge interest, and Joyce pulled her companion across the hall toward
another partially open door.

They had scarcely been in it long enough to illuminate it with the pale flames of their candles,
before they realized that they were very near the heart of the mystery. It was another bedroom,
the largest so far, and its aspect was very different from that of the others. The high four-poster
was tossed and tumbled, not, however, as if by a night's sleep, but more as if some one had
lain upon it just as it was, twisting and turning restlessly. Two trunks stood on the floor,
open and partially packed. One seemed to contain household linen, once fine and dainty and
white, now yellowed and covered with the dust of years. The other brimmed with clothing, a
woman's, all frills and laces and silks; and a great hoop-skirt, collapsed, lay on the floor
alongside. Neither of the girls could, for the moment, guess what it was, this queer arrangement
of wires and tape. But Joyce went over and picked it up, when it fell into shape as she held
it at arm's-length. Then they knew.

"I have an idea!" cried Joyce. "This hoop-skirt, or crinoline, I think they used to call it,
gave it to me. Cynthia, we must be in the room belonging to the lovely lady whose picture hangs
in the library."

"How do you know?" queried Cynthia.

"I don't know, I just suspect it. But perhaps we will find something that proves it later."
She held the candle over one of the trunks and peered in. "Dresses, hats, waists," she enumerated.
"Oh, how queer and old-fashioned they all seem!" Suddenly, with a little cry of triumph, she
leaned over and partially pulled out an elaborate silk dress.

"Look! look! what did I tell you! Here is the very dress of the picture-lady, this queer, changeable
silk, these big sleeves, and the velvet sewed on in a funny criss-cross pattern! Now will you
believe me?"

Truly, Cynthia could no longer doubt. It was the identical dress, beyond question. The portrait
must have been painted when the garment was new. They felt that at last they had taken a long
step in the right direction by thus identifying this room as belonging to the lovely lady of
the portrait down-stairs. Joy grew so excited that she could hardly contain a "hurrah," and
Cynthia was not far behind her in enthusiasm. But the room had further details to be examined.

An open fireplace showed traces of letters having been torn up and burned. Little, half-charred
scraps with faint writing still lay scattered on the hearth. On the dressing-table, articles
of the toilet were littered about, and a pair of candlesticks were set close to the mirror.
(There were, by the way, no traces of candles about the house. Mice had doubtless carried off
every vestige of such, long since.) A great wardrobe stood in one corner, the open doors of
which revealed some garments still hanging on the pegs, woolen dresses mostly, reduced now
to little more than rags through the ravages of moths and mice and time. Near the bed stood
a pair of dainty, high-heeled satin slippers, forgotten through the years. Everywhere a hasty
departure was indicated, so hasty, as Joyce remarked, "that the lady decided probably not to
take her trunks, after all, but left, very likely, with only a hand-bag!"

"And now," cried Joyce, the irrepressible, "we've seen everything in this room. Let's hurry
to look at the last one on this floor. That's right over the library, I think, at the end of
the hall. We've discovered a lot here, but I've a notion that we'll find the best of all in
there!" As they were leaving the room, Goliath, who had curled himself up on a soft rug before
the fireplace, rose, stretched himself, yawned widely, and prepared to follow, wherever they led.

"Doesn't he seem at home here!" laughed Cynthia. "I hope he will come every time we do. He
makes things seem more natural, somehow." They reached the end of the hall, and Joyce fumbled
for the handle, this door, contrary to the usual rule, being shut. Then, for the first time
in the course of their adventures in the Boarded-up House, they found themselves before an
insurmountable barrier.

The door was locked!

CHAPTER V

JOYCE MAKES A NEW DISCOVERY. SO DOES GOLIATH

Yes, the door was locked, and there was no vestige of a key. Joyce was suddenly inspired with
an idea.

"Let's try the keys of the other doors! I noticed that they most all had keys in the locks.
Perhaps one will fit this." They hunted up several and worked with them all, but not one made
the slightest impression on this obstinate lock.

"Now isn't this provoking!" exclaimed Joyce. "The only room in the house that we can't get
in, and the most interesting of all, I'm certain! What shall we do?" Cynthia made no reply,
but looked at her little silver watch.

"Do you know that it's quarter-past six?" she asked quietly.

"Mercy, no! We've got to go at once then. How the time has gone!" Reluctantly enough they hunted
up Goliath, who in thorough boredom had returned to his place on the hearth-rug in the big
bedroom, gathered together their candles, and found their way to the cellar. Cynthia had thoughtfully
requested a tin biscuit-box from the grocer, and in this they packed their candles, thus protecting
them against the ravages of mice, and left them in the cellar near the window. Then they clambered
out.

"To-morrow's Saturday," said Joyce. "In the morning we'll go to the library and look up that
book of costumes. After lunch we'll go back to the B. U. H. and finish exploring. There's the
attic yet, and maybe we can find that key, too!" With a gay good-by they separated each to
her home, on opposite sides of the Boarded-up House.

The result of their researches in the library, next morning, was not wholly satisfactory. They
found that the most recent fashion of hoop-skirts or crinolines had prevailed all the way from
1840 to 1870, or thereabouts. And while these dates limited, to a certain extent the time of
the mysterious happening, it did not help them very much. They felt that they must look for
some more definite clue.

