What we talked about, who shall tell? I would not, for my part, break the secret of one of
those delicious conversations, of which I and every man in his time have held so many. You
begin, very probably, about the weather--'tis a common subject, but what sentiments the genius
of Love can fling into it! I have often, for my part, said to the girl of my heart for the
time being, "It's a fine day," or "It's a rainy morning!" in a way that has brought tears to
her eyes. Something beats in your heart, and twangle! a corresponding string thrills and echoes
in hers. You offer her anything--her knitting-needles, a slice of bread-and-butter--what causes
the grateful blush with which she accepts the one or the other? Why, she sees your heart handed
over to her upon the needles, and the bread-and-butter is to her a sandwich with love inside
it. If you say to your grandmother, "Ma'am, it's a fine day," or what not, she would find in
the words no other meaning than their outward and visible one; but say so to the girl you love,
and she understands a thousand mystic meanings in them. Thus, in a word, though Dorothea and
I did not, probably, on the first night of our meeting, talk of anything more than the weather,
or trumps, or some subjects which to such listeners as Schnabel and Klingenspohr and others
might appear quite ordinary, yet to US they had a different signification, of which Love alone
held the key.

Without further ado then, after the occurrences of that evening, I determined on staying at
Kalbsbraten, and presenting my card the next day to the Hof-Marshal, requesting to have the
honor of being presented to his Highness the Prince, at one of whose court-balls my Dorothea
appeared as I have described her.

It was summer when I first arrived at Kalbsbraten. The little court was removed to Siegmundslust,
his Highness's country-seat: no balls were taking place, and, in consequence, I held my own
with Dorothea pretty well. I treated her admirer, Lieutenant Klingenspohr, with perfect scorn,
had a manifest advantage over Major Schnabel, and used somehow to meet the fair one every day,
walking in company with her mamma in the palace garden, or sitting under the acacias, with
Belotte in her mother's lap, and the favorite romance beside her. Dear, dear Dorothea! what
a number of novels she must have read in her time! She confesses to me that she had been in
love with Uncas, with Saint Preux, with Ivanhoe, and with hosts of German heroes of romance;
and when I asked her if she, whose heart was so tender towards imaginary youths, had never
had a preference for any one of her living adorers, she only looked, and blushed, and sighed,
and said nothing.

You see I had got on as well as man could do, until the confounded court season and the balls
began, and then--why, then came my usual luck.

Waltzing is a part of a German girl's life. With the best will in the world--which, I doubt
not, she entertains for me, for I never put the matter of marriage directly to her--Dorothea
could not go to balls and not waltz. It was madness to me to see her whirling round the room
with officers, attaches, prim little chamberlains with gold keys and embroidered coats, her
hair floating in the wind, her hand reposing upon the abominable little dancer's epaulet, her
good-humored face lighted up with still greater satisfaction. I saw that I must learn to waltz
too, and took my measures accordingly.

The leader of the ballet at the Kalbsbraten theatre in my time was Springbock, from Vienna.
He had been a regular zephyr once, 'twas said, in his younger days; and though he is now fifteen
stone weight, I can, helas! recommend him conscientiously as a master; and I determined to
take some lessons from him in the art which I had neglected so foolishly in early life.

It may be said, without vanity, that I was an apt pupil, and in the course of half a dozen
lessons I had arrived at very considerable agility in the waltzing line, and could twirl round
the room with him at such a pace as made the old gentleman pant again, and hardly left him
breath enough to puff out a compliment to his pupil. I may say, that in a single week I became
an expert waltzer; but as I wished, when I came out publicly in that character, to be quite
sure of myself, and as I had hitherto practised not with a lady, but with a very fat old man,
it was agreed that he should bring a lady of his acquaintance to perfect me, and accordingly,
at my eighth lesson, Madame Springbock herself came to the dancing-room, and the old zephyr
performed on the violin.

If any man ventures the least sneer with regard to this lady, or dares to insinuate anything
disrespectful to her or myself, I say at once that he is an impudent calumniator. Madame Springbock
is old enough to be my grandmother, and as ugly a woman as I ever saw; but, though old, she
was passionnee pour la danse, and not having (on account, doubtless, of her age and unprepossessing
appearance) many opportunities of indulging in her favorite pastime, made up for lost time
by immense activity whenever she could get a partner. In vain, at the end of the hour, would
Springbock exclaim, "Amalia, my soul's blessing, the time is up!" "Play on, dear Alphonso!"
would the old lady exclaim, whisking me round: and though I had not the least pleasure in such
a homely partner, yet for the sake of perfecting myself I waltzed and waltzed with her, until
we were both half dead with fatigue.

At the end of three weeks I could waltz as well as any man in Germany.

At the end of four weeks there was a grand ball at court in honor of H. H. the Prince of Dummerland
and his Princess, and THEN I determined I would come out in public. I dressed myself with unusual
care and splendor. My hair was curled and my moustache dyed to a nicety; and of the four hundred
gentlemen present, if the girls of Kalbsbraten DID select one who wore an English hussar uniform,
why should I disguise the fact? In spite of my silence, the news had somehow got abroad, as
news will in such small towns,--Herr von Fitz-Boodle was coming out in a waltz that evening.
His Highness the Duke even made an allusion to the circumstance. When on this eventful night,
I went, as usual, and made him my bow in the presentation, "Vous, monsieur," said he--"vous
qui etes si jeune, devez aimer la danse." I blushed as red as my trousers, and bowing, went away.

I stepped up to Dorothea. Heavens! how beautiful she looked! and how archly she smiled as,
with a thumping heart, I asked her hand for a WALTZ! She took out her little mother-of-pearl
dancing-book, she wrote down my name with her pencil: we were engaged for the fourth waltz,
and till then I left her to other partners.

Who says that his first waltz is not a nervous moment? I vow I was more excited than by any
duel I ever fought. I would not dance any contre-danse or galop. I repeatedly went to the buffet
and got glasses of punch (dear simple Germany! 'tis with rum-punch and egg-flip thy children
strengthen themselves for the dance!) I went into the ball-room and looked--the couples bounded
before me, the music clashed and rung in my ears--all was fiery, feverish, indistinct. The
gleaming white columns, the polished oaken floors in which the innumerable tapers were reflected--all
together swam before my eyes, and I was in a pitch of madness almost when the fourth waltz
at length came. "WILL YOU DANCE WITH YOUR SWORD ON?" said the sweetest voice in the world.
I blushed, and stammered, and trembled, as I laid down that weapon and my cap, and hark! the
music began!

Oh, how my hand trembled as I placed it round the waist of Dorothea! With my left hand I took
her right--did she squeeze it? I think she did--to this day I think she did. Away we went!
we tripped over the polished oak floor like two young fairies. "Courage, monsieur," said she,
with her sweet smile. Then it was "Tres bien, monsieur." Then I heard the voices humming and
buzzing about. "Il danse bien, l'Anglais." "Ma foi, oui," says another. On we went, twirling
and twisting, and turning and whirling; couple after couple dropped panting off. Little Klingenspohr
himself was obliged to give in. All eyes were upon us--we were going round ALONE. Dorothea
was almost exhausted, when

* * * * *

I have been sitting for two hours since I marked the asterisks, thinking--thinking. I have
committed crimes in my life--who hasn't? But talk of remorse, what remorse is there like THAT
which rushes up in a flood to my brain sometimes when I am alone, and causes me to blush when
I'm a-bed in the dark?

I fell, sir, on that infernal slippery floor. Down we came like shot; we rolled over and over
in the midst of the ballroom, the music going ten miles an hour, 800 pairs of eyes fixed upon
us, a cursed shriek of laughter bursting out from all sides. Heavens! how clear I heard it,
as we went on rolling and rolling! "My child! my Dorothea!" shrieked out Madame Speck, rushing
forward, and as soon as she had breath to do so, Dorothea of course screamed too; then she
fainted, then she was disentangled from out my spurs, and borne off by a bevy of tittering
women. "Clumsy brute!" said Madame Speck, turning her fat back upon me. I remained upon my
seant, wild, ghastly, looking about. It was all up with me--I knew it was. I wished I could
have died there, and I wish so still.

Klingenspohr married her, that is the long and short; but before that event I placed a sabre-cut
across the young scoundrel's nose, which destroyed HIS beauty for ever.

O Dorothea! you can't forgive me--you oughtn't to forgive me; but I love you madly still.

My next flame was Ottilia: but let us keep her for another number; my feelings overpower me
at present.

OTTILIA.

CHAPTER I.

THE ALBUM--THE MEDITERRANEAN HEATH.

Travelling some little time back in a wild part of Connemara, where I had been for fishing
and seal-shooting, I had the good luck to get admission to the chateau of a hospitable Irish
gentleman, and to procure some news of my once dear Ottilia.

Yes, of no other than Ottilia v. Schlippenschlopp, the Muse of Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickel, the
friendly little town far away in Sachsenland,--where old Speck built the town pump, where Klingenspohr
was slashed across the nose,--where Dorothea rolled over and over in that horrible waltz with
Fitz-Boo--Psha!--away with the recollection; but wasn't it strange to get news of Ottilia in
the wildest corner of Ireland, where I never should have thought to hear her gentle name? Walking
on that very Urrisbeg Mountain under whose shadow I heard Ottilia's name, Mackay, the learned
author of the "Flora Patlandica," discovered the Mediterranean heath,--such a flower as I have
often plucked on the sides of Vesuvius, and as Proserpine, no doubt, amused herself in gathering
as she strayed in the fields of Enna. Here it is--the self-same flower, peering out at the
Atlantic from Roundstone Bay; here, too, in this wild lonely place, nestles the fragrant memory
of my Ottilia!

In a word, after a day on Ballylynch Lake (where, with a brown fly and a single hair, I killed
fourteen salmon, the smallest twenty-nine pounds weight, the largest somewhere about five stone
ten), my young friend Blake Bodkin Lynch Browne (a fine lad who has made his continental tour)
and I adjourned, after dinner, to the young gentleman's private room, for the purpose of smoking
a certain cigar; which is never more pleasant than after a hard day's sport, or a day spent
in-doors, or after a good dinner, or a bad one, or at night when you are tired, or in the morning
when you are fresh, or of a cold winter's day, or of a scorching summer's afternoon, or at
any other moment you choose to fix upon.

What should I see in Blake's room but a rack of pipes, such as are to be found in almost all
the bachelors' rooms in Germany, and amongst them was a porcelain pipe-head bearing the image
of the Kalbsbraten pump! There it was: the old spout, the old familiar allegory of Mars, Bacchus,
Apollo virorum, and the rest, that I had so often looked at from Hofarchitect Speck's window,
as I sat there, by the side of Dorothea. The old gentleman had given me one of these very pipes;
for he had hundreds of them painted, wherewith he used to gratify almost every stranger who
came into his native town.

Any old place with which I have once been familiar (as, perhaps, I have before stated in these
"Confessions"--but never mind that) is in some sort dear to me: and were I Lord Shootingcastle
or Colonel Popland, I think after a residence of six months there I should love the Fleet Prison.
As I saw the old familiar pipe, I took it down, and crammed it with Cavendish tobacco, and
lay down on a sofa, and puffed away for an hour wellnigh, thinking of old, old times.

"You're very entertaining to-night, Fitz," says young Blake, who had made several tumblers
of punch for me, which I had gulped down without saying a word. "Don't ye think ye'd be more
easy in bed than snorting and sighing there on my sofa, and groaning fit to make me go hang
myself?"

"I am thinking, Blake," says I, "about Pumpernickel, where old Speck gave you this pipe."

"'Deed he did," replies the young man; "and did ye know the old Bar'n?"

"I did," said I. "My friend, I have been by the banks of the Bendemeer. Tell me, are the nightingales
still singing there, and do the roses still bloom?"

"The HWHAT?" cries Blake. "What the divvle, Fitz, are you growling about? Bendemeer Lake's
in Westmoreland, as I preshume; and as for roses and nightingales, I give ye my word it's Greek
ye're talking to me." And Greek it very possibly was, for my young friend, though as good across
country as any man in his county, has not the fine feeling and tender perception of beauty
which may be found elsewhere, dear madam.

"Tell me about Speck, Blake, and Kalbsbraten, and Dorothea, and Klingenspohr her husband."

"He with the cut across the nose, is it?" cries Blake. "I know him well, and his old wife."

"His old what, sir!" cries Fitz-Boodle, jumping up from his seat. "Klingenspohr's wife old!--is
he married again?--Is Dorothea, then, d-d-dead?"

"Dead!--no more dead than you are, only I take her to be five-and-thirty. And when a woman
has had nine children, you know, she looks none the younger; and I can tell ye that when she
trod on my corruns at a ball at the Grand Juke's, I felt something heavier than a feather on
my foot."

"Madame de Klingenspohr, then," replied I, hesitating somewhat, "has grown rather--rather st-st-out?"
I could hardly get out the OUT, and trembled I don't know why as I asked the question.

"Stout, begad!--she weighs fourteen stone, saddle and bridle. That's right, down goes my pipe;
flop! crash falls the tumbler into the fender! Break away, my boy, and remember, whoever breaks
a glass here pays a dozen."

The fact was, that the announcement of Dorothea's changed condition caused no small disturbance
within me, and I expressed it in the abrupt manner mentioned by young Blake.

Roused thus from my reverie, I questioned the young fellow about his residence at Kalbsbraten,
which has been always since the war a favorite place for our young gentry, and heard with some
satisfaction that Potzdorff was married to the Behrenstein, Haabart had left the dragoons,
the Crown Prince had broken with the ---- but mum! of what interest are all these details to
the reader, who has never been at friendly little Kalbsbraten?

Presently Lynch reaches me down one of the three books that formed his library (the "Racing
Calendar" and a book of fishing-flies making up the remainder of the set). "And there's my
album," says he. "You'll find plenty of hands in it that you'll recognize, as you are an old
Pumpernickelaner." And so I did, in truth: it was a little book after the fashion of German
albums, in which good simple little ledger every friend or acquaintance of the owner inscribes
a poem or stanza from some favorite poet or philosopher with the transcriber's own name, as thus:--

"To the true house-friend, and beloved Irelandish youth.

"'Sera nunquam est ad bonos mores via.'

"WACKERBART, Professor at the Grand-Ducal Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickelisch Gymnasium."

Another writes,--

"'Wander on roses and forget me not.'

"AMALIA v. NACHTMUTZE,

"GEB. v. SHALAFROCK,"

with a flourish, and the picture mayhap of a rose. Let the reader imagine some hundreds of
these interesting inscriptions, and he will have an idea of the book.

Turning over the leaves I came presently on DOROTHEA'S hand. There it was, the little neat,
pretty handwriting, the dear old up-and-down strokes that I had not looked at for many a long
year,--the Mediterranean heath, which grew on the sunniest banks of Fitz-Boodle's existence,
and here found, dear, dear little sprig! in rude Galwagian bog-lands.

"Look at the other side of the page," says Lynch, rather sarcastically (for I don't care to
confess that I kissed the name of "Dorothea v. Klingenspohr, born v. Speck" written under an
extremely feeble passage of verse). "Look at the other side of the paper!"

I did, and what do you think I saw?

I saw the writing of five of the little Klingenspohrs, who have all sprung up since my time.

*****

"Ha! ha! haw!" screamed the impertinent young Irishman, and the story was all over Connemara
and Joyce's Country in a day after.

CHAPTER II.

OTTILIA IN PARTICULAR.

Some kind critic who peruses these writings will, doubtless, have the goodness to point out
that the simile of the Mediterranean heath is applied to two personages in this chapter--to
Ottilia and Dorothea, and say, Psha! the fellow is but a poor unimaginative creature not to
be able to find a simile apiece at least for the girls; how much better would WE have done
the business!

Well, it is a very pretty simile. The girls were rivals, were beautiful, I loved them both,--which
should have the sprig of heath? Mr. Cruikshank (who has taken to serious painting) is getting
ready for the exhibition a fine piece, representing Fitz-Boodle on the Urrisbeg Mountain, county
Galway, Ireland, with a sprig of heath in his hand, hesitating, like Paris, on which of the
beauties he should bestow it. In the background is a certain animal between two bundles of
hay; but that I take to represent the critic, puzzled to which of my young beauties to assign
the choice.

If Dorothea had been as rich as Miss Coutts, and had come to me the next day after the accident
at the ball and said, "George, will you marry me?" it must not be supposed I would have done
any such thing. THAT dream had vanished for ever: rage and pride took the place of love; and
the only chance I had of recovering from my dreadful discomfiture was by bearing it bravely,
and trying, if possible, to awaken a little compassion in my favor. I limped home (arranging
my scheme with great presence of mind, as I actually sat spinning there on the ground)--I limped
home, sent for Pflastersticken, the court-surgeon, and addressed him to the following effect:
"Pflastersticken," says I, "there has been an accident at court of which you will hear. You
will send in leeches, pills, and the deuce knows what, and you will say that I have dislocated
my leg: for some days you will state that I am in considerable danger. You are a good fellow
and a man of courage I know, for which very reason you can appreciate those qualities in another;
so mind, if you breathe a word of my secret, either you or I must lose a life."

Away went the surgeon, and the next day all Kalbsbraten knew that I was on the point of death:
I had been delirious all night, had had eighty leeches, besides I don't know how much medicine;
but the Kalbsbrateners knew to a scruple. Whenever anybody was ill, this little kind society
knew what medicines were prescribed. Everybody in the town knew what everybody had for dinner.
If Madame Rumpel had her satin dyed ever so quietly, the whole society was on the qui vive;
if Countess Pultuski sent to Berlin for a new set of teeth, not a person in Kalbsbraten but
what was ready to compliment her as she put them on; if Potzdorff paid his tailor's bill, or
Muffinstein bought a piece of black wax for his moustaches, it was the talk of the little city.
And so, of course, was my accident. In their sorrow for my misfortune, Dorothea's was quite
forgotten, and those eighty leeches saved me. I became interesting; I had cards left at my
door; and I kept my room for a fortnight, during which time I read every one of M. Kotzebue's
plays.

At the end of that period I was convalescent, though still a little lame. I called at old Speck's
house and apologized for my clumsiness, with the most admirable coolness; I appeared at court,
and stated calmly that I did not intend to dance any more; and when Klingenspohr grinned, I
told that young gentleman such a piece of my mind as led to his wearing a large sticking-plaster
patch on his nose: which was split as neatly down the middle as you would split an orange at
dessert. In a word what man could do to repair my defeat, I did.

There is but one thing now of which I am ashamed--of those killing epigrams which I wrote (mon
Dieu! must I own it?--but even the fury of my anger proves the extent of my love!) against
the Speck family. They were handed about in confidence at court, and made a frightful sensation:

                   "IS IT POSSIBLE?"

          "There happened at Schloss P-mp-rn-ckel,
           A strange mishap our sides to tickle,
             And set the people in a roar;--
           A strange caprice of Fortune fickle:
           I never thought at Pumpernickel
             To see a SPECK UPON THE FLOOR!"

       LA PERFIDE ALBION; OR, A CAUTION TO WALTZERS.

          "'Come to the dance,' the Briton said,
           And forward D-r-th-a led,
             Fair, fresh, and three-and-twenty!
           Ah, girls; beware of Britons red!
           What wonder that it TURNED HER HEAD?
             SAT VERBUM SAPIENTI."

          "REASONS FOR NOT MARRYING.

          "'The lovely Miss S.
           Will surely say "yes,"
           You've only to ask and try;'
           'That subject we'll quit;'
           Says Georgy the wit,
           'I'VE A MUCH BETTER SPEC IN MY EYE!'"

This last epigram especially was voted so killing that it flew like wildfire; and I know for
a fact that our Charge-d'Affaires at Kalbsbraten sent a courier express with it to the Foreign
Office in England, whence, through our amiable Foreign Secretary, Lord P-lm-rston, it made
its way into every fashionable circle: nay, I have reason to believe caused a smile on the
cheek of R-y-lty itself. Now that Time has taken away the sting of these epigrams, there can
be no harm in giving them; and 'twas well enough then to endeavor to hide under the lash of
wit the bitter pangs of humiliation: but my heart bleeds now to think that I should have ever
brought a tear on the gentle cheek of Dorothea.

Not content with this--with humiliating her by satire, and with wounding her accepted lover
across the nose--I determined to carry my revenge still farther, and to fall in love with somebody
else. This person was Ottilia v. Schlippenschlopp.

Otho Sigismund Freyherr von Schlippenschlopp, Knight Grand Cross of the Ducal Order of the
Two-Necked Swan of Pumpernickel, of the Porc-et-Siflet of Kalbsbraten, Commander of the George
and Blue-Boar of Dummerland, Excellency, and High Chancellor of the United Duchies, lived in
the second floor of a house in the Schwapsgasse; where, with his private income and his revenues
as Chancellor, amounting together to some 300L. per annum, he maintained such a state as very
few other officers of the Grand-Ducal Crown could exhibit. The Baron is married to Marie Antoinette,
a Countess of the house of Kartoffelstadt, branches of which have taken root all over Germany.
He has no sons, and but one daughter, the Fraulein OTTILIA.

The Chancellor is a worthy old gentleman, too fat and wheezy to preside at the Privy Council,
fond of his pipe, his ease, and his rubber. His lady is a very tall and pale Roman-nosed Countess,
who looks as gentle as Mrs. Robert Roy, where, in the novel, she is for putting Baillie Nicol
Jarvie into the lake, and who keeps the honest Chancellor in the greatest order. The Fraulein
Ottilia had not arrived at Kalbsbraten when the little affair between me and Dorothea was going
on; or rather had only just come in for the conclusion of it, being presented for the first
time that year at the ball where I--where I met with my accident.

At the time when the Countess was young, it was not the fashion in her country to educate the
young ladies so highly as since they have been educated; and provided they could waltz, sew,
and make puddings, they were thought to be decently bred; being seldom called upon for algebra
or Sanscrit in the discharge of the honest duties of their lives. But Fraulein Ottilia was
of the modern school in this respect, and came back from the pension at Strasburg speaking
all the languages, dabbling in all the sciences: an historian, a poet,--a blue of the ultramarinest
sort, in a word. What a difference there was, for instance, between poor, simple Dorothea's
love of novel reading and the profound encyclopaedic learning of Ottilia!

Before the latter arrived from Strasburg (where she had been under the care of her aunt the
canoness, Countess Ottilia of Kartoffeldstadt, to whom I here beg to offer my humblest respects),
Dorothea had passed for a bel esprit in the little court circle, and her little simple stock
of accomplishments had amused us all very well. She used to sing "Herz, mein Herz" and "T'en
souviens-tu," in a decent manner (ONCE, before heaven, I thought her singing better than Grisi's),
and then she had a little album in which she drew flowers, and used to embroider slippers wonderfully,
and was very merry at a game of loto or forfeits, and had a hundred small agremens de societe!
which rendered her an acceptable member of it.

But when Ottilia arrived, poor Dolly's reputation was crushed in a month. The former wrote
poems both in French and German; she painted landscapes and portraits in real oil; and she
twanged off a rattling piece of Listz or Kalkbrenner in such a brilliant way, that Dora scarcely
dared to touch the instrument after her, or ventured, after Ottilia had trilled and gurgled
through "Una voce," or "Di piacer" (Rossini was in fashion then), to lift up her little modest
pipe in a ballad. What was the use of the poor thing going to sit in the park, where so many
of the young officers used ever to gather round her? Whir! Ottilia went by galloping on a chestnut
mare with a groom after her, and presently all the young fellows who could buy or hire horseflesh
were prancing in her train.

When they met, Ottilia would bounce towards her soul's darling, and put her hands round her
waist, and call her by a thousand affectionate names, and then talk of her as only ladies or
authors can talk of one another. How tenderly she would hint at Dora's little imperfections
of education!--how cleverly she would insinuate that the poor girl had no wit! and, thank God,
no more she had. The fact is, that do what I will I see I'm in love with her still, and would
be if she had fifty children; but my passion blinded me THEN, and every arrow that fiery Ottilia
discharged I marked with savage joy. Dolly, thank heaven, didn't mind the wit much; she was
too simple for that. But still the recurrence of it would leave in her heart a vague, indefinite
feeling of pain, and somehow she began to understand that her empire was passing away, and
that her dear friend hated her like poison; and so she married Klingenspohr. I have written
myself almost into a reconciliation with the silly fellow; for the truth is, he has been a
good, honest husband to her, and she has children, and makes puddings, and is happy.

Ottilia was pale and delicate. She wore her glistening black hair in bands, and dressed in
vapory white muslin. She sang her own words to her harp, and they commonly insinuated that
she was alone in the world,--that she suffered some inexpressible and mysterious heart-pangs,
the lot of all finer geniuses,--that though she lived and moved in the world she was not of
it, that she was of a consumptive tendency and might look for a premature interment. She even
had fixed on the spot where she should lie: the violets grew there, she said, the river went
moaning by; the gray willow whispered sadly over her head, and her heart pined to be at rest.
"Mother," she would say, turning to her parent, "promise me--promise me to lay me in that spot
when the parting hour has come!" At which Madame de Schlippenschlopp would shriek, and grasp
her in her arms; and at which, I confess, I would myself blubber like a child. She had six
darling friends at school, and every courier from Kalbsbraten carried off whole reams of her
letter-paper.

In Kalbsbraten, as in every other German town, there are a vast number of literary characters,
of whom our young friend quickly became the chief. They set up a literary journal, which appeared
once a week, upon light-blue or primrose paper, and which, in compliment to the lovely Ottilia's
maternal name, was called the Kartoffelnkranz. Here are a couple of her ballads extracted from
the Kranz, and by far the most cheerful specimen of her style. For in her songs she never would
willingly let off the heroines without a suicide or a consumption. She never would hear of
such a thing as a happy marriage, and had an appetite for grief quite amazing in so young a
person. As for her dying and desiring to be buried under the willow-tree, of which the first
ballad is the subject, though I believed the story then, I have at present some doubts about
it. For, since the publication of my Memoirs, I have been thrown much into the society of literary
persons (who admire my style hugely), and egad! though some of them are dismal enough in their
works, I find them in their persons the least sentimental class that ever a gentleman fell in with.

     "THE WILLOW-TREE.
       No one to meet her!
     Sing we a litany,
       Wail we and weep we a wild Miserere!"

One of the chief beauties of this ballad (for the translation of which I received some well-merited
compliments) is the delicate way in which the suicide of the poor young woman under the willow-tree
is hinted at; for that she threw herself into the water and became one among the lilies of
the stream, is as clear as a pikestaff. Her suicide is committed some time in the darkness,
when the slow hours move on tolling and tolling, and is hinted at darkly as befits the time
and the deed.

But that unromantic brute, Van Cutsem, the Dutch Charge-d'Affaires, sent to the Kartoffelnkranz
of the week after a conclusion of the ballad, which shows what a poor creature he must be.

     II.

     IV.

