The Queen smiled; she gazed some time in silence upon the pure and open features of the beautiful
Marie, and her look, full of candor, which was languidly raised toward her.  She smoothed back
the black curls which shaded her noble forehead, and seemed to rest her eyes and her soul in
looking at the charming innocence displayed upon so lovely a face.  She kissed her cheek, and
resumed:

"You do not suspect, my poor child, a sad truth.  It is that the King loves no one, and that
those who appear the most in favor will be the soonest abandoned by him, and thrown to him
who engulfs and devours all."

"Ah, mon Dieu!  what is this you tell me?"

"Do you know how many he has destroyed?"  continued the Queen, in a low voice, and looking
into her eyes as if to read in them all her thoughts, and to make her own penetrate there.
"Do you know the end of his favorites?  Have you been told of the exile of Baradas; of that
of Saint- Simon; of the convent of Mademoiselle de la Fayette, the shame of Madame d'Hautfort,
the death of Chalais?  All have fallen before an order from Richelieu to his master.  Without
this favor, which you mistake for friendship, their lives would have been peaceful.  But this
favor is mortal; it is a poison.  Look at this tapestry, which represents Semele. The favorites
of Louis XIII resemble that woman; his attachment devours like this fire, which dazzles and
consumes her."

But the young Duchess was no longer in a condition to listen to the Queen.  She continued to
fix her large, dark eyes upon her, dimmed by a veil of tears; her hands trembled in those of
Anne of Austria, and her lips quivered with convulsive agitation.

"I am very cruel, am I not, Marie?"  continued the Queen, in an extremely sweet voice, and
caressing her like a child from whom one would draw an avowal.  "Oh, yes; no doubt I am very
wicked!  Your heart is full; you can not bear it, my child.  Come, tell me; how do matters
stand with you and Monsieur de Cinq-Mars?"

At this word grief found a vent, and, still on her knees at the Queen's feet, Marie in her
turn shed upon the bosom of the good Princess a deluge of tears, with childish sobs and so
violent an agitation of her head and her beautiful shoulders that it seemed as if her heart
would break.  The Queen waited a long time for the end of this first emotion, rocking her in
her arms as if to appease her grief, frequently repeating, "My child, my child, do not afflict
yourself thus!"

"Ah, Madame!"  she exclaimed, "I have been guilty toward you; but I did not reckon upon that
heart.  I have done wrong, and I shall perhaps be punished severely for it.  But, alas!  how
shall I venture to confess to you, Madame?  It was not so much to open my heart to you that
was difficult; it was to avow to you that I had need to read there myself."

The Queen reflected a moment, laying her finger upon her lips.  "You are right," she then replied;
"you are quite right.  Marie, it is always the first word which is the most difficult to say;
and that difficulty often destroys us.  But it must be so; and without this rule one would
be often wanting in dignity.  Ah, how difficult it is to reign!  To-day I would descend into
your heart, but I come too late to do you good."

Marie de Mantua hung her head without making any reply.

"Must I encourage you to speak?"  said the Queen.  "Must I remind you that I have almost adopted
you for my eldest daughter?  that after seeking to unite you with the King's brother, I prepared
for you the throne of Poland?  Must I do more, Marie?  Yes, I must, I will.  If afterward you
do not open your whole heart to me, I have misjudged you. Open this golden casket; here is
the key.  Open it fearlessly; do not tremble as I do."

The Duchesse de Mantua obeyed with hesitation, and beheld in this little chased coffer a knife
of rude form, the handle of which was of iron, and the blade very rusty.  It lay upon some
letters carefully folded, upon which was the name of Buckingham.  She would have lifted them;
Anne of Austria stopped her.

"Seek nothing further," she said; "that is all the treasure of the Queen. And it is a treasure;
for it is the blood of a man who lives no longer, but who lived for me.  He was the most beautiful,
the bravest, the most illustrious of the nobles of Europe.  He covered himself with the diamonds
of the English crown to please me.  He raised up a fierce war and armed fleets, which he himself
commanded, that he might have the happiness of once fighting him who was my husband.  He traversed
the seas to gather a flower upon which I had trodden, and ran the risk of death to kiss and
bathe with his tears the foot of this bed in the presence of two of my ladies-in-waiting. 
Shall I say more?  Yes, I will say it to you-- I loved him!  I love him still in the past more
than I could love him in the present.  He never knew it, never divined it.  This face, these
eyes, were marble toward him, while my heart burned and was breaking with grief; but I was
the Queen of France!"  Here Anne of Austria forcibly grasped Marie's arm.  "Dare now to complain,"
she continued, "if you have not yet ventured to speak to me of your love, and dare now to be
silent when I have told you these things!"

"Ah, yes, Madame, I shall dare to confide my grief to you, since you are to me--"

"A friend, a woman!"  interrupted the Queen.  "I was a woman in my terror, which put you in
possession of a secret unknown to the whole world.  I am a woman by a love which survives the
man I loved.  Speak; tell me!  It is now time."

"It is too late, on the contrary," replied Marie, with a forced smile. "Monsieur de Cinq-Mars
and I are united forever."

"Forever!"  exclaimed the Queen.  "Can you mean it?  And your rank, your name, your future--is
all lost?  Do you reserve this despair for your brother, the Duc de Bethel, and all the Gonzagas?"

"For more than four years I have thought of it.  I am resolved; and for ten days we have been
affianced."

"Affianced!"  exclaimed the Queen, clasping her hands.  "You have been deceived, Marie.  Who
would have dared this without the King's order? It is an intrigue which I will know.  I am
sure that you have been misled and deceived."

Marie hesitated a moment, and then said:

"Nothing is more simple, Madame, than our attachment.  I inhabited, you know, the old chateau
of Chaumont, with the Marechale d'Effiat, the mother of Monsieur de Cinq-Mars.  I had retired
there to mourn the death of my father; and it soon happened that Monsieur de Cinq-Mars had
to deplore the loss of his.  In this numerous afflicted family, I saw his grief only, which
was as profound as mine.  All that he said, I had already thought, and when we spoke of our
afflictions we found them wholly alike.  As I had been the first to suffer, I was better acquainted
with sorrow than he; and I endeavored to console him by telling him all that I had suffered,
so that in pitying me he forgot himself.  This was the beginning of our love, which, as you
see, had its birth, as it were, between two tombs."

"God grant, my sweet, that it may have a happy termination!"  said the Queen.

"I hope so, Madame, since you pray for me," continued Marie.  "Besides, everything now smiles
upon me; but at that time I was very miserable. The news arrived one day at the chateau that
the Cardinal had called Monsieur de Cinq-Mars to the army.  It seemed to me that I was again
deprived of one of my relatives; and yet we were strangers.  But Monsieur de Bassompierre spoke
without ceasing of battles and death.  I retired every evening in grief, and I wept during
the night.  I thought at first that my tears flowed for the past, but I soon perceived that
it was for the future; and I felt that they could not be the same tears, since I wished to
conceal them.  Some time passed in the expectation of his departure.  I saw him every day;
and I pitied him for having to depart, because he repeated to me every instant that he would
have wished to live eternally as he then did, in his own country and with us.  He was thus
without ambition until the day of his departure, because he knew not whether he was--whether
he was--I dare not say it to your Majesty--"

Marie blushed, cast down her humid eyes, and smiled.

"Well!"  said the Queen, "whether he was beloved,--is it not so?"

"And in the evening, Madame, he left, ambitious."

"That is evident, certainly.  He left," said Anne of Austria, somewhat relieved; "but he has
been back two years, and you have seen him?"

"Seldom, Madame," said the young Duchess, proudly; "and always in the presence of the priest,
before whom I have promised to be the wife of no other than Cinq-Mars."

"Is it really, then, a marriage?  Have you dared to do it?  I shall inquire.  But, Heaven,
what faults!  how many faults in the few words I have heard!  Let me reflect upon them."

And, speaking aloud to herself, the Queen continued, her eyes and head bent in the attitude
of reflection:

"Reproaches are useless and cruel if the evil is done.  The past is no longer ours; let us
think of the future.  Cinq-Mars is brave, able, and even profound in his ideas.  I have observed
that he has done much in two years, and I now see that it was for Marie.  He comports himself
well; he is worthy of her in my eyes, but not so in the eyes of Europe.  He must rise yet higher.
The Princesse de Mantua can not, may not, marry less than a prince.  He must become one.  By
myself I can do nothing; I am not the Queen, I am the neglected wife of the King.  There is
only the Cardinal, the eternal Cardinal, and he is his enemy; and perhaps this disturbance--"

"Alas!  it is the beginning of war between them.  I saw it at once."

"He is lost then!"  exclaimed the Queen, embracing Marie.  "Pardon me, my child, for thus afflicting
you; but in times like these we must see all and say all.  Yes, he is lost if he does not himself
overthrow this wicked man--for the King will not renounce him; force alone--"

"He will overthrow him, Madame.  He will do it, if you will assist him. You are the divinity
of France.  Oh, I conjure you, protect the angel against the demon!  It is your cause, that
of your royal family, that of all your nation."

The Queen smiled.

"It is, above all, your cause, my child; and it is as such that I will embrace it to the utmost
extent of my power.  That is not great, as I have told you; but such as it is, I lend it to
you entirely, provided, however, that this angel does not stoop to commit mortal sins," added
she, with a meaning look."  I heard his name pronounced this night by voices most unworthy of him."

"Oh, Madame, I would swear that he knows nothing of it!"

"Ah, my child, do not speak of State affairs.  You are not yet learned enough in them.  Let
me sleep, if I can, before the hour of my toilette. My eyes are burning, and yours also, perhaps."

Saying these words, the amiable Queen laid her head upon the pillow which covered the casket,
and soon Marie saw her fall asleep through sheer fatigue.  She then rose, and, seating herself
in a great, tapestried, square armchair, clasped her hands upon her knees, and began to reflect
upon her painful situation.  Consoled by the aspect of her gentle protectress, she often raised
her eyes to watch her slumber, and sent her in secret all the blessings which love showers
upon those who protect it, sometimes kissing the curls of her blond hair, as if by this kiss
she could convey to her soul all the ideas favorable to the thought ever present to her mind.

The Queen's slumber was prolonged, while Marie thought and wept. However, she remembered that
at ten o'clock she must appear at the royal toilette before all the court.  She resolved to
cast aside reflection, to dry her tears, and she took a thick folio volume placed upon a table
inlaid with enamel and medallions; it was the 'Astree' of M. d'Urfe-- a work 'de belle galanterie'
adored by the fair prudes of the court. The unsophisticated and straightforward mind of Marie
could not enter into these pastoral loves.  She was too simple to understand the 'bergeres
du Lignon', too clever to be pleased at their discourse, and too impassioned to feel their
tenderness.  However, the great popularity of the romance so far influenced her that she sought
to compel herself to take an interest in it; and, accusing herself internally every time that
she felt the ennui which exhaled from the pages of the book, she ran through it with impatience
to find something to please and transport her. An engraving arrested her attention.  It represented
the shepherdess Astree with high-heeled shoes, a corset, and an immense farthingale, standing
on tiptoe to watch floating down the river the tender Celadon, drowning himself in despair
at having, been somewhat coldly received in the morning.  Without explaining to herself the
reason of the taste and accumulated fallacies of this picture, she sought, in turning over
the pages, something which could fix her attention; she saw the word "Druid."

"Ah!  here is a great character," said she.  "I shall no doubt read of one of those mysterious
sacrificers of whom Britain, I am told, still preserves the monuments; but I shall see him
sacrificing men.  That would be a spectacle of horror; however, let us read it."

Saying this, Marie read with repugnance, knitting her brows, and nearly trembling, the following:

     "The Druid Adamas delicately called the shepherds Pimandre,
     Ligdamont, and Clidamant, newly arrived from Calais.  'This
     adventure can not terminate,' said he, 'but by the extremity of
     love.  The soul, when it loves, transforms itself into the object
     beloved; it is to represent this that my agreeable enchantments will
     show you in this fountain the nymph Sylvia, whom you all three love.
     The high-priest Amasis is about to come from Montbrison, and will
     explain to you the delicacy of this idea.  Go, then, gentle
     shepherds!  If your desires are well regulated, they will not cause
     you any torments; and if they are not so, you will be punished by
     swoonings similar to those of Celadon, and the shepherdess Galatea,
     whom the inconstant Hercules abandoned in the mountains of Auvergne,
     and who gave her name to the tender country of the Gauls; or you
     will be stoned by the shepherdesses of Lignon, as was the ferocious
     Amidor.  The great nymph of this cave has made an enchantment.'"

The enchantment of the great nymph was complete on the Princess, who had hardly sufficient
strength to find out with a trembling hand, toward the end of the book, that the Druid Adamas
was an ingenious allegory, representing the Lieutenant-General of Montbrison, of the family
of the Papons.  Her weary eyes closed, and the great book slipped from her lap to the cushion
of velvet upon which her feet were placed, and where the beautiful Astree and the gallant Celadon
reposed luxuriously, less immovable than Marie de Mantua, vanquished by them and by profound
slumber.

CHAPTER XVI

THE CONFUSION

This same morning, the various events of which we have seen in the apartments of Gaston d'Orleans
and of the Queen, the calm and silence of study reigned in a modest cabinet of a large house
near the Palais de justice.  A bronze lamp, of a gothic shape, struggling with the coming day,
threw its red light upon a mass of papers and books which covered a large table; it lighted
the bust of L'Hopital, that of Montaigne the essayist, the President de Thou, and of King Louis
XIII.

A fireplace sufficiently large for a man to enter and sit there was occupied by a large fire
burning upon enormous andirons.  Upon one of these was placed the foot of the studious De Thou,
who, already risen, examined with attention the new works of Descartes and Grotius.  He was
writing upon his knee his notes upon these books of philosophy and politics, which were then
the general subjects of conversation; but at this moment the 'Meditations Metaphysiques' absorbed
all his attention. The philosopher of Touraine enchanted the young counsellor.  Often, in his
enthusiasm, he struck the book, uttering exclamations of admiration; sometimes he took a sphere
placed near him, and, turning it with his fingers, abandoned himself to the most profound reveries
of science; then, led by them to a still greater elevation of mind, he would suddenly throw
himself upon his knees before a crucifix, placed upon the chimney- piece, because at the limits
of the human mind he had found God.  At other times he buried himself in his great armchair,
so as to be nearly sitting upon his shoulders, and, placing his two hands upon his eyes, followed
in his head the trace of the reasoning of Rene Descartes, from this idea of the first meditation:

     "Suppose that we are asleep, and that all these particularities--
     that is, that we open our eyes, move our heads, spread our arms--are
     nothing but false illusions."

to this sublime conclusion of the third:

     "Only one thing remains to be said; it is that like the idea of
     myself, that of God is born and produced with me from the time I was
     created.  And certainly it should not be thought strange that God,
     in creating me, should have implanted in me this idea, to be, as it
     were, the mark of the workman impressed upon his work."

These thoughts entirely occupied the mind of the young counsellor, when a loud noise was heard
under the windows.  He thought that some house on fire excited these prolonged cries, and hastened
to look toward the wing of the building occupied by his mother and sisters; but all appeared
to sleep there, and the chimneys did not even send forth any smoke, to attest that its inhabitants
were even awake.  He blessed Heaven for it; and, running to another window, he saw the people,
whose exploits we have witnessed, hastening toward the narrow streets which led to the quay.

After examining this rabble of women and children, the ridiculous flag which led them, and
the rude disguises of the men: "It is some popular fete or some carnival comedy," said he;
and again returning to the corner of the fire, he placed a large almanac upon the table, and
carefully sought in it what saint was honored that day.  He looked in the column of the month
of December; and, finding at the fourth day of this month the name of Ste.-Barbe, he remembered
that he had seen several small cannons and barrels pass, and, perfectly satisfied with the
explanation which he had given himself, he hastened to drive away the interruption which had
called off his attention, and resumed his quiet studies, rising only to take a book from the
shelves of his library, and, after reading in it a phrase, a line, or only a word, he threw
it from him upon his table or on the floor, covered in this way with books or papers which
he would not trouble himself to return to their places, lest he should break the thread of
his reveries.

Suddenly the door was hastily opened, and a name was announced which he had distinguished among
those at the bar--a man whom his connections with the magistracy had made personally known to him.

"And by what chance, at five o'clock in the morning, do I see Monsieur Fournier?"  he cried.
"Are there some unfortunates to defend, some families to be supported by the fruits of his
talent, some error to dissipate in us, some virtue to awaken in our hearts?  for these are
of his accustomed works.  You come, perhaps, to inform me of some fresh humiliation of our
parliament.  Alas!  the secret chambers of the Arsenal are more powerful than the ancient magistracy
of Clovis.  The parliament is on its knees; all is lost, unless it is soon filled with men
like yourself."

"Monsieur, I do not merit your praise," said the Advocate, entering, accompanied by a grave
and aged man, enveloped like himself in a large cloak.  "I deserve, on the contrary, your censure;
and I am almost a penitent, as is Monsieur le Comte du Lude, whom you see here.  We come to
ask an asylum for the day."

"An asylum!  and against whom?"  said De Thou, making them sit down.

"Against the lowest people in Paris, who wish to have us for chiefs, and from whom we fly.
It is odious; the sight, the smell, the ear, and the touch, above all, are too severely wounded
by it," said M. du Lude, with a comical gravity.  "It is too much!"

"Ah!  too much, you say?"  said De Thou, very much astonished, but not willing to show it.

"Yes," answered the Advocate; "really, between ourselves, Monsieur le Grand goes too far."

"Yes, he pushes things too fast.  He will render all our projects abortive," added his companion.

"Ah! and you say he goes too far?"  replied M. de Thou, rubbing his chin, more and more surprised.

Three months had passed since his friend Cinq-Mars had been to see him; and he, without feeling
much disquieted about it--knowing that he was at St.-Germain in high favor, and never quitting
the King--was far removed from the news of the court.  Absorbed in his grave studies, he never
heard of public events till they were forced upon his attention.  He knew nothing of current
life until the last moment, and often amused his intimate friends by his naive astonishment--the
more so that from a little worldly vanity he desired to have it appear as if he were fully
acquainted with the course of events, and tried to conceal the surprise he experienced at every
fresh intelligence.  He was now in this situation, and to this vanity was added the feeling
of friendship; he would not have it supposed that Cinq-Mars had been negligent toward him,
and, for his friend's honor even, would appear to be aware of his projects.

"You know very well how we stand now," continued the Advocate.

"Yes, of course.  Well?"

"Intimate as you are with him, you can not be ignorant that all has been organizing for a year
past."

"Certainly, all has been organizing; but proceed."

"You will admit with us that Monsieur le Grand is wrong?"

"Ah, that is as it may be; but explain yourself.  I shall see."

"Well, you know upon what we had agreed at the last conference of which he informed you?"

"Ah!  that is to say--pardon me, I perceive it almost; but set me a little upon the track."

"It is useless; you no doubt remember what he himself recommended us to do at Marion de Lorme's?"

"To add no one to our list," said M. du Lude.

"Ah, yes, yes!  I understand," said De Thou; "that appears reasonable, very reasonable, truly."

"Well," continued Fournier, "he himself has infringed this agreement; for this morning, besides
the ragamuffins whom that ferret the Abbe de Gondi brought to us, there was some vagabond captain,
who during the night struck with sword and poniard gentlemen of both parties, crying out at
the top of his voice, 'A moi, D'Aubijoux!  You gained three thousand ducats from me; here are
three sword-thrusts for you.  'A moi', La Chapelle!  I will have ten drops of your blood in
exchange for my ten pistoles!' and I myself saw him attack these gentlemen and many more of
both sides, loyally enough, it is true--for he struck them only in front and on their guard--but
with great success, and with a most revolting impartiality."

"Yes, Monsieur, and I was about to tell him my opinion," interposed De Lude, "when I saw him
escape through the crowd like a squirrel, laughing greatly with some suspicious looking men
with dark, swarthy faces; I do not doubt, however, that Monsieur de Cinq-Mars sent him, for
he gave orders to that Ambrosio whom you must know--that Spanish prisoner, that rascal whom
he has taken for a servant.  In faith, I am disgusted with all this; and I was not born to
mingle with this canaille."

"This, Monsieur," replied Fournier, "is very different from the affair at Loudun.  There the
people only rose, without actually revolting; it was the sensible and estimable part of the
populace, indignant at an assassination, and not heated by wine and money.  It was a cry raised
against an executioner--a cry of which one could honorably be the organ --and not these howlings
of factious hypocrisy, of a mass of unknown people, the dregs of the mud and sewers of Paris.
I confess that I am very tired of what I see; and I have come to entreat you to speak about
it to Monsieur le Grand."

De Thou was very much embarrassed during this conversation, and sought in vain to understand
what Cinq-Mars could have to do with the people, who appeared to him merely merrymaking; on
the other hand, he persisted in not owning his ignorance.  It was, however, complete; for the
last time he had seen his friend, he had spoken only of the King's horses and stables, of hawking,
and of the importance of the King's huntsmen in the affairs of the State, which did not seem
to announce vast projects in which the people could take a part.  He at last timidly ventured
to say:

"Messieurs, I promise to do your commission; meanwhile, I offer you my table and beds as long
as you please.  But to give my advice in this matter is very difficult.  By the way, it was
not the fete of Sainte- Barbe I saw this morning?"

"The Sainte-Barbe!"  said Fournier.

"The Sainte-Barbe!"  echoed Du Lude.  "They burned powder."

"Oh, yes, yes!  that is what Monsieur de Thou means," said Fournier, laughing; "very good,
very good indeed!  Yes, I think to-day is Sainte- Barbe."

De Thou was now altogether confused and reduced to silence; as for the others, seeing that
they did not understand him, nor he them, they had recourse to silence.

They were sitting thus mute, when the door opened to admit the old tutor of Cinq-Mars, the
Abbe Quillet, who entered, limping slightly.  He looked very gloomy, retaining none of his
former gayety in his air or language; but his look was still animated, and his speech energetic.

"Pardon me, my dear De Thou, that I so early disturb you in your occupations; it is strange,
is it not, in a gouty invalid?  Ah, time advances; two years ago I did not limp.  I was, on
the contrary, nimble enough at the time of my journey to Italy; but then fear gives legs as
well as wings."

Then, retiring into the recess of a window, he signed De Thou to come to him.

"I need hardly remind you, my friend, who are in their secrets, that I affianced them a fortnight
ago, as they have told you."

"Ah, indeed!  Whom?"  exclaimed poor De Thou, fallen from the Charybdis into the Scylla of
astonishment.

"Come, come, don't affect surprise; you know very well whom," continued the Abbe.  "But, faith,
I fear I have been too complaisant with them, though these two children are really interesting
in their love.  I fear for him more than for her; I doubt not he is acting very foolishly,
judging from the disturbance this morning.  We must consult together about it."

"But," said De Thou, very gravely, "upon my honor, I do not know what you mean.  Who is acting
foolishly?"

"Now, my dear Monsieur, will you still play the mysterious with me?  It is really insulting,"
said the worthy man, beginning to be angry.

"No, indeed, I mean it not; whom have you affianced?"

"Again! fie, Monsieur!"

"And what was the disturbance this morning?"

"You are laughing at me!  I take my leave," said the Abbe, rising.

"I vow that I understand not a word of all that has been told me to-day. Do you mean Monsieur
de Cinq-Mars?"

"Very well, Monsieur, very well!  you treat me as a Cardinalist; very well, we part," said
the Abbe Quillet, now altogether furious.  And he snatched up his crutch and quitted the room
hastily, without listening to De Thou, who followed him to his carriage, seeking to pacify
him, but without effect, because he did not wish to name his friend upon the stairs in the
hearing of his servants, and could not explain the matter otherwise.  He had the annoyance
of seeing the old Abbe depart, still in a passion; he called out to him amicably, "Tomorrow,"
as the coachman drove off, but got no answer.

It was, however, not uselessly that he had descended to the foot of the stairs, for he saw
thence hideous groups of the mob returning from the Louvre, and was thus better able to judge
of the importance of their movements in the morning; he heard rude voices exclaiming, as in
triumph:

"She showed herself, however, the little Queen!"  "Long live the good Duc de Bouillon, who
is coming to us!  He has a hundred thousand men with him, all on rafts on the Seine.  The old
Cardinal de la Rochelle is dead! Long live the King!  Long live Monsieur le Grand!"

The cries redoubled at the arrival of a carriage and four, with the royal livery, which stopped
at the counsellor's door, and in which De Thou recognized the equipage of Cinq-Mars; Ambrosio
alighted to open the ample curtains, which the carriages of that period had for doors.  The
people threw themselves between the carriage-steps and the door of the house, so that Cinq-Mars
had an absolute struggle ere he could get out and disengage himself from the market-women,
who sought to embrace him, crying:

"Here you are, then, my sweet, my dear!  Here you are, my pet!  Ah, how handsome he is, the
love, with his big collar!  Isn't he worth more than the other fellow with the white moustache?
Come, my son, bring us out some good wine this morning."

Henri d'Effiat pressed, blushing deeply the while, his friend's hand,-- who hastened to have
his doors closed.

"This popular favor is a cup one must drink," said he, as they ascended the stairs.

"It appears to me," replied De Thou, gravely, "that you drink it even to the very dregs."

"I will explain all this clamorous affair to you," answered Cinq-Mars, somewhat embarrassed.
"At present, if you love me, dress yourself to accompany me to the Queen's toilette."

"I promised you blind adherence," said the counsellor; "but truly I can not keep my eyes shut
much longer if--"

"Once again, I will give you a full explanation as we return from the Queen.  But make haste;
it is nearly ten o'clock."

"Well, I will go with you," replied De Thou, conducting him into his cabinet, where were the
Comte du Lude and Fournier, while he himself passed into his dressing-room.

CHAPTER XVII

TOILETTE

The carriage of the Grand Equerry was rolling rapidly toward the Louvre, when, closing the
curtain, he took his friend's hand, and said to him with emotion:

"Dear De Thou, I have kept great secrets in my heart, and, believe me, they have weighed heavily
there; but two fears impelled me to silence-- that of your danger, and--shall I say it?--that
of your counsels."

"Yet well you know," replied De Thou, "that I despise the first; and I deemed that you did
not despise the second."

"No, but I feared, and still fear them.  I would not be stopped.  Do not speak, my friend;
not a word, I conjure you, before you have heard and seen all that is about to take place.
I will return with you to your house on quitting the Louvre; there I will listen to you, and
thence I shall depart to continue my work, for nothing will shake my resolve, I warn you. 
I have just said so to the gentlemen at your house."

