1895

CHAPTER XIII.

The First Consul left Boulogne to return to Paris, in order to be present at the marriage of
one of his sisters.  Prince Camille Borghese, descendant of the noblest family of Rome, had
already arrived at Paris to--marry Madame Pauline Bonaparte, widow of General Leclerc, who
had died of yellow fever in San Domingo.  I recollect having seen this unfortunate general
at the residence of the First Consul some time before his departure on the ill-starred expedition
which cost him his life, and France the loss of many brave soldiers and much treasure.  General
Leclerc, whose name is now almost forgotten, or held in light esteem, was a kind and good man.
He was passionately in love with his wife, whose giddiness, to put it mildly, afflicted him
sorely, and threw him into a deep and habitual melancholy painful to witness.  Princess Pauline
(who was then far from being a princess) had married him willingly, and of her own choice;
but this did not prevent her tormenting her husband by her innumerable caprices, and repeating
to him a hundred times a day that he was indeed a fortunate man to marry the sister of the
First Consul.  I am sure that with his simple tastes and quiet disposition General Leclerc
would have preferred less distinction and more peace.  The First Consul required his sister
to accompany her husband to San Domingo.  She was forced to obey, and to leave Paris, where
she swayed the scepter of fashion, and eclipsed all other women by her elegance and coquetry,
as well as by her incomparable beauty, to brave a dangerous climate, and the ferocious companions
of Christophe and Dessalines.  At the end of the year 1801 the admiral's ship, The Ocean, sailed
from Brest, carrying to the Cape (San Domingo) General Leclerc, his wife, and their son.  After
her arrival at the Cape, the conduct of Madame Leclerc was beyond praise. On more than one
occasion, but especially that which I shall now attempt to describe, she displayed a courage
worthy of her name and the position of her husband.  I obtained these details from an eye-witness
whom I had known at Paris in the service of Princess Pauline.

The day of the great insurrection of the blacks in September, 1802, the bands of Christophe
and Dessalines, composed of more than twelve thousand negroes, exasperated by their hatred
against the whites, and the certainty that if they yielded no quarter would be given, made
an assault on the town of the Cape, which was defended by only one thousand soldiers; for only
this small number remained of the large army which had sailed from Brest a year before, in
brilliant spirits and full of hope. This handful of brave men, the most of them weakened by
fever, led by the general-in-chief of the expedition, who was even then suffering from the
malady which caused his death, repulsed by unheard of efforts and heroic valor the repeated
attacks of the blacks.

During this combat, in which the determination, if not the number and strength, was equal on
both sides, Madame Leclerc, with her son, was under the guard of a devoted friend who had subject
to his orders only a weak company of artillery, which still occupied the house where her husband
had fixed his residence, at the foot of the low hills which bordered the coast.  The general-in-chief,
fearing lest this residence might be surprised by a party of the enemy, and being unable to
foresee the issue of the struggle which he was maintaining on the heights of the Cape, and
against which the blacks made their most furious assaults, sent an order to convey his wife
and son on board the fleet.  Pauline would not consent to this.  Always faithful to the pride
with which her name inspired her (but this time there was in her pride as much greatness as
nobility), she spoke to the ladies of the city who had taken refuge with her, and begged them
to go away, giving them a frightful picture of the horrible treatment to which they would be
exposed should the negroes defeat the troops.  "You can leave.  You are not the sisters of
Bonaparte."

However, as the danger became more pressing every moment, General Leclerc sent an aide-de-camp
to his residence, and enjoined on him, in case Pauline still persisted in her refusal, to use
force, and convey her on board against her will.  The officer was obliged to execute this order
to the letter.  Consequently Madame Leclerc was forcibly placed in an arm- chair which was
borne by four soldiers, while a grenadier marched by her side, carrying in his arms the general's
son.  During this scene of flight and terror the child, already worthy of its mother, played
with the plume of the soldier who was carrying him.  Followed by her cortege of trembling,
tearful women, whose only source of strength during this perilous passage was in her courage,
she was thus conveyed to the seashore.  Just as they were going to place her in the sloop,
however, another aide-de-camp of her husband brought news of the defeat of the blacks.  "You
see now," said she, returning to her residence, "I was right in not wishing to embark."  She
was not yet out of danger, however; for a troop of negroes, forming part of the army which
had just been so miraculously repulsed, in trying to make good their retreat to the dikes,
met the small escort of Madame Leclerc.  As they appeared disposed to attack, it was necessary
to scatter them by shots at short range.  Throughout this skirmish Pauline preserved a perfect
equanimity. All these circumstances, which reflected so much honor on Madame Leclerc, were
reported to the First Consul.

His self-love was flattered by it; and I believe that it was to Prince Borghese that he said
one day at his levee, "Pauline is predestined to marry a Roman, for from head to foot she is
every inch a Roman."

Unfortunately this courage, which a man might have envied, was not united in the Princess Pauline
with those virtues which are less brilliant and more modest, and also more suitable for a woman,
and which we naturally expect to find in her, rather than boldness and contempt of danger.

I do not know if it is true, as has been written somewhere, that Madame Leclerc, when she was
obliged to set out for San Domingo, had a fancy for an actor of the Theatre Francais.  Nor
am I able to say whether it is true that Mademoiselle Duchesnois had the naivete to exclaim
before a hundred people in reference to this departure, "Lafon will never be consoled; it will
kill him!"  but what I myself know of the frailty of this princess leads me to believe that
the anecdote is true.

All Paris knew the special favor with which she honored M. Jules de Canouville, a young and
brilliant colonel who was handsome and brave, with a perfect figure, and an assurance which
was the cause of his innumerable successes with certain women, although he used little discretion
in respect to them.  The liaison of Princess Pauline with this amiable officer was the most
lasting that she ever formed; and as, unfortunately, neither of them was discreet, their mutual
tenderness acquired in a short while a scandalous publicity.  I shall take occasion later to
relate in its proper place the incident which caused the disgrace, banishment, and perhaps
even the death, of Colonel de Canouville.  A death so premature, and above all so cruel, since
it was not an enemy's bullet which struck him, was deplored by the whole army.

     [Monsieur Bousquet was called to Neuilly (residence of the
     Princess Pauline) in order to examine the beautiful teeth of her
     Imperial Highness.  Presented to her, he prepared to begin work.
     "Monsieur," said a charming young man in a wrapper, negligently
     lying on a sofa, "take care, I pray, what you do.  I feel a great
     interest in the teeth of my Paulette, and I hold you responsible for
     any accident."--" Be tranquil, my Prince; I can assure your Imperial
     Highness that there is no danger."  During all the time that
     Bousquet was engaged in working on the pretty mouth, these
     recommendations continued.  At length, having finished what he had
     to do, he passed into the waiting-room, where he found assembled the
     ladies of the palace, the chamberlains, etc., who were awaiting to
     enter the apartments of the Princess.

     They hastened to ask Bousquet news of the princess, "Her Imperial
     Highness is very well, and must be happy in the tender attachment
     her august husband feels for her, which he has shown in my presence
     in so touching a manner.  His anxiety was extreme.  It was only with
     difficulty I could reassure him as to the result of the simplest
     thing in the world; I shall tell everywhere what I have just
     witnessed.  It is pleasant to be able to cite such an example of
     conjugal tenderness in so high a rank.  I am deeply impressed with
     it."  They did not try to stop good M. Bousquet in these expressions
     of his enthusiasm.  The desire to laugh prevented a single word; and
     he left convinced that nowhere existed a better household than that
     of the Prince and Princess Borghese.  The latter was in Italy, and
     the handsome young man was M. de Canouville.

     I borrow this curious anecdote from the "Memoirs of Josephine," the
     author of which, who saw and described the Court of Navarre and
     Malmaison with so much truth and good judgment, is said to be a
     woman, and must be in truth a most intellectual one, and in a better
     position than any other person to know the private affairs of her
     Majesty, the Empress.--CONSTANT.

     He was slain by a ball from a French cannon, which was discharged
     after the close of an action in which he had shown the most
     brilliant courage.--CONSTANT.]

Moreover, however great may have been the frailty of Princess Pauline in regard to her lovers,
and although most incredible instances of this can be related without infringing on the truth,
her admirable devotion to the person of the Emperor in 1814 should cause her faults to be treated
with indulgence.

On innumerable occasions the effrontery of her conduct, and especially her want of regard and
respect for the Empress Marie Louise, irritated the Emperor against the Princess Borghese,
though he always ended by pardoning her; notwithstanding which, at the time of the fall of
her august brother she was again in disgrace, and being informed that the island of Elba had
been selected as a prison for the Emperor, she hastened to shut herself up there with him,
abandoning Rome and Italy, whose finest palaces were hers.  Before the battle of Waterloo,
his Majesty at the critical moment found the heart of his sister Pauline still faithful.  Fearing
lest he might be in need of money, she sent him her handsomest diamonds, the value of which
was enormous; and they were found in the carriage of the Emperor when it was captured at Waterloo,
and exhibited to the curiosity of the inhabitants of London.  But the diamonds have been lost;
at least, to their lawful owner.

CHAPTER XIV.

On the day of General Moreau's arrest the First Consul was in a state of great excitement.

     [Jean Victor Moreau, born at Morlaix in Brittany, 1763, son of a
     prominent lawyer.  At one time he rivaled Bonaparte in reputation.
     He was general-in-chief of the army of the Rhine, 1796, and again in
     1800, in which latter year he gained the battle of Hohenlinden.
     Implicated in the conspiracy of Pichegru, he was exiled, and went to
     the United States.  He returned to Europe in 1813, and, joining the
     allied armies against France, was killed by a cannon-shot in the
     attack on Dresden in August of that year.]

The morning was passed in interviews with his emissaries, the agents of police; and measures
had been taken that the arrest should be made at the specified hour, either at Gros-Bois, or
at the general's house in the street of the Faubourg Saint-Honore.  The First Consul was anxiously
walking up and down his chamber, when he sent for me, and ordered me to take position opposite
General Moreau's house (the one in Paris), to see whether the arrest had taken place, and if
there was any tumult, and to return promptly and make my report.  I obeyed; but nothing extraordinary
took place, and I saw only some police spies walking along the street, and watching the door
of the house of the man whom they had marked for their prey.  Thinking that my presence would
probably be noticed, I retired; and, as I learned while returning to the chateau that General
Moreau had been arrested on the road from his estate of Gros-Bois, which he sold a few months
later to Marshal Berthier, before leaving for the United States, I quickened my pace, and hastened
to announce to the First Consul the news of the arrest.  He knew this already, made no response,
and still continued thoughtful, and in deep reflection, as in the morning.

Since I have been led to speak of General Moreau, I will recall by what fatal circumstances
he was led to tarnish his glory.  Madame Bonaparte had given to him in marriage Mademoiselle
Hulot, her friend, and, like herself, a native of the Isle of France.  This young lady, gentle,
amiable, and possessing those qualities which make a good wife and mother, loved her husband
passionately, and was proud of that glorious name which surrounded her with respect and honor;
but, unfortunately, she had the greatest deference for her mother, whose ambition was great,
and who desired nothing short of seeing her daughter seated upon a throne. The influence which
she exercised over Madame Moreau soon extended to the general himself, who, ruled by her counsels,
became gloomy, thoughtful, melancholy, and forever lost that tranquillity of mind which had
distinguished him.  From that time the general's house was open to intrigues and conspiracies;
and it was the rendezvous of all the discontented, of which there were many.  The general assumed
the task of disapproving all the acts of the First Consul; he opposed the reestablishment of
public worship, and criticised as childish and ridiculous mummery the institution of the Legion
of Honor.  These grave imprudences, and indeed many others, came to the ears of the First Consul,
who refused at first to believe them; but how could he remain deaf to reports which were repeated
each day with more foundation, though doubtless exaggerated by malice?

In proportion as the imprudent speeches of the general were depriving him of the esteem of
the First Consul, his mother-in-law, by a dangerous obstinacy, was encouraging him in his opposition,
persuaded, she said, that the future would do justice to the present.  She did not realize
that she spoke so truly; and the general rushed headlong into the abyss which opened before
him.  How greatly his conduct was in opposition to his character!  He had a pronounced aversion
to the English, and he detested the Chouans, and everything pertaining to the old nobility;
and besides, a man like General Moreau, who had served his country so gloriously, was not the
one to bear arms against her.  But he was deceived, and he deceived himself, in thinking that
he was fitted to play a great political part; and he was destroyed by the flatteries of a party
which excited all possible hostility against the First Consul by taking advantage of the jealousy
of his former comrades in arms.  I witnessed more than one proof of affection shown by the
First Consul to General Moreau.  In the course of a visit of the latter to the Tuileries, and
during an interview with the First Consul, General Carnot arrived from Versailles with a pair
of pistols of costly workmanship, which the manufactory of Versailles had sent as a gift to
the First Consul.  He took these handsome weapons from the hands of General Carnot, admired
them a moment, and immediately offered them to General Moreau, saying to him, "Take them, truly
they could not have come at a better time."  All this was done quicker than I can write it;
the general was highly flattered by this proof of friendship, and thanked the First Consul warmly.

The name and trial of General Moreau recall to me the story of a brave officer who was compromised
in this unfortunate affair, and who after many years of disgrace was pardoned only on account
of the courage with which he dared expose himself to the anger of the Emperor.  The authenticity
of the details which I shall relate can be attested, if necessary, by living persons, whom
I shall have occasion to name in my narrative, and whose testimony no reader would dream of
impeaching.

The disgrace of General Moreau extended at first to all those who surrounded him; and as the
affection and devotion felt for him by all the officers and soldiers who had served under him
was well known, his aides- de-camp were arrested, even those who were not then in Paris.  One
of them, Colonel Delelee, had been many months on furlough at Besancon, resting after his campaigns
in the bosom of his family, and with a young wife whom he had recently married.  Besides, he
was at that time concerning himself very little with political matters, very much with his
pleasures, and not at all with conspiracies.  Comrade and brother in arms of Colonels Guilleminot,
Hugo, Foy,--all three of whom became generals afterwards,--he was spending his evenings gayly
with them at the garrison, or in the quiet pleasures of his family circle.  Suddenly Colonel
Delelee was arrested, placed in a postchaise, and it was not until he was rolling along in
a gallop on the road to Paris, that he learned from the officer of the gendarmes who accompanied
him, that General Moreau had conspired, and that in his quality as aide-de-camp he was counted
among the conspirators.

Arrived at Paris, the colonel was put in close confinement, in La Force I believe.  His wife,
much alarmed, followed his footsteps; but it was several days before she obtained permission
to communicate with the prisoner, and then could do so only by signs from the courtyard of
the prison while he showed himself, for a few moments, and put his hands through the bars of
the window.  However, the rigor of these orders was relaxed for the colonel's young child three
or four years of age, and his father obtained the favor of embracing him.  He came each morning
in his mother's arms, and a turnkey carried him in to the prisoner, before which inconvenient
witness the poor little thing played his role with all the skill of a consummate actor.  He
would pretend to be lame, and complain of having sand in his shoes which hurt him and the colonel,
turning his back on the jailer, and taking the child in his lap to remove the cause of the
trouble, would find in his son's shoe a note from his wife, informing him in a few words of
the state of the trial, and what he had to hope or fear for himself.  At length, after many
months of captivity, sentence having been pronounced against the conspirators, Colonel Delelee,
against whom no charge had been made, was not absolved as he had a right to expect, but was
struck off the army list, arbitrarily put under surveillance, and prohibited from coming within
forty leagues of Paris.  He was also forbidden to return to Besancon, and it was more than
a year after leaving prison before he was permitted to do so.

Young and full of courage, the Colonel saw, from the depths of his retirement, his friends
and comrades make their way, and gain upon the battlefield fame, rank, and glory, while he
himself was condemned to inaction and obscurity, and to pass his days in following on the map
the triumphant march of those armies in which he felt himself worthy to resume his rank.  Innumerable
applications were addressed by him and his friends to the head of the Empire, that he might
be allowed to go even as a common volunteer, and rejoin his former comrades with his knapsack
on his shoulder; but these petitions were refused, the will of the Emperor was inflexible,
and to each new application he only replied, "Let him wait."  The inhabitants of Besancon,
who considered Colonel Delelee as their fellow-citizen, interested themselves warmly in the
unmerited misfortunes of this brave officer; and when an occasion presented itself of recommending
him anew to the clemency, or rather to the justice, of the Emperor, they availed themselves of it.

It was, I believe, on the return from Prussia and Poland that from all parts of France there
came deputations charged with congratulating the Emperor upon his several victories.  Colonel
Delelee was unanimously elected member of the deputation of Doubs, of which the mayor and prefect
of Besancon were also members, and of which the respectable Marshal Moncey was president, and
an opportunity was thus at last offered Colonel Delelee of procuring the removal of the long
sentence which had weighed him down and kept his sword idle.  He could speak to the Emperor,
and complain respectfully, but with dignity, of the disgrace in which he had been so long kept
without reason.  He could render thanks, from the bottom of his heart, for the generous affection
of his fellow-citizens, whose wishes, he hoped would plead for him with his Majesty.

The deputies of Besancon, upon their arrival at Paris, presented themselves to the different
ministers.  The minister of police took the president of the deputation aside, and asked him
the meaning of the presence among the deputies of a man publicly known to be in disgrace, and
the sight of whom could not fail to be disagreeable to the chief of the Empire.

Marshal Moncey, on coming out from this private interview, pale and frightened, entered the
room of Colonel Delelee:

"My friend," said he, "all is lost, for I have ascertained at the bureau that they are still
hostile to you.  If the Emperor sees you among us, he will take it as an open avowal of disregard
for his orders, and will be furious."

"Ah, well, what have I to do with that?"

"But in order to avoid compromising the department, the deputation, and, indeed, in order to
avoid compromising yourself, you would perhaps do well "--the Marshal hesitated.  "I will do
well?" demanded the Colonel.

"Perhaps to withdraw without making any display"--

Here the colonel interrupted the president of the deputation: "Marshal, permit me to decline
this advice; I have not come so far to be discouraged, like a child, before the first obstacle.
I am weary of a disgrace which I have not deserved, and still more weary of enforced idleness.
Let the Emperor be irritated or pleased, he shall see me; let him order me to be shot, if he
wishes.  I do not count worth having such a life as I have led for the last four years.  Nevertheless,
I will be satisfied with whatever my colleagues, the deputies of Besancon, shall decide."

