The above points all have to do with the mental attitude of the student, and may be summarized
by simply stating that the student must be possessed of mental courage, self-reliance, discrimination,
modesty, and caution, all in proper proportion.

[1] "He that questioneth much shall learn much."--Bacon.

[2] "Mendax in uno praesumitur mendax in alio."

[3] "There are always people ready to assume that things are what they are called, because
it is much easier to deal with names than to examine facts."--Bryce: South America.

[4] "A wise man knows an ignorant one, because he has been ignorant himself, but the ignorant
cannot recognize the wise, because he has never been wise."--Persian Proverb.

[5] "Table talk proves that nine out of ten people read what amuses them, rather than what
instructs them, and proves also, that the last thing they read is something which tells them
disagreeable truths or dispels groundless hopes.  That popular education results in an extensive
reading of publications which foster pleasant illusions rather than of those which insist on
hard realities, is beyond question."--Spencer: The Coming Slavery.

{22}

II

STUDYING UNDERSTANDINGLY

The second essential which may be named, connected with the first, and already mentioned, but
now to be discussed, is that the student should understand what he reads.  This may seem almost
a needless injunction, yet it is very surprising how commonly it is disregarded.  It is, however,
easy to understand why this should be so.  A child, as it grows up, must gain all its knowledge
either by the exercise of its own reasoning powers or from its senses.  How does it learn the
meaning of words?  Certain nouns like "papa" or "cat" it may easily be made to understand by
pointing at the object referred to and uttering the word, but how does it learn the meaning
of abstract nouns, or of verbs and other parts of speech which cannot be illustrated by pantomime?
It is almost inevitable that the child should use many words the meaning of which it does not
understand, and when young children in school recite poetry at class-day exercises, it is almost
certain that they do not understand the meaning of many of the words they use.  Thus, it happens
that they come {23} into the habit of using words and phrases without carefully examining their
meanings.  This tendency should be counteracted from the earliest stage.  The child should
be continually asked the meanings of words which it uses, and should be encouraged itself to
inquire as to those meanings and to take the proper mental attitude.  The use of the dictionary
should be insisted upon even from an early age, the object being to avoid the formation of
the habit of using words or phrases unintelligently, which is one of the worst habits that
one can acquire.

Perhaps it may be thought that an incident like the foregoing would only occur in an elementary
school.  As a matter of fact, college students and graduates, and indeed most of us, {24} do
this very thing more often than we realize, even in subjects like mathematics or mechanics;
and terms like "energy," "momentum," "rate of change," "period of vibration," "value," "social
justice," etc., are often used without a clear understanding, and sometimes without any understanding
at all, of what they mean.

(a) THE STUDENT SHOULD ACQUIRE AND INSIST UPON EXERCISING THE HABIT OF FORMING DEFINITE IDEAS.--This
is one of the most important injunctions to be observed as an essential principle of intelligent
study.[1]  It is self-evident that facts or things cannot be reasoned about intelligently unless
a definite idea is formed of the facts or things themselves.  Vagueness of idea not alone precludes
a proper conception of the thing itself, but may vitiate all reasoning regarding it.  The student
must resolutely make up his mind that he must not rest satisfied with hazy, uncertain, half-formed
ideas.  A half knowledge of a thing may not be useless, but it is generally found that it is
the other half that is needed.  If the student could learn this one precept and continually
apply it, he would have little difficulty in studying properly.

{25}

It is not easy to state just how the habit of forming definite ideas may be acquired.  To a
certain extent it is intuitive.  Some students have it, while others do not; some can cultivate
it, while others apparently cannot.  It is probably safe to say, however, that a student who
cannot cultivate it should not study books, or enter into a profession, but should go to work
with his hands instead of taking a college course.  Such a man will be always likely to be
misled, his conclusions can never be depended upon, and what we term education may do him harm
rather than good.

A definite idea is one that leaves no room for ambiguity--which means just one thing.  The
habit of forming such ideas habitually may be cultivated in several ways, as for instance:

1. STUDY THE DICTIONARY.--By study of the dictionary, the student may train himself to distinguish
slight differences in meaning between words, and habitually to use precisely the word with
the proper meaning to express his idea.  A knowledge of the derivation of words will often
assist, and such books as Archbishop Trench's on "The Study of Words," or a course in English
composition under a good teacher, accompanied by exercises in expression, will all contribute
to {26} the formation of the habit.[2]  Sometimes, however, the dictionary may give little
assistance, for it may be found that one term is defined by means of another and on looking
up that other, it will be found to be defined by means of the first.  Sometimes also a definition
of a word will be given in terms even more difficult to understand than the one which is defined.
There are differences in dictionaries.  The study of language, and particularly of the classics,
if properly pursued, may be of great benefit, because it involves translating {27} from one
language into another, and should include much practice in discovering the precise word or
phrase to express an idea.  The reason why a study of the classics may be better than that
of modern foreign languages, is that in studying the latter the object is more often considered--by
the student at least--to become able to read professional books in a modern language, or to
get a smattering which will be of use in travel or in business; while in the study of the classics
these objects are entirely absent, and the attention is more apt to be concentrated on studying
delicate shades of meaning.  However, everything depends upon the teacher and the way the subject
is taught.[3]

2. "To be sure it is!" answered Dunning, without giving me a chance to speak. "Do you know that
you wrote me a very silly letter once, from Switzerland, about a family called de Blonay, that
had been seated on the same rock, in a little castle, some six or eight hundred years, and the
sort of respect and veneration the circumstance awakened? Well, all that was very foolish,
as you will find when you pay your incognito visit to Ravensnest.
I will not anticipate the result of your schooling; but, go to school."
  For instance, a cow may be defined as
a {28} four-legged animal, but this, while correct, obviously does not define a cow, for the
same definition would apply to many other animals that are not cows.  What constitutes a definition?

This subject is clearly allied with the discussion of the question as to what constitutes perfect
knowledge; what elements, for instance, go to make up what may be called a perfect conception
of a thing. According to Liebnitz, perfect knowledge is clear, distinct, adequate, and intuitive.
The student will do well to look up the discussion of this subject in Jevon's "Elementary Lessons
in Logic" (Lesson VII).

The importance of forming definite ideas, as an essential of proper study, and of understanding
what is read, cannot be exaggerated. Without it one cannot acquire more than a partial knowledge,
and one is always liable to those errors of reasoning which arise from the use of equivocal
language, which may lead us unconsciously from one meaning of a word to another--a logical
error which is perhaps the most fruitful cause of fallacious reasoning.

3. STUDY LOGIC.--Logic is the science of correct reasoning.  It teaches us how to discover
truth, how to recognize it when discovered, how to arrive at general laws from facts collected
by {29} observation or experiment, and how to deduce new facts from those already found to
be true.  It is thus the science of sciences, and finds its application in every branch of
knowledge.  The training of his power of logical thought is, therefore, one of the things that
should be constantly aimed at by the student.

Now all thinking is concerned, first of all, with terms or names for things or qualities or
conceptions of some sort.  Then, it is concerned with comparisons of things, and the discovery
of their identity or dissimilarity, as when I say "Iron is a metal" or "all metals are elements,"
each of which statements is a proposition, the truth or falsity of which I must be able to
discover.  Finally, it is concerned in deducing new propositions from old ones, and so arriving
at new truths, as when I discover from the two propositions stated above, the new truth that
"Iron is an element."

But there are many chances for error in this process; for instance, I might say:

"To call you an animal would be to state the truth"--to which you would agree; and, "To call
you an ass would be to call you an animal"--to which you would also agree; from which I might
conclude that, "To call you an ass would {30} be to state the truth"--which you might have
a vague idea was not true.  If you wish to be sure that this conclusion is incorrect, you must
be able to show just why it is incorrect.  The study of logic would enable you to see just
where the error lies.  You must not be governed by vague ideas, or you will be intellectually
at anybody's mercy.

In the logical study of terms, they are classified and distinguished, and the importance made
manifest of having in mind a clear definition of the meaning of a term before reasoning about
it.  Many terms are ambiguous, as already explained, and may mean many different things, as
for instance the terms "bill," "church," "evil," "value," "social justice."  Here, then, the
importance of definite ideas will be manifest.

Pascal laid down the essentials of logical method in the statement "Define everything and prove
everything."  In other words, do not attempt to think about a term until you have defined the
term and have a clear idea what it means; and insist upon proving every statement at which
you arrive, before accepting it finally and definitely; although for want of time, you may
be obliged sometimes to accept or form a conclusion tentatively or provisionally.  You may
be able to draw correct conclusions from stated {31} premises even though you do not understand
the terms of the premises.  For instance, if I say, "Selenium is a dyad element" and "A dyad
element is one capable of replacing two equivalents of hydrogen," I can correctly draw the
conclusion that, "Selenium is capable of replacing two equivalents of hydrogen," but I cannot
know that the conclusion is correct unless I understand the meaning of the terms in the premises
and so can be sure of the correctness of those premises.

Every student should, therefore, in the writer's opinion, take a systematic course in logic,
or carefully study by himself such books as Jevons' "Elementary Lessons in Logic" or John Stuart
Mill's "Logic."[4]

