But the powers of observation and of deduction are not the only qualities essential to the
poetical character. The philosopher may indeed prosecute his experimental researches into the
arcana of nature, and announce them to the public through the medium of a friendly rédacteur,
as the legislator of Israel obtained permission to speak to the people by the voice of Aaron;
but the poet has no such privilege; nay, his doom is so far capricious, that, though he may
be possessed of the primary quality of poetical conception to the highest possible extent,
it is but like a lute without its strings, unless he has the subordinate, though equally essential,
power of expressing what he feels and conceives, in appropriate and harmonious language. With
this power Dryden's poetry was gifted in a degree, surpassing in modulated harmony that of
all who had preceded him, and inferior to none that has since written English verse. He first
showed that the English language was capable of uniting smoothness and strength. The hobbling
verses of his predecessors were abandoned even by the lowest versifiers; and by the force of
his precept and example, the meanest lampooners of the year seventeen hundred wrote smoother
lines than Donne and Cowley, the chief poets of the earlier half of the seventeenth century.
What was said of Rome adorned by Augustus, has been, by Johnson, applied to English poetry
improved by Dryden; that he found it of brick, and left it of marble. This reformation was
not merely the effect of an excellent ear, and a superlative command of gratifying it by sounding
language; it was, we have seen, the effect of close, accurate, and continued study of the power
of the English tongue. Upon what principles he adopted and continued his system of versification,
he long meditated to communicate in his projected prosody of English poetry. The work, however,
might have been more curious than useful, as there would have been some danger of its diverting
the attention, and misguiding the efforts of poetical adventurers; for as it is more easy to
be masons than architects, we may deprecate an art which might teach the world to value those
who can build rhymes, without attending to the more essential qualities of poetry. Strict attention
might no doubt discover the principle of Dryden's versification; but it seems no more essential
to the analysing his poetry, than the principles of mathematics to understanding music, although
the art necessarily depends on them. To vary the English hexameter, he established the use
of the triplet and Alexandrine. Though ridiculed by Swift, who vainly thought he had exploded
them for ever, their force is still acknowledged in classical poetry.

Of the various kinds of poetry which Dryden occasionally practised, the drama was that which,
until the last six years of his life, he chiefly relied on for support. His style of tragedy,
we have seen, varied with his improved taste, perhaps with the change of manners. Although
the heroic drama, as we have described it at length in the preceding pages, presented the strongest
temptation to the exercise of argumentative poetry in sounding rhyme, Dryden was at length
contented to abandon it for the more pure and chaste style of tragedy, which professes rather
the representation of human beings, than the creation of ideal perfection, or fantastic and
anomalous characters. The best of Dryden's performances in this latter style, are unquestionably
"Don Sebastian," and "All for Love." Of these, the former is in the poet's very best manner;
exhibiting dramatic persons, consisting of such bold and impetuous characters as he delighted
to draw, well contrasted, forcibly marked, and engaged in an interesting succession of events.
To many tempers, the scene between Sebastian and Dorax must appear one of the most moving that
ever adorned the British stage. Of "All for Love," we may say, that it is successful in a softer
style of painting; and that so far as sweet and beautiful versification, elegant language,
and occasional tenderness, can make amends for Dryden's deficiencies in describing the delicacies
of sentimental passion, they are to be found in abundance in that piece. But on these, and
on the poet's other tragedies, we have enlarged in our preliminary notices prefixed to each piece.

Dryden's comedies, besides being stained with the licence of the age (a licence which he seems
to use as much from necessity as choice), have, generally speaking, a certain heaviness of
character. There are many flashes of wit; but the author has beaten his flint hard ere he struck
them out. It is almost essential to the success of a jest, that it should at least seem to
be extemporaneous. If we espy the joke at a distance, nay, if without seeing it we have the
least reason to suspect we are travelling towards one, it is astonishing how the perverse obstinacy
of our nature delights to refuse it currency. When, therefore, as is often the case in Dryden's
comedies, two persons remain on the stage for no obvious purpose but to say good things, it
is no wonder they receive but little thanks from an ungrateful audience. The incidents, therefore,
and the characters, ought to be comic; but actual jests, or bon mots, should be rarely introduced,
and then naturally, easily, without an appearance of premeditation, and bearing a strict conformity
to the character of the person who utters them. Comic situation Dryden did not greatly study;
indeed I hardly recollect any, unless in the closing scene of "The Spanish Friar," which indicates
any peculiar felicity of invention. For comic character, he is usually contented to paint a
generic representative of a certain class of men or women; a Father Dominic, for example, or
a Melantha, with all the attributes of their calling and manners, strongly and divertingly
portrayed, but without any individuality of character. It is probable that, with these deficiencies,
he felt the truth of his own acknowledgment, and that he was forced upon composing comedies
to gratify the taste of the age, while the bent of his genius was otherwise directed.

In lyrical poetry, Dryden must be allowed to have no equal. "Alexander's Feast" is sufficient
to show his supremacy in that brilliant department. In this exquisite production, he flung
from him all the trappings with which his contemporaries had embarrassed the ode. The language,
lofty and striking as the ideas are, is equally simple and harmonious; without far-fetched
allusions, or epithets, or metaphors, the story is told as intelligibly as if it had been in
the most humble prose. The change of tone in the harp of Timotheus, regulates the measure and
the melody, and the language of every stanza. The hearer, while he is led on by the successive
changes, experiences almost the feelings of the Macedonian and his peers; nor is the splendid
poem disgraced by one word or line unworthy of it, unless we join in the severe criticism of
Dr. Johnson, on the concluding stanzas. It is true, that the praise of St. Cecilia is rather
abruptly introduced as a conclusion to the account of the Feast of Alexander; and it is also
true, that the comparison,

  "He raised a mortal to the sky,
  She drew an angel down,"

is inaccurate, since the feat of Timotheus was metaphorical, and that of Cecilia literal. But,
while we stoop to such criticism, we seek for blots in the sun.

Of Dryden's other pindarics, some, as the celebrated "Ode to the Memory of Mrs. Killigrew,"
are mixed with the leaven of Cowley; others, like the "Threnodia Augustalis," are occasionally
flat and heavy. All contain passages of brilliancy, and all are thrown into a versification,
melodious amidst its irregularity. We listen for the completion of Dryden's stanza, as for
the explication of a difficult passage in music; and wild and lost as the sound appears, the
ear is proportionally gratified by the unexpected ease with which harmony is extracted from
discord and confusion.

