THE HOUSE OF HEINE BROTHERS, IN MUNICH

by Anthony Trollope

The house of Heine Brothers, in Munich, was of good repute at the time of which I am about
to tell,--a time not long ago; and is so still, I trust.  It was of good repute in its own
way, seeing that no man doubted the word or solvency of Heine Brothers; but they did not possess,
as bankers, what would in England be considered a large or profitable business.  The operations
of English bankers are bewildering in their magnitude.  Legions of clerks are employed. The
senior book-keepers, though only salaried servants, are themselves great men; while the real
partners are inscrutable, mysterious, opulent beyond measure, and altogether unknown to their
customers.  Take any firm at random,--Brown, Jones, and Cox, let us say,--the probability is
that Jones has been dead these fifty years, that Brown is a Cabinet Minister, and that Cox
is master of a pack of hounds in Leicestershire.  But it was by no means so with the house
of Heine Brothers, of Munich.  There they were, the two elderly men, daily to be seen at their
dingy office in the Schrannen Platz; and if any business was to be transacted requiring the
interchange of more than a word or two, it was the younger brother with whom the customer was,
as a matter of course, brought into contact.  There were three clerks in the establishment;
an old man, namely, who sat with the elder brother and had no personal dealings with the public;
a young Englishman, of whom we shall anon hear more; and a boy who ran messages, put the wood
on to the stoves, and swept out the bank.  Truly he house of Heine Brothers was of no great
importance; but nevertheless it was of good repute.

The office, I have said, was in the Schrannen Platz, or old Market- place.  Munich, as every
one knows, is chiefly to be noted as a new town,--so new that many of the streets and most
of the palaces look as though they had been sent home last night from the builders, and had
only just been taken out of their bandboxes It is angular, methodical, unfinished, and palatial.
But there is an old town; and, though the old town be not of surpassing interest, it is as
dingy, crooked, intricate, and dark as other old towns in Germany. Here, in the old Market-place,
up one long broad staircase, were situated the two rooms in which was held the bank of Heine
Brothers.

Of the elder member of the firm we shall have something to say before this story be completed.
He was an old bachelor, and was possessed of a bachelor's dwelling somewhere out in the suburbs
of the city.  The junior brother was a married man, with a wife some twenty years younger than
himself, with two daughters, the elder of whom was now one-and-twenty, and one son.  His name
was Ernest Heine, whereas the senior brother was known as Uncle Hatto.  Ernest Heine and his
wife inhabited a portion of one of those new palatial residences at the further end of the
Ludwigs Strasse; but not because they thus lived must it be considered that they were palatial
people.  By no means let it be so thought, as such an idea would altogether militate against
whatever truth of character painting there may be in this tale.  They were not palatial people,
but the very reverse, living in homely guise, pursuing homely duties, and satisfied with homely
pleasures.  Up two pairs of stairs, however, in that street of palaces, they lived, having
there a commodious suite of large rooms, furnished, after the manner of the Germans, somewhat
gaudily as regarded their best salon, and with somewhat meagre comfort as regarded their other
rooms.  But, whether in respect of that which was meagre, or whether in respect of that which
was gaudy, they were as well off as their neighbours; and this, as I take it, is the point
of excellence which is desirable.

Ernest Heine was at this time over sixty; his wife was past forty; and his eldest daughter,
as I have said, was twenty-one years of age.  His second child, also a girl, was six years
younger; and their third child, a boy, had not been born till another similar interval had
elapsed.  He was named Hatto after his uncle, and the two girls had been christened Isa and
Agnes.  Such, in number and mode of life, was the family of the Heines.

We English folk are apt to imagine that we are nearer akin to Germans than to our other continental
neighbours.  This may be so in blood, but, nevertheless, the difference in manners is so striking,
that it could hardly be enhanced.  An Englishman moving himself off to a city in the middle
of Central America will find the customs to which he must adapt himself less strange to him
there, than he would in many a German town.  But in no degree of life is the difference more
remarkable than among unmarried but marriageable young women. It is not my purpose at the present
moment to attribute a superiority in this matter to either nationality.  Each has its own charm,
its own excellence, its own Heaven-given grace, whereby men are led up to purer thoughts and
sweet desires; and each may possibly have its own defect.  I will not here describe the excellence
or defect of either; but will, if it be in my power, say a word as to this difference.  The
German girl of one-and-twenty,-- our Isa's age,--is more sedate, more womanly, more meditative
than her English sister.  The world's work is more in her thoughts, and the world's amusements
less so.  She probably knows less of those things which women learn than the English girl,
but that which she does know is nearer to her hand for use.  She is not so much accustomed
to society, but nevertheless she is more mistress of her own manner.  She is not taught to
think so much of those things which flurry and disturb the mind, and therefore she is seldom
flurried and disturbed.  To both of them, love,--the idea of love,-- must be the thought of
all the most absorbing; for is it not fated for them that the joys and sorrows of their future
life must depend upon it?  But the idea of the German girl is the more realistic, and the less
romantic.  Poetry and fiction she may have read, though of the latter sparingly; but they will
not have imbued her with that hope for some transcendental paradise of affection which so often
fills and exalts the hearts of our daughters here at home.  She is moderate in her aspirations,
requiring less excitement than an English girl; and never forgetting the solid necessities
of life,-- as they are so often forgotten here in England.  In associating with young men,
an English girl will always remember that in each one she so meets she may find an admirer
whom she may possibly love, or an admirer whom she may probably be called on to repel.  She
is ever conscious of the fact of this position; and a romance is thus engendered which, if
it may at times be dangerous, is at any rate always charming.  But the German girl, in her
simplicity, has no such consciousness.  As you and I, my reader, might probably become dear
friends were we to meet and know each other, so may the German girl learn to love the fair-haired
youth with whom chance has for a time associated her; but to her mind there occurs no suggestive
reason why it should be so,--no probability that the youth may regard her in such light, because
that chance has come to pass.  She can therefore give him her hand without trepidation, and
talk with him for half an hour, when called on to do so, as calmly as she might do with his sister.

Such a one was Isa Heine at the time of which I am writing.  We English, in our passion for
daily excitement, might call her phlegmatic, but we should call her so unjustly.  Life to her
was a serious matter, of which the daily duties and daily wants were sufficient to occupy her
thoughts.  She was her mother's companion, the instructress of both her brother and her sister,
and the charm of her father's vacant hours.  With such calls upon her time, and so many realities
around her, her imagination did not teach her to look for joys beyond those of her present
life and home.  When love and marriage should come to her, as come they probably might, she
would endeavour to attune herself to a new happiness and a new sphere of duties.  In the meantime
she was contented to keep her mother's accounts, and look after her brother and sister up two
pair of stairs in the Ludwigs Strasse.  But change would certainly come, we may prophesy; for
Isa Heine was a beautiful girl, tall and graceful, comely to the eye, and fit in every way
to be loved and cherished as the partner of a man's home.

I have said that an English clerk made a part of that small establishment in the dingy banking-office
in the Schrannen Platz, and I must say a word or two of Herbert Onslow.  In his early career
he had not been fortunate.  His father, with means sufficiently moderate, and with a family
more than sufficiently large, had sent him to a public school at which he had been very idle,
and then to one of the universities, at which he had run into debt, and had therefore left
without a degree.  When this occurred, a family council of war had been held among the Onslows,
and it was decided that Herbert should be sent off to the banking-house of Heines, at Munich,
there being a cousinship between the families, and some existing connections of business.

It was, therefore, so settled; and Herbert, willing enough to see the world,--as he considered
he should do by going to Munich,-- started for his German home, with injunctions, very tender
from his mother, and very solemn from his aggrieved father.  But there was nothing bad at the
heart about young Onslow, and if the solemn father had well considered it, he might perhaps
have felt that those debts at Cambridge reflected more fault on him than on his son. When Herbert
arrived at Munich, his cousins, the Heines,--far-away cousins though they were,--behaved kindly
to him.  They established him at first in lodgings, where he was boarded with many others,
having heard somewhat of his early youth.  But when Madame Heine, at the end of twelve months,
perceived that he was punctual at the bank, and that his allowances, which, though moderate
in England, were handsome in Munich, carried him on without debt, she opened her motherly arms
and suggested to his mother and to himself, that he should live with them.  In this way he
also was domiciled up two pairs of stairs in the palatial residence in the Ludwigs Strasse.

But all this happened long ago.  Isa Heine had been only seventeen when her cousin had first
come to Munich, and had made acquaintance with him rather as a child than as a woman.  And
when, as she ripened into womanhood, this young man came more closely among them, it did not
strike her that the change would affect her more powerfully than it would the others.  Her
uncle and father, she knew, had approved of Herbert at the bank; and Herbert had shown that
he could be steady; therefore he was to be taken into their family, paying his annual subsidy,
instead of being left with strangers at the boarding-house.  All this was very simple to her.
She assisted in mending his linen, as she did her father's; she visited his room daily, as
she visited all the others; she took notice of his likings and dislikings as touching their
table arrangement,--but by no means such notice as she did of her father's; and without any
flutter, inwardly in her imagination or outwardly as regarded the world, she made him one of
the family.  So things went on for a year,--nay, so things went on for two years with her,
after Herbert Onslow had come to the Ludwigs Strasse.

But the matter had been regarded in a very different light by Herbert himself.  When the proposition
had been made to him, his first idea had been that so close a connection with, a girl so very
pretty would be delightful.  He had blushed as he had given in his adhesion; but Madame Heine,
when she saw the blush, had attributed it to anything but the true cause.  When Isa had asked
him as to his wants and wishes, he had blushed again, but she had been as ignorant as her mother.
The father had merely stipulated that, as the young Englishman paid for his board, he should
have the full value of his money, so that Isa and Agnes gave up their pretty front room, going
into one that was inferior, and Hatto was put to sleep in the little closet that had been papa's
own peculiar property.  But nobody complained of this, for it was understood that the money
was of service.

For the first year Herbert found that nothing especial happened.  He always fancied that he
was in love with Isa, and wrote some poetry about her.  But the poetry was in English, and
Isa could not read it, even had he dared to show it to her.  During the second year he went
home to England for three months, and by confessing a passion to one of his sisters, really
brought himself to feel one.  He returned to Munich resolved to tell Isa that the possibility
of his remaining there depended upon her acceptance of his heart; but for months he did not
find himself able to put his resolution in force. She was so sedate, so womanly, so attentive
as regarded cousinly friendship, and so cold as regarded everything else, that he did not know
how to speak to her.  With an English girl whom he had met three times at a ball, he might
have been much more able to make progress.  He was alone with Isa frequently, for neither father,
mother, nor Isa herself objected to such communion; but yet things so went between them that
he could not take her by the hand and tell her that he loved her.  And thus the third year
of his life in Munich, and the second of his residence in the Ludwigs Strasse, went by him.
So the years went by, and Isa was now past twenty.  To Herbert, in his reveries, it seemed
as though life, and the joys of life, were slipping away from him.  But no such feeling disturbed
any of the Heines.  Life of course, was slipping away; but then is it not the destiny of man
that life should slip away?  Their wants were all satisfied, and for them, that, together with
their close family affection, was happiness enough.

At last, however, Herbert so spoke, or so looked, that both Isa and her mother that his heart
was touched.  He still declared to himself that he had made no sign, and that he was an oaf,
an ass, a coward, in that he had not done so.  But he had made some sign, and the sign had
been read.  There was no secret,--no necessity for a secret on the subject between the mother
and daughter, but yet it was not spoken of all at once.  There was some little increase of
caution between them as Herbert's name was mentioned, so that gradually each knew what the
other thought; but for weeks, that was all.  Then at last the mother spoke out.

"Isa," she said, "I think that Herbert Onslow is becoming attached to you."

"He has never said so, mamma."

"No; I am sure he has not.  Had he done so, you would have told me. Nevertheless, is it not true?"

"Well, mamma, I cannot say.  It may be so.  Such an idea has occurred to me, but I have abandoned
it as needless.  If he has anything to say he will say it."

"And if he were to speak, how should you answer him?"

"I should take time to think.  I do not at all know what means he has for a separate establishment."
Then the subject was dropped between them for that time, and Isa, in her communications with
her cousin, was somewhat more reserved than she had been.

"Isa, are you in love with Herbert?" Agnes asked her, as they were together in their room one
night.

"In love with him?  No; why should I be in love with him?"

"I think he is in love with you," said Agnes.

"That is quite another thing," said Isa, laughing.  "But if so, he has not taken me into his
confidence.  Perhaps he has you."

"Oh no.  He would not do that, I think.  Not but what we are great friends, and I love him
dearly.  Would it not be nice for you and him to be betrothed?"

"That depends on many things, my dear."

"Oh yes, I know.  Perhaps he has not got money enough.  But you could live here, you know,
and he has got some money, because he so often rides on horseback."  And then the matter was
dropped between the two sisters.

Herbert had given English lessons to the two girls, but the lessons had been found tedious,
and had dwindled away.  Isa, nevertheless, had kept up her exercises, duly translating German
into English, and English into German; and occasionally she had shown them to her cousin. 
Now, however, she altogether gave over such showing of them, but, nevertheless, worked at the
task with more energy than before.

"Isa," he said to her one day,--having with some difficulty found her alone in the parlour,
"Isa, why should not we go on with our English?"

"Because it is troublesome,--to you I mean."

"Troublesome.  Well; yes; it is troublesome.  Nothing good is to be had without trouble.  But
I should like it if you would not mind."

"You know how sick you were of it before;--besides, I shall never be able to speak it."

"I shall not get sick of it now, Isa."

"Oh yes you would;--in two days."

"And I want you to speak it.  I desire it especially."

"Why especially?" asked Isa.  And even she, with all her tranquillity of demeanour, could hardly
preserve her even tone and quiet look, as she asked the necessary question.

"I will tell you why," said Herbert; and as he spoke, he got up from his seat, and took a step
or two over towards her, where she was sitting near the window.  Isa, as she saw him, still
continued her work, and strove hard to give to the stitches all that attention which they required.
"I will tell you why I would wish you to talk my language.  Because I love you, Isa, and would
have you for my wife,--if that be possible."

She still continued her work, and the stitches, if not quite as perfect as usual, sufficed
for their purpose.

"That is why I wish it.  Now will you consent to learn from me again?"

"If I did, Herbert, that consent would include another."

"Yes; certainly it would.  That is what I intend.  And now will you learn from me again?"

"That is,--you mean to ask, will I marry you?"

"Will you love me?  Can you learn to love me?  Oh, Isa, I have thought of this so long!  But
you have seemed so cold that I have not dared to speak.  Isa, can you love me?"  And he sat
himself close beside her.  Now that the ice was broken, he was quite prepared to become an
ardent lover,--if she would allow of such ardour.  But as he sat down she rose.

"I cannot answer such a question on the sudden," she said.  "Give me till to-morrow, Herbert,
and then I will make you a reply;" whereupon she left him, and he stood alone in the room,
having done the deed on which he had been meditating for the last two years. About half an
hour afterwards he met her on the stairs as he was going to his chamber.  "May I speak to your
father about this," he said, hardly stopping her as he asked the question.  "Oh yes; surely,"
she answered; and then again they parted.  To him this last-accorded permission sounded as
though it carried with it more weight than it in truth possessed.  In his own country a reference
to the lady's father is taken as indicating a full consent on the lady's part, should the stern
paterfamilias raise no objection.  But Isa had no such meaning.  She had told him that she
could not give her answer till the morrow.  If, however, he chose to consult her father on
the subject, she had no objection.  It would probably be necessary that she should discuss
the whole matter in family conclave, before she could bring herself to give any reply.

On that night, before he went to bed, he did speak to her father; and Isa also, before she
went to rest, spoke to her mother.  It was singular to him that there should appear to be so
little privacy on the subject; that there should be held to be so little necessity for a secret.
Had he made a suggestion that an extra room should be allotted to him at so much per annum,
the proposition could not have been discussed with simpler ease.  At last, after a three days'
debate, the matter ended thus,--with by no means a sufficiency of romance for his taste.  Isa
had agreed to become his betrothed if certain pecuniary conditions should or could be fulfilled.
It appeared now that Herbert's father had promised that some small modicum of capital should
be forthcoming after a term of years, and that Heine Brothers had agreed that the Englishman
should have a proportionate share in the bank when that promise should be brought to bear.
Let it not be supposed that Herbert would thus become a millionaire.  If all went well, the
best would be that some three hundred a year would accrue to him from the bank, instead of
the quarter of that income which he at present received.  But three hundred a year goes a long
way at Munich, and Isa's parents were willing that she should be Herbert's wife if such an
income should be forthcoming.

But even of this there was much doubt.  Application to Herbert's father could not be judiciously
made for some months.  The earliest period at which, in accordance with old Hatto Heine's agreement,
young Onslow might be admitted to the bank, was still distant by four years; and the present
moment was thought to be inopportune for applying to him for any act of grace.  Let them wait,
said papa and mamma Heine,--at any rate till New Year's Day, then ten months distant.  Isa
quietly said that she would wait till New Year's Day. Herbert fretted, fumed, and declared
that he was ill-treated.  But in the end he also agreed to wait.  What else could he do?

"But we shall see each other daily, and be close to each other," he said to Isa, looking tenderly
into her eyes.  "Yes," she replied, "we shall see each other daily--of course.  But, Herbert--"

Herbert looked up at her and paused for her to go on.

"I have promised mamma that there shall be no change between us,--in our manner to each other,
I mean.  We are not betrothed as yet, you know, and perhaps we may never be so."

"Isa!"

"It may not be possible, you know.  And therefore we will go on as before.  Of course we shall
see each other, and of course we shall be friends."

Herbert Onslow again fretted and again fumed, but he did not have his way.  He had looked forward
to the ecstasies of a lover's life, but very few of those ecstasies were awarded to him.  He
rarely found himself alone with Isa, and when he did do so, her coldness overawed him.  He
could dare to scold her and sometimes did do so, but he could not dare to take the slightest
liberty.  Once, on that night when the qualified consent of papa and mamma Heine had first
been given, he had been allowed to touch her lips with his own; but since that day there had
been for him no such delight as that.  She would not even allow her hand to remain in his.
When they all passed their evenings together in the beer-garden, she would studiously manage
that his chair should not be close to her own. Occasionally she would walk with him, but not
more frequently now than of yore.  Very few, indeed, of a lover's privileges did he enjoy.
And in this way the long year wore itself out, and Isa Heine was one-and-twenty.

All those family details which had made it inexpedient to apply either to old Hatto or to Herbert's
father before the end of the year need not be specially explained.  Old Hatto, who had by far
the greater share in the business, was a tyrant somewhat feared both by his brother and sister-in-law;
and the elder Onslow, as was known to them all, was a man straitened in circumstances.  But
soon after New Year's Day the proposition was made in the Schrannen Platz, and the letter was
written.  On this occasion Madame Heine went down to the bank, and together with her husband,
was closeted for an hour with old Hatto.  Uncle Hatto's verdict was not favourable.  As to
the young people's marriage, that was his brother's affair, not his. But as to the partnership,
that was a serious matter.  Who ever heard of a partnership being given away merely because
a man wanted to marry?  He would keep to his promise, and if the stipulated moneys were forthcoming,
Herbert Onslow should become a partner,--in four years.  Nor was the reply from England more
favourable.  The alliance was regarded by all the Onslows very favourably.  Nothing could be
nicer than such a marriage!  They already knew dear Isa so well by description!  But as for
the money,--that could not in any way be forthcoming till the end of the stipulated period.

"And what shall we do?" said Herbert to Papa Heine.

"You must wait," said he.

"For four years?" asked Herbert.

"You must wait,--as I did," said Papa Heine.  "I was forty before I could marry."  Papa Heine,
however, should not have forgotten to say that his bride was only twenty, and that if he had
waited, she had not.

"Isa," Herbert said to her, when all this had been fully explained to her, "what do you say now?"

"Of course it is all over," said she, very calmly.

"Oh, Isa, is that your love?"

"No, Herbert, that is not my love; that is my discretion;" and she even laughed with her mild
low laughter, as she answered him.  "You know you are too impatient to wait four years, and
what else therefore can I say?"

"I wonder whether you love me?" said Herbert, with a grand look of injured sentiment.

"Well; in your sense of the word I do not think I do.  I do not love you so that I need make
every one around us unhappy because circumstances forbid me to marry you.  That sort of love
would be baneful."

"Ah no, you do not know what love means!"

"Not your boisterous, heartbreaking English love, Herbert.  And, Herbert, sometimes I think
you had better go home and look for a bride there.  Though you fancy that you love me, in your
heart you hardly approve of me."

"Fancy that I love you!  Do you think, Isa, that a man can carry his heart round to one customer
after another as the huckster carries his wares?"

"Yes; I think he can.  I know that men do.  What did your hero Waverley do with his heart in
that grand English novel which you gave me to read?  I am not Flora Mac Ivor, but you may find
a Rose Bradwardine."

"And you really wish me to do so?"

"Look here, Herbert.  It is bad to boast, but I will make this boast.  I am so little selfish,
that I desire above all that you should do that which may make you most happy and contented.
I will be quite frank with you.  I love you well enough to wait these four years with the hope
of becoming your wife when they are over.  But you will think but little of my love when I
tell you that this waiting would not make me unhappy.  I should go on as I do now, and be contented."

"Oh heavens!" sighed Herbert.

"But as I know that this would not suit you,--as I feel sure that such delay would gall you
every day, as I doubt whether it would not make you sick of me long before the four years be
over,--my advice is, that we should let this matter drop."

He now walked up to her and took her hand, and as he did so there was something in his gait
and look and tone of voice that stirred her heart more sharply than it had yet been stirred.
"And even that would not make you unhappy," he said.

She paused before she replied, leaving her hand in his, for he was contented to hold it without
peculiar pressure.  "I will not say so," she replied.  "But, Herbert, I think that you press
me too hard.  Is it not enough that I leave you to be the arbiter of my destiny?"

"I would learn the very truth of your heart," he replied.

"I cannot tell you that truth more plainly.  Methinks I have told it too plainly already. 
If you wish it, I will hold myself as engaged to you,--to be married to you when those four
years are past.  But, remember, I do not advise it.  If you wish it, you shall have back your
troth.  And that I think will be the wiser course."

But neither alternative contented Herbert Onslow, and at the time he did not resolve on either.
He had some little present income from home, some fifty pounds a year or so, and he would be
satisfied to marry on that and on his salary as a clerk; but to this papa and mamma Heine would
not consent;--neither would Isa.

"You are not a saving, close man," she said to him when he boasted of his economies.  "No Englishmen
are.  You could not live comfortably in two small rooms, and with bad dinners."

"I do not care a straw about my dinners."

"Not now that you are a lover, but you would do when you were a husband.  And you change your
linen almost every day."

"Bah!"

"Yes; bah, if you please.  But I know what these things cost.  You had better go to England
and fetch a rich wife.  Then you will become a partner at once, and Uncle Hatto won't snub
you.  And you will be a grand man, and have a horse to ride on."  Whereupon Herbert went away
in disgust.  Nothing in all this made him so unhappy as the feeling that Isa, under all their
joint privations, would not be unhappy herself.  As far as he could see, all this made no difference
in Isa.

But, in truth, he had not yet read Isa's character very thoroughly. She had spoken truly in
saying that she knew nothing of that boisterous love which was now tormenting him and making
him gloomy; but nevertheless she loved him.  She, in her short life, had learnt many lessons
of self-denial; and now with reference to this half- promised husband she would again have
practised such a lesson.  Had he agreed at once to go from her, she would have balanced her
own account within her own breast, and have kept to herself all her sufferings.  There would
have been no outward show of baffled love,- -none even in the colour of her cheeks; for such
was the nature of her temperament.  But she did suffer for him.  Day by day she began to think
that his love, though boisterous as she had at first called it, was more deep-seated than she
had believed.  He made no slightest sign that he would accept any of those proffers which she
had made him of release.  Though he said so loudly that this waiting for four years was an
impossibility, he spoke of no course that would be more possible,--except that evidently impossible
course of an early marriage.  And thus, while he with redoubled vehemence charged her with
coolness and want of love, her love waxed warmer and warmer, and his happiness became the chief
object of her thoughts.  What could she do that he might no longer suffer?

And then he took a step which was very strange to them all.  He banished himself altogether
from the house, going away again into lodgings.  "No," he said, on the morning of his departure,
"I do not release you.  I will never release you.  You are mine, and I have a right so to call
you.  If you choose to release yourself, I cannot help it; but in doing so you will be forsworn."

"Nay, but, Herbert, I have sworn to nothing," said she, meaning that she had not been formally
betrothed to him.

"You can do as you please; it is a matter of conscience; but I tell you what are my feelings.
Here I cannot stay, for I should go mad; but I shall see you occasionally;--perhaps on Sundays."

"Oh, Herbert!"

"Well, what would you have?  If you really cared to see me it would not be thus.  All I ask
of you now is this, that if you decide,-- absolutely decide on throwing me over, you will tell
me at once. Then I shall leave Munich."

"Herbert, I will never throw you over."  So they parted, and Onslow went forth to his new lodgings.

Her promise that she would never throw him over was the warmest word of love that she had ever
spoken, but even that was said in her own quiet, unimpassioned way.  There was in it but very
little show of love, though there might be an assurance of constancy.  But her constancy he
did not, in truth, much doubt.  Four years,--fourteen,- -or twenty-four, would be the same
to her, he said, as he seated himself in the dull, cold room which he had chosen.  While living
in the Ludwigs Strasse he did not know how much had been daily done for his comfort by that
hand which he had been so seldom allowed to press; but he knew that he was now cold and comfortless,
and he wished himself back in the Ludwigs Strasse.

"Mamma," said Isa, when they were alone.  "Is not Uncle Hatto rather hard on us?  Papa said
that he would ask this as a favour from his brother."

"So he did, my dear; and offered to give up more of his own time. But your Uncle Hatto is hard."

"He is rich, is he not?"

"Well; your father says not.  Your father says that he spends all his income.  Though he is
hard and obstinate, he is not selfish.  He is very good to the poor, but I believe he thinks
that early marriages are very foolish."

"Mamma," said Isa again, when they had sat for some minutes in silence over their work.

"Well, my love?"

"Have you spoken to Uncle Hatto about this?"

"No, dear; not since that day when your papa and I first went to him.  To tell the truth, I
am almost afraid to speak to him; but, if you wish it, I will do so."

"I do wish it, mamma.  But you must not think that I am discontented or impatient.  I do not
know that I have any right to ask my uncle for his money;--for it comes to that."

"I suppose it does, my dear."

"And as for myself, I am happy here with you and papa.  I do not think so much of these four
years."

"You would still be young, Isa;--quite young enough."

"And what if I were not young?  What does it matter?  But, mamma, there has been that between
Herbert and me which makes me feel myself bound to think of him.  As you and papa have sanctioned
it, you are bound to think of him also.  I know that he is unhappy, living there all alone."

"But why did he go, dear?"

"I think he was right to go.  I could understand his doing that.  He is not like us, and would
have been fretful here, wanting that which I could not give him.  He became worse from day
to day, and was silent and morose.  I am glad he went.  But, mamma, for his sake I wish that
this could be shortened."

Madame Heine told her daughter that she would, if Isa wished it, herself go to the Schrannen
Platz, and see what could be done by talking to Uncle Hatto.  "But," she added, "I fear that
no good will come of it."

"Can harm come, mamma?"

"No, I do not think harm can come."

"I'll tell you what, mamma, I will go to Uncle Hatto myself, if you will let me.  He is cross
I know; but I shall not be afraid of him. I feel that I ought to do something."  And so the
matter was settled, Madame Heine being by no means averse to escape a further personal visit
to the Head of the banking establishment.

Madame Heine well understood what her daughter meant, when she said she ought to do something,
though Isa feared that she had imperfectly expressed her meaning.  When he, Herbert, was willing
to do so much to prove his love,--when he was ready to sacrifice all the little comforts of
comparative wealth to which he had been accustomed, in order that she might be his companion
and wife,--did it not behove her to give some proof of her love also?  She could not be demonstrative
as he was.  Such exhibition of feeling would be quite contrary to her ideas of female delicacy,
and to her very nature.  But if called on to work for him, that she could do as long as strength
remained to her.  But there was no sacrifice which would be of service, nor any work which
would avail.  Therefore she was driven to think what she might do on his behalf, and at last
she resolved to make her personal appeal to Uncle Hatto.

"Shall I tell papa?" Isa asked of her mother.

"I will do so," said Madame Heine.  And then the younger member of the firm was informed as
to the step which was to be taken; and he, though he said nothing to forbid the attempt, held
out no hope that it would be successful.

Uncle Hatto was a little snuffy man, now full seventy years of age, who passed seven hours
of every week-day of his life in the dark back chamber behind the banking-room of the firm,
and he had so passed every week-day of his life for more years than any of the family could
now remember.  He had made the house what it was, and had taken his brother into partnership
when that brother married. All the family were somewhat afraid of him, including even his partner.
He rarely came to the apartments in the Ludwigs Strasse, as he himself lived in one of the
older and shabbier suburbs on the other side of the town.  Thither he always walked, starting
punctually from the bank at four o'clock, and from thence he always walked in the morning,
reaching the bank punctually at nine.  His two nieces knew him well; for on certain stated
days they were wont to attend on him at his lodgings, where they would be regaled with cakes,
and afterwards go with him to some old-fashioned beer-garden in his neighbourhood.  But these
festivities were of a sombre kind; and if, on any occasion, circumstances prevented the fulfilment
of the ceremony, neither of the girls would be loud in their lamentations.

In London, a visit paid by a niece to her uncle would, in all probability, be made at the uncle's
private residence; but at Munich private and public matters were not so effectually divided.
Isa therefore, having put on her hat and shawl, walked off by herself to the Schrannen Platz.

"Is Uncle Hatto inside?" she asked; and the answer was given to her by her own lover.  Yes,
he was within; but the old clerk was with him.  Isa, however, signified her wish to see her
uncle alone, and in a few minutes the ancient grey-haired servant of the house came out into
the larger room.

"You can go in now, Miss Isa," he said.  And Isa found herself in the presence of her uncle
before she had been two minutes under the roof.  In the mean time Ernest Heine, her father,
had said not a word, and Herbert knew that something very special must be about to occur.

"Well, my bonny bird," said Uncle Hatto, "and what do you want at the bank?"  Cheery words,
such as these, were by no means uncommon with Uncle Hatto; but Isa knew very well that no presage
could be drawn from them of any special good nature or temporary weakness on his part.

"Uncle Hatto," she began, rushing at once into the middle of her affair, "you know, I believe,
that I am engaged to marry Herbert Onslow?"

"I know no such thing," said he.  "I thought I understood your father specially to say that
there had been no betrothal."

"No, Uncle Hatto, there has been no betrothal; that certainly is true; but, nevertheless, we
are engaged to each other."

"Well," said Uncle Hatto, very sourly; and now there was no longer any cheery tone, or any
calling of pretty names.

"Perhaps you may think all this very foolish," said Isa, who, spite of her resolves to do so,
was hardly able to look up gallantly into her uncle's face as she thus talked of her own love
affairs.

