"There," said Kitty to the officers. "He's give his word; and if you're wise, ye'll take him
at that."

"All right," said the chief constable, and between them William moved to the door.

"Say, Bill, ye ain't going to be took?" piped little Jim. He had watched the scene dumbfounded
from his place on the table. This was too much.

"Yes," said Bill, "I've give me word as a mahn," and he marched away, while the Widow fled
sobbing to her room.

That was the end of Kenna, so far as Jim was concerned. And, somehow, that last sentence, "I've
give me word as a mahn," kept ringing in Jim's ears; it helped to offset the brutalizing effect
of many other episodes--that Fighting Bill should scoff at bonds and force, but be bound and
helpless by the little sound that issued from his own lips.

Bill's after life was brief. He was condemned to a year in jail for deadly assault and served
the term and came again to Petersburg. There in a bar-room he encountered Hall, the pal of
Whisky Mason. A savage word from Bill provoked the sneer, "You jail bird." Kenna sprang to
avenge the insult. Hall escaped behind the bar. Bill still pursued. Then Hall drew a pistol
and shot him dead; and, as the Courts held later, shot justly, for a man may defend his life.

It was a large funeral that buried Bill, and it was openly and widely said that nine out of
ten were there merely to make sure that he was dead and buried. The Widow Hartigan was chief
mourner in the first carriage. She and Jim led the line, and when he was laid away, she had
a stone erected with the words, "A true friend and a man without fear." So passed Kenna; but
Jim bore the traces of his influence long and deeply--yes, all his life. Masterful, physical,
prone to fight and to consider might as right, yet Jim's judgment of him was ever tempered
by the one thought, the binding force of his "wurd as a mahn."

CHAPTER VI

Jim Loses Everything

The Widow never forgot that her tenure of the hotel might end at any time; and, thinking ever
of Jim and his future, she saved what she could from the weekly proceeds. She was a good manager,
and each month saw something added to her bank account. When it had grown to a considerable
size her friends advised her to invest it. There were Government bonds paying five per cent.,
local banks paying six and seven, and, last of all, the Consolidated Trading Stores paying
eight and sometimes more--an enterprise of which Tom Ford was head.

The high interest was tempting, and pride was not without some power. Kitty was pleased to
think that now she could go to the pompous Mayor as a capitalist. So, creating with an inward
sense of triumph the impression of huge deposits elsewhere, she announced that she would take
a small block of stock in the C. T. S. as a nest-egg for her boy. Thus the accumulations of
ten years went into the company of which the Mayor was head and guide. For a time, the interest
was duly paid each half year. Then came a crash. After the reorganization the Mayor continued
in his big brick house and his wife still wore her diamonds; but the widow's hard-earned savings
were gone. Kitty was stunned but game; falling back on the strength that was inside, she bravely
determined to begin all over and build on a rock of safety. But fortune had another blow in
store for Jim. And it fell within a month, just as he turned thirteen.

It was the end of the Canadian winter. Fierce frost and sudden thaw were alternated as the
north wind and the south struggled for the woods, and the heat of work in the warm sun left
many ill prepared for the onset of bitter cold at dusk. Bustling everywhere, seeing that pigs
were fed, pies made, and clothes mended; now in the hot kitchen, a moment later in the stable
yard to manage some new situation; the Widow fell a victim to pneumonia much as John Downey
had done.

For three days she lay in fever and pain. Jim was scarcely allowed to see her. They did not
understand pneumonia in those days, and as it was the general belief that all diseases were
"catching," the boy was kept away. The doctor was doing his best with old-fashioned remedies,
blisters, mustard baths, hot herb teas and fomentations. He told her she would soon be well,
but Kitty knew better. On the third day, she asked in a whisper for Jim, but told them first
to wash his face and hands with salt water. So the long-legged, bright-eyed boy came and sat
by his mother's bed and held her hot hands. As he gazed on her over-bright eyes, she said softly:

"My darling, you'll soon be alone, without friend or kith or kin. This place will no longer
be your home. God only knows where you'll go. But He will take care of you as He took care of me."

For the first time Jim realized the meaning of the scene--his mother was dying. She quieted
his sobs with a touch of her hand and began again, slowly and painfully:

"I tried to leave you well fixed, but it was not to be. The hotel will go to another. This
is all I have for you."

She drew a little cedar box from under the covers, and opening it, showed him her Bible, the
daguerreotype of his father and a later photograph of herself.

"Jim, promise me again that you will never touch tobacco or liquor till you are eighteen."

"Oh, mother, mother!" he wept. "I'll do anything you say. I'll promise. I give you my word
I never will touch them."

She rested in silence, her hand was on his head. When her strength in a little measure came
again, she said in a low tone:

"My wish was to see you educated, a minister for Christ. I hope it may yet be so."

She was still a long time; then, gently patting his head, she said to those around:

"Take him away. Wash him with salt and water."

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus it came about that the hotel which had been Jim's only home and which he thought belonged
to his mother, passed into the hands of John Downey, Jr., nephew of the original owner. It
was Mrs. John Downey who offered the first ray of comfort in Jim's very bleak world. When she
saw the tall handsome boy she put her arms around him and said:

"Never mind, Jim, don't go away. This will always be home for you."

So the lad found a new home in the old house, but under greatly changed conditions. The new
mistress had notions of her own as to the amount of education necessary and the measure of
service to be returned for one's keep. Jim was able to read, write, and cipher; this much was
ample in the opinion of Mrs. Downey, and Jim's school days ended. The understanding that he
must make himself useful quickly resulted in his transference to the stable. A garret in the
barn was furnished with a bed for him, and Jim's life was soon down to its lowest level. He
had his friends, for he was full of fun and good to look upon: but they were not of the helpful
kind, being recruited chiefly from the hostlers, the pugilists, and the horsemen. He had time
for amusements, too; but they were nearly always of the boxing glove and the saddle. Books
had little charm for him, though he still found pleasure in reciting the heroic ballads of
Lachlin, the Raid of Dermid, the Battle of the Boyne, and in singing "My Pretty, Pretty Maid,"
or woodmen's "Come all ye's." His voice was unusually good, except at the breaking time; and
any one who knew the part the minstrel played in Viking days would have thought the bygone
times come back to see him among the roystering crowd at Downey's.

The next three years that passed were useless except for this, they gifted Jim with a tall
and stalwart form and shoulders like a grown man. But they added little to the good things
he had gathered from his mother and from Fightin' Bill. At sixteen he was six feet high, slim
and boyish yet, but sketched for a frame of power. All this time his meagre keep and his shabby
clothes were his only pay. But Jim had often talked things over with his friends and they pointed
out that he was now doing man's work and getting less than boy's pay. The scene that followed
his application for regular wages was a very unpleasant one; and John Downey made the curious
mistake of trying to throw young Jimmy out. The boy never lost his temper for a moment but
laughingly laid his two strong hands on the landlord's fat little shoulders and shook him till
his collar popped and his eyes turned red. Then Jim grinned and said:

"I told ye I wasn't a kid anny more."

It was the landlady's good sense that made a truce, and after a brief, stormy time the long-legged
boy was reinstated at wages in the yard.

At seventeen Jim was mentioned among the men as a likely "bhoy." Women in the street would
turn to look in admiration at his square shoulders, lithe swing, and handsome head. But the
life he led was flat, or worse than flat. The best that can be said of it is that in all this
sordid round of bar and barn he learned nothing that in any sort had power to harm his rare
physique. His language at times was the worst of its lurid kind. His associates were coarse
and drunken. Yet Jim lived with them in all their ways and neither chewed, smoked, nor drank.
How or why, none understood. He said simply that he "didn't feel like he wanted to." With the
liquor it was a different matter. Here it was a question of principle and his word to his mother
helped him where by nature he was weak. So he grew up, hedged about with a dignity that was
in some sense a foreshadowing of his destiny. But there was much dross to be burned away and
the two great passions that stood between Jim Hartigan and full spiritual manhood had their
roots in these early years at Downey's. Later he matched his strength against theirs and with
that struggle, in which no quarter was asked or given, these pages are ultimately concerned.

CHAPTER VII

He Gets a Much-needed Lesson

Many a man has been ruined by a high, unbroken level of success. Intellectually it makes for
despotism and a conviction of infallibility. In the world of muscle, it creates a bully.

Young Jim was far from losing his interest in the ring, and he was growing so big and strong
that there were few in town who cared to put on the gloves with him. All that Bill Kenna had
taught him, and more, was stored as valued learning. Kenna used to say, in his Irish vein:
"There is twelve rules for to conduct yourself right in a shindy; the first is, get your blow
in first; and, if ye live up to this, ye needn't worry about the other iliven rules." Jim accepted
this as fundamental truth and thereby became the aggressor in nearly every brawl.

His boiling, boisterous, animal nature grew with his body and he revelled in the things of
brawn. He responded joyfully when he was called on to eject some rowdy from the bar-room, and
begetting confidence with each new victory, he began to have a vast opinion of himself. About
this time a powerful rival of Downey's, known as the Dummer House, claimed attention at the
other end of town. One was located to catch the inbound from the west; the other, those from
the east. And when the owners were not at war, they kept at best an armed neutrality.

John Downey had delivered himself of some unhallowed hopes concerning the rival house, and
Jim, as he passed the opposition Inn on a certain evening, had the picturesque devastations
vividly in mind. It so happened that a masting team of oxen was standing patiently outside
awaiting the driver who was refreshing himself at the bar. A masting team consists of six to
twelve strong, selected oxen, yoked two and two to a mighty chain with which they can drag
forth the largest pines that are saved for masts. Jim's too-agile mind noted the several components
of a new and delightful exploit: a crowd of noisy teamsters in a log house bar-room, a team
of twelve huge, well-trained oxen on a chain, the long, loose end of which lay near him on
the ground. It was the work of a minute to hook the chain around a projecting log of the house.
A moment more and he had the oxen on the go. Beginning with the foremost pair, he rushed down
the line, and the great, heaving, hulking shoulders, two and two, bent and heaved their bulk
against the strain. The chain had scarcely time to tighten; no house could stand against that
power. The huge pine log was switched out at one end as a man might jerk a corn cob from its
crib. The other end, still wedged in its place, held for a moment; but the oxen moved slowly
on like a landslide. The log was wrenched entirely away and the upper part of the building
dropped with a sullen "chock" to rest a little lower. There was a wild uproar inside, a shouting
of men, a clatter of glass, and out rushed the flushed-faced rabble, astonished, frightened,
furious to see the twelve great oxen solemnly marching down the street, trailing the missing
log, the fragment of their house, while beside them, running, laughing, hooting, was a long-legged
boy.

Jim's intention had been to clear out, but the trick proved so screamingly funny that he stood
for a minute to enjoy the scene. Shelves had fallen and glasses had broken, but no person had
been hurt. There was a moment's uncertainty; then with an angry shout the enraged patrons of
the Dummer House swept forward. Jim discreetly fled. In the centre of the town friends appeared
and in the street he turned to face his pursuers. Jim had already proved himself one of "the
best men in Links" and it was with a new burst of hilarity that he wheeled about among his
backers to give them "all they wanted." Instead of the expected general onslaught, a method
new to Jim was adopted. The teamsters of the Dummer House held back and from their ranks there
issued a square-jawed, bow-legged man, whose eye was cold, whose step was long and quick. With
the utmost deliberation he measured Jim with his eye. Then he growled:

"Come on, ye ill-born pup. Now ye'll get what ye desarve."

The sporting instinct was strong in the crowd and the two were left alone to fight it out.
It took very little time. Jim had made a mistake--a serious one. This was no simple teamster,
guileless of training, who faced him, but a man whose life was in the outer circle of the prize
ring. The thrashing was complete, and effective for several weeks. Jim was carried home and
ever after he bore upon his chin a scar that was the record of the final knockout from the
teamster's iron fist.

The catastrophe had several important compensations. The owner of the Dummer House decided
that the boy was punished enough, and took no legal proceeding against him. On his part, Jim
began to think much more seriously before giving reckless rein to his sense of humour. On the
whole, his respect for the rights of others was decidedly increased. His self-esteem shrunk
to more normal proportions and if he thought of the incident at all it was to wish very earnestly
that some day, somewhere, he might meet the teamster again on more even terms.

Unfortunately these salutory results were negatived some six months later by an event that
took place in Downey's bar. It was Jim's birthday; he was eighteen and he announced it with pride.

"And here's where ye join us," said several.

"No, I don't care about it," said Jim.

"Ye ain't promise bound now, are ye?"

"No," replied Jim, "but----"

"Make him a sweet one with syrup and just a spoonful of the crather to take the curse off."

Refusing, protesting, half ashamed of his hesitation, Jim downed at a gulp a fruity concoction,
much to the delight of the assemblage. It was not so bad as he had expected it to be and the
crowd roared at the expression on his face.

"Ye're a man for yourself now, lad," said a woodsman clapping him on the shoulder. "Come boys,
another round to Hartigan's health."

It could not be said of Jim that he was normal in anything. In a rare and multiplied degree
he had inherited the full muscling and robust heart of his folk in both lines of forbears.
It was a great inheritance, but it carried its own penalty. The big animal physique holds a
craving for strong drink. Physical strength and buoyancy are bound up with the love of bacchanalian
riot. Jim had given his word to abstain from liquor until he was of age; he had kept it scrupulously.
Now he had tasted of it the pendulum swung full to the other side. That was his nature. His
world might be a high world or a low world; whichever sphere he moved in he practised no half-way
measures.

From that eighteenth birthday Jim Hartigan waged ceaseless warfare within himself. During the
early days he was an easy victim. Then came a shock that changed the whole aspect of his life,
and later one stood beside him who taught him how to fight. But until those events took place,
the town of Links knew him for what he was, a reckless, dare-devil youth, without viciousness
or malice, but ripe for any extravagance or adventure. His pranks were always begun in fun
though it was inevitable that they should lead to serious consequences. It was admitted by
his severest critics that he had never done a cruel or a cowardly thing, yet the constant escapades
and drinking bouts in which he was ever the leader earned him the name of Wild Jim Hartigan.

After each fresh exploit his abject remorse was pitiful. And so, little by little, a great
nature was purged; his spirit was humbled by successive and crushing defeats. At first the
animal rebound was sufficient to set him on his feet unashamed. But during the fourth year
after his coming of age, an unrest, a sickness of soul took possession of Jim and no wildness
sufficed to lift this gloom. And it was in frantic rebellion against this depression that he
entered upon his memorable visit to the Methodist revival.

BOOK II

THE CONVERSION

CHAPTER VIII

The Conversion of Jim

There was much excitement in Methodist circles that autumn. A preacher of power had come from
the east. The church was filled to overflowing on Sunday, and a prayer meeting of equal interest
was promised for Wednesday night.

The people came from miles around and there were no vacant seats. Even the aisles were filled
with chairs when the Rev. Obadiah Champ rose and bawled aloud in rolling paragraphs about "Hopeless,
helpless, hell-damned sinners all. Come, come to-day. Come now and be saved." A wave of religious
hysteria spread over the packed-in human beings. A wave that to those untouched was grotesque
and incomprehensible.

"Sure, they ain't right waked up yet," said one of Jim's half-dozen unregenerate friends who
had come to sit with him on the fence outside, and scoff at the worshippers. Jim was silent,
but a devil of wild deeds stirred irritatingly within him. He looked about him for some supreme
inspiration--some master stroke. The crowd was all in the church now, and the doors were closed
tight. But muffled sounds of shouting, of murmurings, of halleluiahs were heard.

"They're goin' it pretty good now, Jim," said another. "But I think you could arouse 'em,"
he added, with a grin.

Standing by the church was a tall elm tree; near by was a woodshed with axe, saw, and wood
pile. Jim's eye measured the distance from trunk to roof and then, acting on a wild impulse,
with visions of folk in terror for their bodies when they professed concern for nothing but
their souls, he got the axe, and amid the suppressed giggles and guffaws of his chums, commenced
to fell the tree. In twenty minutes the great trunk tottered, crackled, and swung down fair
on the roof of the crowded building.

The congregation had reached a degree of great mental ferment with the revival, and a long,
loud murmuring of prayers and groans, with the voice of the exhorter, harsh and ringing, filled
the edifice, when with a crash overhead the great arms of the tree met the roof. At first,
it seemed like a heavenly response to the emotion of the congregation, but the crackling of
small timber, the showering down of broken glass and plaster gave evidence of a very earthly
interposition.

Then there was a moment of silence, then another crack from the roof, and the whole congregation
arose and rushed for the door. All in vain the exhorter tried to hold them back. He shrieked
even scriptural texts to prove they should stay to see the glory of the Lord. Another flake
of plaster fell, on the pulpit this time; then he himself turned and fled through the vestry
and out by the back way.

Jim's following had deserted him, but he himself was there to see the fun; and when the congregation
rushed into the moonlight it was like a wasp's nest poked with a stick, or a wheat shock full
of mice turned over with a fork. The crowd soon understood the situation and men gathered around
the sinner. There was menace in every pose and speech. They would have him up to court; they
would thrash him now. But the joyful way in which Jim accepted the last suggestion and offered
to meet any or all "this holy minute" had a marked effect on the programme, especially as there
were present those who knew him.

Then the exhorter said:

"Brethren, let me talk to this heinous sinner. Young man, do you realize that this is the House
of God, which you have so criminally destroyed?"

"The divil an' all it is," said Jim. "Sure, ye ain't got the cheek to call a Methody shindy
hall the House of God. I think ye ought to be ashamed of yourself to give a lot of dacent farmers
the hysterics like yer doin'."

"Young man, the spirit of the Lord is mighty, and cometh like a strong wind on the four corners
of the house."

"Then why in the divil did ye blame me for it?" was the answer.

"Oh, son of Belial! Hell fire and eternal damnation, a portion in the pit that burneth with
fire, is the lot of those that desecrate the sanctuary of the Most High. I tell you it were
better for you that you had never been born----"

"But sure, I am born; and it's mesilf that's aloive yet an' going strong."

"Oh, unregenerate blasphemer----"

But a sudden cry and commotion interrupted the preacher.

"Here, lay her down, get some water."

A little girl had been hurt in the crush and now she had fainted. The threats of the men had
roused Jim to his joyful, battle enthusiasm. The onslaught of the preacher had stirred his
sense of humour; but the poor, limp, and seemingly dead form of the little girl, a child whom
he knew and had often petted, was an attack he was ill-prepared to meet.

"There, see what you have done. It were better that a millstone were hanged about your neck
and that you were cast into the depths of the sea than that you should have harmed this little
one. Her blood be on your head."

The mother was kneeling by the child, unwisely holding up its head. She was praying intently;
the air was full of religious fervour. "Oh, God, spare my baby. Oh, God, be merciful."

Jim heard the words and they entered his soul like a two-edged sword. All the fun of the incident
was gone, and all the cruelty, the unkindness, the wickedness, loomed large and larger. With
his intense nature, subject to the most violent reactions, the effect was profound. It seemed
to him, as he stood there, that a veil dissolved before his eyes and that he saw himself and
his life for the first time. There had ever been two natures struggling in his soul, the calm
and wise one of his Ulster blood of placid Saxon stock, and that of the wild and fiery Celt
from Donegal, ready to fight, ready to sing, ever ready for fun, but ever the easy prey of
deep remorse in even measure with the mood of passion that foreran and begot it.

Smitten from within and without, utter humiliation, self-accusation, and abasement filled his
soul. Jim sank to the ground by the little girl, and wept in an agony of remorse.

"Young man," said the exhorter, "if God in His mercy has sent me here to save your soul from
eternal damnation by this hellish deed of yours, then shall I rejoice and praise the Lord,
that out of fire and brimstone He can create a golden pathway."

The little girl now opened her eyes and with a cry of relief the mother sought to lift her
up, but had not the strength. Jim's mighty arms were eager for service, and with that soft,
limp little body against his broad chest, her head on his shoulder, his heart was filled with
inexpressible emotion.

"Bring her in here," and the remnant of the congregation reassembled in the church. In the
very front was Jim, sitting by the mother with the little girl between them. His head was bowed
on his hands, his elbows on his knees.

Then the exhorter began again. Full of scriptural texts charged with holy fire, abounding in
lurid thoughts of burning lakes, of endless torment; gifted with the fluency that sometimes
passes for logic and makes for convincement, he dwelt on the horrors and the might-have-beens.
He shouted out his creeds of holiness, he rumbled in his chest and made graphic mouthings.
He played on all the emotions until he found the most responsive, and then hammered hard on
these. The big broad shoulders before him shook, tears fell from the half-hidden face. Then
the preacher chanced to strike on the note, "your mother," and Jim Hartigan's breakdown was
complete. He sobbed, "Oh, God, be merciful to me, a sinner," and rising, staggered to a place
on the upraised bench--the seat of those who dared to hope for salvation--and wept.

Carried away by his own vehemence, the exhorter wept, too. There was no human being in the
hall who could stand the overwhelming surge of emotion. The congregation wept. Then Jim arose
and in broken voice said: "My mother's dying prayer was that I might join the Church and be
a witness for God. As sure as she is looking down on me now I promise that I will join His
people and niver rest till I have been made fit to stand among those who bear His message.
I give my word as a man."

CHAPTER IX

Jim Hartigan Goes to College

Hartigan never walked in the middle of the road. He was either in the ditch or on the high
place. Having "got religion" it was inevitable, with his nature, that he should become a leader
in the fold. That vision of himself as a preacher, fully ordained, which had burst upon him
at the revival, filled his mind. His mother's last wish resounded in his ears with all the
imperative force of a voice from the grave and he was emotionally ripe for such inner urgings.

The difficulties in the way of such a course would have daunted most men; but Jim was going
strong for the moment, and to him impossibilities were mere trivialities. The Rev. Obadiah
Champ, with others who were proud of the new convert, took him before the Board of Deacons
and there Jim made his ambitions known. He was illiterate, friendless, penniless, and already
twenty-three. He had no taste for study or a life of self-control; meekness and spirituality
were as much to his liking now as travelling on a bog is to a blooded horse.

But his magnificent presence, his glib Irish tongue, his ready wit, his evident warmth and
sincerity, were too much for the reverend bearded ones of the Board. They were carried away,
as most humans were, by his personal charm. They listened with beaming faces. They cast significant
glances at one another. They sent Jim into another room while they discussed his fate. In twenty
minutes he was brought back to hear their decision. "Yes, they would accept him as a chosen
vessel to bear the grace of God abroad among the people. They would educate him without expense
to himself. He might begin his college career at once."

In the ordinary course, Jim would have set to work with a tutor in Links to prepare himself
to enter Coulter College at the next term. But life seemed to order itself in unusual ways
when it was a question concerning Jim. He had no home in Links; he had no money to pay a tutor;
he was as eager as a child to begin the serious work; and his ardour burnt all the barriers
away. He became at once an inmate of Coulter, a special protégé of the president's, admitted
really as a member of the latter's family, and bound by many rules and promises. In preparation
for his formal entry he was required to devote six hours a day to study, and those who knew
him of old had given the president a hint to exact from Jim his "wurd as a mahn" that he would
do his daily task.

In looking back on those days Jim used to revile them for their uselessness and waste. What
he did not understand until life had put him through the fire was that the months at Coulter
broke him to harness. It was beyond the wildest imagining that a youth brought up as Jim had
been should step from a life of boisterous carousing in a backwoods settlement into a seminary
and find congenial or helpful occupation among books. And yet the shock, the change of environment,
the substitution of discipline for license and, above all, the heroic struggle of the man to
meet this new order of existence--these were the things, the fine metals of a great soul, which
life was hammering, hammering into shape.

What this period meant to Jim no one but himself knew. The agony of spirit and of body was
intense. He had given his word to go through with it and he did. But every instinct, every
association of his old life led his mind abroad. Every bird that flew to the roof or hopped
on the lawn was a strong attraction; every sound of a horse's hoof aroused his wayward interest;
and the sight of a horse sent him rushing incontinently to the window. At the beginning, the
football captain had pounced on him as the very stuff he needed, and Jim responded as the warhorse
does to the bugle. He loved the game and he was an invaluable addition to the team. And yet,
helpful as such an outlet was for his pent-up energy, his participation merely created new
tortures, so that the sight of a sweater crossing the lawn became maddening to him in the hours
of study. He had never liked books, and now as the weeks went by he learned to loathe them.

It is greatly to be feared that in a fair, written examination with an impartial jury, Jim
Hartigan would have been badly plucked on his college entrance. But great is the power of personality.
The president's wife behaved most uncollegiately. She interested herself in Jim; she had interviews
with the examiners; she discovered in advance questions to be asked; she urged upon the authorities
the absolute necessity of accepting this promising student. The president himself was biased.
He hinted that the function of examiners was not so much to make absolute measurement of scholastic
attainments as to manifest a discretionary view of possibilities, and to remember that examination
papers were often incapable of gauging the most important natural endowments of the candidate;
that sometimes when it was necessary to put a blood horse over a five-barred gate, the wisest
horseman laid the gate down flat.

The admonitions were heeded, the gate laid flat, and the thoroughbred entered the pasture.
But to Jim, caught up in the wearisome classroom grind, the days held no glimmer of light.
Of what possible value, he asked himself again and again, could it be to know the history of
Nippur? Why should the cuneiforms have any bearing on the morals of a backwoods Canadian? Would
the grace of God be less effective if the purveyor of it was unaware of what Sprool's Commentaries
said about the Alexandrian heresy? Was not he, Jim Hartigan, a more eloquent speaker now, by
far, than Silas McSilo, who read his Greek testament every morning? And he wrote to the Rev.
Obadiah Champ: "It's no use. I don't know how to study. I'm sorry to get up in the morning
and glad to go to bed and forget it. I'd rather be in jail than in college. I hate it more
every day." But Jim had given his "wurd as a mahn" and he hammered away sadly and sorrowfully
as one who has no hope, as one who is defeated but continues to fight merely because he knows
not how to surrender.

CHAPTER X

Escape to Cedar Mountain

It is generally admitted that a college offers two main things, book learning and atmosphere.
Of these the latter is larger and more vital, if it be good. If the college lose ground in
either essential, the loss is usually attributable to a leading set of students. Coulter was
losing ground, and the growth of a spirit of wildness in its halls was no small worry to the
president. He knew whence it sprang, and his anxiety was the greater as he thought of it. Then
a happy inspiration came. Jim's dislike of books had intensified. He had promised to study
for one year. According to the rules, a student, after completing his first year, might be
sent into the field as an assistant pastor, to be in actual service under an experienced leader
for one year, during which he was not obliged to study.

To Jim this way out was an escape from a cavern to the light of day, and every officer of Coulter
College breathed a sigh of relief as he packed his bag and started for the West.

It was in truth a wending of the Spirit Trail when Jim set out; as if the Angel of Destiny
had said to the lesser Angel of Travel: "Behold, now for a time he is yours. You can serve
him best." Jim's blood was more than red; it was intense scarlet. He hankered for the sparkling
cups of life, being alive in every part--to ride and fight and burn in the sun, to revel in
strife, to suffer, struggle, and quickly strike and win, or as quickly get the knockout blow!
Valhalla and its ancient fighting creed were the hunger in his blood, and how to translate
that age-old living feeling into terms of Christianity was a problem to which Jim's reason
found no adequate answer. He talked of a better world, of peace and harps and denial and submission,
because that was his job. He had had it drilled into him at Coulter; but his flashing eye,
his mighty sweeping hand, gave the lie to every word of meekness that fell from his school-bound
tongue. He longed for life in its fullest, best, most human form. He was fiery as a pirate
among the wild rowdies he had lived with yet he had that other side--a child or a little girl
could bully him into absolute, abject submission.

Whoever knows the West of the late '70s can have no doubt as to where the whirlpool of red-blooded
life surged deepest, most irresistibly; where the strong alone could live and where the strongest
only could win. In the Black Hills the strongest of the savages met the strongest of the whites,
and there every human lust and crime ran riot. It was not accident but a far-sighted wisdom
on the part of his directors that sent Jim to Cedar Mountain.

This town of the Black Hills was then in the transition stage. The cut-throat border element
was gone. The law and order society had done its work. The ordinary machinery of justice was
established and doing fairly well. The big strikes of gold were things of the past; now plodding
Chinese and careful Germans were making profitable daily wages; and farmers were taking the
places of the ranchmen. But there was still a rowdy element in the one end of the town, where
cowboy and miner left their horses waiting for half the night, by the doors of noisy life and
riot. This was the future field of pastoral work selected for the Rev. James Hartigan by elders
wise in the testing of the human spirit.

All alone, Jim set forth on his three days' journey from Coulter, by way of Toronto, Detroit,
and Chicago, to the West, and seldom has a grown man had so little knowledge of the world to
rely upon. On the train he met with a painted woman, whose smirks and overtures he did not
understand; and some farmer folk of simple kindness. In the coach, where all slept on their
seats at night, he was like another brother to the little folks, and when a lumberjack, taking
advantage of his size, sought to monopolize two seats, whereby the old farmer was left standing,
Jim's mild and humorous "Sure, I wouldn't do that; it doesn't seem neighbourly," as he tapped
the ruffian's shoulder, put a new light on the matter; and the lumberjack, after noting the
shoulders of the speaker, decided that it wasn't neighbourly, and removed his feet.

Most of the passengers said "good-bye" at Chicago, and the rest at Sidney Junction, where Jim
changed cars for the last leg of the journey.

He had no sooner transferred himself and his bag to the waiting train than there entered his
coach five new passengers who at once attracted his full attention--a Jesuit missionary and
four Sioux Indians. The latter were in the clothes of white men, the Jesuit in his clerical
garb. They settled into the few available places and Jim found himself sharing his seat with
the black-robed missionary.

All his early training had aimed to inspire him with hatred of the papist, and the climax of
popery, he believed, was a Jesuit. He had never met one before, yet he knew the insignia and
he was not at all disposed to be friendly. But the black-robe was a man of the world, blessed
with culture, experience, and power; and before half an hour, in spite of himself, Jim found
himself chatting amicably with this arch enemy. The missionary was full of information about
the country and the Indians; and Jim, with the avidity of the boy that he was, listened eagerly,
and learned at every sentence. The experience held a succession of wholesome shocks for him;
for, next to the detested papist, he had been taught to look down on the "poor, miserable bastes
of haythens," that knew nothing of God or Church. And here, to his surprise, was a priest who
was not only a kindly, wise, and lovable soul, but who looked on the heathen not as utterly
despicable, but as a human being who lacked but one essential of true religion, the one that
he was there to offer.

"Yes," continued the missionary, "when I came out here as a young man twenty-five years ago,
I thought about the Indians much as you do. But I have been learning. I know now that in their
home lives they are a kind and hospitable people. The white race might take them as models
in some particulars, for the widow, the orphan, the old, and the sick are ever first cared
for among them. We are told that the love of money is the root of all evil; and yet this love
of money, in spite of all the white man can do to inculcate it, has no place at all in the
Indian heart."

Jim listened in astonishment, first to hear the dreadful savages set so high by one who knew
them and had a right to speak, but chiefly to find such fair-mindedness and goodness in one
who, according to all he had ever heard, must be, of course, a very demon in disguise, at war
with all who were not of his faith. Then the thought came, "Maybe this is all put on to fool
me." But at this point two of the Indians came over to speak to the missionary. Their respectful
but cordial manner could not well have been put on and was an answer to his unspoken question.

"Are these men Catholics?" he asked.

"I'm afraid not yet," said the priest, "although I believe they are influenced strongly. They
observe some of the practices of the Church and cling to others of their own."

"Their own what?"

"Well, I may say their own Church," said the father.

"Church? You call theirs a Church?" exclaimed Jim.

"Why not? Their best teachers inculcate cleanness, courage, kindness, sobriety, and truth;
they tell of one Great Spirit who is the creator and ruler of all things and to whom they pray.
Surely, these things are truth and all light comes from God; and, even though they have not
learned the great story of the redemption, we must respect their faith so far as it goes."

"And these are the 'beasts of heathen' I have always heard about."

"Oh, yes," said the missionary, "they have many habits that I hope to see stamped out; but
I have learned that my Church was wise when it sent me, not to antagonize and destroy, but
to seek for the good in these people and fortify that as a foundation on which to build the
true faith."

"Well, this is all a great surprise to me," said Hartigan; and again his deepest astonishment
lay in the new knowledge of the papist, rather than of the Indian.

They were several hours together. The missionary and his Indian friends finally left the train
at a station nearest their home in Pine Ridge and Jim was left alone with some very new ideas
and some old-time prejudices very badly shaken.

The rest of the journey he sat alone, thinking--thinking hard.

       *       *       *       *       *

There was no one to meet him at the Cedar Mountain station when he stepped out of the car--the
last passenger from the last car, in the last station--for at that time this was the north
end of the track. All his earthly belongings, besides the things he wore, were in a valise
that he carried in his hand; in his pocket he had less than five dollars in money, and his
letter of introduction to the Rev. Dr. Jebb of Cedar Mountain.

In all his life, Jim had never seen a mountain, nor even a high hill; and he stood gazing at
the rugged pile behind the town with a sense of fascination. It seemed so unreal, a sort of
pretty thing with pretty little trees on it. Was it near and little, or far and big? He could
not surely tell. After gazing a while, he turned to the railway agent and said:

"How far off is that mountain top?"

"A matter of two miles," was the answer.

Two miles! It did not seem two hundred rods; and yet it did, for the man on horseback half
way there looked toy-like; and the distance grew as he gazed. A rugged, rocky pile with white
snow-ravines still showing in the springtime sun, some scattering pines among the ledges and,
lower, a breadth of cedars, they were like a robe that hid the shoulders and flanks of the
mountain, then spread out on the plain, broken at a place where water glinted, and later blended
with the purple sage that lent its colour to the view.

It was all so new and fairylike; "the glamour and dhrei that the banshee works on the eyes
of men," was the thought that came, and the Irish tales his mother used to tell of fays and
lepricauns seemed realized before his eyes. Then, acting on a sudden impulse, he dropped his
bag and started off, intent on going up the mountain.

And when he reached the cedar belt he knew that the railway man had spoken the truth, but he
held on up the ever-steepening trail, ceasing his song only when he needed the breath to climb.
A cottontail waved its beacon for a minute before him, then darted into the underbrush; the
mountain jays called out a wailing cry; and the flicker clucked above. Sharp turns were in
the trail, else it had faced an upright cliff or overshot a precipice; but it was easily followed
and, at length, he was above the cedars. Here the horse trail ended, but a moccasin path went
on. It turned abruptly from a sheer descent, then followed a narrow knife edge to rise again
among the rocks to the last, the final height, a little rocky upland with a lonely standing
rock. Here Jim turned to see the plain, to face about and gasp in sudden wonder; for the spell
of the mountain seen afar is but a little echo of the mountain power when it has raised you up.

He recalled the familiar words, not understood till now:

    "Thy mercies are like mountains great,
    Thy judgments are like floods."

He gazed and his breath came fast as he took in the thought, old thoughts, yet new thoughts,
strong and elusive, and wondered what he had found.

Crossing the little upland, he approached its farther end and stood by the pinnacle of rock
that, like a lonely watchman, forever looked down on the blue and golden plains. A mountain
chipmunk stared at him, flicked its tail, and dived under a flat ledge; a bird whose real home
was a thousand miles off in the north faced the upland breeze and sang in its unknown tongue.
Jim drew still nearer the rocky spire, rounded a ledge, and faced an unexpected sight. In a
little open lodge of willows, bent and roofed with a canvas cover, sat an Indian youth, alone,
motionless, beside him was a pot of water, and between him and the tall rock, a little fire,
from which a tiny thread of smoke arose.

Hartigan started, for that very morning he had learned from the old Jesuit enough about the
Red-men to know that this was something unusual. On the rock beyond the fire he saw, painted
in red, two symbols that are used in the Red-man's prayers: "the blessed vision" leading up
to the "spirit heart of all things." A measure of comprehension came to him, and Father Cyprian's
words returned in new force.

The lad in the little lodge raised a hand in the sign of "Stop," then gently waved in a way
that, in all lands and languages, means: "Please go away." There was a soft, dreamy look in
his face, and Jim, realizing that he had entered another man's holy place, held back and, slowly
turning, sought the downward trail.

It came to him clearly now this was one of the interesting things told him that morning by
the Jesuit. This Indian boy was taking his hambeday, his manhood fast and vigil; seeking for
the vision that should be his guide, he was burning his altar fire beside the Spirit Rock.

As he retraced his steps the wonder of this new world enveloped Jim. At the edge of the cedars
he paused and, looking out over the great expanse of green plumage, he said aloud: "All my
life have I lived in the bottom of a little narrow well, with barely a glimpse of the sky,
and never a view of the world. Now I am suddenly brought forth to see the world and the bigness
of the heavens, and the things I dimly got from books are here about me, big, living, actual."

He was himself so much, could he be also a part of this wonder-world? It seemed impossible,
so wholly new was everything it held.

CHAPTER XI

A New Force Enters His Life

Back at the railway station, Hartigan looked for his bag where he had dropped it, but it was
gone. The agent, glancing across and divining his quandary, said stolidly:

"I guess Dr. Jebb took it. Ain't you the party he's looking for? He said 'J. H.' was the initials.
You'll find him at that white house with the flowers just where the boardwalk ends."

Jim went down the road with alert and curious eyes and presented himself at the white cottage.
He found a grave and kindly welcome from Mrs. Jebb--a stout, middle-aged, motherly person--and
from the Rev. Josiah Jebb, D.D., M.A., etc., pastor of the Methodist Church and his principal
to be for the coming year.

A gentle, kindly man and a deep scholar, Dr. Jebb had no more knowledge of the world than a
novice in a convent. His wife was his shield and buckler in all things that concerned the battle
with men and affairs; all his thoughts and energies were for his pulpit and his books.

Failing health rather than personal fitness had to do with Dr. Jebb's being sent to the hills.
But the vast extent of territory in his charge, the occasional meetings in places separated
by long hard rides, together with the crude, blunt ranch and farmer folk who were his flock--all
called for a minister with the fullest strength of youth and mental power. It was to meet this
need that the trustees of the church had sent James Hartigan to supplement the labours of the
Rev. Dr. Jebb. Thus these two, diverse in every particular of bodily and mental equipment,
were chosen to meet the same religious problem.

The evening meal was spread by Mrs. Jebb herself, for their meagre stipend did not admit of
a helper; and Jim, with his hearty, rollicking ways, soon won his accustomed place, a high
place in their hearts. That night he was invited to stay with them; but it was understood that
next day he would find permanent lodgings in the town. Not a complex task, since, to quote
Mrs. Jebb, "his hat covered his family, and three hundred a year simplified the number of rooms."

Jim rose at six in the morning, lighted a fire in the kitchen stove--for this is etiquette
in the simple regions where servants are not and the guest is as a son--and put on a full kettle
of water. This also is etiquette; it assumes that the family will not be up for some time.
Had it been near the breakfast hour, but half a kettle would have been correct. Then he left
the house, stick in hand, for a long walk. This time he struck out in the direction of the
open plains. The flimsy little town was soon behind him, and the winding trail among the sagebrush,
went reaching out to the east. The pine woods of his native country were not well stocked with
life; the feathered folk were inconspicuous there; but here it seemed that every bush and branch
was alive with singing birds. The vesper sparrows ran before his feet, flashed their white
tail feathers in a little flight ahead, or from the top of a stone or a buffalo skull they
rippled out their story of the spring. The buffalo birds in black and white hung poised in
the air to tell their tale, their brown mates in the grass applauding with a rapt attention.
The flickers paused in harrying prairie anthills and chuckling fled to the nearest sheltering
trees. Prairie dogs barked from their tiny craters; gophers chirruped or turned themselves
into peg-like watchtowers to observe the striding stranger.

But over all, the loud sweet prairie lark sang his warbling yodel-song of the sun with a power
and melody that no bird anywhere, in any land, can equal. It seemed to Jim the very spirit
of these level lands, the embodiment of the awakening plains and wind, the moving voice of
all the West. And all about, as though responsive, the flowers of spring came forth: purple
avens in straggling patches; golden yellow bloom, with blots and streaks of fluffy white; while
here and there, as far as eye could reach, was the blue-white tinge of the crocus flower, the
queen of the springtime flowers, the child of the sky and the snow.

The passionate youth in him responded to the beauty of it; he felt it lay hold on him and he
would have sung, but he found no words in all his college-born songs to tell of this new joy.
"I didn't know it could be so beautiful. I didn't know," he said again and again.

At the seven o'clock whistle of a mill he wheeled about toward the town, and saw there, almost
overhanging it, the mountain, bright in the morning, streaked with white, lifting a rugged
head through the gray-green poncho of its cedar robe, a wondrous pile capped by the one lone
tower that watched, forever watched, above the vast expanse of plains.

Jim was nearly back to the town when a horse and rig appeared coming rapidly toward him. He
heard a shout and saw a man run from a house to look. The horse was going very fast and shaking
his head; something was wrong. As it came toward him he saw that the driver was a young girl.
She was holding with all her strength to the reins, but the horse, a tall, rawboned creature,
was past control. Horses Jim surely understood. He stepped well aside, then wheeling as the
runaway went past, he ran his best. For a little while a swift man can run with a horse, and
in that little while Jim was alongside, had seized the back of the seat, and, with a spurt
and a mighty leap, had tumbled into the rig beside the driver. Instantly she held the reins
toward him and gasped:

"I can't hold him; he's running away." Then, as Jim did not at once seize the reins, she hurriedly
said: "Here, take them."

"No," he said with amazing calmness, "you can control him. Don't be afraid. You hurt yourself
pulling; ease up. Keep him straight, that's all."

The sense of power in his presence and matter-of-fact tone restored her nerve. She slackened
a little on the reins. The horse had believed he was running away; now he began to doubt it.
She had been telegraphing terror along the lines, and now she began to telegraph control.

"Speak to him, just as you would if he were all right," said Jim in a low voice.

The girl had been pale and scared-looking, but she responded to the suggestion and talked to
the horse.

"Good boy, good boy, Stockings; keep it up," just as though she had been putting him to his utmost.

There was open fareway straight ahead and little to fear so long as the horse kept in the road
and met no other rig. In a quarter of a mile he began to slacken his pace.

"Will you take the lines now?" the girl asked shyly.

"No, it isn't necessary, and the horse would feel the change and think he had beaten you."

"My arms are tired out," she said rather querulously.

"Then ease up for a while. Don't pull so hard."

She did so and was surprised that the horse did not speed away. In a quarter of a mile more
the victory was won. She gave the usual signal to stop and Stockings came gently to a pause.

"Now," said Jim, "if you like, I'll take the lines. The battle is over. You have won. From
now on you will be able to drive that horse; but if I had taken the lines he would have felt
the change; he would have felt that he could boss you, and ever after he would have been a
dangerous horse for you to drive."

In the struggle, the horse had got one leg over the trace. Jim got out, spoke to the big, strong
brute, and did the firm-handed, compelling things that a horseman knows. The tall creature
stood a little trembly, but submissive now, as the man unhooked the trace, adjusted all the
leathers, and then, with a word or two, adjusted the horse's mood.

"Shall I leave you now?" he asked.

"No," she said, "my arms are aching. I wish you would drive me home."

As he mounted the seat again and headed for the village, Jim had his first chance to look at
the girl beside him. If fear had paled her face at all it was wholly overcome, for the richest
glow of health was in her cheeks and on her brow. She was beautiful he knew, with her brown
hair flying and brilliant colour, but these things did not entirely account for a charm of
which he was delightfully conscious. Her hands were a little shaky from the struggle with the
horse, but otherwise she was fully recovered and self-possessed and talked in an animated if
somewhat nervous way about the adventure. In a land where rasping voices were the rule, it
was instantly to be noted that her voice was soft and low.

"Stockings is not a bad horse," she said, "except in one way; the lines get under his tail.
That always makes him back up and kick; then he got his leg over the trace, was frightened,
and ran away. He's the only one of our horses that we have any trouble with. I was bound I'd
drive him, in spite of Pa; but I'm thinking now that Pa was right." Then, abruptly: "I'm Miss
Boyd; aren't you the new preacher?"

"Yes."

"I saw you at the station when you came yesterday."

"Sure, I didn't suppose a human being took notice of it," he laughed.

"Here's where I live. Will you come in?"

"No, thank you," he said; "I'm late now for breakfast at Dr. Jebb's." So he tied the horse
to the post, helped her from the rig, and with a flourish of his stick and cap left her.

"The Rev. James Hartigan," she mused; "so that is Dr. Jebb's assistant." Then in Stockings's
ear: "I think I like him--don't you, old runaway?"

CHAPTER XII

Belle Boyd

Belle had been in the express office signing some receipts for goods consigned to her father
when Jim stepped from the train. He appeared framed in the open doorway; six feet four, broad
and straight, supple and easy, with the head of a Greek god in a crown of golden curls, and
a dash of wild hilarity in his bright blue eyes that suggested a Viking, a royal pirate. He
was the handsomest man she had ever seen and when he spoke it was with a slight and winsome
Irish brogue that lent new charm to a personality already too dangerously gifted.

It seemed to her that Nature had given him all the gifts there were for man; and he was even
better furnished than she perceived, for he had youth, health, happy moods, magnetic power
in face and voice, courage, and the gift of speech. And yet, with all these unmeasured blessings
was conjoined a bane. To be possessed of the wild, erratic spirit of the roving, singing Celt,
to be driven to all ill-judged extremities, to be lashed by passion, anger, and remorse, to
be the battle ground of this wild spirit and its strong rival, the calm and steadfast spirit
of the North--that was a spiritual destiny not to be discerned in a first meeting; but Belle,
keen and understanding, was to discover it very soon.

Belle Boyd was an only child. Her father was a well-to-do trader; he had had just enough schooling
to give him a high notion of its value, and he resolved to equip his child with the best there
was in reach. This meant an Illinois college. She entered at seventeen. Here many vague aspirations
of schoolgirl life took definite shape, and resulted in some radical changes in her course
of studies. Her mother had but one thought--to prepare Belle for being a good wife to some
one. Her views on many subjects were to be left blank, so that she might at once adopt those
of her prospective husband. Her tentacles alone were well considered in the maternal method,
so that she could cling ivy-like to her oak, stay up with him or go down with him; but help
him to stand up--no, never and not at all!

But Illinois was seething with a different thought in the late '70's. There were women who
boldly proclaimed that sex and mind had little bearing on each other; that woman should train
herself to be herself, and to stand on her own feet; that when woman had the business training
of men, the widow and the unmarried woman--half of all women--would no longer be the easy prey
of every kind of sharper. These new teachers were, of course, made social martyrs, but they
sowed the seed and the crop was coming on. That every woman should prepare herself to stand
alone in the world was the first article in their creed. This crystallized an old and shapeless
thought that had often come to Belle, and the pointed application that she made was to focus
her college studies on a business training. Bookkeeping, shorthand, and exact methods were
selected for specialization; and when at the age of twenty Belle was graduated and went home
to Cedar Mountain, she had, in addition to her native common sense, a disciplined attention
that made her at once a power in the circle of the church. It was her own idea to take a business
position at once. Her mother was absolutely opposed to it. "Why should her child be sent to
work? Were they not able to keep her at home? What was the good of parents giving years to
toil if not to keep their children at home with them?" Mr. Boyd was more inclined to see things
Belle's way, and at length a compromise was reached by which Belle became her father's bookkeeper
and secretary, and for a time all went well.

Then a new factor entered the case, one for which the reformer has not yet found a good answer.
The daily routine of the desk was assumed as a matter of course; and Belle quickly got used
to that and found abundant mental diversion in other things and in hours of freedom. But her
body had less strength than her mind, and the close confinement of the office began to tell.
Her hands got thin, her cheeks lost their colour, her eyes grew brighter. Mrs. Boyd began to
worry, and sent secretly to Illinois for bottles of various elixirs of life, guaranteed to
put health, strength, youth, and brains into anything. She also made foolish and elaborate
efforts to trick the daughter into eating more at meals, or between meals, without avail. At
this juncture a very capable person took matters in hand. Dr. Peter Carson, family physician
and devoted friend, was consulted; his views were clear and convincing: Belle must give up
the office for a year at least; she needed fresh air and sun; the more the better. Every girl
in the Black Hills rides as a matter of course, and Belle was at home on a broncho; but now
it must be, not an occasional run, but a daily ride in the hills--off for miles, till the vital
forces had renewed their strength.

For a month or more Belle rode and browned in the sun. The colour came again to her cheeks,
and zest to her life; and there also came a strong desire to be in a business of her own. But
it must be something out of doors; it must be something of little capital; and something a
woman could do. Belle studied her problem with great care and presently there began to arrive
at the post office sundry catalogues of extraordinary hens with unbelievable records as producers
of eggs and of rapid-raising broilers. The result was that the acre of ground behind the store
was cut up into poultry runs for the various strains of stock that Belle decided on and that
spring Belle launched out on her career as a poultry farmer. There were Leghorns and Houdans
for eggs, and Brahmas in another yard for mothers. Four things conspired to make her venture
a success. She was the only one in Cedar Mountain with thoroughbred poultry, so there was a
large demand for high-class eggs for setting. The eggs that for table use brought fifty cents
a dozen were worth two dollars and a half a dozen for hatching. Her store training had taught
her to watch the market reports in the papers, which arrived twice a week, and her college
training taught her to study hen hygiene. Last but not least, she got their food for nothing.

On closing her books that autumn Belle found that on her investment of $250 capital borrowed
from her father, she had cleared $250, and had all the capital to render back intact. She realized
that while it was possible to make 100 per cent, on small capital, the rate decreased rapidly
as the capital increased. She estimated that ten times as much capital would only produce about
25 per cent, because the possibility of personal management of every hen and every detail would
grow proportionately smaller, and it was this personal touch which counted. Next, the sovereign
advantages of grass range and table scraps must diminish with each additional hen; and if she
had paid herself an adequate salary the profit would have been wiped out. Last, and perhaps
the most important to her, she was absolutely tied to the farm. She could not be away one week
without suffering loss. It was with ill-concealed admiration that her father listened to a
summary of these conclusions; later, with the remarkable common sense that characterized most
of her ways, Belle seized a chance to sell out and lodge her money in the local bank. But the
venture had been a success in two respects. It had helped her to health and it had given her
business experience and confidence.

The winter was now on, and Belle's outdoor activities were somewhat circumscribed, for there
is a real winter in the Black Hills. But she was in robust health again and she turned her
energies more and more to church work. She was depended on to get up the "sociables," to plan
the entertainments, to invent new and happy games that would take them as near as they dared
go in the direction of dance and stage without actually outraging the old-fashioned Methodist
conscience by getting there. It was Belle who entirely refurnished the parsonage in one harmonious
style by copying a mission chair and table from a picture, and then inviting each of the boys
to make a like piece, and each of the girls to make a "drape" to match it. It was a sort of
Noah's Ark trick, this gathering in of things in pairs, but it succeeded originally--the ark
was full--and it succeeded now, for the parsonage was full; and it will always succeed, for
it is built on the old fundamental pairing instinct.

Belle also imported and put in practical working the idea of a daily school 'bus, which gathered
up the twenty-odd children for ten miles along the winter road and brought them on a huge hay
rack to the Cedar Mountain School in the morning, and took them back at night to their homes.
But in all these multiplied activities there was a secret dissatisfaction. She felt that she
was a mere hanger-on of the church, a sort of pet cat to the parson's wife. She was not developing
herself independently, and she began secretly to outline a scheme which meant nothing less
than leaving home to take some sort of position on the west coast. She had no fear for her
success, but she was restrained by two things: the question of health in case she could not
find an outdoor enterprise, and the sorrow her parents would feel over her--to their thinking,
unnecessary--departure.

For some time both in her school and church work Belle had been much associated with John Lowe,
the schoolteacher. He was considered a well-meaning person, a dozen years older than herself,
and had certain pleasing qualities, a suave manner--almost too suave--and a readiness of speech.
He was fairly well educated, a good worker, a member of the church, and had no obvious bad
habits. His history was not known; in fact, no one's history was known in those days of beginnings.
Every one had to be taken as he was found and often on his own statement.

Lowe soon became a devoted admirer of Belle; and Mrs. Boyd, seeing a chance to beguile her
daughter into settling down, did all she could to bring them together, never losing a chance
of praising Jack. He was just what Belle needed as an executive help to realize much that she
had planned. As a public reciter he had some little prominence; as a schoolteacher he was just
a step nearer the world of brains than were the other possible men in town, and by that much
more acceptable; and the inevitable result of propinquity was reached. The engagement of Belle
Boyd and Jack Lowe was announced.

There was no ardent love-making on either side, and sometimes Belle, when left alone, would
wonder why she was not more elated each time she heard him coming; rather, she seemed to feel
weighted by the attachment. She reproached herself for this and as she strove to reach a more
satisfactory state of mind she found herself thinking with a sigh of that free career she had
planned in the business world. Mrs. Boyd's maternal hopes were too nearly realized to leave
her with any discernment and Belle's father was too much wrapped up in business and small politics,
to see even the mountains that were beyond his back yard; but another frequent visitor at the
house was gifted with better eyes and more knowledge of the world.

Dr. Carson had never felt attracted toward Lowe. Instinctively he disliked him. He knew at
the beginning that the teacher was much older than he admitted. One or two were despatched home
before them, to apprise the afflicted family of his safety; and the intelligence was hailed
with melancholy joy by the Reillaghans. A faint light played for a moment over the gloom Which
had settled among them, but it was brief; for on ascertaining the safety of their second son,
their grief rushed back with renewed violence, and nothing could be heard but the voice of sorrow
and affliction.

Darby More, who had assumed the control of the family, did everything
in his power to console them; his efforts, however, were viewed with
a feeling little short of indignation.

"Darby," said the afflicted mother, "you have, undher God, in some sense, my fair son's death to
account for. You had a dhrame, but you wouldn't tell it to us. If you had, my boy might be livin' this
day, for it would be asy for him to be an his guard."

"Musha, poor woman," replied Darby, "sure you don't know, you afflicted crathur, what you're
spakin' about. Tell my dhrame! Why, thin, it's myself towld it to him from beginning to ind, and
that whin we wor goin' to mass this day itself. I desired him, on the paril of his life, not to go
out a tracin' or toards the mountains, good or bad."

"You said you had a prayer that 'ud keep it back," observed the mother, "an' why didn't you say
it?"

"I did say it," replied Darby, "an' that afore a bit crassed my throath
this mornin'; but, you see, he broke his promise of not goin' to the
mountains, an' that was what made the dhrame come thrue."

"Well, well, Darby, I beg your pardon, an' God's pardon, for judgin' you in the wrong. Oh,
wurrah sthrue! my brave son, is it there you're lyin' wid us, avourneen machree!" and she
again renewed her grief.

"Oh, thin, I'm sure I forgive you," said Darby: "but keep your grief in for a start, till I
say the De Prowhinjis over him, for the pace an' repose of his sowl. Kneel down all of yez."

He repeated this prayer in language which it would require one of Edward Irving's adepts in the Unknown
Tongues to interpret.

When he had recited about half of it, Owen, and those who had gone
to seek him, entered the house, and after the example of the others,
reverently knelt down until he finished it.

Owen's appearance once more renewed their grief. The body of his brother had been removed to a
bed beyond the fire in the kitchen; and when Owen looked upon the features of his beloved companion,
he approached, and stooped down to kiss his lips.

He was still too feeble, however, to bend by his own strength; and it is also probable that the
warm air of the house relaxed him. Be this, however, as it may, he fell forward, but supported
himself by his hands, which were placed upon the body; a deep groan was heard, and the apparently
dead man opened his eyes, and feebly exclaimed--"A dhrink? a dhrink!"

Darby More, had, on concluding the De profundus, seated himself beside the bed on which Mike
lay; but on hearing the groan, and the call for drink, he leaped
rapidly to: his legs and exclaimed, "My sowl to hell an' the divil,
Owen Reillaghan, but your son's alive!!

Off wid two or three of yez, as the divil can dhrive yez, for the
priest an' docthor!!

Off wid yez! ye damned spalpeens, aren't ye near there by this! Give us my cant! Are yez gone?
Oh, by this and by that--hell--eh--aren't yez--" But ere he could finish the sentence, they
had set chit.
"Now," he exclaimed in a voice whose tremendous tones were strongly
at variance with his own injunctions--"Now, neighbors, d--n yez, keep
silence. Mrs. Reillaghan, get a bottle of whiskey an' a mug o' wather.
Make haste. Hanim an diouol! don't be all night!"

The poor mother,
however, could not stir; the unexpected revulsion of feeling which
she had so suddenly experienced was more than she could sustain. A
long fainting-fit! was the consequence, and Darby's commands were
obeyed by the wife of a friendly neighbor.

The mendicant immediately
wetted Mike's lips, and poured some spirits, copiously diluted with
water, down his throat; after which he held the whiskey-bottle, like
a connoisseur, between himself and the light. "I hope," said he, "this
whiskey is the raal crathur."

"And how did ye like my sermon?" was the hearty greeting Hartigan gave Belle Boyd next day,
as they met on the boardwalk of Main Street. She glanced up with a faint flush, looked down,
then meeting his eyes squarely she said:

"Some parts I liked, but much of it I did not."

This was an unexpected reply; Jim had quite looked for a burst of admiration. In answer to
his questions, Belle gave an analysis of the sermon, as they walked along, pointing out the
clay and the gold, and the total lack of form.

His attitude, at first, had been superior and his tone frivolous. For, strange to say, the
gallantry so strong in his Irish blood is ever mixed with, or maybe it is a mere mark of belief
in, the superiority of the male. But, before Belle had finished two things had happened--he
was much less sure of his sermon and was a little in awe of her. There could be no doubt that
she was right. Yes, those two stories would have been better left out; an early paragraph should
have been at the end, for it was the summing up; and the illogical conclusion, which had no
promise in anything he said before, was weak, to say the least. Hartigan felt much as he used
to feel when his mother had called him into a detailed account of some doubtful conduct.

"What are you going to give us next time?" inquired Belle.

"I thought of beginning a series of sermons on the bad habits of the congregation--swearing,
drinking, gambling, horse-racing, smoking, and spitting. Last Sunday, right by the door in
church, two men were smoking their pipes and spitting on the floor. It seems to me that Revelations
XI:2 is about the right medicine for such conduct. This is the text: 'And he opened the bottomless
pit and there arose a smoke out of the pit,' Or Psalms XXXVII:20: 'The wicked shall perish
... into smoke shall they consume away,' Then there is a passage in Jeremiah VII:30: 'They
have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name to pollute it,' With these
I think we have a good scaffolding to build on."

Belle looked puzzled and said nothing. Hartigan was waiting for her approval. He wanted it.

"What do you think?" he asked, a decided note of anxiety creeping into his question.

"I would not do it," was the answer.

"Why not?" said Jim instantly on the defensive. "Don't they need it, and aren't they awfully
weak on these things?"

"Yes, they are," said Belle, "but----"

"But what?"

"Mr. Hartigan," she replied as she stopped at her gate, "if you wanted a rich man to help a
poor widow, and went to him saying: 'You miserable old skinflint, I know you are as greedy
as the pit, but I demand it as a human right that you help this poor woman out of your ill-gotten
abundance,' how much are you going to get? Nothing at all; and the truer it is the less your
chance. On the other hand, if you go to him and say: 'Mr. Dives, you are one of the few men
in town who have the power to help this woman. I know she is well worthy of help, for she's
having a hard struggle. Now, you had a struggle once and know what that means. It made a keen,
successful business man of you; but I know you are kind-hearted and generous and that all you
want is to be sure that the case is genuine. Well, I can assure you it is. Will you not help
her with the rent till strawberry time, when she expects to get a little money?' That way you
will get something. He has to become generous when you say he is; and I think that you will
get more out of these people if you assume that they are something good. Later, when they know
you better, you can put them right on their faults."

Hartigan stared at her with frankly admiring eyes.

"Well," he said, "you surely have the level head. You are right and I will do as you say. But
I wonder why you take all this trouble with me?"

Flushed and happy over her victory and very deeply moved by the look she had seen on Jim's
face, Belle realized the full meaning of her success and took a woman's pride in the fact that
this great, powerful, self-confident, gifted man should in two short encounters completely
change about and defer to her judgment. There was a moment's silence in which she sought to
get her voice under control. Then she added:

"Will you let me know what you decide to preach on?"

"I will," said Jim, his eyes still on her face.

They had been standing at the door of the Boyd home. In that instant of his dependence upon
her Belle had been conscious of a very sweet and precious bond between them. Without turning
toward him, she touched his arm lightly with her hand and went into the house.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jim's first effort had not encouraged Dr. Jebb to transfer much of the pulpit service to the
young man. Subsequently, he had a long talk with him and pointed out some of the defects as
Belle had done; also a number of lapses which, though purely academic, he considered of prime
importance. Thus, more than a month elapsed before Jim was again called to fill the pulpit.

Meanwhile, he had had many experiences of value in his widespread congregation, among them
the raising of a charitable fund for an unfortunate neighbour, and he had become well acquainted
with Jack Shives, the blacksmith, a singular mixture of brusqueness and kindness. Shives was
a good citizen who did good work at the forge, but he was utterly opposed to all creeds and
churches. He made it a point to set all the weight of his solid character against these, as
well as the power of his biting tongue.

As soon as Dr. Jebb asked him to take the pulpit, Jim called on Belle.

"Well, I'm to have another chance," he said, as with one hand he lifted an armchair that Dr.
Jebb could not have moved at all.

"Good," said she. "What is the subject to be?"

"I have three subjects I wish to treat," he began; "one, foreign missions; the next is the
revised version of the New Testament; and the last is the secularizing influence of church
clubs. Which do you say?"

Belle looked serious. At length she said:

"Maybe you can make something constructive out of these ideas. It depends on how you handle
them; but they seem to me far-off and doubtful."

He looked the disappointment he felt and waited for her to go on.

"What was the good thing that struck you most when you came among us?"

Hartigan gazed through the window at the round top of Cedar Mountain, then at the frank face
of the slim girl, and with a little outburst of his real nature he cried:

"Bejabers, it was the kind way you all received me."

"All right, then; why not make that your subject for the next sermon? Let these people know
that you think they are kind, and that they make you feel it, and they will become kinder.
Then, when you are established in their hearts, you can talk about their faults. That will
come later.

The sermon was duly outlined. The outline was brought for Belle to hear. She was keenly interested
because in some sense she was on trial; and under the stimulating influence of her attention,
Jim expanded the outline to a whole sermon and preached it all to Belle then and there. It
was full of eloquent passages and wholesome lessons, but it was far too long, as Belle insisted;
and again there was a readjustment with the result that on the following Sunday Hartigan delivered
a brilliant sermon on Kindness, the kindness he had received, the kindness that is the heart
of all true religion. The quaint humour, the vivid presentation, and the every-day applications
were new and true notes to that congregation. It shocked some of the old-fashioned type, but
the reality it gave to religion was not lost, and the human interest and sincerity of it held
every mind. It cannot be given in full, but the opening passages will illustrate Jim's theme
and his method. After reading the parable of the Good Samaritan, he said:

     "Now, friends, I have selected the story of the Good Samaritan for
     a starting point; and it's a good one, even if I never get back to
     it through the whole length of the sermon.

     "I want you to understand that here was a man who was a kind of
     outcast; he didn't go to church and he didn't know or care a cent
     about doctrines or creeds; his people were notorious for wine
     drinking so that it's more than likely he was often drunk, and it's
     ten to one he swore every time he got mad. But he was ready to lend
     a helping hand to anybody that had need of him.

     "And I want you to note that the men who would not do a finger's
     tap to help were a holy priest with a big salary and a highly
     respectable church member in training for the ministry. So you see,
     the Lord selected these three to illustrate this point then, now,
     and for all time, that he had nothing but contempt for the
     coldblooded holy-rollers and that the ignorant outcast infidel was
     his sort because he had a kind heart.

     "Now, friends, we've all three kinds right with us all the time.
     Though I don't go much on mincing words, I won't specify the priest
     nor the Levite right here in Cedar Mountain; but I will make
     mention of the Good Samaritan.

     "Ye see, it wasn't exactly a case of being held up by robbers; but
     we had to raise enough to get the Hanky family out of their
     troubles when Jack Hanky broke his arm, his leg, his buggy, and his
     bank account all on one and the same unlucky day; and it was my job
     to raise the wind to help him weather the storm. Well, I went about
     as you all know, and got a little here and a little there; then
     squeezed out a little more from some of the dry sponges, and still
     was short. So I went to Jack Shives and he contributed more than
     any one else; and then, on top of that, he put Hanky's buggy in
     good shape without a cent of pay, and went down night after night
     to sit at his bedside and help him pass the long hours away.

     "Now the fact is, Jack Shives and I have had many a fight on
     religious questions. He swears and drinks all he wants to, which
     I'm bound to say isn't much. He jokes about the church and the
     preacher and every one that goes to church. He pokes fun at the
     hymn book and laughs at the Bible and every one that tries to
     follow it word for word. Jack thinks he's all kinds of an infidel;
     but he isn't. I have a notion of my own that he's a better
     Christian than he allows, better than a good many church members I
     could name. In fact, I believe if the Lord Jesus were to get off at
     Cedar Mountain from to-morrow's noon train, the first thing he
     would do would be to go to the post office and say: 'Can you tell
     me where Jack Shives, the blacksmith, lives? He's a particular
     friend of mine, he's done a lot of little odd jobs for me and I
     guess I'll put up at his house while I'm in Cedar Mountain.'"

And so he talked for the allotted time, translating the age-old truth into terms of to-day
and personal application. A few of the older folk thought he treated some very serious subjects
too lightly; they preferred the sing-song tone so long associated with scripture texts. Others
had their doubts as to Jim's theology. His eulogy of the blacksmith was a little too impulsive,
but none had any question of the thrilling human interest of his words and the completeness
of his hold on every one's attention. It was wholesome, if not orthodox; it drove home with
conviction; it made them laugh and cry; and it was a masterpiece of the simple eloquence that
was so much his gift and of the humour that was the birthright of his race.

From that day forth the doubtful impressions created by Hartigan's first appearance in the
pulpit were wiped out and he was reckoned as a new and very potent force in the community.

CHAPTER XIV

The Lure of the Saddle

One of the needs that Hartigan very soon became aware of in his far-flung pastoral work was
that of a good saddle horse. An income of three hundred dollars a year will not maintain very
much in the way of a stable, but a horse had to be got, and the idea of looking for one was
exceedingly pleasant to him. It needed but the sight and smell of the horse leathers to rouse
the old passion bred and fostered in Downey's stable. He loved the saddle, he knew horses as
few men did, and had he been ninety pounds lighter he would have made a famous jockey.

For many days he was able to put his mind on nothing else. He eagerly took every chance to
visit likely stock; he was never so happy as when he was astride of some mettlesome animal,
interpreting its moods as only the born horseman can do, and drawing on the reserves of strength
which are closed to all but the expert rider. He responded in every fibre of his great physique
to the zest of this renewed experience of a loved and lost stable life, and yet the very passion
of his enjoyment appalled him at times for it seemed to be in some sense a disloyalty to the
new life he had taken up and to draw him away from it.

In those days there were motley bands of immigrants crossing the plains from the East, making
for the Black Hills as an island of promise in the great open sea, and one of these wanderers
from far-off Illinois arrived one evening with the usual outfit of prairie schooner, oxen,
milch cow, saddle horses, dogs, and children. Calamity had overtaken the caravan. The mother
had died; the father was disgusted with the country and everything in it; and his one idea
was to sell his outfit and get the children back East, back to school and granny. At the auction,
the cattle brought good prices, but no one wanted the horses. They were gaunt and weary, saddle-and
spur-galled; one young and the other past middle life. It was the young horse that caught Hartigan's
eye. It was rising three, a well-built skeleton, but with a readiness to look alert, a full
mane and tail, and a glint of gold on the coat that had a meaning and a message for the horse-wise.
The auctioneer was struggling to raise a bid.

"Will any one bid on this fine young colt? All he needs is oats, and a few other things."

A laugh went up, which was just what the auctioneer wanted, for merriment is essential to a
successful sale.

"Here now, boys, who will start him at five dollars? And him worth a hundred."

It was too much for Hartigan. He raised his finger to the auctioneer.

"There, now, there's a preacher that knows a horse," he prattled away, but no second offer
came, and the colt was knocked down to Hartigan for five greasy dollars.

"A good clean-down is worth a bushel of oats to a horse," is old stable wisdom, "and a deal
cheaper," as Hartigan added. Within the hour Blazing Star, as the new owner named him from
the star blaze in his forehead, was rubbed and curry-combed as probably he never had been in
his life before. He was fed with a little grain and an abundance of prairie hay, his wounds
were painted with iodine and his mane was plaited. He was handled from forelock to fetlock
and rubbed and massaged like a prizefighter who is out for mighty stakes.

"They are just like humans," Hartigan remarked to the "perchers" at Shives's blacksmith shop.
"All they need is kindness and common sense."

Before a month had gone, Hartigan was offered fifty dollars for the colt; and this in a land
where twenty-five dollars is the usual price for a saddle horse. In truth, no one would have
recognized this fine, spirited young horse as the sorry jade that landed in the town a short
four weeks before. But Hartigan, who had a trainer's eye, said to Shives and the "perchers":

"Wait for two months and then you will see something."

And they did. They saw the young Achilles riding down the street on the wonderful chosen steed
of all the herd. There were perfectly balanced life and power in every move of both, the eagerness
to up and do, the grace of consummate animalism. They had seen many a fine man on a noble horse,
but never before had they beheld a picture so satisfying to both eye and heart as that of the
Preacher on his five-dollar steed.

Five miles from Cedar Mountain is Fort Ryan and to the south of it a plain, where every year
in the first week of July the Indians gather in their tepees and the whites in tents and prairie
schooners for a sort of fair, in which are many kinds of sin on the largest scale. Herds of
horses are there, and racing is a favourite sport. It was here on the Fourth of July that an
Indian on a rough-looking buckskin pony had won, over all the field that year, a purse containing
five hundred dollars. The whites, who had their racers set at naught, were ready for almost
any scheme that promised them revenge, and they made an ill-favoured and sulky lot as they
sat on the shady side of the movable saloon that lingered still on the racing plain. Their
eyes were pinched at the corners with gazing at the sunlight, and their ragged beards were
like autumn grass. A horseman appeared in the distance, and ambled toward them. This was a
common enough sight, but the easy pace was pleasing to the eye, and when he drew near these
men of the saddle found a horseman's pleasure in the clean-limbed steed so easily ridden.

"Guess it's the new preacher," said one with a laugh. "He's come down from Cedar Mountain to
save us from Hell, as if Hell could be any worse than this."

Hartigan drew up to inquire the direction to a certain cabin and when he learned the way he
rode on.

"Looks to me like he would have made a cowboy, if they had ketched him young."

"Do you see that horse? Ain't there some blood there?"

"Yes, there is," said Long Bill, "and it strikes me it is worth following up. Let's have another
look."

The group sauntered to where the Preacher was making a call and one of them began:

"Say, mister, that's quite a horse you've got there; want to sell him?"

"No."

"Looks like a speeder."

"Yes, there's nothing in Cedar Mountain to touch him."

"Say, mister," said cattleman Kyle, "if he's a winner, here's your chance to roll up a wad."

Hartigan stared and waited. The cult of the horse is very ancient, but its ways are ever modern.

"You say he's a great speeder; will you try him against Kyle's horse?" said Long Bill.

Jim looked a rebuff and shook his head.

"Oh, just a friendly race," the man went on; "Kyle thinks he has the best American horse in
town." And as various members of the party looked more critically at Blazing Star and felt
his limbs they became more insistent.

When Jim had joined the Church, horse-racing was one of the deadly sins he had abjured. So
while he refused to enter a race, he was easily persuaded to ride his horse against Kyle's
for a friendly mile. Whether begun as a race or not, it was in deadly earnest after the first
fifty yards and it proved just what they needed to know: that Kyle's horse, which had been
a good second best with the Indian, was a poor second in the race with Blazing Star. With this
essential information, Kyle asked if he could hire Hartigan's horse for a brush with the Indian.

Hartigan went through a most painful struggle with his conscience. But clearly "this was not
a regular race." It was "just a sort of speed test with an Indian pony like the one he had
had with Kyle." He was not going to ride in it. He would only rent his horse for wages. "Sure,
every one hires out his horse when he has a good one." So Blazing Star was hired out to Kyle,
and a new though unimportant race was arranged, for a stake, otherwise the Indian would not
have taken the trouble to ride. The Red-men's black eyes looked keenly on as he measured the
new horse. Then the unexpected happened. Blazing Star was not accustomed to the new jockey,
the gentle ways that had fostered his speed were lacking. The rider's idea was whip and spur
and go from the start. The horse got "rattled" and the Indian pony won. The defeat stirred
Hartigan to a rage such as he had not experienced in months. The unrest of his conscience over
the affair, coupled with his contempt and fury at the bad horsemanship of the rider, set loose
from his tongue a lurid torrent blended of Links, Scripture, and Black Hills.

"Here, you jelly-backed cowpuncher, let me show you how to ride. Will you ride again?" he shouted
to the Indian, as the latter put the roll of bills in his tobacco pouch.

The Indian shook his head.

"I will put that up twenty-five dollars to nothing," and Hartigan held up the twenty-five dollars
he had received as hire for his horse. Again the Indian shook his head. "I'll give you that
if you'll ride." Jim held up a ten, "and double it if you win."

With a gesture, the Indian consented, received the bill, and put it with the rest. They rode
to the starting post, were unceremoniously started, and Hartigan showed how much a man could
do for a horse. In spite of his rider's great weight that splendid beast responded to every
word, and when on the home run Hartigan used the quirt, Blazing Star seemed to know it was
merely a signal, not an insulting urge, and let himself go. The Indian pony, too, was doing
his utmost, but Blazing Star swept past his opponent and led at the finish by more than a length;
the race was won; and Hartigan wakened up as a man out of a dream to face the awful fact that
he, a minister of the gospel, had not only ridden in a horse race, but had gambled on the same.

CHAPTER XV

Pat Bylow's Spree

At the time of the incidents at Fort Ryan, Belle was away on a visit to Deadwood. Otherwise,
Hartigan would surely have consulted her and profited by her calmer judgment in the matter
of the race. As it was, his torturing sense of moral iniquity led him to preach a sermon in
which he poured forth all the intensity of his nature. Quietly to drop the subject was not
his way; he knew that every one was talking about it, so nothing would do but a public denunciation
of himself, and all that followed the race track.

The text he chose was: "My wounds stink, and are corrupt, because of my foolishness" (Psalms
XXXVIII:5). Jim's thought was that once the sinner is saved, all his sins become peculiarly
and especially repugnant to him. They acquire nothing less than a stench in his nostrils, and
henceforth are as repellent as once they were attractive, no matter what they may be; and he
enumerated drunkenness, swearing, gambling, and horse-racing. At mention of the last a smile
spread over the faces of the congregation. He noted it at once, and said:

"Yes, I know what you are thinking. You are wondering how I came to ride my horse in a race
at Fort Ryan. Well, it was the devil laid a snare for me, and I fell in. But this I will say:
I promise you I will never do the like again, and if each of you will stand up now and give
me the same promise about your own particular besetting sin, then I'll feel that we have made
a great gain, and I will be glad I rode that race after all."

In this land of the horse no one was long inclined to take the matter seriously. A nature so
buoyant as his could not long be downcast, and Hartigan's sense of sin for his part in the
race was soon put behind him. Then happened an incident that gave him a chance to score a triumph.

In a remote part of the valley some five miles back of Cedar Mountain was Bylow's Corner, a
group of three or four houses near the road, the log cabins of homesteaders. These men had,
indeed, few pleasures in life. Their highest notion of joy was a spree; and every month or
two they would import a keg of liquor, generally of a quality unfit for human consumption.
The word had been passed around that Pat Bylow had got a keg of the "real stuff," and the rest
of the Corner assembled on a certain Saturday night for an orgy, which it was expected would
last about two days. Word of it reached Hartigan, too, and he decided that here was a glorious
opportunity to save bodies and souls at once. Without consulting any one he mounted Blazing
Star, and in half an hour was at the Corner. Tying his horse to a tree, he went to the house
that was the known meeting place. There were lights in the window and boisterous noises issuing
forth. At the door he stopped and listened; rough voices were grumbling; there was an occasional
curse, a laugh, then a woman speaking shrilly; a minute's silence, during which the sweet song
of a night bird was heard in the dark bushes by the stream, whereupon a hoarse, brutalized
voice shouted:

"Oh, hurry up and start that bung, you act like a schoolgirl."

The Preacher knocked. There was no answer. He knocked again and much louder. There was a moment's
silence. Then a heavy voice:

"Who's there?"

"It's me," was the unhelpful reply.

A man moved to the door again demanding:

"Who's there?"

"It's a friend who wants to join you."

There was some discussion, then the door was cautiously opened. The man inside got a glimpse
of the tall form of the Preacher, let off a savage snarl and oath, and attempted to slam the
door. But he was not quick enough; the Preacher got his foot in and pushed irresistibly. There
were curses from within and others came to help. But the Preacher was too much for them; the
door went back with a clatter and he stood in the middle of the room. The rude log cabin held
five men, three women, and a table on which was a small keg of whiskey and some glasses. The
keg had not yet been opened, and the glasses were empty.

"What do you want here?" growled the biggest of the men, advancing threateningly.

"Sure, I am here to spill that accursed stuff on the ground and hold a prayer meeting in the
hopes of saving your souls," was the answer.

"Get to h--l out of this and mind your own business," he said, fingering an ugly knife he had
snatched from the table.

Hartigan did not move. As the big brute edged in, not at all quickly, for the fight was scarcely
yet on, Hartigan landed a swift football drop kick under the hand that held the knife. The
weapon was dashed up to the ceiling and stuck shivering in the logs, while its owner stumbled
and fell with a growl of pain, one hand hanging helpless. Two other men rushed to the attack.
They had no weapons, and the Preacher man[oe]uvred to take them singly. With two chops and
an undercut he laid them on their backs, and the remaining men refrained from declaring war.

"Sure now," said the Preacher, as he looked calmly around, "I regret to have the meeting open
so unrestful, when it was my intention to start it with a prayer, followed by a hymn with all
of you joining in. But you seemed to want it this way and, of course, I had to humour you.
Now I will begin by pouring out a drink offering on the altar of God."

He stepped toward the keg. It was unopened. He raised it in his hands and dashed it down on
the floor. It bounded up unhurt. Realizing his purpose for the first time, the men gave vent
to savage oaths backed by an assertion of property rights. Then, seeing that he was undeterred,
they set upon him with a rush.

Jim, it must be confessed, found a new joy in that new attack. It gave him a chance to work
off his superabundant energy. The confined space of the cabin was in his favour. He blocked
all attempts to encompass him, while his mighty arms did terrific execution, and when the finish
came it showed the would-be revellers lying around in various positions eloquent of defeat.

"Sure, it's mighty sorry I am, but I have to tend to my job."

Going to the fireplace, and picking up one of the bricks used to support the logs, he smashed
in the head of the keg and spilled the odorous contents on the floor. The final splash he threw
toward the fire, expecting to see it blaze into a blue flame, but it acted as water and the
room was filled with an evil stench. The Preacher knew what it meant; his contemptuous "Humph!"
expressed it all.

"Where are you going?" he demanded, as the tallest of the ruffians moved to the door.

"You mind your own business. I am going home," was the answer.

"Come back and join us, we're going to have a prayer meeting," and Jim stepped over to the door.

"Now get down on your knees, all of ye," and he himself kneeled. The little man and two of
the women followed his example.

"Get down on your knees!" the Preacher thundered to those standing. The big fellow had got
a stick of firewood for a weapon and, despite his crippled right hand, was disposed to fight.

"Oh, ho! shillelah play," chuckled Hartigan, "that's an ould, ould game with me."

He rose and picked up a leg of the table broken off during the struggle. It was not a heavy
club, but it was in skilful hands. There is one move of the shillelah that the best experts
have trouble to parry, that is the direct thrust. The slash right and the slash left, the overhead
or the undercut have a simple answer; but the end-on straight thrust is baffling. Jim knew
this of old, and a moment later the big woodsman was on the floor with a bloody nose, a sense
of shock, and a disposition to surrender.

"Now come, every one of ye, and join in our prayer meeting. Come on," he beckoned to the other
two, "or it will be me duty to knock sense into ye."

And so he gathered that graceless group around him. Kneeling in their midst, he prayed for
help to make them see that he wanted to be their friend, that he was acting for their interests,
that he knew as well as they did the hankering for drink.

"O Lord, you know. And I know that anyway that stuff was not whiskey at all, at all; that it
would not burn in the fire, and I'll bet it would freeze if it were put out of doors"; and
having contributed these expert remarks, he closed with, "Amen."

"And now we will sing a hymn," and he led them in "Come to Jesus." But it was not a success,
so he fell back on the praying, which was his specialty, and more than once his congregation
joined in with an "amen." Sulky Big Pat had to be threatened again, for he was of fighting
stock; but the prayer meeting closed without further hostilities and the orgy had been made
physically impossible. As he rose, Hartigan said in his inimitable way:

"Now, friends, I want to apologize to you all for seeming uncivil, but there are times when
a man has to be a little abrupt, and if I have hurt your feelings or annoyed you in any way
I am very sorry for it, because I'd rather be friends. Let's shake hands before I leave, and
I will be glad to see any of you in church."

Then a strange thing happened. The little man had shaken hands effusively, the big one sulkily,
but there was one there who took the Preacher's hand warmly and in a husky voice said:

"Mr. Hartigan, I want you to know you have made me think different. I am coming to church.
I know you are right." Then turning to a woman by his side: "This is my wife--she feels as I do."

"Thank you for coming to-night," said the woman. "You will pray for us, won't you? We will
try; only it is terribly hard, once you have taken on the habit."

"Sure, it's myself that knows it," said Hartigan. "I've been through it all, I tell you."

There was a brotherly warmth in the Preacher's handclasp and in his words as he turned to go
out in the calm and beautiful blue night. The Black Hills' coyotes howled and Blazing Star
whinnied a mild remonstrance at the long desertion. The Preacher mounted and as he swung lightly
down the wagon trail, he had a sense of joy, of triumph, of uplift that had seldom been his.
Here for the first time he had put his great physical strength to the service of the new life.
It was a consecration, so to speak, of his bodily powers. And overtopping this was another
happiness, which, he was just beginning to realize, completely filled his thoughts these days:
the prospect of crowning each day's adventures by telling them all to Belle.

CHAPTER XVI

The New Insurance Agents

Woman's suffrage was a disturbing question in the West of the '80's and it had not by any means
passed Cedar Mountain by. There was more than one fiery dispute among the "perchers" of Shives's
shop, where Jim was very fond of dropping in. Indeed the smithy was the public forum of the town.

Hartigan had very strong views, of the oldest and most conservative type, on the sphere of
woman--notwithstanding the fact that his mother had been the capable leader of men. He did
not say much about this; but he assumed that the absence of his father was the sole cause of
his mother's dominance.

Shives, being twice as old, was much less certain. He could cite Cleopatra, Catherine of Russia,
Catherine de' Medici, and other familiar names to prove the woman's power; to which Hartigan
replied:

"And a fine moral lot they were! Was ever power put to more devilish use?"

This was a jibe and not an answer. But it caused a laugh, and that always counts in debate.
Then, with singular blindness to the fact that he himself was at the time being guided by a
certain young woman, Jim issued his challenge:

"If you can show me a couple that started fair and square together on equal footing and didn't
end with the man as head and leader in everything to do with fighting the battle of life, I'll
give in--I'm licked."

Two mornings later, Dr. Carson was standing outside his office door, when he heard a quick
stride on the boardwalk and the gay voice of the Preacher singing "Roy's Wife of Aldivallock."

"The top of the morning to ye, Doc," was his cheery greeting; and the doctor answered:

"Say, Jim, come here. I've got a good one for you. This is a brand-new one." They walked down
the boardwalk to the place where most of the offices were and there read on a newly placed
signboard the legend:

"John and Hannah Higginbotham, Insurance Agents."

"How is that?" said Carson, as he lit a cigar.

"Well, I'll be--surprised," was the answer.

As Jim looked in astonishment the door was opened and a dapper little man with a fuzzy red
beard appeared.

"Good morning, gentlemen, good morning!" he said, in a perfectly good Yankee twang. "Can I
do anything for you to-day in my line? Step in, gentlemen; I'm John Higginbotham." They entered
and, behind the desk, sighted a stout woman of medium size, middle age, and moderately good
appearance.

"Hannah, these are two of our fellow townsfolk, calling. Excuse me, gentlemen, I didn't get
your names." He was enlightened and prattled on: "Oh, Reverend Hartigan and Dr. Carson. Good!
Healing for the body and healing for the soul, and my healing is for the estate--happy trinity,
isn't it? Sit down, gentlemen."

"Can we do anything for you in our line?" said the buxom lady behind the desk, in a strong,
deep voice; and now Jim noticed for the first time her square jaw and her keen eye that brightened
as she spoke.

"Not at present, thank you," said Jim. "We are merely making a neighbourly call."

"The fact is," said Dr. Carson, "the thing that stopped us this morning was your new signboard."

"There! There! I told you so; I told you it was good business," said the little man. "The first
thing in commerce is to have a good article and the next is to win the attention of the public.
I felt sure it was a good move."

"You've got the attention of the whole town at one stroke," said Carson. "If you have the wares
to follow it up----"

"Wares! My company is The Merchants' Mutual. It is the----"

Realizing that he had injudiciously turned on a hydrant, Carson said heartily:

"Oh, yes, yes; of course; I should have known. Why, every one knows that The Merchants' Mutual
is one of the companies. How did you come in, by rail or by the trail?"

At this point, Hannah rose and, passing out of the door, gave a momentary glimpse of a kitchen
stove with pots and kettles boiling.

John smiled blandly, raised a flat hand with an oratorical gesture:

"Ah, that is an important question, and bears directly on the signboard. You see, we came from
Bootlebury, Massachusetts. Hannah's father was quite a man in that town, and I worked my way
up till I had a little insurance office of my own and married Hannah. Well" (he didn't say
"well" and he didn't say "wall," but there isn't any in-between way to spell it aright), "if
I'd got all the insurance business in Bootlebury, it would not have been horses and cushions,
but I didn't get half of it, and Hannah says, 'John, I think we'd getter go out West,' for,
somehow, she didn't want to stay in a place where folks said she'd had a 'come down.'

"We'd had about ten years of it, and I had just about come to her way of thinking when her
dad died and left her quite well fixed. An' Hannah she had quite an eye to biz; she worked
at my office desk as much as she did at the cook stove; an' now she says to me, 'Here is where
we get out.'

"Every one was talking about the Black Hills then, and that was why we headed this way. Well,
we figured out that the railway fares from St. Louis 'round to Sidney and north to the Hills
were so much higher than the steamboat fare from St. Louis to Pierre, that we could save enough
to buy a team of ponies and a buckboard at Pierre, and then cross the Plains with the settlers
going in and be ahead by the value of the team, which would be needed in our country business
anyhow."

"Time didn't count?" interrupted Carson.

"Not much; and we wanted to see the country."

"By George! I wish I'd been with ye," said Jim. "If only it had been a saddle trip it would
have been perfect."

"Perfect!" exclaimed the little man; "I wish you could have seen us. The farther we went up
that endless river of mud the worse it seemed; and when we landed at Pierre it did seem the
last of all creation.

"I didn't have much heart to buy the ponies, but Hannah kept with me and never once seemed
to feel discouraged. But when we crossed the river with our outfit and really set out on the
blank, bleak plains, I tell ye, we felt heart-sick, sore, and lonesome--at least, I did."

At this moment Hannah came in from the kitchen and took the lead in conversation.

"Has John been giving you an outline of our policy in the matter of lapsing premiums and residuary
annuities?"

"Now, Hannah," replied John, "I think that is a little too much like business for friendly
callers."

"Business is always in order in the office," was Hannah's retort.

"I understand," said John, "that the Methodists are very strong in Cedar Mountain."

"Well, we think so," answered Hartigan.

"Good," said Higginbotham. "I have always felt that it was wisest to associate myself with
the church that was spiritually strongest. I am not in sympathy with narrow views." He did
not mention the fact that in Bootlebury he had associated himself with the Unitarians for the
same reason.

A loud sizzling in the next room caused Hannah to spring up heavily and return to the kitchen.

Jim was more interested in their venturesome trip across the Plains than in reasons for doctrinal
affiliation, and he steered the conversation by saying:

"How did you come out on the Plains trip?"

And John bubbled on with a mixture of fun, pathos, and frank admiration for his wife that appealed
strongly to both hearers. His gift of language was copious without being varied or clever,
but his homely phrases carried the thought.

"I'll not forget the morning of our journey. It was raining by the bucketfuls. 'Well,' says
I, 'for a semi-arid country this is going some'; and I felt so homesick and sore, I said, 'Hannah,
let's not go any farther'; and Hannah she just looked at me and said, 'See here, John, I've
come out so far to go to the Black Hills and I'm going.' Then, when the weather let up a little,
we started out; and, after a couple of hours we stuck in a muddy creek and were all day getting
across. Next day a couple more gullies just as bad, and the rain came down till ever hole in
the prairie was a pond; and I tell you I wished I'd bought a boat instead of the buckboard.
And the mosquitoes, oh, my! Well, we floundered around about three days and got all our stuff
wet and half spoiled. Then we found we'd missed the way and had to flounder three days back
again. I tell you, I felt pretty much discouraged. Then we saw something a-coming. It turned
out to be a settler going back. He said there was nothing but pond holes and bogs, the mosquitoes
were awful, the boom was bust, and the Sioux on the war path. I felt pretty sick. That was
a finisher; and when that man says, 'You better come back with us,' I was for going. But Hannah,
she just boiled up and she says, 'John Higginbotham, if you want to go back with that bunch
of chicken-hearts, you can go. I'm going to the Black Hills, if I have to go alone.' I tried
to make her see it my way, but she got into the buckboard, gathered up the reins, and headed
for the West. I had to get in behind as best I could. We didn't talk much. We weren't on speaking
terms that day; and, at night, as we sat eating supper, it started to raining worse'n ever,
and I says, 'I wish we'd gone back.'

"'I don't,' she snapped, an' we never spoke till the morning.

"Then she called me to breakfast. I tell you, I never saw such a change. The sun was up and
the sky was clear. In a little while, we were out of the sloughs and had no mosquitoes. Then
we got a bad shake. A band of horsemen came riding right at us. But they turned out to be U.
S. cavalrymen. They put us right on the road, and told us the Indian scare was just fool talk,
and had nothing back of it. After that, all went fine and in two days we were in the Hills.

"I tell you, I felt different as we stood there at our last campfire, and I says, 'Hannah,
you're a wonder. You are the best of the outfit. It was your money we started on. It was your
grit kept me going on when I was for quitting, and you are in every deal I make. You bet I'll
let the world know we are partners.' So that's why that signboard went up. Not a bad ad I reckon,
for no one sees it without taking notice; so, if there's anything in our line you need, let
me know."

As Carson and Hartigan walked down the street, the doctor said: "Well, what do you think of
Woman Suffrage now?"

Hartigan shrugged his big shoulders, gave a comical glance back at the signboard, and replied:

"You've got me!"

It was indeed a poser for Jim; a shock to a deep-set prejudice. Notwithstanding the fact that
his mother had been a woman of power, the unquestioned and able head in a community of men,
he had unconsciously clung to the old idea of woman's mental inferiority. In college he had
had that notion bolstered up with Scripture texts and alleged Christian doctrine.

This was not the time or place, he felt, to discuss the principle of it, and his natural delicacy
would, in any case, have kept him from a free expression; but later, in the blacksmith shop,
that neutral territory of free speech, they had it out. Higginbotham was there and was ready
and able to fight with Scriptural weapons. He pointed out that all the texts quoted, such as:
"Wives be in subjection to your own husbands in everything, etc.," were from St. Paul, who
was believed to have had a painful history in such matters; whereas, St. Peter, admittedly
a far better authority, said: "Likewise, ye husbands, dwell with them, giving honour to the wife."

"Which may or may not be sound doctrine," said John, "but I know my wife brought me out here,
it was her capital that set me up, she has a hand in all business, so why not say so on the
signboard?"

Cedar Mountain had its fill of fun and there were many venerable jokes about "wearing the pants"
and others about a spelling of "hen-pecked." "Wasn't it 'Hannah-pecked' now?" And some there
were, even women, who condemned the innovation as godless; but all of these hostile comments
died away when folk came to know the pair and realize how justly they were represented on the
signboard: "John and Hannah Higginbotham, Insurance Agents."

CHAPTER XVII

Belle Makes a Decision and Jim Evades One

It was late on Wednesday afternoon. Belle was working at the sewing machine in the back room
of the Boyd home when there was a familiar knock at the front door. She was not unprepared
for it and yet she dreaded this inevitable interview. Lowe had been pointedly cold for some
time. He had been to the house only once in the past month and he had made it quite plain that
Hartigan was the objectionable figure in the horizon. Belle realized that their relations had
come to a crisis. She had not admitted frankly to herself what she would do when this talk
took place, but in her heart there was not the slightest doubt.

At the sound of his step and knock she went into the parlour, closing the door into the rear
room to insure some measure of privacy, and then admitted Jack. His greeting had the obvious
air of a man who has been wronged. For a while, with characteristic obliquity, he talked of
his school work. Belle sewed meanwhile, asking occasional questions. After a quarter of an
hour of this the conversation languished. Belle was determined that he should open the subject
himself, and in the awkward pause that ensued she busied herself basting up a lining for her
frock. At last, clearing his throat, Lowe began:

"Belle, I've got something else to say to you."

She looked at him squarely, the direct gaze of her clear, dark eyes in striking contrast with
his close-lidded, shifting glance. He went on:

"I think that you and the new preacher are going too far and it had better stop now."

"Just what do you mean, Jack? What do you accuse me of, exactly?"

From the very beginning of their friendship he had always writhed under the directness of her
mental processes. He was ever for evasion, indirection; she for frank, open dealing in all
things. He tried to retreat.

"I'm not accusing you of anything."

"No, but of something," she replied with a faint smile. "What is it?"

"There's a lot of talk about town--about you and Hartigan. It makes me a laughing stock. If
we weren't engaged----"

Belle interrupted:

"That's just what I want to speak about. I've been wanting to have a frank talk with you for
some time, Jack, and we may as well have it now.

"I have always liked you and you have been awfully attentive and helpful to me. I thought I
was in love with you, but you know that when we had our talk a year ago, I begged you not to
make an announcement and when you insisted on telling a few friends it was agreed that I was
to have a year to decide finally. That was why I never wore your ring." She drew a box from
her breast and held it out to him.

"We have both made a mistake, Jack. I made the worst one when I allowed you to over-persuade
me a year ago; but we are not going to spoil two lives by going on with it."

Lowe's mind was not of particularly fine calibre. For some months, whenever he faced the truth,
he had realized that he would never marry Belle. He was fond of her to the extent possible
in a nature such as his and he was keenly alive to the financial advantage of becoming Boyd's
son-in-law. His past history would not bear close inspection and latterly some of his youthful
vices had come to light and to life. He knew only too well what a marriage into the Boyd family
would do for his fortunes, financially and socially, and a dull rage of several weeks' nursing
burned in him against Hartigan. As he took his hat to depart he was foolish enough to speak
what was in his mind. He uttered a silly attack on the Preacher. It moved Belle and brought
the colour to her face. His bitter comments on their own relations had not called forth any
response from her, but this shaft went home, as he meant it should. She controlled herself
and merely remarked:

"I would not say that; it might get to his ears."

And so he departed.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was on that same afternoon that Hartigan had a new and, to him, terrifying experience in
the dangerous world of the emotions.

He had ridden forth to make a pastoral call at the Hoomer homestead, out on the plain five
miles northeast of Cedar Mountain. When first he glimpsed the house among the low log stables,
there were two women in sight; when he came to the door and entered, there was but one, the
mother. Half an hour later, the daughter, Lou-Jane, appeared arrayed for conquest. She was
undeniably handsome, in spite of a certain coarseness that made Hartigan subtly uneasy, though
he could not have told why. She was of the rare vigorous type that is said to have appeared
in Ireland after many survivors of the great Armada were washed ashore on the rugged western
coast. The mingling of the Irish and Spanish blood in her had resulted in black eyes, black
eyebrows, and red, or golden-red hair, combined with a clear, brilliant Irish complexion. She
was lively, energetic, rather clever, and tremendously taken with the new preacher.

Jim was naturally shy with women, as most big men seem to be, and the masterful Lou-Jane smote
him with utter confusion. She prattled on about the tea, about the church, the Rev. Dr. Jebb,
the local people, the farm, national politics, dry-farming, horses, cows and alfalfa, with
the definite purpose of finding out his interests. Getting the best response on the topic of
horses, she followed it up.

"You must come and see my pony. He's a beauty. I got first prize on him as girl rider at the
fair last year. I'm so glad you like horses."

She laid her hand on his arm a dozen times to guide him here or there; she took his hand at
last and held on, to his utter embarrassment, long after he had helped her over a fence, and
looked disappointed when she got no flirtatious response. She led out her saddle pony and laughingly
said:

"Here, give me a hand."

Grasping her raised foot, he lifted her with a sweep to the pony's bare back.

"My, you're strong," was her flattering comment, and she swung the hackima and loped the pony
round the field and back to the stable, delighted to see in his eye a frank glow of admiration
for her skill.

"Will you lift me down?" she said merrily; not that she had the least need of help, but she
liked to feel those strong arms about her; and as he did so, she made herself quite unnecessarily
limp and clinging.

Jim did not usually lack words, but Lou-Jane was so voluble that he was completely silenced.
At the stable, where Ma Hoomer was milking, Lou-Jane delayed for a moment to whisper: "Stay
here till I come for you."

Then she tripped on with Jim at her heels. As they entered the house Hartigan looked at his watch.

"Now please don't hurry," said Lou-Jane. "Ma'll be back in a few minutes, then we'll have a
cup of tea. Sit here; you'll find it more comfortable," and she motioned to a sofa. 

Tired of all these fruitless attempts, I ended where I ought to have begun: I went to Carpentras.
But it was too late: the Anthophora had finished her work; and I
did not succeed in seeing anything new.

During the course of the year I learnt from Léon Dufour,[2] to whom
I had spoken of the Sitares, that the tiny creature which he had found
on the Andrenæ[3] and described under the generic name of Triungulinus,
was recognized later by Newport[4] as the larva of a Meloe, or Oil-beetle.

Now it so happened that I had found a few Oil-beetles in the cells of the same Anthophora that
nourishes the Sitares.

Could there be a similarity of habits between the two kinds of insects? This idea threw a sudden light
for me upon the subject; but I had plenty of time in which to mature
my plans: I had another year to wait.

Fabre often refers to him as the Wizard of the Landes. Cf.

The first Bee to appear, an Osmia, is dropped alive into a glass jar containing a few of these
larvæ; and after a lapse of some fifteen minutes I inspect them through
the pocket-lens.

Five Sitares are embedded in the fleece of the thorax. It is done, the problem's solved! The larvæ
of the Sitares, like those of the Oil-beetles, cling like grim death to the fleece of their
generous host and make him carry them into the cell. Ten times over I repeat the experiment with
the various Bees that come to plunder the lilac flowering outside
my window and in particular with male Anthophoræ; the result is still
the same: the larvæ embed themselves in the hair of the Bees' thorax.

But after so many disappointments one becomes distrustful and it
is better to go and observe the facts upon the spot; besides, the
Easter holidays fall very conveniently and afford me the leisure for
my observations.

 It was Hartigan's nature always to
see the humorous side of things, and his racy description of the big man with the knife, down
on his knees with one eye on the door and the other on the Preacher, was irresistible, much
funnier than the real thing. It gave her a genuine thrill, a woman's pleasure in his splendid
physical strength.

"Sure," he said with his faint delicious brogue, "it was distasteful to have to annoy them,
but there are times when one has to do what he doesn't like."

Then he proceeded to a graphic account of the second ruffian smelling the palms of his hands
and squinting through his fingers, praying for grace with his lips and for a club with his heart.

"I don't know what Dr. Jebb will say," she remarked at last, "but it seems to me we must judge
by results in this case."

Hypocrite that she was! Had she not that very week denounced the opportunist doctrine that
the end justifies the means? But in her delighted eyes and glowing interest Jim found a vast
reward.

Dr. Jebb was human and discreet. He smiled and said little about the energetic methods of his
assistant; and when next Sunday Charlie Bylow and his wife appeared in church and later joined
the group on the anxious seat, he felt that the matter was happily ended as it had oddly begun.

Exactly four weeks after the strenuous prayer meeting word reached the Preacher in a rather
pointed way that a keg of the "pizen juice" had arrived on the evening train and was to be
carried at once to Pat Bylow's. Hartigan mounted his racer and sped thitherward at nightfall.
A half mile from Pat's house was Charlie's, and at the door was the owner, apparently expecting
to see him--though this circumstance did not impress Hartigan.

"Can I do anything to help?" he asked.

Hartigan shook his head, laughed lightly, and rode on. At Pat's shanty he tied his horse to
the fence, stepped to the door, knocked, and, without waiting, went in. A woman's voice shrilled:

"Pat, here's that ---- preacher again."

There were other voices, male and female, in the lean-to kitchen. Pat came in and glared at
the intruder. There was a rising fury in his manner, but no evidence of drink.

"What do you want?" he asked.

"Well, to be frank with you," said Hartigan, "I have reason for suspecting an unhelpful indulgence
is planned here for to-night, and I was hoping that I might persuade you to reconsider it beforehand.
And sure we don't want to get agitated, and I don't want to use language that might sound like
disapproval."

He glanced around. There was no sight of any spree in prospect. A glimpse of the kitchen showed
only the preparations for an ordinary meal, and Hartigan wondered whether or not there had
been a mistake. Could it be that he was the butt of a practical joke?

Pat was sulkily waiting, not knowing just what to say, when voices were heard outside and heavy
steps; then the door opened and in came three men, the first carrying under his arm a barrel-shaped
bundle. The presence of the Preacher was obviously disconcerting to the new-comers.

"Gimme that," growled Pat. He seized the keg and was marching off with it when Hartigan strode
over in front of him.

"Hold on, Pat, let me see that."

Bylow exploded into a torrent of abusive profanity. Some of those present had been witnesses
of the previous affair, and realizing what the pastoral visit might mean, they added their
voices to the uproar. The language was emphatic rather than concise. The women, too, gave free
rein to their tongues, but their observations reflected on their male escorts more harshly
than they did on any one or anything else.

However puzzled Hartigan might be by the complexities of the female mind, the mental processes
of the unlettered male were quite familiar to him and he showed his comprehension by a simple
challenge.

"Now, boys, I don't want to seem thoughtless or indelicate, but I want you to know that I can
lick the whole bunch of you with one hand tied behind my back and the other in a sling. Not
that I have any intention of doing it, and I apologize to the ladies for mention of the subject,
but it may help us to an understanding. If you have not yet gathered my meaning, I will put
it simpler. I am here to stop this spree before it begins."

At this moment there was a light shuffling step outside and the door swung back revealing the
small, familiar figure of Jack Lowe. A quick, meaning look and some sort of indistinguishable
signal passed between Lowe and Pat, whereupon the latter at once placed the keg on the table.

"How do you do, Mr. Hartigan?" said Lowe. "I think we are here for the same purpose."

"Maybe so," said Jim dryly, "I don't know. I'm here to remove temptation from our friends,
and before I leave I mean to spill that cursed stuff on the floor."

"You are right," said Lowe, "absolutely right. Pat, let me have that keg," and the schoolteacher
proceeded to hammer around the bung, in the way of the orthodox bung-starter. There were murmurs
and strong words, but he went on while Hartigan stood guard. The bung came loose, he lifted
it out, and put his nostrils to the hole.

"That's the real stuff, just as it dropped from the quill. Smell that, Mr. Hartigan. Ain't
that the real magollyon? But all the same here she goes." He tipped the keg a little and some
liquor spilled out.

"See that? You get the gold? I tell you, Mr. Hartigan, that green rot-gut is poison, but you
can tell when it's real by the shine. If it is whiskey it shines yellow like corn, if it is
vitriol it shines green." He took a glass and filled it. "See the gold, and it smells like
corn tossel." He put it to his lips. "That's what puts heart in a man, and makes him forgive
his worst enemy.

"But here she goes." He spilled a little more on the ground. Then:

"You know, Mr. Hartigan, I am wholly in sympathy with this visit of yours, but I don't go as
far as you do. I've been talking to Pat and he's a good sport. He realizes that you put up
a fine fight that other time and that you cleaned them up single-handed. He doesn't want any
further unpleasantness, but he doesn't see what right you have to keep him and his friends
from using a moderate amount of this keg. Is that your idea, Pat?"

"An' what's the matter with it," growled Pat. "Why shouldn't I have one or two drinks? No man
gets drunk on that."

"There you are," said Lowe, turning to Hartigan, "that's in reason. Why not have a drink all
round and then talk it over?"

Hartigan was frankly puzzled by the turn of affairs. It seemed to be an offer of peace, after
a fashion, but he could not fit Lowe into the scheme of things. He tried to read what was going
on behind the schoolteacher's shifty eyes, but the face was a mask. At last he said:

"If these men and women," and Hartigan let his eyes travel over the faces about him, "could
have stopped with one or two drinks I wouldn't be here now. Ye take one or two, but that is
only the beginning. I know what drink is; I've been through it all, I tell ye, and there's
no stopping if it gets the hold on ye."

"Leave it to the d--d preachers and there wouldn't be nothin' left to do in life," said Pat
with a contemptuous sneer.

"Come now," said Lowe, eager to prevent hostilities. "You wouldn't object to liquor if nobody
took too much, would you, Mr. Hartigan?"

"No," said Jim with a grim smile, "but I'm not to be taken in by the plausibilities of the
Devil. That keg is going to be emptied."

"I'm with you to the finish there," said Lowe, "but what harm is there in filling these small
glasses so"; he emptied a moderate draught into a row of tumblers set out upon the table.

"If Pat is willing to meet you half way and see this keg emptied on the floor, you wouldn't
refuse a small drink with him in his own house, would you?"

Hartigan hesitated. He could not convince himself that the offer was genuine. And yet if he
actually saw, with his own eyes, the keg emptied of its contents, what trick could there be?
It seemed churlish to refuse. Suppose the offer were made in good faith, by not refusing that
which in the male code is the sign of brotherhood and equality, he might secure an influence
for good with the elder Bylow. And Lowe seemed to sense the thought, for he said, "If you take
just a taste with these men now, all will come to hear you preach next Sunday. Won't you, boys?"
And there was a grunt of assent. "All right; it's a bargain."

Jim was actually weighing the proposition--his old craving for drink was not by any means eradicated.
The sight of the liquor and the smell roused an appetite that only an iron will had subdued.
As he stood uncertain, debating, Lowe said, "Hold on; we're a glass short. Never mind, I'll
find one"; and he hastened back into the lean-to kitchen and returned with a glass, which was
partly concealed by his hand till it was filled with whiskey. Then he said, "If it was 'pizen
juice' I wouldn't let any one touch it; but this is the simple clear whiskey, as you can prove
for yourself. I wish we could send this to the hospital."

He offered it to Hartigan, who smelled it. Then Lowe said, "Well, here's to the empty keg."

The seductive liquor was potent in his nostrils, even there it had stimulation; and Hartigan,
acting on a sudden impulse, drained the glass, as the others drank in silence.

There said Lowe, "You see it is the mildest of the mild; it wouldn't hurt a child." And he
prattled away of truth and soberness, so that the potion should have ample freedom for its
work; till the planned and subtle mixture should have time to dethrone Hartigan's reason, blind
his spirit, and unhinge his will. The ancient fury in his hot young blood was all too ready
to be aroused. Without a word, Lowe filled the glass again and Jim, no longer his best self,
but dazed and reckless, drank with all the rest; then soon threw all restraint aside; and in
the bacchanalian orgy that followed fast and filled the night, he was the stable-yard rowdy
once again--loud and leading--but here let the curtain fall--draw down the thickest, blackest veil.

CHAPTER XIX

The Day of Reckoning

The sun was high next day when the door of Pat Bylow's abode was opened, and a man entered.
The scene that met his eyes is better undescribed, but to him it gave no shock. He came expecting
to see it. In his hand he carried a tin pail. There were men and women lying about the floor.
He stepped over them toward a tall form in soiled black clothes and knelt beside it. Pouring
some water on a cloth he laid it on the pale forehead. The prostrate man opened his eyes and
groaned.

"Mr. Hartigan," said the other. "It's me. It's Charlie Bylow. Won't you be after having a drink
of water?"

Hartigan raised himself on his elbow, peered out of his bloodshot eyes, and drank eagerly.
The cup was three times emptied.

"You better come over to my shanty and go to bed," said Charlie seriously. The Preacher groaned:

"Oh! God what have I done? What have I done?" He clutched his throbbing brow with both hands,
as he rose and shakily followed Charlie.

"Oh! fool that I am. Oh, God! Ruined. All is ruined. I wish I were dead!" he exclaimed. "Oh!
God forgive me."

As they passed the fence where Blazing Star had been hitched, Hartigan stopped and stared.
Charlie said:

"It's all right, Mr. Hartigan, I took care of him. He is in the stable."

Coming to Bylow's house, Jim passed the entrance and went on to the stable. With trembling
hands he opened the door and hesitated. He half expected Blazing Star to spurn and disown him.
He was prepared for any and every humiliation, but the long, joyous neigh that greeted him
was a shock, and a help.

"Oh! Blazing Star, if you only knew, you would not even look at me."

Charlie took the Preacher by the arm and led him to the house.

"Here, Mr. Hartigan, take off your clothes and go to bed. I will give you a wet towel for your
head and, by and by, I will bring you some coffee."

"Oh! God be merciful, or strike me dead," and Jim broke down in an agony of remorse. "This
is the end. All I hoped for gone. I don't want to live now."

"Mr. Hartigan, sure now I know how you feel. Ain't I been through it? But don't be after making
plans that are rash when you ain't just yourself. Now go to bed and rest awhile," and his kind
Irish heart was wrung as he looked on the utter degradation of the manly form before him, and
the shocking disfigurement of the one-time handsome face. Charlie and his wife left Hartigan
alone. They shut the door and Charlie went back to his brother's shanty to help the other victims
of the orgy.

Jim tossed around uneasily, winning snatches of sleep, groaning, talking, abasing himself.

"Oh, Belle!" he moaned aloud. "Will you ever look at me again? Oh, God! And me a preacher."

Cedar Mountain was not so big but that every one knew everybody else's business; and Mary Bylow
understood when she heard the name "Belle." But she didn't know just what to do. After an hour
she again heard him.

"Oh! Belle, Belle, what will you say?"

Taking the hot coffee from the stove, Mrs. Bylow knocked at the door and went in.

"Take this, it will make you feel better."

She hoped he would talk, but he didn't. He only thanked her feebly. Then Charlie came back
from his brother's shanty. He had remembered that, it being Sunday, the Preacher would be missed
and he saddled his horse to set out for Cedar Mountain. As he left, his wife came out and said:

"While you are there, drop a hint to Belle Boyd," and Charlie nodded.

Arriving at Dr. Jebb's, Charlie explained the case to the pastor without detail:

"Sure, Mr. Hartigan had a little accident at our corner last night and sprained his ankle.
My wife is nursing him, but he won't be able to preach to-day."

"Oh, dear! Oh, dear! Well, it is all right, I will take both services," and the blind and gentle
old man turned to his books.

Then Bylow rode to the Boyd home. Here, he realized, was a much more difficult job. But he
was determined to go into no details. It was Belle who answered his knock. Charlie began:

"My wife told me to tell you that Mr. Hartigan got hurt last night. He is at our house. He
won't be in town to-day."

"What? Did he interfere in a spree?"

"Yes."

"Is he shot?"

"No."

"Is he wounded?"

"No, not exactly."

"What is the matter?"

"Only a general shakeup, he had a bad fall," and Bylow moved uneasily.

It was a simple matter to bluff a simple old clergyman, but it was another thing altogether
to mislead an alert young woman. Belle knew there was something wrong--something more and different
from what she had been told.

"Is the doctor with him?"

"No."

"I will get the doctor and come at once."

"No, I wouldn't; at least, not till morning."

Bylow's manner roused Belle all the more to prompt action. Seeing that all his explanations
made things worse, Charlie abruptly left, mounted his broncho, and went "rockity rockity" as
the pony's heels went "puff, puff" on the dusty trail around the hill and away.

The doctor was not to be found that morning and Belle found it hard to await his return. In
the meantime, some strange rumour must have reached the town for in Sunday-school Belle met
Eliza Lowe, the recently arrived sister of the schoolteacher. The look on her face, the gleam
in her eye, were unmistakable. She had not yet learned of her brother's part in the affair.
Belle found herself avoiding the sister's gaze.

As the hours passed the conviction deepened in Belle that there was something seriously wrong;
she could feel it in the air. It was something more than an accident to Hartigan. There was
the indefinable shadow of shame about it. The oppression became unbearable and on leaving Sunday-school,
she went down to the doctor's house. He had just got in from a case near Fort Ryan and was
eating a belated meal. Belle went straight to the point:

"Dr. Carson, I want you to take me at once to Bylow's Corner."

"Why?"

"There's something wrong. Mr. Hartigan is in serious trouble. I don't believe that he has fallen
from his horse as they say. I want to know the truth."

Her face was pale, her mouth was set. The doctor looked keenly at her a moment and then, comprehending,
said:

"All right, I will"; and in ten minutes the mudstained buckboard with a fresh horse in it was
speeding over the foot of Cedar Mountain on the trail to Bylow's.

       *       *       *       *       *

While Belle was fretting under the delay and marshalling her forces for the trip to the Corner,
Hartigan lay in the quiet Bylow cabin and under the influence of cold water, coffee, and a
more collected mind, gradually acquired some degree of composure. He had risen and dressed
and was sadly musing on the wreck of all his life which that one fiery sip had brought about,
when the thought of Blazing Star came to him. He went eagerly to the stable and as he rubbed
the animal down he found help in the physical action. He hammered the currycomb on a log to
clean it before putting it in the box, then gazing to the eastward along the trail that climbed
around the shoulder of Cedar Mountain, he saw a buckboard approaching. In the Black Hills one
identifies his visitor by his horse, and Jim recognized the Carson outfit. Sitting beside the
doctor was a woman in a light-coloured dress with a red parasol raised above her. It smote
him as no man's fist had ever done. He turned into the stable, put saddle and bridle on Blazing
Star, swung to the seat, gave rein to the willing beast and, heading away from Cedar Mountain
on the Deadwood Trail, went bounding, riding, stricken, too hard hit and shamed to meet the
eyes of the woman whose praise he had come to value as the best approval he might hope to win.

The doctor's buckboard came to the door, tied up, and the two occupants went in.

"Where is your patient, Mrs. Bylow?"

The woman pointed to the bedroom door, went to it, knocked, opened it, and finding the room
empty said:

"He was here a few minutes ago. I expect he is out to the stable."

Belle sat down. The nervous strain of the past hours was telling on her. She felt unstrung
and vaguely depressed.

The doctor and Mary Bylow went to the stable. The empty stall, with no sign of saddle, bridle,
or preacher, were enough. They returned to the house.

In answer to Belle's look the doctor made a gesture, and said simply:

"Gone."

"Where?"

The doctor shook his head and pointed northward.

"Please tell me all about it, Mrs. Bylow," said Belle.

"There is times to tell lies," said Mary naively, "but this ain't. I'll tell you the whole
truth," and she did in a quivering voice, while tears ran from her eyes.

"Trapped, trapped," was Belle's only comment. "Where do you suppose he went?"

"Not to Cedar Mountain," said Carson, "that's sure. No one passed us."

Charlie Bylow, coming into the cabin, heard the doctor's last comment.

"He was heading due north and going hard when last we saw him," was his contribution.

"Dr. Carson, he's headed for Deadwood, and I'm going after him to bring him back." Belle stood
up with sudden decision. The need for action once more present, all her strength responded.

The doctor shook his head. "I don't think you should go. You know what all the town would say."

"You are going with me," was the answer.

"When?"

"Right now."

"Better go home first."

"And have a fight with my folks? No, no! We go now. I have an aunt in Deadwood, you know!"

"It's forty-five miles, and we can't get there till midnight, even if my horse holds out."

"We may overtake him before that," said Belle, though she knew quite well they would not, for
Hartigan would ride like a madman.

It had not been difficult to enlist Carson's sympathies. A sincere friendship had sprung up
between the boyish preacher and himself and their total dissimilarity had made them congenial.
Carson was amused in his quiet way to note how exactly Belle was moving as he thought best
and surest, so now he merely added:

"Deadwood it is," and with a farewell word to the Bylows they were off.

CHAPTER XX

The Memorable Trip to Deadwood

It was a long, hard journey, and it was one o'clock in the morning before they reached Deadwood.
Every public house that could get a license to sell liquor announced itself as a "hotel." Those
few that could not, made a virtue of their failure and flaunted a sign, "Temperance House."
The "wet houses" were on the main gulch, the "dry" ones in off nooks, or perched on breezy
hills. To the best of these latter the doctor drove, had the luck to find the owner still on
duty, and secured a room for himself. Then they drove to the home of Belle's aunt, Mrs. Collins.
One has to take a hotel on its rules; but a relative may be called up and inconvenienced at
any time.

"Well, Auntie, it's Belle Boyd. I want you to take care of me till the morning. I will tell
you all about it later," this to the inquiring head that emerged from an upper window. So Belle
was left and the doctor went to his hotel.

Up very early next morning, Belle went at once to the stable of the Temperance House. Yes,
there he was, Blazing Star, in all his beauty. Then she went into the hotel and mounted guard
in the little parlour. Dr. Carson came down and was sent to sit out of doors. At length the
sound of the foot she awaited came from the stairs and she heard the landlady say:

"There's some one in the parlour waiting for you." For a moment there was no sound; then the
footsteps approached.

Belle was at the window looking out, partly hidden by the cheap lace curtains. As the Preacher
entered, she turned fully toward him. Her back was to the light and he did not immediately
perceive her. Then with a gasp:

"Belle!" and, sinking into a chair, he covered his face with his hands.

She went to him, laid her hand on his shoulder, and stood there in silence. The great broad
shoulders began to shake under that soft touch. There was no sound uttered for long, then,
brokenly, his one refrain: "Oh, Belle!"

She sat down beside him, and took his hand--the first time she had ever done so--and waited
in silence.

He wanted to tell her all, but found no words.

She said, "Never mind that now. Tell me what you are here for."

He tried again but in a wild, incoherent way. The sum of it all was that he was "ruined, degraded,
and lost. He would go down to the Big Cheyenne and get a job as a cowboy."

"Now listen, Jim," she said. "You have made a bad mistake; but a man may make one big, bad
mistake and still be all right. It is the man that goes on making a little mistake every day
that is hopeless."

There was a long pause. Then she continued: "What is it you of all people admire most in a
man? Is it not courage to see things through, no matter how black they look?"

In his then frame of mind Hartigan had expected drunkenness to be singled out as the worst
of all sins; there was a ray of comfort in this other thought; he nodded and grunted an inarticulate
assent.

"Jim, I don't doubt your courage. I know you too well, believe in you too much. I want you
to drop the idea of the Big Cheyenne. Turn right around and go back to Cedar Mountain at once;
and the sooner you get there the easier it will be."

He shook his head, and sat as before, his face buried in his hands. "I--cannot--do--it." He
forced out the words.

"Jim Hartigan cannot--isn't brave enough?" she asked, her voice a little tremulous with sudden
emotion.

In all his life, he had never been charged with cowardice. It stung. Of all things he most
despised cowardice, and here it was, brought squarely home to him. He writhed under the thought.
There was a dead silence in the little parlour.

Then Belle spoke: "Is this the only answer I am to have--after coming so far?" she asked in
a low voice.

Oh, blind, stupid, cowardly fool that he was! He had not thought of that. How much was she
braving for him! He was rated a man of courage among his friends, yet now he was yielding to
miserable cowardice.

Then his impulsive nature responded. He blurted out: "Belle, I will do anything for you; I
will do anything you tell me to." It was an unconditional surrender, and the wise victor gave
the honours of war to the vanquished by changing the subject.

"Then come to breakfast," she said in a lighter tone and led him to Aunt Collins's house, whither
the doctor had already gone.

A day's rest, a forty-mile ride in the wind, a change of scene, good friends, a buoyant disposition,
a flush of youth, and Belle, absorbed in all he did and said--who would not respond to such
a concentration of uplifting forces?

Hartigan's exuberance returned. His colour was back in his cheeks. His eyes sparkled and his
wit sparkled, too. He won the heart of Mrs. Collins. She said he was "the beautifullest man
she had ever seen." Even John Collins, a plough- and wagon-dealer by trade, was impressed with
the mental gifts and manly appearance of the young preacher, and Belle knew that the thing
she had set out for was won.

Instead of discussing plans she announced them as if they were settled. The doctor wished to
stay a day or two in Deadwood, but that did not suit Belle at all. She was quite clear about
it. Her aunt must drive back with her at once. The doctor and the Preacher must come, too,
but arrive a little later in Cedar Mountain. So they boarded their buckboards, waved good-bye,
and set their faces to the south.

The sun shone as it knows how in Dakota. The great pine-clad hills were purple in the lovely
morning haze as the little party left Deadwood that day on the buffalo trail for Cedar Mountain.
The doctor drove first in his buckboard, not without misgivings, for the good horse had had
little rest since that forty-five mile drive. Next came the horseman on the gold-red horse
that men turned to look after. Last, the prairie buckboard of the house of Collins with Aunt
Anna driving and Belle at her side.

The prairie larks sang from low perches or soared a little way in the air to tell the world
how glad they were on that bright summer morning. The splendour of the hills was on all things,
and Jim on Blazing Star was filled with the glad tonic. For five miles they ambled along, and
when the doctor stopped at a watering place--he had been told to stop there--the others caught
up with him. Hereupon there was a readjustment, and their next going found the Collins rig
leading with Blazing Star behind, and Belle with Hartigan in the second buckboard.

That was a drive of much consequence to two of the party. In that second buckboard the fates
laid plans, spun yarns, and rearranged many things. Hartigan opened his heart and life. He
told of his mother, of his happy childhood; of his losses; of his flat, stale, unprofitable
boyhood; of Bill Kenna and his "word as a man"; of his own vow of abstinence, kept unbroken
till he was eighteen. He gave it all with the joyous side alone in view, and when a pathetic
incident intruded, the pathos was in the things, not in the words of the narrator. The man
had a power of expression that would have made a great journalist. His talk was one continuous
entertainment, and lasted unbroken to the half-way house, where they were to stay an hour for
rest and food.

How sweet it is to tell one's history to a woman who takes in every word as of large importance!
How pleasant it is to confess to a keen and sympathetic hearer. The twenty-five miles passed
far too soon. It was short, but long enough for large foundations to be laid.

Belle was only twenty-two, but hers was a wise head. Hartigan had spoken freely about himself
and thus had conferred in some large sort a right to advise. She had deliberately constructed
a new mood for his thoughts, so that the horrors of the Bylow cabin were forgotten. The questions
now for him and for her were, how to set him right with the church, and how begin all over
again. Hartigan's idea was to go openly before the whole congregation with a humble apology,
and publicly promise to abstain from drink forever. Belle vetoed this emphatically.

"Never rub your head in the mud," she said. "You make your peace with God first, then with
Dr. Jebb, and the deacons. Pay no attention to any one else. There will be some talk for a
while, but it will die away.

"You don't know the Black Hills as I do, Jim. People out here don't take things quite so seriously
as eastern folk. Many a western preacher carries a flask of brandy as snakebite antidote or
chill cure. Not long ago I heard of a minister up north who was held for horse-stealing. Yes,
more than once. And how he explained it, I don't know: but he is preaching yet. I don't mean
to make light of these things, Jim, but I want to keep you from a kind of reparation which
will be more of a shock to the people than what they now know. We must have some sense of proportion.
Since there was no public scandal, you will find that the whole matter will be overlooked."

Belle was right; he knew she was; and later events proved it.

Most men propose when they find "the one woman"; but some don't. Many marriages take place
without any formal proposal. The man and the woman come together and discover such sympathy,
such need of each other, that they assume much that remains unspoken. Nothing was said of love
or marriage on that journey from Deadwood, but James Hartigan and Belle Boyd were conscious
of a bond that happily and finally became complete. Thenceforth he made no move without consulting
her; thenceforth she had no plans in which he was not more than half.

They were ten miles from Cedar Mountain when the last change was made. Those who noted their
arrival some while later saw Belle ride up the Main Street with her aunt, and tie up at her
father's door. Twenty minutes later Hartigan rode beside the doctor's rig to his home, at the
other side of the town.

CHAPTER XXI

The Ordeal

Jim went at once to Dr. Jebb's to report. Mrs. Jebb opened the door, greeted him with a hearty
handshake, and was more than usually cordial. Dr. Jebb was kind, but embarrassed. He offered
Jim a chair and began nervously:

"There was a rumour--there--that is--we missed you on Sunday."

Jim, with characteristic directness, said: "Doctor, I'll tell you all about it." Just then
there was a timid knock and Mrs. Jebb reappeared. "May I be present, Jim?" she said. "I understand
that you have something to talk about, and you know, you were always my boy."

Dr. Jebb looked puzzled. Jim said: "If I can't trust you, who is there left to trust?" And
then told the story of his fall. He painted himself not quite so black as he might have done
the day before, but black enough.

Dr. Jebb looked terribly worried and distressed. "I don't know what to say," he kept repeating.
"All my heart is with you, but my judgment condemns you. I don't know what to say."

Then Mrs. Jebb spoke. "Now, Josiah, you know perfectly well that your affections always were
a safer guide than your judgment. There was no bad intention on the part of the sinner--for
we are all sinners--this was just an unfortunate accident, and Jim shows in every possible
way his regret. There remains the Cerocoma.

Any lingering doubts may be dispelled: by good fortune, a friend of
mine, Dr. Beauregard, who is preparing a masterly work upon the Blister-beetles,
had some pseudochrysalids of Schreber's Cerocoma in his possession.



"As long as you don't make it public by bringing it before the church," said Mrs. Jebb, "all
right."

Thus it was that Dr. Jebb sent out a notice, to such of the deacons as he could not see personally,
that a meeting was to be held at his house that night.

In the same afternoon another interview took place in Cedar Mountain. School-trustee Higginbotham
was sitting in his office when the schoolteacher came up the boardwalk and into the insurance
office.

"Hello, Jack."

"Hello, John"; and the visitor sat down. Higginbotham glanced at him and noticed that his face
was drawn and his eyes "like holes burnt in a blanket." His fingers trembled as he rolled a
cigarette.

"Say, John," Lowe began nervously, "in case any rumour gets around that the Preacher and I
were a little reckless at Bylow's, you can contradict it. At least there's nothing in it as
far as I am concerned. I think the Preacher must have taken some before I arrived. He showed
the effects, but not much."

"Hm," said Higginbotham. "You got there late?"

"Yes, you see we--that is, both of us--went there to stop that spree--and we did, in a way,
but things got a little mixed."

"How was that?"

"Well, I went there to help him and I did what I could for him, but they had had some already.
We spilled the keg on the floor and the fumes were pretty strong and affected him a little.
Didn't amount to much. I did what I could. It was strong enough to affect me--unpleasantly,
too. I thought I'd just let you know in case there was anything said about it."

As soon as he was gone, Hannah appeared. Apparently, she had overheard the conversation. "Well,
did you catch on?"

"Partly; how did it strike you?"

"I think he is trying to save his own skin by dragging in the Preacher."

"I think so, too; but all the same, I won't use his story if it can be dispensed with. The
less we dig into this thing the better."

A little later the notice came from Dr. Jebb, inviting Deacon Higginbotham to a meeting at
his house that evening, for important business. As he walked across the village Charlie Bylow
stepped out from a dark corner near Dr. Jebb's house.

"Say, Deacon," he began, "I've been waiting to see you. I know what is on to-night. I want
you to know it was a put-up job. It was the schoolteacher worked it. The stuff was doped all
right. The Preacher went there to stop it as he did the other time, but they fooled him and
trapped him."

"Yes, I thought so," said the little deacon, "and how was it worked?"

"Well, I don't just exactly know. I haven't been on good terms with my brother since I joined
the church, so I don't go to his house any more; but I heard some talk about its being the
'slickest thing ever.' I know the Preacher went there to stop it and that they trapped him
and that it was Jack Lowe did it."

"Will you go before the deacons of the church and tell them that--if it is necessary?"

"No," replied Bylow uneasily; "at least I don't want to go before any meeting. I only know
that's right; that's the way it happened; and I don't want any one to blame Mr. Hartigan."
Here Charlie abruptly ended and went away.

Higginbotham turned back to his house. Hannah listened with the keenest attention and then
said: "It's easy to straighten it all out. I'll see Belle and tell her to go to Jim at once
and keep him from talking. You know what he is when he gets going. He'll talk too much and
spoil it all." Thus these two loyal friends laid plans to screen him.

At Jebb's house, Higginbotham took the earliest occasion to warn Jim.

"Now don't talk. Simply answer one or two questions when asked and as briefly as possible.
'Yes' or 'No' is enough. You know we've got to satisfy the old Deacon Blight crowd somehow."
And Jim promised to obey. 

I therefore proceed to give it as briefly as possible, not, however, omitting any material points.

"The
Irish word Domnach, which is pronounced Dona, means the Lord's day,
or the first day in the week, sanctified or consecrated to the service
of the Lord.

 Before he had more than outlined the facts, Higginbotham jumped up:

"Dr. Jebb, you have alluded to a rumour. I call it a shameful fabrication, with no basis in
fact. I have made a thorough investigation and am prepared, with two reliable witnesses, to
prove that Mr. Hartigan went to the Bylow cabin to prevent a disgraceful spree, as he did once
before. They had prepared by getting a keg of whiskey. This liquid sin, if I may so call it,
Mr. Hartigan spilled on the floor; unfortunately, it was in a small, close cabin and the fumes
affected his head so that he was temporarily ill. These are the facts; and to prove them I
have two reliable witnesses. Call in Charlie Bylow and John Lowe." He looked with a pretense
of expectation toward the door; getting no response he said: "Humph, not arrived yet. Well,
we won't wait. In the meantime, I must say that to my mind altogether too much has been made
of this accident and I am satisfied to dismiss the subject if the rest of the deacons consent."

"No, I don't consent; I don't think we should," said Deacon Blight. "We can't afford to have
a scandal about our spiritual leader. Let's prove it or disprove it right now."

And, acting on the majority vote, Dr. Jebb called Jim Hartigan to appear. Dr. Jebb was supposed
to be chairman, but Higginbotham was irrepressible.

"I want to ask one or two questions," he called out; and, without waiting for permission, he
began: "Now, Mr. Hartigan, I understand that you went to the Bylow Corner last Saturday night
to prevent a whiskey spree, as we know you have done before; that in some way the fumes of
the liquor entered your head and so overpowered you that you were ill afterward; and that it
was a painful surprise to you, as one well known to be a teetotaller. Isn't that so?"

"Well, yes," said Jim, in some perplexity; "but it was this way----"

"Never mind the way of it," said Higginbotham emphatically. Then, turning to the others: "I
don't see that we need go any further."

"Hold on, hold on," said Deacon Blight; "I'd like to ask one or two questions. You admit being
under the influence of liquor at Bylow's?"

"Yes," was the reply.

"Were you ever under the influence of liquor before?"

"I was."

"Once, or more than once?"

"More than once," said Jim. He would have said "many times" but for a scowl from Higginbotham.

"Oh, ho!" said the deacon. "When was that?"

"Before I was converted."

"Never since?"

"No; except last Saturday."

Here Dr. Jebb interrupted. "It seems to me that we need not follow the subject any further
than to inquire into the mental attitude of the brother who fell into the snare. I know it
is one of absolute contrition now, especially as the affair was of the nature of an accident
during the discharge of his duty. It seems to me, therefore, that we should accept his expression
of penitence coupled with a promise to abstain so long as he is here with us."

Jim volunteered to abstain for all time, but Higginbotham's moderate counsels prevailed.

Deacon Blight thought that the transgressor should be suspended from office pending a fuller
investigation. Deacon Higginbotham thought that it had already been more than fully investigated.
Deacon Whaup had never heard of the affair until this evening, but thought that Mr. Hartigan
ought to retire during further discussion.

As soon as Jim was outside, Higginbotham, fully determined to stop all further talk, said:
"Dr. Jebb, I move we accept the promise Mr. Hartigan has given and table the whole matter.
It is absurd to follow it further in the light of what we know--making a big mountain of a
very small mole-hill."

Blight, however, didn't think so. He argued for delay and for stern measures. Dr. Jebb put
the motion and it was carried with but one dissenting vote; and so the matter was officially
closed. As they dispersed, Dr. Jebb reminded them that the deliberations of the Board of Deacons
were to be considered strictly confidential.

And Jim went forth with strange and mixed feelings. He was grateful for Higginbotham's determined
protection and yet he would have held the Board in higher respect if it had punished him severely.
Such was the nature of the ardent Celt.

CHAPTER XXII

The Three Religions Confront Him

Jack Shives's blacksmith shop, off the Main Street of Cedar Mountain, was noted for two things:
the sound, all-round work it turned out in the smithy line, and the "perchers," an ever-present
delegation of village characters that sat chewing straws as they perched on the shop lumber.
Most of them came to hear old Shives talk, for Jack was a philosopher and no subject was out
of his field. Hartigan liked Shives, enjoyed the shop with its smoke and flying sparks, and
took a keen relish in the unfettered debate that filled in the intervals between Shives's ringing
blows on the anvil.

Dr. Jebb thought himself a very up-to-date divine. He had tried to have a sort of free discussion
in his study Sunday nights after meeting, but the restraint of parsondom was over it all. He
was really a painfully orthodox old person; all his up-to-dateness was within the covers of
the catechism, and the real thinkers kept away. Dr. Carson had better success, but he was a
bitter politician, so that all who differed from him on national or local politics avoided
his house. The blacksmith shop, however, was open for all, and the real discussions of the
village were there. Shives had a masterful way of assuming the chairmanship, and of doing the
job well, often while pounding the anvil; sometimes an effective punctuation of his remarks
came in the hiss of hot iron thrust in the tank, and Shives enjoyed the humour of obliterating
his opponent for the moment in a cloud of steam.

Jim Hartigan, with his genial, sociable instincts, was found in Shives's shop more often than
in the tiny room which, with the bed, table, and books, was all he had in the way of home.
Dr. Jebb was afraid to take any large part in these deliberations. They were apt to discuss
what he considered the undiscussable foundations of the Church. But Dr. Carson was one of the
most strenuous of the debators.

"I tell you, there ain't a bit o' use o' your talking," said Shives. "If I stick my finger
in that fire, I'm a-going to get burnt and all the prayers and repentance I can put up ain't
a-going to wipe off that burn. I've got to suffer for what I do just the same, whether I belong
to church or not."

"Sure, now," said Hartigan, "if I see your point, there is little to it. You are talking about
sin being its own punishment, which is true; but suppose a doctor came along and by his work
and skill saved you from losing the finger altogether and in the end your finger was little
the worse and you were much the wiser--what about your theory then?"

"That is not the point. If it was the same thing, when I hurt my finger I would only have to
say, 'I repent; the Lord will take my punishment,' and at once my finger would be restored
as it was before."

"Well, that may be your Church's creed, but it isn't mine," said Hartigan; and they wrangled
till the blacksmith halted in his raking of the coals, turned to Hartigan, and beating in the
air with his coal rake like a band leader with his baton, he said with punctuated emphasis:
"My creed tells me I must suffer for my own doings just as surely as if I lay my finger on
this anvil and hit it a crack with the hammer, and no man can save me from that, and if you
tell me that God is a wild beast and merely wants a victim to punish, no matter who, then I
want to know where the justice comes in. There is not any greater wickedness than to let the
guilty escape, except it be to punish the innocent; and that's the whole sum and substance
of your religion, which was neatly summed up by old Blue Horse down at Pine Ridge. After he
had heard the missionary explaining it for about the thousandth time, he said: 'Ho, me see
now; your God is my devil.'

"I tell you there's only one sum and substance of all religion that's worth while, and that
is to be a kind, decent neighbour, do your work, and help others to do theirs. You will find
that set forth, straight as a string, in your own textbook, where it says, 'Love your neighbour
as yourself.'" And the blacksmith drew the radiant iron from the forge to pound, pound, pound,
amid the laughter that proclaimed the defeat of the Preacher.

Hartigan was never strong on theology. At college he had neglected the chance to learn the
cut and parry in that strangest of all games, and the puzzle for which he had no quick answer
was that of the burnt finger. In the smithy debates the answer had to be quick, or it was no
answer at all. He had lost the chance and was mortified to see the verdict of the crowd against
him.

"Jack," he said, "I want you to come to church and see how simple it all is."

"Church. Huh! I think I see myself," said the blacksmith.

"That's not fair," said Hartigan. "You condemn church without going to see what it is."

"Oh, I've been there a-plenty."

"When?"

"Twenty years ago."

"Oh, pshaw! It's all changed since then."

"Is it? That's a good one. I thought God's religion was unchangeable for ever and ever. I tell
you, young fellow, if you keep on working and thinking you will wind up with a religion of
common sense and kindness which, as near as I can make out, is what the man Jesus did preach."

"Then why don't you come to hear it?" retorted Hartigan.

"Because ye don't preach it."

"That's not a fair way to put it," reiterated Hartigan. 

Among all earthly aims is there one that is either more important or greater? It alone is in
keeping with that deep-rooted feeling inseparable from passionate love, with that earnestness
with which it appears, and the importance which it attaches to the
trifles that come within its sphere.

It is only in so far as we regard this end as the real one that the difficulties encountered,
the endless troubles and vexations endured, in order to attain the object we love, appear
to be in keeping with the matter.


As Jim mounted Blazing Star and rode away at an easy swing, all eyes followed him, and the
blacksmith growled: "'Homely in the cradle, handsome on the horse,' they say. He must 'a' been
a clock-stopper when he was a kid. Pity to waste all that on a pulpiteer."

Later, the Preacher had a full discussion with Belle. The blacksmith had dented Hartigan's
armour in several places. Where was the justice in punishing one being for another's sins?
Even if the sufferer was willing, it was still wicked injustice. How could repentance wipe
out the self-brought injury? These were among the puzzles. Dr. Jebb was his natural helper,
but the Preacher brought them first to Belle. She had gone deeper and further than he had.
She dreaded doctrinal discussion, but at length said:

"Did you never hear of the transfusion of blood whereby a man may give of his strength and,
by suffering, save a friend from death? Did you never hear of a man tottering and almost down
who was found by a friend at the right moment, helped to greater strength by mutual suffering,
and so restored to his balance before he went down to ruin?"

And the fervent answer was, "Yes, I have."

       *       *       *       *       *

New vistas were opened to them by this open-hearted talk--truly communion--and as they rode
through the gray-bloomed sage they followed still the thought. Then he waved a hand and raised
his face toward Cedar Mountain with its column seeming small against the sky.

"I want you to see it, Belle. I want you to stand there with me and know how much it means
when your spirit is just right."

She swung her horse with his and they headed for the trail. He had talked to her about it before,
but he had felt a little disappointed that her imagination was not stirred as his had been--that
the mystery and charm, the emotional awe, so easy for his Celtic blood, had not been conjured
up in her by his words. But he still had hopes that the feeling of the far-up shrine would
weave enchantment of its own; and he told her of the second sight that the fay of his mother's
land could give if one sang a song of the one right pitch in the glen of the "very stone."

So they rode through the sage to the trailing cedar robe and followed upward till the upper
edge of the fragrant woods was reached. There they tied the horses and climbed on foot to the
upland. The grass among the rocks was yellow now, and high gentians seized on the rare moment
to flaunt their wondrous blue against that perfect background. A flock of autumn birds rose
up and flew on, as the climbers, reaching the Spirit Rock, paused and turned to look out over
the golden plains to the east, over the blue hills to the north, and into the purple glow that
the waning sunlight left on all the west.

Belle rejoiced in it for its material beauty and its wealth of colour; and Jim, shyly watching
her, said:

"Sometimes as I stand by this rock pinnacle and look over the plain, I feel as if I were an
ocean rover, high up in the lookout, peering over the rough and tumbling sea. It possesses
me with more than the power of a dream." Then, after a pause: "See, here is where the Indian
boy was sitting as he kept his fast and vigil. I wonder what he saw. Some day, Belle, I want
to take that vigil. Do you remember that the prophets of old always did so when they sought
light? I am learning that the Indian had some light, and to-day I have done as he would do,
I have brought my sacred medicine with me." He produced a little cedar box that his father
had made. He opened it and deeply inhaled its fragrance. "That is cedar, Belle; it carries
me back to other days when, under the cedar shingles, my mother put her arm about me and prayed
that I might find the Eternal Guide."

He took out his mother's Bible, her photograph and the daguerreotype of his father. These were
his sacred relics, and with them was a bundle of cedar twigs to keep the fragrance ever there--to
keep continually with them the power, through smell, to conjure up those days and thoughts
of her love. Belle took them reverently and gazed at the prim old pictures; then she looked
him squarely in the eyes, intensely for a moment, like one who looks through a veil for the
first time and sees a hidden chamber unguessed before.

"Belle," he said, and his voice was a little husky; "if I had gone on to the Big Cheyenne that
time, I would have built a fire as soon as I had the chance and burnt all these to ashes; and
then what--God only knows, for these were the vessels of my sanctuary; this was the ark of
my covenant, with the rod that budded, the tables of the law, and the precious incense." She
laid her hand on his in silent comprehension and he went on. "All my life I have had two natures
struggling within me; and the destroyer would have won, and had won, when you turned the rout.
If you had not come to me in Deadwood I would surely have burnt these relics. Now you understand.
I couldn't speak about it down there; but up here it is easy. Some time I may be missing for
a couple of days. Do not worry then; it will only mean I have gone up into my mountain. I am
seeking the light that comes from prayer and fasting and vigil in a high place."

"I know those things as words," she said. "Just as we all learned them in Sunday-school; but
you make them as real as this mountain, a part of my very life."

He replaced the relics in their cedar box and she realized that for the first time she had
had a glimpse of the deep and spiritual quality of his soul.

BOOK III

THE HORSE PREACHER

CHAPTER XXIII

Blazing Star

The Angel of Destiny who had special charge of Jim had listed and measured his failings and
had numbered them for drastic treatment. The brawling spirit of his early days, the proneness
to drink, the bigoted intolerance of any other mode of thought than his own, the strange mistake
of thinking physical courage the only courage, a curious disregard for the things of the understanding--each
was the cause of bitter suffering. Each in its kind was alloy, dross, and for each the metal
had to pass through the fires and, purified, come forth.

