At the present day it must be enormously larger. I remember well the exceeding plentifulness
of the little fishes--none of them so large as many of those which now fill the so-called sardine
boxes--when I was at Douarnenez in 1839. All the men, women, and children in the place seemed
to be feasting upon them all day long. Plates with heaps of them fried and piled up crosswise,
like timber in a timber-yard, were to be seen outdoors and indoors, wherever three or four
people could be found together. All this was a thing of the past when I revisited Douarnenez
in 1866. Every fish was then needed for the tinning business. They were to be had of course
by ordering and paying for them, but very few indeed were consumed by the population of the place.

And this subject reminds me of another fishery which I witnessed a few months ago--last March--at
Sestri di Ponente, near Genoa. We frequently saw nearly the whole of the fisher population
of the place engaged in dragging from the water on to the sands enormously long nets, which
had been previously carried out by boats to a distance not more I think than three or four
hundred yards from the shore. From these nets, when at last they were landed after an hour
or so of continual dragging by a dozen or twenty men and women, were taken huge baskets-full
of silvery little fish sparkling in the sun, exactly like whitebait. I had always supposed
that whitebait was a specialty of the Thames. Whether an icthyologist would have pronounced
the little Sestri fishes to be the same creatures as those which British statesmen consume
at Greenwich I cannot say; but we ate them frequently at the hotel under the name of gianchetti,
and could find no difference between them and the Greenwich delicacy. The season for them did
not seem to last above two or three weeks. The fishermen continued to drag their net, but caught
other fishes instead of giancketti. But while it lasted the plenty of them was prodigious.
All Sestri was eating them, as all Douarnenez ate sardines in the old days. When the net with
its sparkling cargo was dragged up on the sand and the contents were being shovelled into huge
baskets to be carried up into the town, the men would take up handfuls of them, fresh, and
I suppose still living, from the sea, and plunging their bearded mouths in them, eat them up
by hundreds. The children too, irrepressibly thronging round the net, would pick from its meshes
the fishes which adhered to them and eat them, as more inland rising generations eat blackberries.
I did not try the experiment of eating them thus, as one eats oysters, but I can testify that,
crisply fried, and eaten with brown bread and butter and lemon juice, they were remarkably good.

Fortified by the excellent example of Sir Francis Doyle, who in his extremely amusing volume
of Reminiscences gives as a reason for disregarding the claims of chronology in the composition
of it, the chances that he might forget the matter he had In his mind if he did not book it
at once, I have ventured for the same reason to do the same thing here. But I have an older
authority for the practice in question, which Sir Francis is hardly likely to have lighted
on. That learned antiquary and portentously voluminous writer, Francesco Cancellieri, who was
well known to the Roman world in the latter years of the last, and the earliest years of the
present, century, used to compose his innumerable works upon a similar principle. And when
attacked by the critics his cotemporaries, who Italian-like supposed academically correct form
to be the most important thing in any literary work, he defended himself on the same ground.
"If I don't catch it now, I may probably forget it; and is the world to be deprived of the
information it is in my power to give it, for the sake of the formal correctness of my work?"

There is another passage in my book on Brittany respecting which it would be interesting to
know whether recent travellers can report that the state of things there described no longer
exists. I wrote in 1839--

"Very near Treguier, on a spot appropriately selected for such a worship--the barren top of
a bleak unsheltered eminence--stands the chapel of Notre Dame de la Haine! Our Lady of HATRED!
The most fiendish of human passions is supposed to be under the protection of Christ's religion!
What is this but a fragment of pure and unmixed Paganism, unchanged except in the appellation
of its idol, which has remained among these lineal descendants of the Armorican Druids for
more than a thousand years after Christianity has become the professed religion of the country!
Altars, professedly Christian, were raised under the protection of the Protean Virgin, to the
demon Hatred; and have continued to the present day to receive an unholy worship from blinded
bigots, who hope to obtain Heaven's patronage and assistance for thoughts and wishes which
they would be ashamed to breathe to man. Three Aves repeated with devotion at this odious and
melancholy shrine are firmly believed to have the power to cause, within the year, the certain
death of the person against whom the assistance of Our Lady of Hatred has been invoked. And
it is said that even yet occasionally, in the silence and obscurity of the evening, the figure
of some assassin worshipper at this accursed shrine may be seen to glide rapidly from the solitary
spot, where he has spoken the unhallowed prayer whose mystic might has doomed to death the
enemy he hates."

I must tell one other story of my Breton recollections, which refers to a time much subsequent
to the publication of the book I have been quoting. It was in 1866 that I revisited Brittany
in company with my present wife; and one of the objects of our little tour was the Finisterre
land's end at the extreme point of the horn-like promontory which forms the department so named.
We found some difficulty in reaching the spot, not the least part of which was caused by the
necessity of threading our way, when in the immediate neighbourhood of the cliffs, among enormous
masses of seaweed stacked in huge heaps and left to undergo the process of decay, which turns
it into very valuable manure. The odour which impregnated the whole surrounding atmosphere
from these heaps was decidedly the worst and most asphyxiating I ever experienced.

We stood at last on the utmost Finis terrae and looked over the Atlantic not only from the
lighthouse, which, built three hundred feet above the sea level, is often, we were told, drenched
by storm-driven spray, but from various points of the tremendous rocks also. They are tremendous,
in truth. The scene is a much grander one than that at our own "Land's End," which I visited
a month or two ago. The cliffs are much higher, the rocks are more varied in their forms--more
cruelly savage-looking, and the cleavages of them are on a larger scale. The spot was one of
the most profound solitude, for we were far from the lighthouse, and the scream of the white
gulls as they started from their roosting-places on the face of the rocks, or returned to them
from their swirling flights, were the only indication of the presence of any creature having
the breath of life.

The rock ledges, among which we were clambering, were in many places fearful spots enough--places
where a stumble or a divagation of the foot but six or eight inches from the narrow path would
have precipitated the blunderer to assured and inevitable destruction. "Here," said I to my
wife, as we stood side by side on one such ledge, "would be the place for a husband, who wanted
to get rid of his wife, to accomplish his purpose. Done in ten seconds! With absolute certainty!
One push would suffice! No cry of any more avail than the screams of those gulls! And no possibility
of the deed being witnessed by any mortal eye!"

I had hardly got the words out of my mouth before our ears were startled by a voice hailing
us; and after some searching of the eye we espied a man engaged in seeking sea-fowls' eggs,
who had placed himself in a position which I should have thought it absolutely impossible to
reach, whence he had seen us, as we now saw him!

Let this then, my brethren, be a warning to you!

CHAPTER III.

Returning from my Breton journey, I reached my mother's house in York Street on the 23rd of
July, 1839, and on the 26th of the same month left London with her to visit my married sister
in her new home at Penrith, where Mr. Tilley had established himself as Post Office surveyor
of the northern district. His home was a pretty house situated between the town and the well-known
beacon on the hill to the north of it.

The first persons I became acquainted with in this, to me, entirely new region, were Sir George
Musgrave, of Edenhall, and his wife, who was a sister of Sir James Graham. My brother-in-law
took me over to Edenhall, a lovely walk from Penrith, and we found both Sir George and Lady
Musgrave at home. We--my mother and I--had not at that time conceived the idea of becoming
residents at Penrith. But when subsequently we were led to do so, we found extremely pleasant
and friendly neighbours at Edenhall, and though not in strict chronology due in this place,
I may throw together my few reminiscences of Sir George.

He was the beau-idéal of a country gentleman of the old school. He rarely or never went to
London--not, as was the case with some of his neighbours, because the expense of a season there
was formidable, for his estate was a fine one, and he was a rich man living largely within
his income, but because his idea was, that a country gentleman's proper place was on his own
acres, and because London had no temptations for him. He was said to be the best landlord in
the county, and really seemed to look upon all his numerous tenants, and all their labourers,
as his born subjects, to whom protection, kindness, assistance, and general looking after were
due, in return for their fealty and loyal attachment. In our way to that place, we had to march
through a district named Tapelola, which was so very rugged that our horses were unable to proceed
until the roads were cleared for them, which was immediately done on application to the caciques.
We continued our march by the districts of Silo, Suchiapa, and Coyumelapa, to those of Tecomayatacal
and Ateapan; the chief town of which was extensive, closely built, and very populous. This place
belonged to my encomienda.

Lady Musgrave was a particularly lady-like woman, the marked elegance of whose breeding might,
with advantage, have given the tone to many a London drawing-room. I have seen her surrounded
by country neighbours, and though she was velut inter ignes luna minores, I never saw the country
squire's or country parson's wife, who was not perfectly happy and at ease in her drawing-room,
while unconsciously all the time taking a lesson in good breeding and lady-like manners. She
was thoroughly a help-meet for her husband in all his care for his people. I believe that both
he and she were convinced at the bottom of their hearts that Cumberland and Westmoreland constituted
the choicest, best, and most highly civilised part of England. And she was one of those of
whom I was thinking, when in a former chapter I spoke of highly educated people whom I had
known to affect provincialism of speech. Lady Musgrave always, or perhaps it would be more
correct to say generally, called a cow a "coo," and though I suspect she would have left Westmoreland
behind if evil fate had called her to London, on her own hill-sides she preferred the accents
of the native speech.

Sir George had, or affected to have, considerable respect for all the little local superstitions
and beliefs which are so prevalent in that "north countree." And the kindness with which he
welcomed us as neighbours, when we built a house and came to live there, was shown despite
a strong feeling which he had, or affected to have, with regard to an incident which fatally
marked our début in that country.

We bought a field in a very beautiful situation overlooking the ruins of Brougham Castle and
the confluence of the Eden with the Lowther, and proceeded to build a house on the higher part
of it. But there was a considerable drop from the lower limit of our ground to the road which
skirted the property, and furnished the only access to it. There was some difficulty, therefore,
in contriving a tolerable entrance from the road for wheel traffic, and it was found necessary
to cause a tiny little spring that rose in the bank by the roadside to change its course in
some small degree. The affair seemed to us a matter of infinitesimal importance, but Sir George
was dismayed. We had moved, he said, a holy well, and the consequence would surely be that
we should never succeed in establishing ourselves in that spot.

And surely enough we never did so succeed; for, after having built a very nice little house,
and lived in it one winter and half a summer, we--for I cannot say that it was my mother more
than I, or I more than my mother--made up our minds that "the sun yoked his horses too far
from Penrith town," and that we had had enough of it. Sir George, of course, when he heard
our determination, while he expressed all possible regret at losing us as neighbours, said
that he knew perfectly well that it must be so, from the time that we so recklessly meddled
with the holy well.

He was the most hospitable man in the world, and could never let many days pass without asking
us to dine with him. But his hospitality was of quite the old world school. One day, but that
was after our journey to Italy and when he had become intimate with us, being in a hurry to
get back into the drawing-room to rejoin a pretty girl next whom I had sat at dinner, I tried
to escape from the dining-room. "Come back!" he roared, before I could get to the door, "we
won't have any of your d--d forineering habits here! Come back and stick to your wine, or by
the Lord I'll have the door locked."

He was, unlike most men of his sort, not very fond of riding, but was a great walker. He used
to take the men he could get to walk with him a tramp over the hill, till they were fain to
cry "Hold! enough!" But there I was his match.

Most of my readers have probably heard of the "Luck of Edenhall," for besides Longfellow's[1]
well-known poem, the legend relating to it has often been told in print. I refer to it here
merely to mention a curious trait of character in Sir George Musgrave in connection with it.
The "Luck of Edenhall" is an ancient decorated glass goblet, which has belonged to the Musgraves
time out of mind, and which bears on it the legend:--

  "When this cup shall break or fall,
  Farewell the luck of Edenhall."

[Footnote 1: Subsequently to the publication of his poem Musgrave asked Longfellow to dine
at Edenhall, and "picked a crow" with him on the conclusion of the poem, which represents the
"Luck" to have been broken, which Sir George considered a flight of imagination quite transcending
all permissible poetical licence.]

